What think ye of the CONGRESS Now? OR, An ENQUIRY, HOW FAR The AMERICANS are
BOUND To ABIDE by, AND EXECUTE the DECISIONS of, THE LATE CONGRESS?

It is hoped and expected, that this (...) Justice and Tenderness of the Mother
Country, and this open Resistance to its Authority, can only have found Place
among the lower and more ignorant of the People: The better and wiser Part of
the Colonies will know, that Decency and Submission may prevail, not only to
redress Grievances, but to obtain Grace and Favor; while the Outrage of a
public Violence can expect nothing but Severity and Chastisement. General
Conway. NEW YORK: Printed by JAMES RIVINGTON, M,DCCLXXV.

What think ye of the CONGRESS Now? OR, An ENQUIRY, etc.
ONE of the most sacred and invaluable rights of Englishmen, and consequently
of the inhabitants of his Majesty's American colonies, is the liberty of the
press. By this is meant the liberty of publishing, by means of the press,
remarks upon, objections to, and discussions of, all public transactions,
whether relating to religion or government. Every Englishman claims this
liberty as his birthright: the law has made it a part of his property; none
can deprive him of it without his consent; it is not even in his own power to
alienate it; and he ought in duty to exercise this right, as often as he thinks
his communications would be of service to the public.

The liberty of the press is so essential to the well-being of society in
general, that the late Congress, in their Address to the inhabitants of QUEBEC,
mention it as one of those rights, without which a people cannot be free and
happy, and under the protecting and encouraging influence of which, these
colonies have hitherto so amazingly flourished and increased. They complain
that the King's " profligate ministry," are endeavoring to wrest it from us,
and declare their resolution not to resign it but with their latest breath.

It is a pity that these generous Patrons and Defenders of American liberty
forgot in their Memorial to the inhabitants of the confederated Colonies, to
take notice of what so greatly concerned them; and that they did not place some
guard for the security of a right, which was deemed by them so essential to the
freedom and happiness of Americans; and which, they knew, was in some danger of
being violated and trampled upon by a set of people, whose views were more
contracted, whose sentiments were less generous, and whose zeal was more dimly
enlightened than their own. To this unlucky omission we must ascribe it, that
even the Sons of Liberty, of the lower and more illiberal classes, are
perpetually running counter to the sentiments of the Congress, in striving to
intimidate writers, and printers, and readers, and speakers, and thinkers, on
the side of government.

One of their ways of confuting pamphlets, like the old popish way of confuting
heretics, is by fire and faggot. This proceeds from the same bigotry, and is
dictated by the same spirit, which commonly disgraced the dark ages preceding
the Reformation. And when these burning zealots assemble together, in order to
hold an Auto de Fe, I advise all dealers in political heresy, to take care of
themselves. And in general, I advise all writers of unpopular pieces to keep
their own secrets, as we know not what revolutions may happen.

For should the writers in behalf of peace, order and government be certainly
known, or only strongly suspected, and should the nominal Sons of Liberty, but
the real Sons of Licentiousness, Faction and Confusion, be in full possession
of that power which they are striving to obtain; there is reason to believe,
that the writers and their writings would be both consumed together in the same
fire.

For thus says Holt, in his Journal of November 24, speaking of some of our
beer-house gentry, who assembled on occasion of a new publication: It was with
one consent concluded, to treat the pamphlet (the Farmer's FREE THOUGHTS, etc.)
as it was thought the AUTHOR DESERVED to be treated; and it was accordingly
committed to the flames! This is fine. It shows the spirit of the times; and
clearly intimates what kind of law and gospel may be expected, if ever we
submit to the dominion of such Sons of Liberty.

But yet of such a submission in this province, I think there can be no danger.
The pretended Sons of Liberty here, have already passed the meridian of their
power and importance. The eyes of my countrymen and fellow-citizens begin, at
last, to be opened to their true interest and happiness. They have been
witnesses of a long train of such infamous abuses of, and insults upon, true
constitutional Liberty, as they think are unsufferable. And the time is
hastening on, when men will not only venture to write and speak their own
sentiments, but, in spite of Comittee-men, to eat and drink as they please,
without any other restraint than that of the laws.

In the mean while, under such protection as our legal constitution can at
present afford me, and (which is much more) under the sanction and auspices of
the late Congress, who virtually guaranteed to all Americans the Liberty of the
Press; I shall proceed, in the exercise of so beneficial and essential a right,
to diffuse some liberal sentiments on the administration of government, amongst
my countrymen, relating to a matter of the utmost importance to all the
Americans; I mean, the late "administration of government" by the Congress
itself.

In what is now to be offered to the public, I mean to avoid all personal
reflections upon the members of the Congress; for I never had any personal
objections to any of them. Some of them are men for whom I have a peculiar
regard, and who are generally esteemed for many excellent qualities. If I
should therefore happen to speak of our own Delegates, or of the Delegates in
general, disrespectfully; and yet I here pledge myself to the public that I
will not speak of them so disrespectfully, as they themselves speak of the King
and Parliament; the reader will be kind enough to remember, that what is thus
spoken, is it to be construed as spoken, of them, not in their private or
personal, but their congressional capacity. A man's private character may be
amiable, while his public proceedings are odious. Thus, for instance, it is
allowed, both by friends and foes, that there is not a more amiable and worthy
character in the kingdom, in private life, than that of the King's present
Prime Minister; and yet no monster can be more detested, than his Lordship is
in his public character, by our American patriots.

In order to form a right judgment of the Proceedings of the late Congress, we
ought to recollect the occasion of its appointment; which, if I mistake not,
was this. The peace and happiness of the American colonies had been, for some
time, interrupted and disturbed, by certain acts of the British Parliament,
laying restrictions upon our trade, and imposing duties on some articles of our
commerce; and it was thought necessary to the restoration of peace and
happiness among us, to obtain a repeal of those acts, and some proper security
that we should not be disturbed again by acts of a similar nature. As the
colonies were circumstanced, it required the most prudent management and
address to gain so important a point; for it was apparent, that a small degree
of misconduct would defeat the whole purpose.

The business was therefore taken out of the hands of the people, whose
imprudence already had much injured the cause; and it was committed to the
conduct of a few Gentlemen of distinction and character, in whose wisdom,
integrity and honor the greatest confidence was reposed. The exercise of
parliamentary power, in imposing what we called taxes upon us, was the evil
complained of by the American colonies; to remove this evil, and not to
increase it, was consequently the commission with which our Delegates were
vested.

And had they attended to the nature and design of their commission, and acted
according to it, no one would have thought it expedient to question their
authority. The fomentors of our disturbances would have been under peculiar
obligations to acquiesce in their determinations; and I am sure that the
friends of peace would all have exerted themselves to give full force and
efficacy to them.

But since the Gentlemen of the Congress have so widely mistaken their proper
business; since the whole tenor of their proceedings was calculated to increase
the evil, which they were sent to remove; it has become necessary to inquire,
previously to our entering into more particular disputes, how far the colonies
are bound to abide by, and to execute the decisions of, the late Congress? For
though they speak in a high and absolute tone, and undertake solemnly to bind
themselves and their constituents; yet there is room to question, whether, in
such a course of proceedings, they were able to bind any but themselves. But
supposing they were able to bind their constituents, that is, the persons who
gave their votes for sending them to the Congress; yet, be it remembered, that
a very great part of the Americans are not their constituents in any sense at
all, as they never voted for them, nor ever signified any approbation of their
acting in behalf, and in the name, of the colonies.

Before I proceed farther, I think proper, in order to remove prejudices
against what may be offered, to declare, (regard it who will) that I am not
conscious of being under the influence of any mercenary or private motives. I
have no ambition, nor resentment, nor envy, nor jealousy, nor ill will, that I
can propose to gratify by writing. I feel myself warmly affected to the
happiness of mankind in general, and of my present countrymen in particular;
and I sincerely wish, that all Americans may enjoy as much liberty, of every
kind, as is consistent with good order and safety.

I do also farther declare, honestly and heartily, that I think the policy of
some of the late acts, respecting the colonies, to have been wrong; -- that we
do not enjoy all the privileges of Englishmen, while we give no kind of consent
to the laws that govern us; -- and, that it is time that we were exempted, in a
regular way, from parliamentary taxation, on some generous and equitable plan.

But then it is but fair, on the other hand, to declare my belief, that the
Americans, with their own free consent, were originally placed under the
absolute authority of the English Parliament; -- that they never yet have been
legally exempted from it; -- that they have neither right nor ability to exempt
themselves; -- and that they never can be properly exempted, but by the
generous and friendly concessions of Great Britain.

Let us now examine the grand question, Whether the Americans are bound to
abide by, and to execute the decisions of, the late Congress, or not. And here
it is allowed, that so far as we could lawfully authorize them, and in reality
did authorize them, to act, and so far as they acted agreeably to their
commission, their proceedings are undoubtedly binding upon us.

But then, if they either departed from their commission, or if their
commission was unlawful in any degree, so far their proceedings can lay no
obligation upon any of their constituents. Thus, if I empower a person to do
for me some particular act, that act when done is binding upon me; but if the
person exceeds his commission, and does in my name some other act, it is at my
own option whether I will abide by it or not. Thus again, if the commission I
give him be invalid, or contrary to law, -- it conveys no power, and all that
is done in virtue of it, is ineffectual. There can be no difference in the
case, where the parties are a number of persons jointly concerned.

Whether the late Congress was an assembly strictly lawful or not, I shall not
now take time to enquire. For the present I will suppose, that it was,
considered in itself, materially lawful; and that no objections could properly
be made to it till it acted illegally. It is one of the undoubted privileges of
Englishmen to petition, in cases of grievance; and consequently to meet
together for settling the substance and forms of petitions, under certain
prescribed regulations. Yet, by the way, what right the Americans have to plead
the privilege of Englishmen, any more than the privilege of Dutchmen, if they
are not in full subjection to the authority of Great Britain, let those who
can, show.

Looking then upon the Congress as lawfully assembled, let us now atttend to
their proper business. This was, as has been already observed, to procure for
the American colonies relief from parliamentary taxation. If we examine the
credentials that were laid before the Congress, we shall find, that the
Delegates from New Hampshire were sent, to consult and adopt (such) measures,
as may have the most likely tendency to extricate the colonies from their
present difficulties, to secure and perpetuate the rights, liberties and
privileges, and to restore that peace, harmony and mutual confidence, which
once happily subsisted between the parent country and her colonies.

The Delegates from the Massachusetts Bay were publicly authorized to proceed
no farther than, in conjunction with the other members of the Congress, to
deliberate and determine upon wise and proper measures, to be by them
recommended to all the Colonies, for the recovery and establishment of their
just rights and liberties, civil and religious Quere, What religious rights had
been invaded by the Parliament?
, and the restoration of union and harmony between Great Britain and the
Colonies, most ardently desired by all good men.

Those from Rhode Island were authorized and empowered by the Governor, to meet
and join with the Commissioners or Delegates from the other Colonies, in
consulting upon proper measures to obtain a repeal of the several acts of the
British Parliament, etc. and upon proper measures to establish the rights and
liberties of the Colonies upon a just and solid foundation.

The Delegates from Connecticut were authorized and empowered to attend the
Congress, to consult and advise with the Commissioners or Committees of the
several English Colonies in America, on proper measures for advancing the best
good of the Colonies.

If we come home to New York, our confidence in the wisdom and prudence of the
Gentlemen appointed to go as Delegates from hence, was so great, that we gave
them no particular instructions, but only a general commission " to attend the
Congress at Philadelphia."

The Delegates from New Jersey had the like general commission, being only
nominated and appointed, to represent the colony of New Jersey in the said
general congress.

In Pennsylvania the House of Assembly appointed a committee from themselves to
attend the Congress, in behalf of that province, to consult upon the present
unhappy state of the Colonies, and to form and adopt a plan for the purposes of
obtaining redress of American grievances, ascertaining American rights upon the
most solid and constitutional principles, and for establishing that union and
harmony between Great Britain and the Colonies, which is indispensibly
necessary to the welfare and happiness of both.

The Deputies from the Three Lower Counties, were sent to the Congress, to
consult and advise with the Deputies from the other Colonies, and to determine
upon all such prudent and lawful measures, as may be judged most expedient for
the Colonies immediately and unitedly to adopt, in order to obtain relief for
an oppressed people, and the redress of our general grievances.

Thus far all seems to be fair and pacific. The Delegates from these eight
colonies are sent to the Congress, for the most laudable purposes, of obtaining
the repeal of certain obnoxious acts, and of promoting the restoration of peace
and harmony between Great Britain and her Colonies. And in the prosecution of
this great and good work, they are generally confined by their instructions, to
the use of such means as are prudent and lawful.

But if we go on to Maryland, matters there will appear doubtful, and
suspicious. The Delegates from thence are appointed to do all in their power,
in the Congress, to effect one general plan of conduct, operating on the
commercial connection of the Colonies with the Mother Country. This expression
is ambiguous. To operate on this commercial connection may signify either to
strengthen or weaken it, with equal propriety. If the former was intended, then
their Delegates were employed to consult the Congress in forming a plan, for
increasing the intercourse between Great Britain and her Colonies, in the way
of commerce. And why they should have meant the latter, I cannot conceive. For
I should think the people of Maryland would have no objections against a
commercial connection with Great Britain, however adverse they may be to a
connection of another kind.

Let us now step from Maryland into Virginia, and we shall hear more of this
operation upon commercial connexions. For there the Delegates are instructed,
nay the whole Congress is instructed, to consider of the most proper and
effectual manner of so operating on the commercial connection of the colonies
with the mother country; as to procure redress for the much injured province of
the Massachusetts Bay, to secure British America from (not against) the ravage
and ruin of arbitrary taxes, and speedily to procure the return of that harmony
and union so beneficial to the whole nation, and so ardently desired by all
British America. From the language that is here used, a stranger would imagine,
that all British America was reduced to the utmost extremity of distress by the
arbitrary and oppressive tyranny of Great Britain. But God be thanked! whatever
the poor Virginians may have suffered, we see no marks yet of the ravage and
ruin abovementioned in the province of New York, or in the adjacent colonies.
The Virginians have a right to seek relief from their distress, and with that
view they may, at any time, resolve for themselves to operate on their own
commercial connection with Great Britain, if they think proper to try the
experiment. But if this operation is to put an end to, or to suspend, all
commerce with Great Britain, how it can be productive of the harmony, and union
proposed, is more than I can guess. The breaking of a connection between two
distant bodies can have no tendency to produce an union between them; and the
setting up a fixed opposition on either side, is not the most likely way to
obtain harmony.

In South Carolina, while rice is their staple commodity, they know better than
to think of operating in such a way, upon the commercial connection aforesaid.
Therefore they only gave it in charge to their Delegates, to concert, agree to,
and effectually prosecute such legal measures, as in the opinion of the said
deputies, and of the deputies so to be assembled, shall be most likely to
obtain a repeal of the said acts, and a redress of those grievances.

The last commission produced in the Congress was from North Carolina; by which
the deputies from that colony were authorized to deliberate upon the present
state of British America, and to take such measures as they may deem prudent to
effect the purpose of describing with certainty the rights of Americans,
repairing the breach made in those rights, and for guarding them for the future
from any such violations done under the sanction of public authority.

We see now the powers that were committed to those, who were to constitute the
congress. If we compare their commissions together, it will appear that the
general and grand design was, as was asserted before, to obtain for the
colonies an exemption from taxation by the British Parliament. In the pursuit
of this great object, many of the Delegates are expressly directed by their
respective constituents, to confine themselves to the use of such means and
measures as are proper and lawful; some of them are particularly cautioned to
observe the rules of prudence in the course of their proceedings; and some of
them are very seasonably reminded, that they were to negociate, not for an
independent community, but for British America; that is, if I understand the
expression, for North America, considered as a part of the British dominions.

If these commissions are thought by any to require a more particular
explanation, they may have recourse to the resolves of the several Assemblies
and Committees, which they published previously to their nominating and
appointing Delegates to represent them in Congress, and in which their
principles and their views are particularly explained* Of these resolves more
will be said presently.

The Congress being met together, and having inspected and compared their
various commissions, were next to proceed upon business. With a view of
facilitating the proceedings, a very worthy and respectable member, eminent
both for his knowledge of the law, and his love of constitutional liberty,
presented a plan, which he carefully drew up in the cool hours of leisure and
retirement, and in which he endeavored to point out such claims of the
colonies as might be prudently asserted, and the particular modes of address
that would be most likely to secure them. This paper of proposals, at first,
met with all the respect that was due to the author's abilities; and nothing
appeared that was inconsistent with the genuine spirit of candor and
moderation on one side, and a due regard to the dignity and honor of
Great Britain on the other.

During this state of flattering tranquillity, the artful leaders of the
Congress found no great difficulty in persuading those members who were
patriots in reality, moderate and pacific, honest and unsuspicious, to bind
themselves in an agreement, that their names should be subscribed to whatever
should be carried by a majority of votes, and that no protest or dissent should
appear in the minutes.

After this great point was secured, it was not long before those same leaders
took occasion to throw off their mask, and to discover their own natural
features. This new appearance was no more expected by some that were present,
than the springing of a mine, or the bursting of a bomb, in Carpenter's-Hall;
nor was it less astonishing to them, than such an explosion would have been.
The moderate party soon found, that they had been circumvented and ensnared;
that they were allowed to have no influence in the debates; that their
remonstrances were slighted; and that every thing was borne down by the
impetuosity of their managers. Then it was, that duty and honor required them,
as I conceive, to leave the Hall. This account of the unpublished transactions
within doors, is not a fiction of the writer's imagination, but what he has
collected from credible report.

Let us now proceed to form a judgment from more indisputable evidence, and see
how matters stand in the publications of the Congress.

There are but four possible ways of securing to the colonies an exemption from
the authority in question; namely, by force of arms, by force of threatenings,
by force of evidence that we are justly entitled to our claims, and by the
efficacy of respectful representations and petitions.

As to the two first of these ways the congress had no authority or directions
from their constituents to pursue them; but, on the contrary, most of them were
forbid to pursue them, by being charged to keep within the bounds of what was
prudent and lawful. Whatever therefore was done by them, in either of these
ways, was without orders, in some instances contrary to orders, and can lay no
obligation even upon their constituents.

If passing by the words of their instructions, we have recourse to the general
sentiments of the Colonies, when the Congress was appointed, it will not help
the matter. At that time it was the opinion of the Colonies, that subjection
and obedience were due from us to Great Britain, in most cases.

Her general supremacy over the Colonies was then acknowledged; and it was the
opinion that the time was not come, in which it was proper to claim an
independency, or in which they were able to support it. On these principles,
the use of force or compulsion against Great Britain is both imprudent and
unlawful, as being inconsistent with that subjection which is allowed to be
due. Consequently we cannot suppose, that the Colonies, at that time, intended
to make the Congress a mere Council of War, to concert plans of hostility
against Great Britain, in order to dispossess her of her American jurisdiction;
and if the Congress was not erected into a council of war by their
constituents, they had no right to act in that capacity, and every hostile
effort that they made, was in virtue of an usurped or self-delegated authority.

What the general opinion, even of the most dissatisfied part of the Colonies,
then was, relating to these points, may be seen in the printed resolves from
all parts of the country; and it is not to be gathered from the passionate
verbal declarations of fellows, whose greatest merit consists in blustering and
bellowing at town meetings, or in assemblies of the mobility. In most of those
resolves, the loyalty of the people is warmly asserted, and their abhorrence of
an absolute independency, as destructive to the Colonies, is as warmly avowed.
And therefore, if any weight was to be allowed to the many public and solemn
declarations of those resolves, the Congress must have known, that it was no
part of their business to concert measures that were inconsistent with the
loyalty professed, or with the subordination acknowledged to be due to the
mother country, -- at least, till all other methods should be tried, and found
to be ineffectual, and till they should receive new instructions.

It follows from this view of the case, by necessary consequence, that all that
was done or projected by the congress, in the way of hostility against
Great Britain (and little was done or projected by them in any other way) was
uncommissioned and unauthorised, and cannot be binding even upon their
constituents.

As to the second way abovementioned, I will, at present, only observe, that
what they had no right nor power to do, they had no right to threaten that they
would do; and that we are no more obliged to adopt the language of their
threatenings, than to execute their projects of hostility.

The third way of securing to the Colonies an exemption from the authority of
parliament, with regard to taxation, would have been to prove, that this
privilege had been properly granted to them, either in the original
establishment of the colonies, or by some legal subsequent act. A point of this
nature must be proved by clear facts, and not by metaphysical arguments, taken
from the abstract nature of Englishmen, and of such Englishmen too as refuse
submission to the English laws. For though the parliament has always exercised
the authority which is now contested, and has in a late act declared, that the
said Colonies have been, are, and of right ought to be subordinate unto, and
dependent on the imperial crown and parliament of Great Britain; and that the
King and Parliament of Great Britain had, have, and of right ought to have full
power and authority to make laws and statutes of sufficient force to bind the
Colonies, and his Majesty's subjects in them, in all cases whatsoever; which
doctrine is as firmly believed by the inhabitants of Great Britain in general,
as the contrary is by perhaps one half of the Americans: yet, if the congress
could have made it appear, either by authentic facts, or conclusive arguments,
that the parliament was mistaken, it would have gone far toward securing the
great object in view. If after that the parliament would have still persisted
in its claim, we might have appealed to the world for its invalidity; and none
of us would have had scruples of conscience, to prevent our joining in a
general association to recover by a vigorous effort, a right that was rendered
unquestionable. But the Congress has neither proved the right, nor attempted to
prove it. Non ad disputandum, sed ad judicandum, se convenisse aiebat synodus.

The fourth way for obtaining the relief proposed, is that of respectful
representation, or remonstrance, and petition. The Congress indeed, has
remonstrated and petitioned; but to whom? Why, not to the King and parliament,
as they ought to have done; but, as they by no means ought to have done, to the
inhabitants of the Colonies, with a particular view to the disaffected part of
them, -- to the people of Great Britain, -- and, as very "sincere and
affectionate friends," to the Papists in Canada.

"Flectere si nequeo Superos, Acheronta movebo." And what is the purport of
these several addresses? Instead of exhorting the inhabitants of the Colonies,
as the case required, to return immediately to their duty, to behave themselves
peaceably, to pursue the business of their respective stations and occupations,
not pragmatically to meddle with matters out of their line, and above their
capacities, and to leave the direction of political affairs to the
constitutional guardians of their liberties; I say, instead of doing this, they
set them all up for politicians and patriots, inflame their minds with
resentment against their lawful superiors, and animate them to rebellion.

The tendency of their address to the people of Great Britain, is similar, it
being artfully adapted to the purpose; which is to persuade them to take part
with the malcontents of America, in opposition to their own Sovereign, and the
whole legislative body, and in defiance of all laws human and divine.
Throughout this address, there seems to be no small diffidence of its
succeeding; and therefore under the alternate operation of hope, and fear, and
contempt, the blind and stupid Englishmen are occasionally either coaxed, or
threatened, or given to understand, that we look upon them as a parcel of fools
and puppies.

After all, the address to the Canadians is undoubtedly the most unpardonable
of the three, as it discovers the deepest and most inveterate malignity against
the mother country. In that we see every mean, cajoling art practiced, that was
thought likely to disaffect the Canadians to the government they are under, and
to corrupt their fidelity.

This is what the Congress has done in the way of petition and remonstrance;
excepting the petition to the King, which they tell us they have sent. But if
the petition be of a piece with the addresses, and dictated by the same evil
spirit; it would have shown more wisdom, and modesty, and as much loyalty, to
have preferred a petition, on such an occasion, to the King of France, or the
Emperor of Morocco.

The only way that had so much as a chance for succeeding, and which all
reasonable men, so far as I can learn, expected the Congress would pursue, was
that of dutiful and respectful application to the King, Lords and Commons of
Great Britain, upon whose united consent and concurrence the important
concession depended, and if the Congress had addressed only the three branches
of the legislature of Great Britain, in behalf of the colonies; and if the
addresses to them had been duly expressive, of loyalty to the King -- of a
desire to continue members of the great British empire, -- of a willing
submission to the superintending authority of Great Britain -- of an aversion
to a state of independency, except in matters of taxation only -- of a
readiness to comply with the King's requisitions in all cases of exigency, and
also to contribute some equitable annual sum, toward defraying the annual
charges of government, in consideration of being released from parliamentary
taxation; and if, at the same time, they had endeavored to excuse, as well as
they could, the late unwarrantable proceedings in most of the Colonies, begging
they might sink in eternal oblivion: I doubt not but petitions, formed on some
such plan, and attended with no circumstances that were offensive or
exceptionable; would have had much weight with the King and Parliament; and it
is not improbable that the prayer of them would have been granted.

Nor let it be said, that such petitions from the Congress would not have been
received. They could not have been received, as coming from a legal body; but
they might have been received, as coming from a number of respectable men, and
relating to matters of great importance to the public. In January, 1769, a
petition on this very subject of parliamentary taxation, was presented to
Parliament, from a number of Gentlemen of the Massachusetts Bay, which included
a majority of the members of the Council, and was signed by Mr. Danforth, as
President. It however appearing that this petition had not passed in a legal
assembly of the Council, and that consequently no person could be authorized to
sign it as President, it was refused under that title, and was ordered to be
brought up, only as a petition from Samuel Danforth, in behalf of the several
individual members of the Council, at whose request it had been signed. This is
a case directly in point; and we may infer from it, that although the
Parliament would not have received an address, signed by Mr. Randolph, as
President of the Congress, yet that they might have received one as coming from
Peyton Randolph, in behalf of all those individuals who were members of the
Congress. This way of addressing the Parliament would therefore have been
prudent and rational, and far more likely to succeed than any other which the
Congress could have taken. And after such a trial, if it failed of success, the
colonies would have been less inexcusable in proceeding to violent measures.

The reader will be better able to form a proper judgment of this matter, if he
attends to the following excellent letter, written to the Governor of the
Massachusetts Bay in 1765, by General CONWAY, then one of his Majesty's
Principal Secretaries of State, and as true a friend to the rights and
liberties of America, as England has ever bred. Though he wrote officially, yet
the letter is known to express his own particular sentiments, as well as those
of the administration. It is in the following words:

"It is with the greatest concern his Majesty learns the disturbances which
have lately arisen in your province, the general confusion that seems to reign
there, and the total langour and want of energy in your government to exert
itself with any dignity or efficacy, for the suppression of tumults, which seem
to strike at the very being of all authority and subordination amongst you.

"Nothing can certainly exceed the ill-advised and intemperate conduct held by
a party in your province, which can in no way contribute to the removal of any
real grievance they might labor under, but may tend to impede and obstruct the
exertion of his Majesty's benevolent attention to the ease and comfort, as well
as to the welfare of all his people.

"It is hoped and expected, that this want of confidence in the justice and
tenderness of the mother country, and this open resistance to its authority,
can only have found place among the lower and more ignorant of the people: The
better and wiser part of the Colonies will know, that decency and submission
may prevail, not only to redress Grievances, but to obtain Grace and Favor,
while the outrage of a public violence can expect nothing but severity and
chastisement.

"These sentiments you and all his Majesty's servants, from a sense of your
duty to, and love of your country, will endeavor to excite and encourage; you
will all in a particular manner, call upon them, not to render their case
desperate. You will in the strongest colors represent to them the dreadful
consequences that must inevitably attend the forcible and violent resistance to
acts of the British Parliament, and the scene of misery and destruction to both
countries, inseparable from such a conduct.

For however unwillingly his Majesty may consent to the exertion of such powers
as may endanger the safety of a single subject; yet can he not permit his own
dignity and the authority of the British Legislature to be trampled on by force
and violence, and in avowed contempt of all order, duty, and decorum.

"If the subject is aggrieved, he knows in what manner legally and
constitutionally to apply for relief; but it is not suitable either to the
safety or dignity of the British Empire, that any individuals, under the
pretense of redressing grievances, should presume to violate the public peace."
All the Printers of NEWSPAPERS on this Continent, who have a Regard for the
true Interests of their Country, are requested to publish the above Letter, in
order to give some check to the Operation of that seditious Poison which so
many of the Americans have been persuaded inadvertently (...) swallow.


In this Letter, with which the Congress must have been acquainted, the only
way of procuring the redress of American Grievances, and of obtaining favor
from Great Britain, is pointed out by authority; and a friendly caution is
given against a contrary way of proceeding, as it can expect nothing but
severity and chastisement. The Congress therefore, in order to procure a
redress of American grievances, and to obtain the favor of a free American
constitution (which was the purport of their commission) in their profound
Wisdom and Sagacity, have rejected the only way, which they had been told would
be likely to succeed, and have adopted that specific mode of conduct which they
had been told would not succeed, but would bring down upon them and their
adherents severity and chastisement, and render their case desperate.

But this was such a breach of the trust reposed in them, and so contrary to
the very end and design of their appointment, that even those whom they call
their constituents cannot possibly be bound, either in honor or conscience to
abide by it. Some that were forward in voting for delegates to represent them
in the congress, are highly chagrined and disgusted at their proceedings, and
scruple not to declare, that, for their parts, they gave them no power to shut
up the ports, and stop their necessary business of the country, upon which the
prosperity and happiness of the people absolutely depended; much less to
provoke and insult a power, which never yet has been provoked and insulted with
impunity. And as to others, who still appear to approve of the proceedings of
the Congress; they did not, because they could not, give their Delegates a
power to act in opposition to the laws of their country and that the general
course of their actions was, in almost every point contrary to law, will
shortly be proved.

If then their constituents are not bound by their proceedings, there can be no
dispute with regard to others, who amount to a large majority of the
inhabitants, especially in the province of New York. In some Parts of this
province, the people had no meetings at all, as they would have no hand in the
manufacturing of committees. In other parts, the meetings did not consist of a
hundredth part of the inhabitants; and there is neithere county, town nor
precinct in the province, excepting the county and city of New York, in which
the number of voters for Committee Men, was comparable with the number of those
who refused to be concerned in the business, if I have been rightly informed.
The greatest part of this province therefore are under no ties, either real or
imaginary, to submit to the decisions of the Congress; but, on the contrary,
they are under the strongest ties, both of duty and interest, to give them no
countenance. We are not to judge of the province in general, from appearances
in the city; nor ought we to imagine, that our substantial Farmers, or the
Store-keepers and Tradesmen in the country, because they have tamely submitted,
in most cases, to be governed by the city, will consent to be ruined by it.

As matters have turned out, it is much to the credit of this province, that so
very small a part of it was represented in the Congress. It is a farther credit
to us, that, as we have reason to believe, the Delegates from hence opposed,
with all their influence, the headlong and destructive measures taken by the
Congress, that they still disapprove of them, and that they do not really wish
that we would pursue them. This is naturally inferred from their known
disposition and sentiments; and our opinion is confirmed by certain anecdotes
from Philadelphia, that have reached us. If this was actually the case, our
opposition to the proceedings of the Congress, or rather our total disregard of
them otherwise than to show our contempt and abhorrence of them, is also
justified by the opposition that was made to them on the spot, by the New York
Delegates, on their first proposal. None of us had any thing to do with the
Congress but by representation; all that we did by representation, was to
oppose and protest against what was transacted; and after having opposed the
proceedings of the Congress by our particular representatives, those of us who
were then represented, are bound in honor personally to oppose them too.

That such was the conduct of the Delegates from New York, is the general
opinion. We think however, that we are justly entitled to more direct and
authentic information; and therefore those Gentlemen are now called upon
explicitly to declare, how far they consented to, or opposed, the resolutions
of the Congress. When the people, under no directions of the law, but prompted
by their own alacrity, choose agents to appear for them, and negociate their
concerns at a general meeting of popular committees from different parts of the
country; they have always a right to be informed, in what particular manner the
trust has been executed. No resolves of perpetual secrecy, no combinations to
keep their employers always in the dark, could dissolve the prior obligations
our Delegates were under, to make report, on their return, in what manner they
discharged their commission, and how far they exerted themselves to fulfill the
design of their appointment.

Accordingly it is hoped, that the worthy and candid Gentlemen, who appeared at
the Congress in behalf of this province, will take the hint, and not wait to be
called upon again, as they certainly will be if they refuse to comply; and make
a full and clear report of their own particular transactions, during the
debates and proceedings of the Congress. Till we certainly know how they acted
to thank them for their actions, will be premature, absurd and preposterous, --
asking the pardon of our city Mechanics.

What is called a Journal of the transactions of the Congress, after a long
while made its appearance. Why this was kept back near a month, unless to see
in what manner the Extracts that had been published would be received by the
public, I am unable to explain. I pretend not to fathom the depth of
congressional politics. I can only say, that on perusing the Journal, I was not
a little disappointed. I imagined that after a month's labor of the press, the
production would have been a huge volume of the Proceedings, which would have
clearly and faithfully shown, what part each member contributed to the mighty
work that was formed. But -- parturiunt montes. We are still in the dark,
nearly as much as ever. We are told indeed what Committees were appointed to
frame the several addresses; but we are not told what particular members of
those Committees dissented from the rest, and were overruled by the majority.
In short we know not from the Journal, what part any one gentleman acted, who
was honored with our confidence, and entrusted in some degree with our
interests and safety. Till this matter is explained, or, at least, till some
assurances are given, that it shall be explained, every member of the Congress
must bear a part of the odium of having jointly contributed to the formation of
a plan, which is, like what they are pleased to call the established religion
of Canada "fraught with sanguinary and impious tenets," and which will go near
to prove fatal to the Colonies.

If the greatest Enemies of British-America had been employed to contrive the
ruin of the colonies, they could not have proposed a more effectual scheme for
the purpose, than that we should be led on to provoke the resentment, and
enrage the power, of Great Britain, by acts of hostility and rebellion. Now the
Congress appears to me, and appears to thousands of others in this country, not
indeed to have contrived, but to have adopted from New England, this very
scheme; and then to have recommended it to the Americans with all their
influence.

That a forcible opposition to the King's troops, when employed to protect the
Kings civil officers in the execution of the British laws within the British
dominions, is an act of hostility against Great Britain, is surely too plain to
require proof. The laws of England have made it treason, which is the highest
and most unpardonable of all crimes relating to the state. For when crimes of
this nature are properly clased, The third species of treason is, if a man do
levy war against our Lord the King in his realm. And this may be done by taking
arms, not only to dethrone the King, but under pretense to reform religion, or
the laws, or to remove evil counselors, or other grievances, whether real or
pretended Black^^oue's Commentaries.
. I beg the reader, before he proceeds farther, to peruse this (...) a second
time, and to give every part of it the attention it deserves.

Now whether we will allow these colonies to be within the British Realm or
not, it is certain that Great Britain claims a jurisdiction over the colonies
as a part of its realm, and will consider the same actions to be treason here
which are treason in England; and there can be no doubt but that a war levied
against the King by any of his subjects, whether in Europe or America, will be
treated as equally criminal. Yet supposing the contrary, we know that force
opposed to the Kings troops in America will be repelled by force; and this will
necessarily produce a war between Great Britain and these colonies, in which
the strongest must conquer.

The people in New England, if they have not actually levied war against the
King, have manifestly discovered a disposition to levy war against him; and
throughout the summer past they have been making such military preparations, as
can have no other end than to enable them to fight the King's troops. Nay, on a
certain false alarm, that was given to try the temper of the people, they were
all in arms, and assembled together by thousands, with no other design than to
fight the King's army in Boston; and they would have fought them, if they had
met with an opportunity.

Now, what can the Congress say, to such treasonable proceedings as these? Take
it in their own words.

RESOLVED, That this Congress do APPROVE of the opposition made by the
Inhabitants of the Massachusetts Bay, to the execution of the late acts of
parliament; and if the same shall be attempted to be carried into execution by
force, in such case ALL AMERICA OUGHT TO SUPPORT THEM IN THEIR OPPOSITION.

The Earl of CHATHAM, one of the most illustrious patrons of American liberty,
speaking of a much less exceptionable part of the conduct of the New England
people, says: Their resentment got the ascendant of their duty, and hurried
them into actions contrary to all laws of policy, civilization and humanity,
which, in their cooler hours, they would have thought on with horror. See the
Supplement to Holt's Paper of September 8.
What his Lordship here strongly condemns, and even what is unspeakably worse,
the Congress are not ashamed, in the face of the public, to approve of, and to
recommend to the patronage and support of all America. Thus we likewise see how
cont^^^ (...) the sentiments of their warmest friends in England the Congress
have proceeded; and after this, they can be no longer entitled to expect that
they will continue to be their advocates.

Having taken a view of one part of the line, in which the people of
New England had proceeded in their opposition to Parliament, at the time of the
Congress, let us now attend to another. The county of Suffolk, of which Boston
is the capital, at a meeting of Delegates from every town and district in the
county, on the 6th of September, after a preamble, beginning with these dutiful
and decent expressions: Whereas the power, but not the justice, the vengeance
but not the wisdom, of Great Britain, which of old persecuted, scourged and
excited our fugitive parents from their native shores, now pursues us their
guiltless children with unrelenting severity -- Resolved, among other things,

4. That no obedience is due from this province to either or any part of the
acts abovementioned, but that they be rejected as the attempts of a wicked
administration to enslave America. --

6. That if the justices of the superior court of judicature, assize, etc.
justices of the court of common pleas, or of the general sessions of the peace,
shall sit and act during their present disqualified state, this county will
support and bear harmless all sheriffs and other deputies, constables, jurors,
and other officers, who shall refuse to carry into execution the orders of said
court. --

"8. That all persons refusing (to give up their commissions held under the
present act) shall from and after said day (the 20th of September) be
considered by this county as obstinate and incorrigible enemies to this
country. --

11. That whereas our enemies have flattered themselves, that they shall make
an easy prey of this numerous, brave and hardy people, from an apprehension
that they are unacquainted with military discipline, we therefore for the
honor, defense and security of this country and province, advise, as it has
been recommended to take away all commissions from the officers of the militia,
that those who now hold commissions, or such other persons be re-elected in
each town as officers in the militia, as shall be judged of sufficient capacity
for that purpose, and who have evidenced themselves the inflexible friends to
the rights of the people; and that the inhabitants of these towns and districts
who are qualified do use their (...) diligence to acquaint themselves with the
art of war as soon as possible, and do for that purpose appear under arms at
least once every week. --

13. That as we understand it has been in contemplation to apprehend sundry
persons of this county, who have rendered themselves conspicuous in contending
for the violated rights and liberties of their countrymen, we do recommend,
should such audacious measure be put in practice, to seize and keep in safe
custody, every servant of the present tyrannical and unconstitutional
government throughout the county and province, until the persons so
apprehended, be liberated from the hands of our adversaries, and restored safe
and uninjured to their respective friends and families.

If this scheme be analyzed, it will be found evidently to contain in it the
following ingredients. First, a DECLARATION of INDEPENDENCY, made by the
Suffolk Committees, asserting that no obedience is due from them to any acts of
Parliaments, which they disapprove of. Secondly, an EDICT, to shut up the
courts of justice, which shall presume to act by authority derived from the
King and Parliament. Thirdly, a PROSCRIPTION, of all that do not resign their
commissions held under the authority aforesaid, as obstinate and incorrigible
enemies, who are to be treated accordingly. Fourthly, a PROCLAMATION, that
officers be forthwith appointed by the people, to supersede those that are
appointed by the Crown. Fifthly, an ORDER, issued to their own officers and
people to arm themselves, and learn the art of war, to qualify them to fight
against their LAWFUL SOVEREIGN. And, Sixthly, a DECREE, for seizing and
throwing under confinement, (perhaps in dungeons, with a scanty allowance of
bread and water only) every person in the province who is thought worthy of
confidence by the crown; in case the King's officers of justice should be so
audacious, as to apprehend any of those delinquents who have rendered
themselves conspicuous in the late riotous, tumultuous and seditious
proceedings of that province.

Now if all this does not amount to an open revolt and rebellion, I have always
mistaken the meaning of the word; and I shall be obliged to any gentleman,
learned in the law or acquainted with history, if he will inform me, or the
public, what rebellion is.

Indeed what rebellion is not, we have been lately told, with much confidence,
in the STRICTURES of a certain wandering spirit; who has thought fit to
interpose in the literary way for the honor of New England. This writer
contends, that no man who is not blinded by the Demon of Jacobitism, could
possibly be guilty of the weakness, of calling Cromwell's resistance a
rebellion. It will be allowed on all sides, that if Cromwell's dethroning and
murdering his Sovereign, whose right to the throne was unquestionable -- his
ravaging and laying waste his kingdoms -- his dissolving the authority of the
Lords and Commons, -- and his total subversion of the constitution, -- did not
amount to a rebellion; then the people of Suffolk are not guilty of rebellion.
But whatever this political partizan may think of the matter, all reputable
writers, whether of our own or of foreign nations, and all our acts of
Parliament, that mention it, call Cromwell's outrageous opposition to legal
authority, a rebellion; and one act in particular calls it, the unnatural
rebellion, usurpation and tyranny of ungodly and cruel men. In the sense
therefore of all those writers, and of all those acts of Parliament, the people
of Suffolk must appear, in no small degree, to be guilty of rebellion. The
writer here referred to, intimates, that he himself is no Jacobite. So far may
be (...) enough. But if, at the same time, he had shown himself to be more of a
Georgeite, and less of a Cromwellite, it would have been more becoming, in a
person of his supposed station.

Let us now lift up our eyes, and turn them to the Congress. As soon as thy
received, by express, an authentic copy of the abovementioned Suffolk
Resolves, they broke through all their rules of secrecy, and, at once, gave
such a blast from the trumpet of sedition, as made one half of America shudder.
If this language be too figurative, I will endeavor to express myself in
plainer terms. Know then, courteous reader, that the Congress, on receiving
those Suffolk resolves, which they ought to have sent back with indignation and
abhorence; on that very day, some say in the same hour, but however, without
any hesitation, or taking time to debate, resolved to proclaim from the press,
their approbation of them, -- and, which is more, their thorough approbation of
them, -- nay, which is more still, their most thorough approbation of them,
without any exception. This appeared from the minutes then published, and
signed, by order, CHARING THOMSON, Secretary; in which the whole copy of those
resolves is inserted, and honored with the following encomium.

The Congress taking the foregoing into consideration,

Resolved unanimously,

That this assembly deeply feels the suffering of their countrymen in the
Massachusetts Bay, under the operation of the late unjust, cruel and oppressive
acts of the British Parliament; that they most thoroughly approve the wisdom
and fortitude with which opposition to those wicked ministerial measures has
HITHERTO been conducted, and they (...) recommend to their brethren a
perseverance in the same form and temperate conduct as expressed in the
resolutions determined upon at a meeting of the Delegates for the county of
Suffolk, on Tuesday the 16 th instant, trusting, that the effect of the united
efforts of North America in their behalf, will carry such conviction to the
British nation, of the unwise, unjust, and ruinous policy of the present
administration, as quickly to introduce better men and wiser measures.

It is denied, I am told, by some of the advocates for the Congress, that they
(the Congress) ever meant to signify their approbation of the whole proceedings
of the county of Suffolk. But such an insult upon common sense is absolutely
unsufferable. If their meaning is to be taken from plain and unequivocal
language, they certainly meant, in this resolve, to express the strongest
approbation of the whole, and every part, of the Suffolk proceedings.

That the Congress have, in reality, given their sanction to the rebellion that
has begun in the county of Suffolk, is to me as evident as words, and
corresponding facts, are able to make it. In this sense, the people of Suffolk
themselves have understood the resolve; in this sense, the Americans in general
are known to understand it; and not a member of the Congress has stood forth,
to remove the mistake, or to soften the common interpretation. Till something
of the Kind is thus done, and the language of the resolve is otherwise fairly
accounted for; it will be impossible for the Americans not to continue in the
belief, that the Congress have taken the part which is here ascribed to them,
and have recommended a rebellious opposition to the supreme authority of the
British empire.

What must be the consequence of a rebellious war with the Mother Country, any
person of common sense, if he will take the liberty to exercise it, may easily
foresee. Even a final victory would effectually ruin us; as it would
necessarily introduce civil wars among ourselves, and leave us open and exposed
to the avarice and ambition of every maritime power in Europe or America. And
till one part of this country shall have subdued the other, and conquered a
considerable part of the world besides, this peaceful region must become, and
continue to be, a theater of inconceivable misery and horror.

But that we should have any expectation or hope of being able to conquer or
with stand the force of Great Britain, is to me astonishing. I doubt not but
the Americans are naturally as brave as any other people; and it is allowed,
that they are not wanting in numbers. But they are without fortresses, without
discipline, without military stores, without money. These are deficiencies
which it must be the work of an age to remove; and while they continue, it will
be impossible to keep an army in the field.

Some may imagine, that discipline of itself will be sufficient for the
purpose; and that disciplined men may be easily made in such a country as this.
But it is not in the power of all the friends of the Congress, to introduce
what deserves the name of discipline into any of the colonies to the southward
of New England; not for want of men capable of teaching it, but for want of a
fund for regular pay, and authority, to keep a proper number of soldiers
together. But had they men enough that were completely disciplined, they would
not be able to march one regiment so far as to Boston. A regiment on actual
duty, at a distance from home, must be punctually paid, and must be governed by
an authority, the legality of which they are unable to question; otherwise,
they will soon grow tired of the service, become mutinous, learn to be jealous
of their own rights and liberties, and refuse to be led on, or governed by a
set of unconstitutional officers.

The circumstances of New England are such, that a large number of armed and
half-disciplined men might be got together, in the neighborhood of Boston, on
some great and general alarm; but they could not continue there a week, without
eating up the country, and being obliged to disperse to avoid starving. If it
is their business to fight the King's troops, they must be able to bring them
to a battle immediately, and at their own time; or else they will have reason
to rue the attempt. Besides; supposing they had an army of 50,000 men, provided
for in such a manner as to be able to form a regular encampment; if the
appearance of the King's troops would not, yet a report that the smallpox was
among them, instantly would put them to flight. This is not said by way of
reflection on the people of New England; for were the smallpox to get into
their army, and by that means, to spread through the country, it would
undoubtedly sweep off a great part of its inhabitants.

I shall pursue the subject of the inability of America, to defend itself in a
war with Great Britain, no farther; as the reader may easily improve upon these
hints.

To those who are so absurd as to depend upon possibilities only I have but
little to say. It is barely possible that the stars in their courses may fight
in favor of the colonies, that an earthquake may swallow up the King's army in
Boston, and that every ship of war and every transport ordered from England to
America may be blasted with lightning, or overwhelmed in the ocean. But if
there should be no miraculous interposition of heaven to defeat the natural
power of the mother country, should we go on to enrage it, it must at last fall
upon us with an irrisistible impetuosity.

I have often thought that all our hostile declarations and appearances were
never intended for any thing more than threatenings, in order to intimidate
Great Britain. If this is the case, it appears impossible that they should
answer the purpose. Whatever we may think of ourselves, it is not the opinion
in England that our power at present is equal to theirs. Our threatenings
therefore will appear to the mother country to be ridiculous and contemptible.
If we have no power to execute, we have no right to threaten; and every effort
in this way will expose our folly.

But the Congress, not relying altogether on the military strength of the
colonies, nor on the success of their threatening to exert it, have proceeded
also to form an Association, in which they bind themselves and all whom they
represent, as far as they are able, not to import any British goods, after a
certain limited time, and to support this resolution by a non-consumption
agreement. The non-importation is extended to Ireland, the West Indies, the
Western Islands, etc. After a while a non-exportation is to follow. We are then
to cut ourselves off from all communication with those foreign markets, which
have supplied and enriched the colonies; and there is not to be the least
relaxation, till twenty acts of Parliament are repealed to please us, some of
which immediately affect us, and some of which do not concern us.

It is no small thing to obtain the repeal of one act of Parliament, even when
the regular and proper steps are taken; but to demand the repeal of a long
succession of acts, and to require that the Parliament should make the most
humiliating concessions to us, is such a piece of heroism as has no parallel.
And the penalty of noncompliance is still more heroical than the demand
itself; for it is inflicted upon ourselves, principally and chiefly. We engage
to deprive ourselves of the comforts of life, to become as poor as dogs, and to
live like savages, if the Parliament will not consent to give up its authority.
I have heard of non-importation schemes before; but of none that was comparable
with the present one.

In our former non-importation agreement, some regard was shown for the lives
of the Americans, and therefore drugs and medicines were excepted. But now,
considerations of this kind are not regarded, and we are not allowed to import
antimony, nor mercury, either crude or prepared, nor Jesuit's bark; though we
know that every year thousands of lives in America are owing to a proper use of
these capital medicines. We may think little of such matters, so long as we or
our families are in health, or before the present stock is exhausted; but
afterward, should we, or our wives and children, come to struggle with
sickness, and to be seized with obstinate disorders, which will yield to the
force of no medicines, but such as we are deprived of by our non-importation
agreement, we shall be apt to entertain no very high opinion of the wisdom of
the Congress in this particular.

There seems to have been much pains bestowed upon the non-importation plan, in
selecting and rejecting, and putting distinctions on the various articles of
commerce; but after all, many parts of it appear to be whimsical and partial.
Thus, for instance, foreign indigo is excluded, while foreign coffee, liable to
the same objections, is admitted. Foreign molasses is not to be imported, while
it pays a duty of a penny sterling; but as soon as the present act is repealed,
by which it will become subject to a duty of six pence, the importation of it
is considered as not interfering with the rights of the colonies. This, by the
way, is opening a fine backdoor for the smugglers, with all that train of
guilt which commonly attends them.

In the 4th article of the Association, the Congress resolve, after a certain
period, not to export any merchandise or commodity whatsoever to Great Britain,
Ireland, or the West Indies, except rice to Europe. This phraseology is
original, and hardly intelligible. In exactly the same style the Provincial
Congress of the Massachusetts Bay might resolve: We will export nothing to
Pennsylvania, the three Lower Counties, or Long Island, except cod-fish to the
North-American colonies. But to let this pass. By the artful construction of
the sentence, it seems to have been the design of the Congress to delude the
Americans with an insinuation, that rice might be exported from Carolina, to
Europe in general, without sending any part of it to Great Britain. It may
therefore be proper to explain to the reader, under what regulations the
exportation of American rice has been placed by acts of Parliament.

By an act, in the reign of Queen Anne, all rice produced in the English
plantations in America, that should be sent abroad, was required to be imported
into England, Wales, or Berwick upon Tweed, or to some other of the
Plantations, under such securities and penalties as certain enumerated goods
and commodities were made subject to by an act of the 12th Charles II. But by
an act of the 3d George II. it was provided, that rice may be carried from
Carolina directly to any part of Europe southward of Cape Finisterre, without
landing it in England, as formerly required, on the following conditions: --
That the vessels in which it is exported, be built in Great Britain, owned by
persons residing in Great Britain, navigated chiefly by British sailors, and
cleared outward from some port in Great Britain, for Carolina: -- That every
master of such vessel, before he can be entitled to a clearance, must obtain a
license from the Commissioners of the Customs, for loading in Carolina, with
rice, for such parts of Europe as are southward of Cape Finisterre; in order to
which he must produce a certificate from the collector and comptroller of the
port where the license is applied for, certifying that he has given bond, for
not less than L.1000 sterling, be his vessel ever so small, with sufficient
security, that no tobacco, sugar, etc. shall be taken on board, unless for the
necessary use of the ship: -- That every such vessel, after landing its rice in
the southern European ports, shall proceed to Great Britain before it returns
to America; and in case the master, or others in his name, do not produce,
within a limited time, a certificate, from the British Consul, or, in his
absence from some principal merchants of the foreign port made use of, of
having landed the rice in the manner prescribed, his bond shall be forfeited.

But this is not all, nor yet half. It is farther enacted, that before taking
in the rice, the masters of the vessels shall deliver to the collector of the
port in Carolina, the abovementioned licenses and certificates, and make oath
of their intentions relating to their cargoes; and after going through as many
other forms, and submitting to as many other restraints, as have been already
mentioned, (all which it would be tedious to enumerate) that they shall pay to
the collector or comptroller in Carolina, the full sum for the half-subsidy for
all the rice mentioned in their papers; and in case the same is not paid within
thirty days after the demand made, the bond shall be forfeited, and shall and
may be put in suit, and the persons bound therein, shall pay treble costs. See
Ruffhead's Statutes at large, vol. vi.


This is the act under which rice may be exported from Carolina; and from the
foregoing particulars we may be able to judge, what the Congress mean by
exporting rice to Europe. For unless they can believe, that the commissioners
of the customs in England will give their license to the Carolina exporters,
from time to time, to carry all their rice to the European ports* that are to
the southward of Cape Finisterre, their agreement to export rice to Europe,
must imply their consent to export no small part of it directly to
Great Britain; though they attempt ungenerously to conceal it from the nothern
colonies, by a studied vagueness of expression.

It is impossible to single out any one act of Parliament, that is more
obnoxious for its display of that parliamentary supremacy which is denied by
the Congress, than this act which regulates the exportation of rice. And yet a
quiet submission is paid to this act, while others less exceptionable are
opposed with such a spirit of licentiousness, as threatens the destruction of
all the colonies. This rice act shows what the opinion of Parliament was forty
years ago, and the submission of the Americans, shows their opinion at that
time, concerning the authority of Parliament in American affairs.


But the reason of this partiality is known in part. The Delegates from
Carolina were firmly attached to the interests of their constituents, and would
not consent to their immediate ruin. They opposed and remonstrated with spirit;
and rather than they should be suffered to withdraw themselves from the
Congress, as they threatened, their requisition was granted. Had the Delegates
from this province, who are not suspected of wanting as firm an attachment to
our interests, been possessed of as intrepid a resolution as their brethren
from Carolina, and followed their spirited example; we might have come in too
for some share of indulgence. But they always suffered themselves to be borne
down by a majority of votes, from the Republicans of the East, and the
Aristocratics of the South; and the consequence is, that we have received no
more benefit from an actual representation in the Congress, than from a virtual
one in Parliament.

It would be endless to point out, and remark upon, all the instances of the
fanciful and whimsical disposition of the Congress, which appear in their
papers: such as their regulating the expenses of funerals, but not of weddings,
-- their making sumptuary, but not agrarian laws; the latter of which a
majority of the Americans would perhaps like much better, and the expediency of
which, some people of New England, of levelling principles, have already taken
into consideration, as I have been credibly informed. But one or two articles
more of the association deserve particular notice.

In the 12th article, the Committees of Correspondence are ordered, in their
respective colonies, to frequently inspect the entries of their Custom-Houses,
and inform each other from time to time of the true state thereof. This is a
resolution which there can be no prospect of executing, but by methods of
violence. For it is not to be supposed, that the officers of his Majesty's
Customs will submit their books and papers to the inspection of those, who have
formed a confederacy to rob the King of his Customs. However, the
Committee Men, it seems, must inspect the entries; and if they cannot obtain
them by fair means, they must get them as they can; or else this decree of the
Congress cannot be executed.

In the 14th article the Congress resolve, to have no trade or friendly
communication with any colony or province of North America, which shall not
accede or adhere to their association; while they know it is not in the power
of several of them to join in it, however favorable their disposition may be
to such a junction. This punishment therefore (for as such it is intended) is
decreed against those who are unquestionably innocent, and against those who
may be some of the best friends to the general proceedings of the Congress.
And, which is still worse, this punishment is to continue, till a complete
political revolution is effected, till the British Parliament is dispossessed
of every claim of jurisdiction over the colonies, and not only till every
enumerated obnoxious law respecting ourselves shall be repealed, but till the
established landmarks and boundaries of one of the King's provinces, which has
been lately conquered from the French, shall be altered and removed according
to our dictates. Till the whole of this work is accomplished, the provinces of
Quebec, Nova Scotia, East and West-Florida, must all continue under the ban of
our new American empire: And none of us are allowed to purchase so much as a
beaver-skin that has been brought across any of the lakes, under pain of the
penalties to be inflicted on the violaters of the association agreement.

If we turn back from the Association to the declaration of Rights, we shall
see the principles of the Congress, and be able to collect some proofs of their
aiming at a total independency. By their demand in the Association it appears,
that they mean to emancipate themselves at once from all the Acts of Parliament
that have been passed under his present Majesty. If they succeed in this, they
know, that by the same methods they can clear themselves of all former acts,
and become independent; and that this is intended, is probable from some broad
hints which they drop in their declaration. Thus they say there are many other
infringements and violations of their rights, of a date more ancient than the
present reign, which we pass over for the present, and proceed to state such
acts and measures as have been adopted since the last war. So again: we have
for the present only resolved to pursue the following peaceable measures. From
hence Great Britain will naturally judge, that granting even all that they
demand at present will be no security for the future peaceable demeanor of the
Colonies; since intimations are here given, that there are many other
infringements and violations of their rights, which also in due time must be
rectified.

That the views of the Congress are thus immoderate, is no more than might be
naturally expected from a review of their principles, as expressed in their
declaration; a full examination of which I shall defer for the present. I shall
now only take notice of a few particulars in this part of their exhibition,
which are the most glaring and striking.

In their preamble, they complain that our Assemblies have been frequently
dissolved, contrary to the rights of the Americans. -- This implies, that they
claim in behalf of our Assemblies, a right not to be dissolved, or interrupted,
by the King's authority, let the tendency of their temper and proceedings be
ever so injurious to the peace and safety of the public. Yet it is an undoubted
prerogative of the crown to dissolve the British Parliament, whenever and as
often as the interest of the public is thought to require it. The Congress
therefore will not allow the King to exercise the same authority over our
American Assemblies, in any of the Colonies, which the constitution allows him
to exercise over the Parliament in England. Thus, we see, after having rejected
all the authority of Parliament over the Colonies, their next attempt is to
reduce and farther circumscribe that of the King.

In pursuance of this part of their plan, the Congress remonstrate to the
King's Governor and General, acting by his immediate authority, against his
fortifying the neck of land that leads into Boston, and magisterially require
him to desist: Whereas the King has as unquestionable a right to erect
fortresses in any part of his dominions, as to erect Beacons, etc. Let the
Reader consult Blackstone's COMMENTARIES. Lib. 1. Cap. 1. on the King's
Prerogative.


One of the most essential rights of the British crown, without which the King
can be but little better than a cipher, is the command of the militia, and of
all the sea and land forces within the British dominions. But in America the
Congress have already wrested from the King the command of the militia, in one
of our largest provinces, and not only so, but they have armed that militia
against him; and unless he will submit to walk in their leading-strings, he is
likely to be treated in the same manner in the rest of the Colonies, -- Good
Heavens! let the province of New York be excepted.

That he should have the command of any regular troops in America is thought
intolerable; and therefore, the Congress, in their proceedings of Oct. 14,
resolve, N. C. D. That the keeping a standing army in these Colonies, in time
of peace, without the consent of the legislature of that Colony, in which such
army is kept, is against law. But this is not enough. They resolve again, in
the very same day, in the very same words; and print the resolve a second time,
verbatim, in the proceedings of that very day, that it might be sent abroad
armed with a double force.

Yet what are we to understand by the expression against law, is not easy to
determine. If they mean by it, contrary to any laws that have been enacted in
the Colonies, I conceive, that an attempt to point out such laws, would puzzle
the Congress.

They cannot mean, that it is contrary to acts of Parliament, because, they
know that the Parliament has provided for the troops in question from year to
year, for the very purpose that an army might be kept in America, without
having once thought of asking the consent of the Colonies.

If they mean, contrary to the common law of England, the position is more than
they can defend. They indeed resolve, that the Colonies are entitled to the
common law of England; but if they are not subject to the statute law of
England, they have no more right to the common law than the Inhabitants of
Otaheite. But allowing that the Colonies are entitled to the common law of
England; yet there is an act of Parliament, now in force, that declares, that
the government of the military, forces (which includes the assignment of their
posts and stations) " within ALL his Majesty's realms and dominions, ever was
and is the undoubted right of his Majesty, and his royal predecessors, the
Kings and Queens of England; and that both or either House of Parliament
cannot, nor ought to pretend to the same." If this always or ever was the case,
as the act of Parliament asserts; then it is certain that the common law of
England can afford no pretense for this claim of the Congress.

After thus maiming and mangling the regal authority in America, the Congress,
it must be confessed, in order to make some amends, are willing enough to give
it full scope in England, and even to enlarge it there beyond its natural and
constitutional dimensions. They apply to the King, and to him only, to relieve
them from the obnoxious acts; as if they ascribed to him a full power of
repealing, dispensing with, or suspending, the laws made by Parliament. But no
addresses to the two Houses of Parliament are prepared, explaining the nature
and foundation of the demand, and requesting their concurrence. Does not this
imply an opinion, that the King may take upon himself to do all that is
needful, for the relief of the Colonies, without waiting for the approbation or
consent of Parliament? or, must we suppose, that the representatives of America
in Congress, had too much pride to stoop to the representatives of a small
European island in parliament; and that they imagined, that the hostile
preparations made in America, would terrify the Parliament into a compliance
with their schemes?

The way being thus prepared, by an entire demolition of the authority of
Parliament over the Colonies, and by a diminution of that of the King; the next
part of the plan is, to make provision for enlarging the authority and dignity
of the members of the Congress and some of their friends. This part of the
scheme has not yet been expressly avowed. It is rather too soon to speak
plainly to the public; but something of this sort may be inferred from the
tenth Article of the Declaration, which is as follows:

Resolved, N. C. D. It is indispensibly necessary to good government, and
rendered essential by the English constitution, that the constituent branches
of the Legislature be independent of each other; that, therefore, the exercise
of the legislative power in several Colonies, by a council appointed, during
pleasure, by the crown, is unconstitutional, dangerous, and destructive to the
freedom of American Legislation.

Here, Reader, if thou can but read, you may see, that an American House of
Lords is in agitation; in which the members must have the same right,
privileges and honors, which the English constitution has given to the members
of the House of Lords in the Mother Country. They must be independent of the
Crown, and independent of the representatives of the people. They must continue
for life; and according to the English constitution, their rights and titles
must descend to their heirs, lawfully begotten, and from them again, to their
heirs, forever and ever. There must also, I suppose, be the same Orders of the
American nobility, that belong to the English; and then none can dispute or
question, that the gentlemen of the Congress will have a right to the highest
Order.

For my part, I am ravished and transported at the foresight of this American
grandeur. I long for the day, in which I may expect to see such articles as the
following, in HOLT's Paper. Last Friday arrived in this City, from the
Eastward, the most noble and puissant Prince -- Duke of -- in America. His
Grace lately was dangerously ill of a Megrim in the head, and a griping in the
bowels, attended with an overflowing of the gall; but we have the pleasure of
assuring the public, that he is perfectly recovered.

Oh! how we shall shine with Dukes in America! There will be no less than fifty
three of them. There will be Duke Timnah, Duke Alvah, Duke Jetheth, -- Aye, we
shall have two-and-forty more Dukes than the ancient and celebrated Edomites
could muster for the blood of them. The Committees of Correspondence will
furnish us with Marquisses; and the Committees of Observation, with Earls. The
Viscounts may consist of Heroes that are famed for their exploits in tarring
and feathering; and the Barons, or Lowest Order, of those, whose merit has been
signalized in burning such Pamphlets as they were unable to answer. If there
must be Lords spiritual too, as well as temporal; Boston, we know has two, that
are well fitted for the purpose; New Jersey has one, and most of the Colonies
can furnish their quota. But to return from this digression.

The Congress in the last mentioned resolve, contend, that it is
Unconstitutional for the members of our provincial councils to be appointed by
the crown, to continue during pleasure only; and yet this was the original
constitution of every Colony, in which such appointments now take place. If we
call such a council unconstitutional in New York, we must mean by the word, not
what is contrary, but what is agreeable to the constitution of this province. A
council thus appointed, was declared, by an act of our assembly, passed in
1691, by way of Bill of Rights, to be a proper and constitutional branch of the
legislative authority here. King William himself, the immortal and true patron
both of civil and ecclesiastical liberty, was of the same opinion, and
appointed counselors for this and other Colonies on the same terms.
Notwithstanding, and though the matter is overstrained by the Congress, I have
no objections against an appointment of Counselors during good behavior; and
I believe, that the independency of our councils, on the Crown, after their
appointment, would be a real improvement of our Constitution, relating to that
branch of our legislative authority.

While the Congress assert, that it is indispensibly necessary to good
government, that the constituent branches of the legislature should be
independent on each other, they strenuously urge, that the Council in the
Massachusetts Bay, should be restored to a dependency on the representatives of
the people. For, according to the tenor of their late charter (a charter which
it is thought better that all America should perish than not see replaced) the
members of the council are all chosen by the house of assembly; and it depends
upon that house, whether they shall be confirmed or displaced, at the end of
every year. Could the Congress imagine that such a dependency as this, on the
lowest branch of the legislature, will not have as bad an effect on the
council, as a dependency on the highest? If not, why did they discover such
glaring impartiality? The reason may be easily guessed: It is the spirit of the
present system, to depress the power of the crown, and to exalt the power of
the people; and the design of it, to prepare the way for introducing and
establishing an American Republic, or Aristocracy, or rather both; the former
to the Eastward, and the latter to the Southward,

It has been long suspected, and indeed pretty well known by some persons, that
a set of people in the Colonies, whose head quarters are at Boston, have for
many years been aiming at, and preparing the way for, a government of their own
modelling, independent of Great Britain, to be erected as soon as the
disposition of the Colonies could be brought to favor the attempt. Their
machinations, for the most part, have been carried on in the dark; but yet in
the exuberance of their zeal, and in some of their unguarded moments, they have
discovered enough to alarm all the friends of our excellent constitution, and
all who esteem the kind and parental protection of the mother country, as
essential to the happiness and safety of the Colonies.

Near seven years ago, a writer, who made much noise in this city, who was well
acquainted with the secrets of the New England republican faction, and whom
some suppose to have been their agent in this province, in the warmth of an
unreined imagination, was led to utter more in an apocalyptical strain, than
was probably intended. While his mind labored with pleasing conceptions of the
progress that was making toward an independent American establishment,
confident of succeeding, and regardless of precautions, he took up his parable,
and said:

Courage then, Americans! -- The finger of God points out a mighty empire to
your sons. -- We need not be discouraged. -- The angry cloud -- will soon be
dispersed. -- The day dawns, in which the foundation of this mighty empire is
to be laid, by the establishment of a regular American constitution. All that
has hitherto been done, seems to be little beside the collection of materials,
for the construction of this glorious fabric. It Is time to put them together.
The transfer of the European part of the great family is so vast, and our
growth so swift, that before seven years roll over our heads, the first stone
must be laid. -- Peace or war; famine or plenty; poverty or affluence; in a
word, no circumstance, whether prosperous or adverse, can happen to our parent;
nay, no conduct of hers, whether wise or imprudent, no possible temper on her
part, whether kind or cross-grained, will put a stop to this building. There is
no contending with omnipotence, and the Predispositions are so numerous, and so
well adopted to the rise of America, that our success is indubitable. And in
the next paragraph, shifting his imagery, he says: "We are moulding the great
political mass into order." See the American Whig, No. v.


In these figurative expressions, though not fully understood by readers in
general, enough was discovered to justify the inference, that preparations were
then making for a revolution in the colonies, that much had been already done
toward it, and that in a short time the effects of it would be visible to the
world.

The grand object in view was no less than a mighty empire, for the Americans.
This expected and intended empire, under the representation of a building or
magnificent temple, the writer views with rapture and prophetic enthusiasm. The
time swiftly approaches, nay, "the day dawns," says he, in which the foundation
of it is " to be laid." The materials are already collected, for the
construction of this glorious fabric, and nothing is now wanting but to put
them together.

A specimen of these materials was soon after exhibited in the town of Boston;
and if any one is desirous of knowing their form and qualify, let him carefully
read the Copy of an agreement entered into by the inhabitants of Boston, on
August 1, 1768; the declaration and resolves made by them in the September
following -- The Circular Letter To the above mentioned Circular letter, a very
sensible and spirited, though inaccurately penned answer was returned, by the
Select Men of the Town of Hatfield, of the same province, dated September 23d,
1768. Part of the answer is in the following words.

We are not sensible that the state of America is so alarming, or the State of
this province so materially different from what it was a few Months since, as
to render the measure you propose, viz. a provincial convention) either
salutary or necessary.

And here we propose to your consideration, whether the circular letter, which
gave such umbrage, containing these expressions, or others of the like import:
That the King and parliament, by the late revenue act, had Infringed the rights
of the colonies, imposed an inequitable tax, and things yet worse might be
expected from the independance and unlimited appointments of crown officers
therein mentioned, was so perfectly innocent, and entirely consistent with that
duty and loyalty professed by the House of Refresentatives the last year, in
their petition to his Majesty; and whether the last house might not have
complied with his Majesty's requisition, with a full saving of all their rights
and privileges, thereby prevented our being destitute of a general court at
this day.

We cannot comprehend what pretense there can be for the proposed convention,
unless the probability of a considerable number of regular troops being sent
into this province, and an apprehension of their being quartered, part in your
town and part at the castle -- and here we would observe, that it was a matter
of doubt and uncertainty, whether any were coming or not; if otherwise, for
what purpose the King was sending them, whether for your defense in case of a
French war (as you tell us there is in the minds of many a prevailing
apprehension of one approaching, and if we do not misunderstand your letter,
induced them to pass the votes transmitted to us), or whether they are designed
for the protection of the new-acquired territories, is altogether uncertain.
That they are to be a standing army in time of peace, you give us no evidence;
and if your apprehensions are well grounded, it is not even supposeable they
are intended as such -- and if your town meant sincerely, we cannot see the
need they had of interposing in military matters, in an unprecedented way
requesting their inhabitants to be provided with arms, etc. (a matter till now
always supposed to belong to another department) especially as they must know
such a number of troops would be a much better defense, in case of war, than
they had heretofore been favored with. To suppose what you surmise they may be
intended for, is to mistrust the King's paternal care and goodness. If by any
sudden excursions or insurrections of some inconsiderate people, the King has
been induced to think them a necessary check upon you, we hope you will, by
your loyalty and quiet behavior soon convince his Majesty, and the world, they
are not longer necessary for that purpose; that thereupon they will be
withdrawn, and your town and the province saved any farther trouble and expense
from that quarter.

We are sensible the colonies labor under many difficulties, and we greatly
fear, what the consequences of the disputes with our mother country will prove;
however we are far from thinking the measures you are pursuing have any
tendency to deliver the good people of this province, but on the contrary, to
immerge them into greater. After all, we should hope (were it not for your
present attempt, attended with a bad complexion) we might soon have deliverance
from our present troubles, and things restored as at the first. The governments
have, in our opinion, consulted, and are pursuing, the properest methods to
obtain redress of their grievances [ In consequence of the use of these
methods, the duties upon paper, glass, and pointers colors were taken of.];
our duty is, to wait with patience the event, unless we are determined to take
the alternative. How far passion and disappointment, and private resentment may
influence any to hurry their neighbors into such mad and desperate measures,
we don't know, but pray God pevent.

Suffer us to observe, that in our opinion, the measures the town of Boston are
pursuing, and proposing to us, and the people of this province to unite in, are
unconstitutional, illegal, and wholly unjustifiable, and what will give the
enemies of our constitution the greatest joy, subversive of government,
destructive of that Peace and good order which is the cement of society; and
have a direct tendency to rivet our chains, and deprive us of our rights and
privileges, which the inhabitants of this town desire may be secured to us, and
perpetuated to our latest posterity.

Thus we have freely expressed our sentiments, having an equal right with
others, though a lesser part of the community, and take this first opportunity
to protest against the proposed Convention, -- and hereby declare our loyalty
to his present Majesty, and Fidelity to our country; and that it is our firm
resolution, to the utmost of our power, to maintain and defend our rights in
every prudent and reasonable way, as far as is consistent with our duty to God
and the King.

Attest. OLIVER PARTRIDGE, TOWN CLERK.


Extracted from the MASSACHUSETTES GAZETTE of October 6, 1768.


sent about the same time, from the Selectmen of Boston to the Selectmen of the
several towns, within that province -- and some other publications of that
period. He will there see that the materials collected were all of the right
stamp, and excellently calculated to answer the purpose.

The writer goes on, and shows that he was well acquainted with the whole
design of those preparations, and could tell the very time when the foundation
of the "glorious fabric" was to be publicly laid, Before seven years roll over
our heads, the first stone must be laid. Thus we see the particular time for
beginning this work was then already fixed and determined; and such
predispositions were made, that the event was rendered indubitable, in the
opinion of the workmen. All these particulars were declared to the public, by
the American Whig, on the 11th of April, 1768; and his prophecy was fully
verified by the event. For, we all know, that before the revolution of seven
years was completed, and exactly at the end of six years and five months, the
first stone of the long projected building, actually was laid by the people of
Suffolk. This corner stone bears an inscription, and the inscription informs
us, in CAPITALS, That it was laid during the administration, and under the
auspices, of the late Congress, then sitting, with exquisite propriety, in
Carpenters-Hall.

Afterward this same writer considers the intended American Empire under the
more natural emblem of an image to be made of clay; and then he tells us in
corresponding language, that all hands are briskly at work, mixing and kneading
the ingredients together, and " moulding" the great political mass into "order."

Now, comparing all this with other appearances and known facts, it seems
impossible for any judicious person to doubt, but that there is a set of people
among us, disaffected to the constitutional supremacy of Great Britain over
these Colonies, who have formed a scheme for establishing an independent
government or empire in America; and that they have been regularly pursuing it
for many years past. Nor can it be doubted, but that the late Congress, though
several of its members perhaps were not admitted to the secret, was under the
influence and direction of, and meant nothing less than to cooperate with, the
master builders abovementioned, in making a proper arrangement and disposition
of the materials that were plentifully provided. With this key, the
aenigmatical proceedings of the Congress may be explained; and what has
hitherto appeared to be extravagant and absurd, will be found to be regular and
consistent. If we consider them as endeavoring to obtain a reconciliation of
Great Britain to the Colonies, on some generous and honorable plan, their
conduct is unaccountable; but if we consider them as associated with, and
directed by, the projectors of the glorious fabric of an independent American
republic, the whole mystery is unriddled; and whatever we may think of their
principles or their designs, we shall have a more favorable opinion of their
understandings.

We have now taken a view of the original design of the Congress, and of the
authority with which the members were jointly and severally vested. We have
compared their conduct with their instructions; and have stated the difference
between the work proposed and the work done. And on the review, it appears,
that instead of promoting, they have counter-acted, the design of their
appointment; that they have altogether neglected the work they were sent upon;
that the powers delegated to them by their constituents, for the good of the
colonies, were prostituted to the purposes of private ambition; and that all
their proceedings as far as we can judge, were instigated and directed by the
New England republicans, to the utmost confusion of the Colonies, the disgrace
of their constituents, and their own infamy.

It cannot therefore remain a question one moment, whether we are under
obligations to adopt and pursue the measures they have prescribed, or not; we
manifestly owe them no obedience at all; we owe them no respect as a body: Much
less are we bound to plunge ourselves headlong into that abyss of misery and
destruction which they have opened; an abyss, which indeed must soon swallow us
up, unless we resolve to proceed in direct opposition to the impulses and
instigations, with which they and their adherents endeavor to push us on.

Rebellion and civil war are the necessary consequence of our being governed by
the Congress. They are the necessary, though not perhaps the immediate
consequence. For we cannot suppose that Great Britain, conscious of her own
superior strength, and jealous of her rights, will meanly put up with our
wanton insults; or that she will be so intimidated with any threatenings of
ours, as to sacrifice at once her own dignity, honor and interest, at the
shrine of Carpenters-Hall, in Philadelphia. Such conduct would render her a
laughing stock to all Europe, and cause the Americans themselves most heartily
to despise her.

I have too good an opinion of the wisdom, discretion and loyalty of the
inhabitants of this province in general, to believe that any sophistry can
mislead them, that any insidious arts can seduce them to engage in the
execution of the most violent part of the plan recommended by the Congress;
which is to support the rebellion in New England with their lives and fortunes,
to the irrecoverable ruin of their families. To undertake such a frantic
adventure, must be the business only of fools or fanatics, and is contrary to
the prevailing disposition of this sensible and sober province.

But as to the less horrible part of the plan, which is contained in the
association; the danger of adopting it is greater, because its appearance is
less tremendous. And yet when we consider, that we are under no obligations to
the Congress, that we are at perfect liberty to judge for ourselves, and to
consult our own happiness, as if the Congress had never existed, and that our
condition would soon become inexpressibly miserable by pursuing even this part
of the scheme; I hope we shall have the prudence and grace to avoid it.

It has generally been thought, and is now pretty well known, that our
resolving to import nothing from Great Britain, will produce another act of
Parliament for shutting up our ports; and that our commerce will be at a total
stand, till the resolution is recalled, in such a way as will be acceptable.
Now, if the operation of such an act upon the single town of Boston only, has
brought so much distress upon so many of its inhabitants, that all America has
been obliged to contribute to their relief; we may judge in what manner we
shall be affected by the shutting up of this port, while all the neighboring
ports will be in the same condition, and our poor will have no prospect of
assistance from any of the other Colonies.

It is impossible that we can hold out, under such circumstances, for any
considerable time. According to the common course of things, we shall be
obliged at last to submit to the authority of Great Britain; and then, after a
contest of this kind, she will have a right to establish new and less
favorable terms for us, with which notwithstanding we shall readily comply, as
they will be the only conditions of peace and safety. So that this
non-importation project, instead of relieving us from parliamentary taxation,
will in the end, naturally and almost necessarily, cause it to fall upon us
with more than double weight.

In short: If we regard the Congress at all, we shall bitterly repent it. But
if we have recourse to our legal representatives, allow them their due honor
and influence, and under their direction pursue only prudent and constitutional
measures, it will undoubtedly prove, in a more proper sense than the word has
commonly been used in, the salvation of this province.

If our present assembly should refuse to act a worthy part, on this occasion,
which I can hardly suspect that they will; we must, for the present, bear it
with as much patience as we can, consistently with our duty; -- looking forward
to the time, which in that case will be hastened when we shall have an
opportunity of a new choice, and when it will be our own faults, if we are not
represented by men, who will pay a proper regard to the happiness and
prosperity of their constituents.

Let us then, my friends and fellow subjects of this province, withdraw
ourselves immediately from within the vortex of the Congress -- that we may be
at liberty to pursue the real good of our country, under the friendly direction
of the law and sound policy. Let us disband our Committees, but without any
personal reproaches or reflections on account of what is past; and, for the
future, like men of sense and spirit, let us scorn to yield any obedience but
to the laws and to lawful authority. In seeking for the redress of our
grievances, let us neither practice nor countenance any violent methods, till
mild and safe ones shall have been fairly tried, and found to be ineffectual.
If our case cannot be bettered, let us be careful however not to render it
worse, by our own mismanagement. If we should be unable immediately to procure
an exemption from the authority of Parliament; yet that is no reason for our
not securing to ourselves as much liberty as we can; and, in order to that, we
must rescue our necks from the yoke of the Congress, and our legs 2nd arms from
the fetters of Committees. This is the bondage we have most reason to dread, as
it is equally oppressive and disgraceful.

Before I conclude, permit me, in a few words, to address you, Gentlemen, who
are authorized to represent the freeholders of this province, in the HOUSE OF
ASSEMBLY.

After hearing so much of Congresses and Committees, it gives me peculiar
pleasure to consider, that our constitution is not yet dissolved, that our
legal representatives are not yet discarded, that they are now met together in
their legislative capacity, and that their authority may still be vigorously
exerted. It is to you, Gentlemen, that I would persuade my fellow subjects of
this province to have recourse, at this time of difficulty and danger, and not
to any power that is foreign and unconstitutional.

I will venture to say, that neither you nor your predecessors have ever met
together at so critical a season as the present; that so much has never
depended on the wisdom of your determinations; and that you have never had such
a call for the full exertion of your united abilities.

The people whom you represent are dreadfully perplexed, embarrassed and
divided. They know not what measures to pursue, to obtain safety. If your
wisdom and prudence can procure for them an adequate relief, you will
henceforward be loved and revered as so many guardian angels to your country,
and your names will be transmitted with peculiar luster, in the annals both of
Great Britain and her colonies, to the latest posterity.

Although some of you are partly indebted to my vote, and much more to my
influence, for seats in your honorable house; yet I presume not to dictate to
any of you, nor would I obtrude my advice upon your respectable body. But,
convinced that you are willing to hear the opinion of any constituent, who
desires to offer it, with becoming deference, on a subject that demands the
attention of all; I beg your indulgence for a few moments.

You will undoubtedly be urged by many, to give your sanction to the
proceedings of the late Congress; and the example of several assemblies on this
continent will be proposed, to induce your compliance. But do not forget,
Gentlemen, the nature and dignity of your own station, and of the trust that is
reposed in you. You are the lawful and proper guardians of our rights and
liberties; and you have solemnly engaged yourselves to guard them, whenever
they are invaded or exposed. In this honorable and important work, you are not
to be governed by the example of others; but you are expected to act with a
spirit of independency and freedom, that is worthy of your political character.
The law, and your own wisdom, are to be your only guides; and the happiness of
the province is to be your only mark. The constitution is the ground you stand
on, and while you adhere to it, it will be your support. But the moment you
quit this ground, you are unsafe; as soon as ever you pursue or countenance
unconstitutional measures, you expose yourselves, you injure us, you desert
your station, you betray your trust.

If you give your sanction to the proceedings of the Congress in general terms,
and without exceptions, as some other assemblies have done; you will, like
them, become answerable for the guilt of such proceedings, as are contrary to
law and subversive of the constitution. You will then be necessarily understood
to approve of the approbation of the Congress, to recommend their
recommendations, and consequently to approve of and recommend all the
rebellious transactions of the people of Suffolk. Are you willing, Gentlemen,
to be considered in this light? Can you, who are the representatives and
legislators of one of the first provinces in America, of a province which has
hitherto been respected for its loyalty and sound policy, think of degrading
yourselves so far below your proper rank, as to become the rear-guard of a
faction against that supreme power, which presides over, and must of necessity
govern the whole British Empire? Forbid it, Honor! Forbid it, Decency! We do
not think so contemptuously of you, as to believe it is possible. We should be
extremely unhappy at such a time as this, if we had not great confidence in
your firmness and steadiness, and in your disposition to support your own
dignity and the real interests of the province.

There is no occasion for entering into a detail of circumstances, which all
are acquainted with. However it may be proper to observe to you, Gentlemen,
that though your constituents in general are willing to allow, that hitherto
they have not been oppressed by the power of the British Parliament; yet, that
they imagine there is reason to complain of some late acts, as violations of
their constitutional liberty. In this case, a silent submission, they think,
would have a dangerous tendency; and the continuance of those acts, they
believe, would be productive of evil, both to the mother country and her
American colonies. They wish therefore, from the most generous motives, that
all such acts may be repealed, and, at the same time, that a barrier may be
fixed between the supremacy of Great Britain and the rights of the Americans,
in such a manner, and on such equitable principles, that hereafter no
infringements may be made, and that no jealousies may be likely to arise, on
either side. They conceive, that now is the proper time for this settlement to
be made on a lasting basis, and that you are the only proper persons to appear
in behalf of this province. They have legally deputed you to act in their
stead, and they rely on your wisdom, caution and prudence to conduct a concern
of such great importance and delicacy.

Of the different methods that have been proposed for obtaining the end in
view, some are unquestionably right, and some wrong. If any doubts can remain
with you, Gentlemen, concerning what is right or wrong in this case; you will
naturally think it expedient, before you determine which methods to pursue, to
examine the matter carefully and impartially, that you may not be misled by any
error of judgment. In this inquiry you will attend to the true merits of the
cause, and found your determination on evidence arising from the nature of the
case, and the fitness of things; without seeing with other men's eyes, or
suffering yourselves to be warped by other men's opinions. For, we humbly
conceive, that you are bound, by the nature of the trust reposed in you, to act
according to the unbiassed direction of your own judgment, and not according to
the contrary opinions of any people whatever.

If then you believe that the Congress acted wrong, or that they might have
taken more prudent or safe measures, in order to secure the rights of the
colonies, as I am persuaded that you do; it then clearly follows, that you are
bound in honor, and in duty to your constituents, to reject what appears to be
wrong, and to prosecute those measures which appear in themselves to be most
prudent and safe. He that can hesitate a moment in so clear a case, is not
worthy to represent a virtuous and well-meaning people.

I know very well the difficulty that will press you. The generosity of your
disposition will render it disagreeable and painful to you, to act on a plan
that is not only separate, but essentially different from that which has been
generally adopted by the other colonies; and perhaps you are afraid of being
stigmatized as traitors to the common cause of America. I would by no means
altogether condemn such feelings; they are generous and honorable, when duly
regulated. But truth, propriety and reason, are always entitled to our first
regard; to a regard, which must not give way to more private affections.

The neighboring governments are considered by this as sister colonies; and as
such we have always loved them with sincere affections, and we are desirous of
promoting their interests whenever we can, consistently with our own. But the
most favorite sister is not to be justified or supported, in doing what is
evidently wrong. If the other colonies are justly considered by this as
sisters, we should remember too, that, in the same sense, England is to be
considered as its mother; and the natural connection is much stronger between a
child and its parent, than it can be between a sister and sisters.

To pursue the metaphor a little farther. If we see our sisters be taking
themselves to wrong courses, we should endeavor to reclaim them, by
affectionate admonitions, and especially by a good example. This will be much
more to our honor, and finally more to their advantage, than if we encourage
them to go on by our weak compliances. These sisters of ours, of whom we are
speaking, are allowed to have many good qualities, for which we esteem them.
They are naturally good-tempered; but for some time past they have been in an
ill humor, and they are perpetually quarrelling with our mother, a venerable
and worthy lady, but not entirely without foibles. The beginning of the dispute
was tolerably decent; but they now go on like a parcel of saucy and impudent
hussies, threatening and abusing her; and they insist upon it, that she shall
fall down upon her knees, and publicly ask their pardon -- for having lately
exercised such an authority over them as she always used to exercise, and in
such a way as she thinks is warranted by the laws of the land. It has been
proposed to these daughters, to try if the matter in dispute with their mother
cannot be settled in an amicable conference. But no; they swear and protest,
that they will not exchange a single word with her in that way; but that they
will stab the old hag to the heart, or starve her to death, but they will force
her to a submission.

Such, Gentlemen, I conceive, is the conduct of our sister colonies at this
time, with regard to our common and venerable parent. Such is their conduct
toward her, though they know that they are still greatly dependent on her, and
that she has a sufficient number of dutiful and brave sons, who are resolutely
determined to revenge her quarrel, and maintain her authority. The question
then is, whether this province shall act, unbiassed by partial affections,
according to its own real judgment and principles, or not: Or, whether she
shall enter upon a course of extravagant, profligate and dangerous practices,
merely in compliance with a termigant sisterhood, that has been lately deluded
and debauched, and rendered almost desperate by the Congress? To this question
you will certainly give an unanimous negative. If you act at all in this
matter, it will be on a different plan, and mere conformably to the general
opinion of the freeholders in the province.

But, for God's sake, Gentlemen, why should you not act? Will it justify
inactivity in you, that others are acting wrongly? Are you afraid or ashamed of
appearing singular in doing what is right? You must know, that singularity in
right conduct will be an honor to you, and a shame only to them that act
otherwise* If you mean that the grievances you complain of, should, if
possible, be redressed; something should be done to promote the redress of
them; for it is not to be expected, that they will redress themselves. If you
aim at the end, common sense requires you to use such means as are most likely
to effect it. Such means as were most proper before the meeting of the
Congress, are most proper still; for, with all their assumed powers, they were
not able to alter the nature of things.

Let it then be the business of this session, after providing for the immediate
exigencies of this province, to do what ought to be done by every province on
the continent; that is to prepare and transmit proper addresses to the King,
Lords and Commons of Great Britain; decently stating your whole claims, and
dutifully requesting that they may speedily be confirmed to you. Addresses from
your body will be received and regarded; which is a greater honor than could
have been allowed to addresses from the Congress.

In your addresses declare, that you act in behalf of a loyal province, which
you constitutionally represent, and that you have no connection with the late
Congress. Heartily and generously confess, that a mistaken zeal for liberty has
produced among us some tumultuous and disorderly proceedings, which are not to
be justified, Beg that all these things may be buried in oblivion, and that
there may be no repeating of past grievances. Profess, in your own names and in
ours, loyalty and allegiance to the King in the strongest terms; and express
our willingness to acknowledge the supremacy of Great Britain in all cases,
excepting those of taxation. Give assurances that we dread the very thoughts of
an absolute independency; and that we see no prospect of security or happiness,
but under the powerful protection and mild superintendency of the mother
country.

In consideration of our being indulged with the favors requested, signify
your willingness to bind yourselves and your constituents to raise annually,
without any deduction, such a sum as may be thought equitable, for the general
support of government; and promise, at the same time, that this province will
always pay due regard to his Majesty's farther requisitions, in cases of
emergency. In short, propose and say whatever you may think proper; only be
careful that your addresses be dutiful, your requests reasonable, and your
offers generous; and then, I doubt not but this province will be received by
the mother country with open arms.

In this way, you will effectually provide for the happiness and security of
the people whom you represent, and probably contribute, in no small degree, to
the general happiness of America. All good members of society within the
British empire will esteem and respect you; and none will blame or reproach you
but those turbulent spirits, whose censures are much more desirable than their
praises.

Before I withdraw, suffer me to remind you, Gentlemen, that, in this province,
the friends to peace and political moderation have always been more than twenty
to one; and to assure you, that their numbers are daily increasing. Every day
confirms them in their opinion. There is no danger of their falling off; they
understand one another; they have formed their judgment on conviction; they are
connected by principle; they are animated by the consideration both of public
and private interest; and they now compose a body, which, notwithstanding any
domestic assaults they may meet with, will not be disordered, but will remain
as firm and impenetrable as the Macedonian Phalanx.

To conclude. I have offered my sentiments on a question of the utmost
importance to the colonies, with that plainness and freedom which every
Englishman, in such cases, has a right to use. The real good of my country, was
the sincere aim of this inquiry. If I should be thought to have spoken too
harshly of the late Congress, this must be my apology: It was an object that
appeared to me in every view, hideous and detestible. I meant no personal
reflections on any of its members, as has been intimated before; I respect such
of them as I have any particular knowledge of. My most earnest wish is for the
happiness of America. I consider Great Britain and her colonies, with her other
dependencies, as but one body, which must be affected throughout by the
sufferings of any particular member. I consider them as constituting one great
and illustrious family, to which I have the honor to belong; and I pray that
its tranquillity may be speedily restored, and that peace and harmony may
forever reign through every part of it. Government and good order are its
strength; Liberty, civil and religious, is its glory. Every thing that
contributes to its reputation and happiness, I love; every thing that tends to
distress or disgrace it, I abhor. For this reason I abhor the late Congress.
Its first appearance raised our curiosity, but excited no terror. But it was
not long, before it turned out to be a perfect monster, -- a mad, blind monster!

Monstrum horrendum, inform, ingens, cui lumen ademptum.

FINIS.
A PLAN OF A PROPOSED UNION, BETWEEN GREAT BRITAIN AND The COLONIES of
New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, New York, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Maryland, Delaware Counties, Virginia, North Carolina, South
Carolina, and Georgia.


Which was produced by one of the Delegates from Pennsylvania, in Congress, as
mentioned in the preceding Work.

A PLAN OF A proposed UNION, etc.
THAT a British and American legislature, for regulating the administration of
the general affairs of America, be proposed and established in America,
including all the said Colonies; within, and under which government, each
Colony shall retain its present constitution, and powers of regulating and
governing its own internal police, in all cases whatever.

That the said government be administered by a President- General, to be
appointed by the King, and a Grand Council to be chosen by the Representatives
of the People of the several Colonies, in their respective Assemblies, once in
every three years.

That the several Assemblies shall choose members for the Grand Council in the
following proportions, viz. New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island,
Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware Counties, Maryland,
Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia.


Who shall meet at the city of (...) for the first time, being called by the
President-General, as soon as conveniently may be after his appointment.

That there shall be a new election of members for the Grand Council every
three years, and on the death, removal or resignation of any member, his place
shall be supplied by a new choice, at the next sitting of Assembly of the
Colony he represented.

That the Grand Council shall meet once in every year, if they shall think it
necessary, and oftener, if occasions shall require, at such time and place as
they shall adjourn to, at the last preceding meeting, or as they shall be
called to meet at, by the President-General, on any emergency.

That the Grand Council shall have power to choose their Speaker, and shall
hold and exercise all the like rights, liberties and privileges, as are held
and exercised by and in the House of Commons of Great Britain.

That the President-General shall hold his Office during the pleasure of the
King, and his assent shall be requisite to all acts of the Grand-Council, and
it shall be his office and duty to cause them to be carried into execution.

That the President General, by and with the advice and consent of the Grand
Council hold and exercise all the legislative rights, powers, and authorities,
necessary for regulating and administering all the general police and affairs of
the colonies, in which Great Britain and the colonies, or any of them, the
colonies in general, or more than one colony are in any manner concerned, as
well civil and criminal as commercial.

That the said President General and Grand Council, be an inferior and distinct
branch of the British legislature, united and incorporated with it, for the
aforesaid general purposes; and that any of the said general regulations may
originate and be formed and digested, either in the Parliament of
Great Britain* or in the said Grand Council, and being prepared, transmitted to
the other for their approbation or dissent, and that the assent of both shall
be requisite to the validity of all such general (...).

That in time of war, all bills for granting aids to the crown prepared by the
Grand Council, and approved by the President General, shall be valid and passed
into a law without the assent of the British Parliament.

RESOLVED,

That the Congress will apply to his Majesty for a redress of grievances under
which his faithful subjects in America labor; and assure him, that the
Colonists hold in abhorrence the idea of being considered independent
communities on the British government, and most ardently desire the
establishment of a Political Union, not only among themselves, but with the
Mother State, upon those principles of safety and freedom which are essential
in the constitution of all free governments, and particularly that of the
British Legislature; and as the Colonies from their local circumstances, cannot
be represented in the Parliament of Great Britain, they will humbly propose to
his Majesty and his two Houses of Parliament, the foregoing plan, under which
the strength of the whole Empire may be drawn together on any emergency, the
interest of both countries advanced, and the rights and liberties of America
secured.


