THE AMERICAN VINE, A SERMON, PREACHED IN CHRIST-CHURCH, PHILADELPHIA, BEFORE
THE HONORABLE CONTINENTAL CONGRESS, JULY 20th, 1775.

BEING THE DAY RECOMMENDED BY THEM FOR A GENERAL FAST THROUGHOUT THE UNITED
ENGLISH COLONIES OF AMERICA.

BY THE REVEREND JACOB DUCHE, M. A.

PHILADELPHIA. PRINTED BY JAMES HUMPHREYS, JUNIOR.

M,DCC,LXXV.

PRAYER before SERMON.
O THOU eternal and exhaustless source of light, and life, and love! In thee we
live and move and have our being! Every moment deals to us a portion of thy
bounty, and demands the tribute of unceasing praise! Thy name is LOVE! And LOVE
the essence of thy nature! The religion thou have taught us is a religion of
love! And love is the principle and end of all thy dispensations!

NEVER do thou send thy judgments abroad into the world, never do thou
suffer thy chastising hand to fall heavy upon thy children, but when they
become insensible of that endearing relation, in which they stand to thee and
to each other, and thus violate thy eternal living law of love!

WE acknowledge, therefore, and adore thy wisdom and goodness in the infliction
of national punishments upon national guilt! Our eyes must be blinded, and our
hearts hardened indeed, if we do not see and feel, under our present
visitation, the manifest tokens of thy divine displeasure!

WE own and lament, that the dark cloud of judgment, which now hangs over our
heads, has risen from our unnumbered sins and rebellions against thee! Against
thee only have we sinned! To thee only have we been disobedient and ungrateful.
We have neglected to improve under thy past corrections. We have shamefully
slighted thy past loving-kindnesses. Our prosperity has rendered us forgetful
of thee our GOD, regardless of thine holy ordinances, inattentive to the
precepts of thy gospel!

BUT yet, spare us, good LORD, spare thy people, whom thou have redeemed, and
let not thine heritage be brought to confusion! Recall thy ministers of
vengeance! And put a stop to the unnatural effusion of christian blood!

FROM our present grievous calamities, not our merits, but thy mercy, not our
foresight but thy providence alone can deliver us. Accept, therefore, the
prayers and supplications, that have this day been offered at the footstool of
thy throne! Accept, for thy WELL-BELOVED' s sake, our public acts of penitence
and humiliation!

GIVE us grace seriously to lay to heart the great danger we are in from our
present unhappy divisions! Take away all hatred, bitterness and resentment from
our breasts. Enable us to forgive our offending BRETHREN, even as we ourselves
look for forgiveness at the hands of our offended GOD!

AND O thou, who alone can make men to be of one mind in an house! Restore
that brotherly union and concord, which ought ever to subsist inviolate in the
great family to which we belong! And as there is but one body, and one spirit,
and one hope of our calling, one LORD, one faith, one baptism, one GOD and
FATHER of us all, so may we henceforth be all of one heart and of one soul,
united in one holy bond of truth and peace, of faith and charity!

FOR this purpose we pray, that thou would give thy blessing to a preached
gospel! Enable thy ministering servants of every denomination to be instant in
season and out of season, in promoting the great work of christian love: And
whilst they are faithfully employed in planting and watering, do thou, LORD of
the harvest! crown their labors with a blessed increase!

ALL this we ask for the sake and through the merits of thy well-beloved son
JESUS CHRIST our LORD, in and through whom we have the high and inestimable
privilege of addressing Thee, as

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

THE AMERICAN VINE, A SERMON, etc.
PSALM LXXX. VERSE XIV. RETURN, WE BESEECH THEE, O GOD OF HOSTS! LOOK DOWN FROM
HEAVEN, AND BEHOLD AND VISIT THIS VINE!
IF we could retire awhile, my brethren, from the sphere of political tumult,
contemplate at leisure the system of the universe, and look beyond second
causes for the springs and principles of motion, we should doubtless be able to
discern in almost every human event, the marks of Sovereign Wisdom, the energy
of Infinite Power, and the prevalence of Almighty Goodness; and should thereby
be led to acknowledge the immediate influence and operation of the great moral
Governor.

NOT only the course of all public transactions, the rise and fall of empires
and kingdoms app^ar to be directed by his omnipotent hand; but his providence
is known to extend to the concerns of individuals, to things of the minutest
nature, so that, according to the language of inspiration, NOT A SPARROW FALLS
TO THE GROUND WITHOUT HIS KNOWLEDGE, AND THE VERY HAIRS OF OUR HEADS ARE
NUMBERED.

WHAT a scene of disorder, ruin and desolation would soon be exhibited upon the
theater of the world, was the ALMIGHTY to withdraw his overruling influence!
Men, savage in some degree by nature, and more savage by the growth and
indulgence of their evil lusts and passions, would soon fall upon each other
with a violence and ferocity equal to that of beasts of prey. Ambition, tyranny
and vengeance would rage without control, and the whole world would, ere long,
be deluged in blood.

HAPPY, however, for mankind, this is not the case. An all-wise and
all-powerful Being sits at the helm. He presides, unseen, in the councils of
Princes. He prospers or disappoints them in their projects and undertakings;
and renders all the thoughts, intentions and actions of men subservient to the
completion of his own most wise and benevolent purposes.

CONQUEST and defeat, the shouts of the victor, and the cries of the vanquished
are from him. The prosperity of nations and the happiness of individuals,
public misfortunes and private distresses, plentiful harvests and years of
famine, the ravages of war, and the smiles of peace, are all dealt forth by him
to the sons of men, at such times and in such degrees, as in his wisdom and
goodness he finds expedient for their real welfare. Happy, therefore, that
people, who, amid all the variety of changes to which governments as well as
individuals are exposed, have placed their sole dependence upon the KING OF
KINGS!

WITH these principles in our hearts, and with a sincere purpose of HUMBLING
OURSELVES UNDER THE MIGHTY HAND OF GOD, and imploring his gracious
interposition under our present public distresses, I would fain hope, that we
have all THIS DAY ENTERED THE COURTS OF THE LORD'S HOUSE.

THE trumpet is sound^d in Zion. A Fast is proclaimed. A solemn assembly
convened. The numerous inhabitants of our extensive colonies, are now prostrate
with us before the Throne of Grace, and jointly lifting up their hands and
hearts to Heaven in some such supplicatory address as this: RETURN, WE BESEECH,
THEE, O GOD OF HOSTS! LOOK DOWN FROM HEAVEN, AND BEHOLD AND VISIT THIS VINE!
And would to God! that our united prayers and supplications might prevail, that
the Lord of mercy would incline his ear, and say to the destroying Angel: IT IS
ENOUGH -- STAY NOW THINE HAND.

IN the Psalm from whence my text is taken, the Royal Author, after having
enumerated the many distinguishing favors, with which Heaven had heretofore
blessed his church and nation, proceeds in the most earnest manner to deprecate
some grievous calamities with which they were at that time oppressed:

GIVE EAR, O SHEPHERD OF ISRAEL, THOU THAT LEADEST JOSEPH LIKE A FLOCK; THOU
THAT DWELL BETWEEN THE CHERUBIMS, SHINE FORTH! -- THOU HAVE BROUGHT A VINE
OUT OF EGYPT: THOU HAVE CAST OUT THE HEATHEN AND PLANTED IT; THOU PREPAREDST
ROOM FOR IT, AND DID CAUSE IT TO TAKE DEEP ROOT, AND IT FILLED THE LAND. THE
HILLS WERE COVERED WITH THE SHADOW OF IT, AND THE BOUGHS TH^REOF WERE LIKE THE
GOODLY CEDARS. SHE SENT OUT HER BOUGHS UNTO THE SEA, AND HER BRANCHES UNTO THE
RIVER. WHY HAVE THOU THEN BROKEN DOWN HER HEDGES, SO THAT ALL THEY THAT PASS BY
THE WAY DO PLUCK HER. THE WILD BOAR OUT OF THE WOOD DOES WASTE IT; AND THE WILD
BEAST OF THE FIELD DOES DEVOUR IT. RETURN, WE BESEECH THEE, O GOD OF HOSTS!
LOOK DOWN FROM HEAVEN, AND BEHOLD AND VISIT THIE VINE!

IN applying this passage of scripture to the present solemnity, my
observations will turn chiefly upon the blessings by which we have hitherto
been distinguished, the ungrateful returns we have made to the God of Heaven,
for his unmerited goodness, and the only means by which, as a people, we can be
re-instated in his favor.

I. GREAT and astonishing have been the blessings of Providence, by which these
American colonies have been distinguished from their very first settlements to
the present period. They have indeed been a VINEYARD PLANTED BY THE LORD'S
RIGHT HAND. And though some gloomy scenes have now and then shaded the
brightness of the prospect, yet even these have greatly contributed to their
prosperity and enlargement.

IF we look back a little into the annals of America, we shall find, that this
very spot, on which our large and populous city now stands, was, less than a
century ago, a wild uncultivated desert. The arts and customs of civilized life
were here unknown. Naught else was visible, but the sad effects of ignorance,
superstition and idolatry. The untutored savage roamed the wood, like a beast
of prey, stranger to the comforts and advantages of mental culture, involved in
Pagan darkness, with scarcely one ray of heavenly truth to irradiate the gloom
of nature.

SUCH was the dark and dreary prospect, when Providence conducted our
Forefathers to this new world. He took the tender slip from the PARENT VINE. HE
CAST OUT THE HEATHEN AND PLANTED IT. THE HILLS WERE SOON COVERED WITH THE
SHADOW OF IT, AND THE BOUGHS THEREOF WERE LIKE THE GOODLY CEDARS. SHE SENT OUT
HER BOUGHS UNTO THE SEA, AND HER BRANCHES UNTO THE RIVER. -- From NORTH to
SOUTH he stretched the extensive line. -- From EAST to WEST he ^ad the prospect
open -- THE WILDERNESS AND SOLITARY PLACE WERE MADE GLAD, AND THE DESERT
REJOICED AND BLOSSOMED LIKE THE ROSE.

OUR sober Ancestors brought over with them, not only the several useful arts
and improvements, of which the natives were ignorant, but a treasure of
infinitely greater value, even the charter of TEMPORAL FREEDOM, and the records
of ETERNAL TRUTH. The banners of CHRISTIAN and BRITISH Liberty were at once
unfolded, and these remote parts of the earth were thereby added to the
MESSIAH'S kingdom.

NUMBERLESS, indeed, were the toils, difficulties, and dangers, to which the
first founders of these colonies, as well as their successors were exposed,
before they arrived at their present height of opulence and splendour. So
remarkable, however, were the interpositions of Providence, that the most
inattentive mind must have frequently discerned them.

SCARCELY is there recorded in the annals of history a more rapid series of
successes of every kind in the settlement and population of any country on the
globe. Whilst favored with the nurturing care and protection of the mother
country, whose fleets and armies, in conjunction with our own, have ever been
faithfully and successfully employed in our defense, our common enemies have
looked with astonishment and envy upon our rising glory, nor have dared for
years to interrupt a repose, purchased, under the smiles of Heaven, by virtue,
industry, and British and American valor.

AND happy, my dear brethren, should we still remain, if the parent would be
satisfied with such returns from the children, as filial duty would always
prompt them to pay, and not exact such an illegal and unrighteous tribute, as
by weakening and distressing them, must in the end weaken and distress the
parent too.

HERE then our present calamities commence. Our MORNING JOYS are past -- and a
NIGHT Of HEAVINESS succeeds -- The HEDGES OF LIBERTY, by which we hoped our
VINEYARD was secured, ARE BROKEN DOWN, and THEY THAT PASS ^Y THE WAY, ARE
seeking to PLUCK OUR GRAPES.

IT IS not indeed THE WILD BOAR OUT OF THE WOOD, OR THE WILD BEAST OF THE FIELD,
that are ready to WASTE AND DEVOUR IT. It Is not now a foreign enemy, or the
savages of our own wilderness, that have made the cruel and unrighteous assault
-- But it is even, thou, BRITAIN, that with merciless and unhallowed hands,
would cut down and destroy this BRANCH of thine own VINE, the very BRANCH,
which Providence HAS MADE STRONG even FOR THYSELF!

II. INJURED and oppressed as we are, unmeriting the harsh and rigorous
treatment, which we have received from such an unexpected quarter, let us,
however, look up to an higher cause for the awful infliction; and whilst we are
faithfully persevering in the defense of our TEMPORAL RIGHTS, let us humble
ourselves before God, lay our hands upon our hearts, and seriously and
impartially enquire, what returns we have made to Heaven for its past favors,
and whether its present chastisements have not been drawn down upon us by a
gross neglect of our SPIRITUAL PRIVILEG^S.

HAS OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS, then, SHONE FORTH AS THE LIGHT, AND OUR JUST DEALINGS
AS THE NOON DAY? -- Has a sense of GOD'S unnumbered and unmerited mercies
awakened in our souls an ardent affection for our divine Benefactor? Have we
been more zealous for the honor of his government and the observance of his
laws? Have we testified our zeal by a correspondent practice? By works of
piety, beneficence, and public virtue? Have our heads of families been careful
to s^t good examples to their children and servants, by a punctual attendance
at the house of GOD, by a decent and devout behavior in our solemn assemblies,
and by regular, daily, grateful addresses to their heavenly Father in their
closets at home?

HAVE we been careful to check that overweening fondness of gaiety and
pleasure, which frequently discovers itself in the dispositions of our
children? -- to check it did I say -- yea, to endeavor to root it out of their
hearts, and plant and nourish in its room the love of GOD and of goodness? --
In a word, have we been industrious, in our several stations and according to
our respective abilities, in propagating the gospel of JESUS CHRIST, as well in
sound doctrine as in sound practice? Has OUR LIGHT for this purpose, so SHONE
BEFORE MEN, THAT THEY SEEING OUR GOOD WORKS, have been led TO GLORIFY OUR
FATHER WHICH IS IN HEAVEN? --

ALAS! my brethren, have we not rather been so far carried away by the stream
of prosperity, as to be forgetful of the source from whence it was derived? So
elevated by the prospect, which peace and a successful commerce have opened to
us, as to neglect those impressions of goodness, which former afflictions had
left upon our hearts? Have not luxury and vice, the common attendants of wealth
and grandeur, too soon made their appearance amongst us, and begun to spread a
dangerous infection through our hitherto healthy and thriving state? Amid the
hurry and tumult of the passions, has not conscience fallen asleep? Has not a
false security gained ground? And a worldly spirit too generally prevailed?

AND is it not for this, that the ALMIGHTY has bared his arm against us? -- Is
it not for this, that he now speaks to us in thunder? And, as we would not be
drawn by the cords of his love, that he is now chastising us with the rods of
his wrath? Is it not for this, that the flames of an UNNATURAL WAR have burst
forth in the very bowels of our native land? And that our garments have been
already stained with kindred blood? --

O MY GOD! let this suffice! -- let MERCY interpose, and stay the avenging hand
of JUSTICE!

FOR behold! we now desire to TURN UNTO THEE WITH ALL OUR HEARTS, WITH FASTING,
AND WITH WEEPING AND WITH MOURNING! We know, that MERCY is thy darling
attribute, and that JUDGMENT is a STRANGE WORK to thee! -- RETURN then, WE
BESEECH THEE, O GOD OF HOSTS! LOOK DOWN FROM HEAVEN! And once more BEHOLD AND
VISIT THIS VINE!

III. BUT WHEREWITHAL, my dear brethren, SHALL WE COME BEFORE THE LORD, AND BOW
OURSELVES BEFORE THE HIGH GOD? With what sacrifice shall we approach his altar?
With what language, or by what conduct shall we invite him to return?

THE SACRIFICE OF GOD IS A BROKEN SPIRIT: A BROKEN AND A CONTRITE HEART, O GOD,
THOU WILL NOT DESPISE. PRAYER and SUPPLICATION, is a language, which he will
not refuse to hear: And REPENTANCE and REFORMATION of life, through the
redeeming power of his EVER-BLESSED SON, is the only conduct, that will
reinstate us in his favor.

LET us adore, then, the divine wisdom and goodness, for putting it into the
hearts of that Honorable Assembly, now entrusted with the great cause of
American Liberty, to call upon the whole people, whom they represent, in the
most solemn and affectionate manner, to join in deprecating the Divine
displeasure, by one general act of religious humiliation. Heaven be praised,
that they have hereby shown their attention and zeal for our eternal as well as
temporal welfare.

Go on, ye chosen band of Christian Patriots! Testify to the world, by your
example as well as by your counsels, that ye are equally the foes of VICE and
of SLAVERY -- Banish the Siren LUXURY, with all her train of fascinating
pleasures, idle dissipation, and expensive amusements from our borders. Call
upon honest industry, sober frugality, simplicity of manners, plain hospitality
and christian benevolence to throw down the usurpers, and take possession of
their seats. Recommend every species of reformation, that will have a tendency
to promote the glory of GOD, the interest of the Gospel of JESUS, and all those
private and public virtues, upon the basis of which alone, the superstructure
of true Liberty can be erected.

To second your virtuous attempts, let the MINISTERS of the everlasting gospel,
the ambassadors of JESUS CHRIST, step forth with fresh zeal and courage to
their duty. Let them remember, that they are not only answerable for their own
souls, but for the souls of those under their care. "They are set as watchmen
over the house of Israel." -- Let them, therefore, CRY ALOUD AND SPARE NOT: let
them LIFT UP THEIR VOICE AS A TRUMPET, AND SHOW ISRAEL THEIR TRANSGRESSION, AND
THE HOUSE OF JACOB THEIR SIN.

FROM these let the MAGISTRATES take the alarm -- Let them boldly rebuke vice
-- Let them punish immorality and profaneness without respect to rank or
fortune -- Let them become MINISTERS of the GOSPEL as well as MINISTERS of
JUSTICE -- Let them inculcate the knowledge and practice of true religion and
virtue, as far as their influence and authority extends.

WHEN MAGISTRATES and MINISTERS shall ardently conspire for such pious and
benevolent purposes -- Heaven will surely smile upon their labors of love; and
the people committed to their charge will GROW IN GRACE, and become eminent
examples of every divine and social virtue.

WE cannot expect, my dear brethren, that the GOD OF HOSTS WILL RETURN, LOOK
DOWN FROM HEAVEN, AND BEHOLD AND VISIT OUR VINE; that he will cause his sun to
shine, and his refreshing dews and rains to (...) upon it, unless we are
careful to cultivate and improve the soil, and to root out every useless
noxious weed, that will impede its growth. By neglecting this, we shall be in
danger of incurring the dreadful sentence denounced against the barren
fig tree, CUT IT DOWN: WHY CUMBERETH IT THE GROUND?

BUT whilst I am recommending in general those essential branches of a true
reformation, piety and gratitude to GOD, repentance and humiliation for past
neglects, together with the revival of every private and public virtue, which
can adorn and dignify the citizen and the christian, let me not forget to
remind you, at this awful season in particular, of the great gospel duty of
CHARITY, which will ever prompt us to sympathize with the distresses, and to
relieve the wants of our brethren.

WHILE prosperity stretches her silken banner over our heads, and administers a
continual supply of the comforts and enjoyments of life, let us not be content
to repose at ease beneath her friendly shade, and selfishly and solitarily
reach forth our hands to take her cup of bliss, whilst thousands are suffering,
neglected beside us, and ten thousands at our right hand. In these calamitous
times at least, let us deem it BETTER TO GO TO THE HOUSE OF MOURNING THAN TO
THE HOUSE OF FEASTING. Let us cheerfully sacrifice our hours of entertainment
and convivial mirth, and be willing to contract our usual expenses, that we may
have leisure TO WEEP WITH THEM THAT WEEP, and have somewhat to spare for the
relief of them that want.

FOR, alas! if arms must decide the unnatural contest, and Heaven should even
smile upon our righteous cause, our success cannot be purchased without many a
tear, on the part of the victor as well as the vanquished. An anxious parent
may be afflicted with the melancholy tidings of the death of an only Son -- A
fond wife may be plunged into all the bitterness of woe, upon reading the name
of her affectionate spouse among the number of the slain -- A beloved child may
listen with an heartfelt anguish to the sad story of his father's fall -- And
all this load of misery may be dreadfully accumulated by the languors of
disease, and the frowns of poverty.

OUR fasting and humiliation, therefore, will stand us in no stead, unless,
whilst we are seeking TO LOOSE THE BANDS OF WICKEDNESS in our own hearts, we
endeavor likewise TO UNDO THE HEAVY BURDENS OF OTHERS, AND TO LET THE
OPPRESSED GO FREE -- unless we DEAL OUR BREAD TO THE HUNGRY, AND BRING THE POOR
THAT ARE CAST OUT INTO OUR HOUSES -- WHEN WE SEE THE NAKED, THAT WE COVER HIM,
AND HIDE NOT OURSELVES FROM OUR OWN FLESH.

IF our hearts and hands are employed in such deeds of beneficence and love,
OUR LIGHT SHALL BREAK FORTH AS THE MORNING, AND OUR HEALTH SHALL SPRING FORTH
SPEEDILY: OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS SHALL GO BEFORE US: THE GLORY OF THE LORD SHALL BE
OUR REAR-WARD.

IN a word, if we would wish THE GOD OF HOSTS TO RETURN, TO LOOK DOWN FROM
HEAVEN AND BEHOLD AND VISIT our American VINE, we must be prepared to meet him
by such heavenly tempers and dispositions, as alone can testify our vital union
and communion with him. Happy, if we find him a reconciled GOD in CHRIST JESUS!
Thrice happy, if our faith has fixed us to the ROCK OF AGES! Then indeed the
rude winds may blow, the billows of public or private adversity may rise and
rage: But we shall stand collected and secure, like the stately cedars of the
mountain, amid the general storm.

FINIS.
For shine in the third line from the bottom of page 2^ read descend.


