THE CRISIS. NUMBER XXIV.
-- Immedicabile Vulnus
Ense recidendum, ne pars sincera trahatur.
OVID. The prudent Surgeon, of a Gangrene sure,
By Amputation keeps the Vitals pure;
State Dissolutions thus effect a Cure.

A Disease of a venal Majority in the great council of the nation, may be truly
called a mortification in the body politic. This desperate case requires a
desperate remedy. A patriotic King would neither delay, nor fear the
application. Its success depends upon the hand that operates. The operation of
a wholesome and salutary desolution has been wisely instrusted by our
considerate ancestors to the sovereign. The exertion of this great prerogative
was petitioned for, with the greatest reason, during the tyranny and iniquities
of the last venal parliament, by the first, the most loyal, and respectable
metropolis in the universe, the city of London. It was petitioned for, and
twice refused.

(...) ^^^^tion. If a tyrannic parliament still persists, a Patriot King, (like
an honest dictator) will dissolve such miscreants.

Thus corruption will be extinguished, honest representatives elected, and a
good King enthroned in the hearts of a grateful and affectionate people, whom
he has thus constitutionally protected from slavery and ruin. What, (says some
ministerial scribbler, a Johnson perhaps) shall a King of England detach
himself from his Parliament? I answer Yes; if that Parliament is corrupt,
wicked, and tyrannical; it is then no constitutional Parliament, but an illicit
gang; nor is he constitutional King, but a daring and unthinking tyrant, who
adheres to them. By so doing, he plainly shows that it is not his intention to
protect, but to enslave his people. That venerable body alone can be called a
Parliament, who are known, according to the import of the word (parler le meant)
to speak their mind, to be above all human influence. Can this be said of a
servile, detestable, insidious, unconstitutional majority, who came to the
great council, with a mercenary gagg in their mouths, their perfidious names in
the court calendar, and Lord Bute's (under the color of Lord North's)
instructions in their pockets? Our Kings, it is true, are parliamentary Kings,
but there is a wide difference between a parliament and a cabal; between sages
convened, and voters hired, between free, constitutional states, and servile,
ministerial dependents.

When a Parliament is degenerated thus far, they loose their honor, they ought
to loose their former name; they deserve no farther confidence. They would find
none, in a wise and good King. No Prince who is not under the ideocy, insanity,
or the worst passions, could adhere to such a junto. Such men are audacious in
calling themselves a Parliament. They no longer represent, but usurp; they are
not faithful servants, but assuming tyrants, they are not counselors of the
King, but traitors to the people. A great council, (or rather a great majority)
composed of such monsters, such pests of a community, cannot be said either to
regard, or to represent a people; their views and interests are different. The
people sue for protection, they for places; the people wish to support the
constitution, they to supply their luxury; the people are affected by the decay
of commerce, they by the largesses of the minister.

Can a patriotic King confide in, or cooperate with such a mock-parliament?
When we hear a King talk of steadily pursuing the advice of the great council
of the nation, it must be taken for granted, that he knows and believes the
majority of that council (whose votes are decisive of the fate of this kingdom)
to be incorrupt. Can such faith as this be found in Israel? If not, a King of
England may well be asked, even by the meanest of his subjects, why he is
wicked enough, or weak enough, to approve, sanctify and confirm, the despotic
acts, not of such a parliament, but of such a traitorous convention? Is it his
duty in such a case, to confide or to dissolve? In such a dangerous crisis the
constitution has given a judicial power to Kings; they are bound to exercise
that power, not for the destruction, but for the safety of the commonwealth.
They are not to consult the views, the wishes, the interests, or security of
ministers or favorites, but the salvation of the kingdom. Our laws, under
which every king must submit to reign, speaks plainly to the sovereign, in
open, intelligible, rational terms, when it says, "Cessa regnare, si non vis
judicare." If you will not exercise those judicial powers, with which the
constitution has entrusted you, resign your crown, you are no longer fit to
reign over a free people. The word (judicare) in the maxim abovementioned,
extends not merely to the exertion of a King's judicial powers in civil, or
criminal cases, (though this would be the false interpretation of a Mansfield)
but it must be taken in its largest, and most important sense; it is allowed by
every honest man, learned interpreter, to extend to the whole system of the
King's executive powers. In that large sense it has ever been considered by
such political writers as Lock, Sidney, Acherly, and Nathaniel Bacon, who
writes so admirably on government.

This maxim is strong, and pointed; it comes directly home to my present
purpose, and opens a large field for no very favorable inferences at the
present juncture. A King of England must not, cannot live for himself, (much
less for his minions) but only for his people. I speak an honest,
constitutional truth, when I say that he must not indulge, but toil. A King's
revenues, magnificence, splendour, pomp, and grandeur, are not designed to
emblazon him, but to do honor to his kingdom. All his glittering rays of
Majesty are reflected from the people. An English throne is like a Turkish
Sopha, to be made the idle seat of slumber and repose. It is erected for the
exercise of mercy, truth, and justice. Neither of these princely attributes is
concerned in maintaining corruption, or repelling just suitors without redress;
nay, with ignominious language and contempt. It is a King of England's duty to
cleanse the Augean stable. He is the Argus of the commonwealth; his eyes, his
ears, his mental powers, must all be open to his people, whilst his royal
passions are subdued. He can acquire neither honor nor security by an
injudicious struggle with his subjects. Truth and liberty will prevail. Tyrants
and fools have been dethroned. Injured subjects have triumphed and exulted in
their ruin. Minions, and abandoned ministers have been guarded to the scaffold;
and corruption itself, though not to be dissolved, may be at last extinguished,
in another glorious and necessary revolution.

These are lessons which English princes should be taught betimes in their
minority. By these, even Kings themselves, may profit in riper yeas. By these,
the present obdurate, deluded sovereign, whom heaven has not been pleased to
bless with any great share of natural discernment, may be taught to avoid these
miseries, which must attend his rash and headstrong perseverance, his unjust
and guilty confidence; his tyrannic pride, and an insolent contempt of that
people, through whose patience and indulgence, he most unworthily holds the
crown of England.

CASCA.


