AN ESSAY ON THE CULTURE AND MANAGEMENT OF HEMP, MORE PARTICULARLY FOR THE
PURPOSE OF MAKING COARSE LINENS.

Agricola incurvo terram dimovit aratro:
Hinc anni labor, hinc patriam, parvosque nepotes
Sustinet;
VIRGIL. BY A FARMER.

ANNAPOLIS: Printed by ANNE CATHARINE GREEN, and SON. M,DCC,LXXV.

ADDRESS TO THE INHABITANTS OF NORTH AMERICA.
AS it has been thought requisite, by a continental association, to put a stop
to the importation of manufactures into America, it is absolutely necessary to
fall speedily on some effectual method to furnish, at least, the coarsest
articles of our clothing.

OUR country produces wool, cotton, hemp and flax, materials amply sufficient
to answer every demand of necessity and convenience. The quantity may be
increased by attention and diligence, and wrought up with a degree of skill
easily attainable.

WE see already many families, scattered throughout these provinces, almost
entirely clothed in their own homespun manufactures; why therefore should any
of us despair of accomplishing that which is actually practiced, before our
eyes, by so many?

BY beginning with coarse manufactures we shall begin at the right end, we
shall, every succeeding year, improve upon the past, and, after a fair exertion
of the means in our power, we shall look back, with wonder and astonishment, at
our present apprehensions.

WE must now exert ourselves in manufactures, or, from an unconquerable
indolence, be driven to the basest and most humiliating concessions,
concessions that others may dispose of our lives, liberties, and properties, at
their pleasure.

WHEN every thing valuable to men is thus at stake, the author claims the
privilege of a citizen, and entreats the attention of the public, to a subject
of so great consequence to this country as that which is now submitted to their
consideration. It is no less than a certain, cheap and easy method of
supplying, internally, the most necessary and considerable parts of or
clothing.

A GREAT increase of the quantity of wool may gradually be effected, by a
general pursuit of the means recommended by the congress; but, as it will
require much time before a sufficient quantity, for every purpose, can be
obtained, it is apprehended the inconvenience may be, in a great measure,
obviated, by blending it, for most uses, with another material, which may be
easily procured in the utmost plenty.

COTTON may be raised, in many parts of these colonies, with success; and,
being useful in all, the cultivation of it ought to be encouraged in those
places where the climate and soil are favorable, with a view of not only
answering their own exigencies, but also in quantity sufficient to supply their
neighbors, who have not the same advantages.

THOSE who have attempted the manufacture of linen in this country, have
generally made it of flax, and have been greatly discouraged, from frequent
disappointments in their expectations of a crop: Flax sown, even on our best
and freshest lands, is often scarce worth the saving. The scantiness of the
crop is, doubtless, sometimes owing to bad husbandry; but, where there are so
many instances of its failing, under the utmost attention and diligence, it is
fairly presumable, that the want of success is, generally, owing to some other
cause than mismanagement.

IN Zealand, along the shores of the Baltic, particularly about Riga, in
Scotland and Ireland, and in some parts of Flanders, where the greatest
quantities of flax are raised, we are informed, that, even in these northern
countries, it thrives only upon deep, moist, stiff, clayey, or loamy soils; and
that the province of Zealand, which consists, almost entirely, of wet, heavy,
low, clayey land, is remarkable for producing the best flax of any part of
Europe; whilst the gravelly, lighter soils produce flax, fine, indeed, in
quality, but in very small and uncertain quantities. And in those countries
they have double, perhaps treble, the moist drizzling weather that we have in
these colonies, though not such heavy showers, or the sun so parching as with
us.

SUCH of our lands, only, as are fresh, rich, deep, and strong, and have a low,
moist situation, can give reasonable hopes for a tolerable crop of flax; and
even on these (...) ^^vourable spots, we know from experience, that the season
must continue moist and warm; for, if it proves dry, which oftenest happens,
the flax is seldom worth the pulling, either for its seed or bark.

WEEDS, which are destructive to all crops, are more especially so to flax,
which suffers greatly from them, in its goodness as well as quantity; nor is it
absurd to conceive, that weeds and dry weather should prove the bane of this
crop, when we reflect that, from its first shoot it continues a considerable
time very weak and low, its leaf small and narrow, affording scarce any shade,
leaving the ground exposed to the powerful action of a scorching sun, which
exhales and dries up the moisture so necessary to the support of the flax, and
pushes into vegetation the seeds of much hardier plants.

FROM experience, then, we have reason to despair of raising flax in sufficient
quantities to answer all our demands. Our climate is not moist and dropping
enough, and our soil, in general, is too sandy and dry, to rely on flax
entirely, or indeed principally.

A TOTAL neglect of flax is not intended to be recommended; where it succeeds
tolerably, let the raising of it be continued, but the author hopes to be able
to show, that, where the cultivation of flax cannot be carried on to advantage,
HEMP may be substituted in its room, and will effectually answer, especially in
coarse manufactures, every purpose to which flax has been applied. Indeed
nothing but a total ignorance of the very great ease, advantage, and certainty,
with which HEMP may be raised, and of its most valuable properties, could so
long have prevented it from becoming generally cultivated for domestic purposes.

BENEFICENT nature, which has made this plant so useful, has also most
indulgently fuited it to almost every climate, as well as to every sort of
soil; for we find it raised in so many countries of Europe, as well as in
America, lying under such different latitudes, that it, most assuredly, may be
cultivated, with great advantage, from the shores of Florida to the banks of
St. Laurence.

UNDOUBTEDLY one climate, or soil, may suit this plant better than another;
this colony may produce better HEMP for linen, whilst that produces better for
the rope-walk: For though, on strong, fat, cold grounds, the HEMP may be
stronger and fitter for some purposes, yet we may be assured, that such HEMP as
grows on a light, dry, well cultivated soil, even if it does not grow so high,
or strong, will be fitter to answer our domestic wants. We may therefore
reasonably imagine, that, in temperate climates, our own for instance,
especially in the lower parts of these provinces, and of the southern colonies,
where the lands in general are light and warm, they are properly adapted to
raise this plant to the greatest perfection.

A MOST peculiar advantage attending the culture of this plant is, that it may
be repeatedly sown on the same piece of ground, experience having shown that
any dry land, so that it is properly prepared with manure, will produce much
heavier crops than the richest fresh lands, and that the same piece of ground,
assisted with a moderate quantity of manure, will admit of being successively
sown, probably to the end of time, without any diminution of crops.

HOW easy therefore is it in every man's power to prepare, even on the meanest
land, a portion of ground sufficient to raise what is necessary to supply, at
least, his family wants? It will not require a fourth, perhaps not a tenth of
the ground necessary to produce an equal quantity of flax.

I HAVE heard of three hundred and a half of clean broken flax raised from one
acre, but we commonly put up with near a third less, and estimate that as no
bad crop.

FRESH lands, sown with HEMP, will produce from four to eight hundred of clean
broken HEMP; old ground, duly prepared, will yield, according to the seasons,
from half a ton, to twelve or fourteen hundred on the acre. I know a piece of
upland, which has been sown with HEMP, successively, for at least ten years
past, produce, in a favorable season, at the rate of twenty-four hundred per
acre; so powerful are the effects of a proper cultivation!

HEMP also produces a most certain crop, it being by no means subject to those
accidents to which flax is exposed, from the uncertainty of seasons; rain, it
is true, is necessary at the time of sowing, and it will indeed be something
extraordinary if there does not happen, during the course of ten weeks, (for so
long the season for sowing HEMP continues) a shower sufficient for this
purpose; for its vegetation is so quick, that, in a very few days after it is
sown, its leaves entirely cover and shade the ground, protect it from the
scorching sun, enable it to retain the moisture, and prevent the seeds of the
common weeds from sprouting. From this time the dews alone will prove
sufficient to bring it to perfect maturity, and, indeed, heavier crops are
produced on ground highly manured, in dry seasons, than in over wet years.

THE more we consider the nature and properties of HEMP, and reflect how
happily it is adapted to our climate and soil, the more reason there is to wish
that the inhabitants of these colonies would avail themselves of its advantages.

IF we had not this invaluable plant to rely on, we ought now to bend our
attention to manufactures; but, with it, after a trial, we shall most certainly
find it our interest to continue making our coarse linens, notwithstanding the
most perfect harmony should be again restored between Great Britain and
America; for, as the greatest part of the coarse linens that has been consumed
in these colonies these many years past, has been imported from foreign
countries, and there purchased for our use, and paid for in specie by the
British merchant, a prosecution of this manufacture would not interfere with
the interest of our mother country.

THE basis of the most useful manufactures is, with us, full as certain as in
any other part of the world, and the gross materials are excellent, and
procured in plenty with very little labor. Provisions are good, plenty, and
cheap; either advantage would be sufficient encouragement, in any other
country, to begin manufacturing.

THE manufacturers, who in Great Britain are now arrived to such a pitch of
skill and dexterity, were once as ignorant in the arts of manufacturing as we
are at present. They had rivals and difficulties far greater than ours to
encounter, but their industry and perseverance have surmounted every obstacle;
why then ought we to despair of attaining a sufficient degree of facility in
working up these coarser materials, where so little art and skill will be
wanted? We cannot pretend to rival Great Britain in such manufactures as
require much time, assiduity, and attention to bring to perfection; nor is this
a disadvantage to us: Satisfied in our present infant state, with manufacturing
those articles that are most necessary for preserving our existence, we can yet
employ our hands to better advantage in raising and exporting a variety of
produce, sufficient to pay for these superfluities which we want in return from
the mother country, which will turn to the mutual advantage of both.

THE goodness, and consequently the real value of the coarsest manufactures,
depends principally on the quantity of the finer part of the material of which
it is composed, rather than the workmanship; in this we shall have a singular
advantage, for we can afford a much greater proportion of the fine part of the
material, in our coarse linens, than can be afforded in Europe, where the close
working the materials constitutes a great part of the profit.

NOTHING is wanted but the countenance, example, and encouragement of people of
influence; and docility, attention, and industry in the poor.

INSTEAD of the number of negroes amongst us being, as imagined by some, an
impediment to manufactures, they might easily be made very useful, in
forwarding the work; they must do as directed, and even slavery itself, we
find, in numberless instances, has not extinguished their spirit to excel.

HUMANITY and the interest of the master bid us treat the female negroes with
lenity and indulgence, at least during their pregnancy, and whilst they are
suckling their children, in the latter universally, and often in the former
state, they are too feeble to labor constantly in the field: Had they not
better, for themselves and masters, at such times be employed in spinning?

WE have generally a good deal of weather in winter when little or nothing can
be done in the field; our evenings are long, and laboring people in Europe
employ the hours before bed time in working on some manufacture; we have many
white, as well as negro children, who have strength and address enough to spin,
wind yarn, pick wool, cotton, etc. though now, because not able to labor in
the field, kept entirely idle. If the young and the weak, and, in the winter
evenings and bad weather, when they cannot labor out, all the working hands
were employed in dressing, spinning, and weaving HEMP into coarse linen, what
family need purchase imported osnabrigs?

BY a proper distribution of our time, and employing the almost useless and
burdensome parts of our families, especially where there are a number of
negroes, the business of the plantation or farm may go on as profitably as at
present, and the necessary coarse clothing be fabricated at the same time.

MANUFACTURES cannot be carried to perfection in an instant, nor was planting
or farming, yet this country has made great advances lately in the latter, nor
has any country, with half the advantages of this, failed in the former.

ARTS, manufactures, and commerce, only, can support multitudes of people, in a
narrow compass, and numbers will not be wanting where these are cultivated with
vigor and propriety; nor are proofs wanting of the amazing effects of industry
when supported and encouraged by liberty; for wherever there is employment and
protection for people, there will population thrive.

WE are certainly now in a situation to make a beginning; when we can supply
ourselves with coarse substantial clothing, our hands will become more
numerous, both from our natural increase, and emigrations from Europe, and we
shall advance toward perfection by degrees; but what is most wanted should be
first fully accomplished; by such means, and such only, can we become populous
or truly rich.

IT is a certain fact, though not attended to, that the landed interest will be
most benefited by such improvements; the value of land depending solely on
population, and rising or falling as the people are numerous or otherwise; the
landed gentlemen ought, therefore, as well for their own interest as that of
the public, to be assiduous in forwarding manufactures, and consequently
population.

PREMIUMS, or personal encouragement, to such as may deserve well, together
with bounties judiciously proposed, might be of singular use in promoting
improvements, and the manufacture of linen in particular; their good effects
have been wonderfully felt in Scotland, and in Ireland, by the dint of which
the linen manufacture, in both kingdoms, has been brought to the greatest
perfection, and has proved of the utmost advantage to both.

THE true interest of a state is not always to insist upon too uncommon
perfection in its fabrics; that manufacture, for which there is the greatest
demand, ought always to be promoted in preference to any other, and, as we want
larger quantities of coarse than of fine linens, the encouragement should be
directed to that end.

A MANUFACTURE, thus dispersed and encouraged, will insinuate itself into every
family, and, from its natural connection with agriculture, it seems peculiarly
adapted to the country, and must necessarily concur with it in increasing
population, and prove a source of many advantages to these colonies.

CONSCIOUS that, in the following essay, little is advanced but what has
resulted from experiments, the author can therefore, with the greater
confidence, submit it to the impartial public; from the importance alone of the
subject he presumes to engage their attention, for, deficient as he is in point
of abilities, and little accustomed to writing, he claims no merit but that of
wishing to do his duty; far from flattering himself that he has exhausted a
subject so interesting, and so extensive, he will think himself happy if his
weak efforts shall contribute to excite men of greater abilities to take under
their consideration a subject, from the cultivation of which such great and
important advantages will, most probably, be derived to the community.

An ESSAY on HEMP.
CHAP. I. A Description of the Plant.
HEMP is commonly distinguished into two sorts, one that grows wild, the other
produced by cultivation; this latter is male and female in different plants,
the male, bearing the flower, is commonly called fimble hemp, and the other,
bearing the seed, karle hemp.

THE root of HEMP, produced by cultivation, is from three to eight inches long,
according to the quality of the land, and the quantity of seed sown thereon. It
is of a whitish color, undivided and running to a point, having fibers only on
two lines, exactly opposite to each other, when not straitened for want of
room. The stalk is round, from the root for some little way up, it then assumes
a fluted quadrangular form, is hollow, covered with a greenish bark, composed
of filaments; this bark, as it appears upon the stalk, forms a knotty, rough,
or prickly covering to it. These knots and prickles are mere excrescences of
gum, which serve to glue the fibers of the bark together, and to cover,
strengthen, and protect them, till they arrive at full maturity; at proper
distances, this bark is secured, from place to place, by six small fastenings,
which keep it close to the stem, like so many little nails ranged on the
circumference of the same circle.

ITS length and thickness are various, owing to many different causes. A grain
of hemp seed, sown by itself in a soil that agrees with it, commonly produces a
stalk large and firm, with many branches, and looks like a little tree. If it
is of that sex which produces the seed, it will yield a great number of grains,
and those very good; but its bark, being too hard and coarse, is only fit for
the rope-walk: on the contrary, the due quantity of seed, sown in a field that
is properly prepared for the purpose, produces stalks that are straight,
slender, without branches, and the bark of such, being smooth, fine, and soft,
is valuable for many other uses. The leaves grow two and two opposite to one
another, they are divided into many segments, being oblong, sharp pointed,
jagged, full of veins, of a deep green, rough to the touch, and of a strong
smell, that affects the head.

THE flowers, that grow on the male stalk, issue from the aloe of the leaves,
are of a purple color without, and whitish on the inside; these flowers are
not followed by any seed; and, on the contrary, the seed, on the stalks that
produce it, is never preceded by any flower.

WHATEVER the order of nature may be in the vegetation of this plant, both the
male and female stalks are produced indiscriminately from the grains of seed
that grow on the same stalk: and the difference cannot be known till they come
to blossom.

THE seed grows, in a great number of bunches, at the end of the stalk and
branches; this, when come to maturity, forces the membranous capsulae, or outer
husks, which contain it, to open, and discover a round smooth grain, somewhat
flattened, containing, under a thin shell, of a shining light gray color, a
white tender kernel; this kernel is enclosed in a green film, or thin covering,
and consists of two lobes that terminate in the germ, from which proceeds both
the root and bud of the future plant. Its substance is sweet to the taste, of a
strong smell when fresh; of a fat, spongious, gummy or oily matter; being very
porous, or open, it most readily receives the impression of heat and humidity,
which transmit to it the nutritious juices, supplied by a fat well labored
soil, and occasion it instantly to swell and spring up as soon as it is sown;
the two lobes unfolding, form two thick, green, oval shaped leaves, opening a
passage through the earth for the tender bud of the germ, which springs up at
the same time between them; after a quick germination the plant shoots up, its
fibers are formed, and attain to maturity, the oil and gum being the principles
of their strength and union.

CHAP. II. Of the land proper for HEMP; and the methods of preparing the ground.
IT is an opinion generally received, that HEMP can only be raised on such
lands as are naturally the best and richest; this being a crop that requires a
great deal of sustenance, there is no doubt but that it certainly may be raised
on such lands to most advantage, yet experience has demonstrated, that HEMP is
one of those plants which may be cultivated in many different situations, and
in almost every different soil, no plant yielding, in our climate, a crop more
certain or more advantageous.

RICH, dry bottom lands are those where HEMP has hitherto been principally
raised amongst us; but rich swamp well drained, high lands, either loamy or
light, so that they are rich and made mellow, will all, in their natural state,
bring this plant to great perfection. It is most probable that this plant may
be cultivated, to great advantage, on such dry marshes as are, either, from
their natural situation, or by means of drains and banks, out of danger from
inundations. This is but conjecture; however, as there are in every creek and
bay considerable quantities of marsh, it certainly would be worth the trouble
for the possessors to give it a fair trial, by having it properly broke up and
thoroughly rotted; should the hemp fail, it could be laid down in grass to
great advantage.


THOUGH most situations are suitable for HEMP, yet, as it requires a vast
quantity of nourishment, and in a few crops exhausts the richest soil, the land
intended for it ought not only to be the best that can be procured, but, to
insure a good crop, a quantity of manure, proportioned to the quality of the
ground, ought to be added; for experience shows us, that lands highly manured
amply repay every extraordinary trouble and expense of this kind, by producing
double the quantity that is usually raised on the richest lands in their
natural state.

IT may therefore be most advisable, for those who propose to cultivate this
plant, to set apart a piece of level land, not too low, far less a wet
situation, but convenient and best adapted to be improved. This piece of ground
ought, by the assistance of manure and other compositions, to be as highly
prepared as possible; when this is once accomplished, a very little dressing
will be requisite to keep it in proper tilth, and it will then admit of being
sown without any diminution of crops.

A DEEP light mould, which gives freedom for the fibers to pass every way, is
absolutely requisite for HEMP, but at the same time warmth is so essentially
necessary, that it will grow better in a poorer soil, that is warm and mellow,
than in a very rich one that is cold and wet. For which reason, sand becomes a
most essential ingredient in HEMP grounds, and therefore, rich, light, dry
soils ought to be preferred.

THOSE lands which are of a deep, black, or dusky loams, as they consist of a
proportion of sand, with a large quantity of pure mould, will be easiest, and
best cultivated.

STIFF or clayey lands, though they may not be so easily cultivated in the
beginning as the poor sandy lands, yet, after they are once prepared by labor
and proper manure, will be easily kept in order, as they will require less
manure, and last much longer than the very poor sandy soils, which, from their
texture, are but ill calculated to retain the manure; therefore, when this sort
of sandy land is intended for HEMP, that this waste of the most essential parts
of the manure may be prevented as much as possible, it will be proper that its
nature be changed by means of such bodies or compositions as will tend best to
effect this purpose, for which clay is peculiarly useful, and particularly so
when half burnt, or mixed with lime, which conveys fertility, and corrects the
bad qualities of the clay, by rendering it more friable, or its parts more
easily disunited, and therefore the more readily mixed with the sand.

THE sea owse, that is the settling of the tides on the shores between high and
low water mark, is an excellent manure for loose sandy soils; the cleanings of
ponds and ditches, as they consist of the putrid animal and vegetable bodies,
mixed with the rich earth deposited there by rains, etc. becomes likewise here
of considerable benefit: The same may be said of the mud in rivers, and creeks
or bays, where, by the stagnation of the water, the rich particles of the soils
carried down by the floods, have time to subside. But of all correctors or
alteratives for sandy soils, none is preferable to marl, where it can be had.
In short, all bodies or compositions, which tend to give consistence or
stability to the soil, are proper in this case; for, by intermixing those
substance with the sand, its nature becomes changed from a sandy to a loamy
soil, in which state it is better calculated to retain the manure, which it may
be afterward necessary to give it, as the nutritive particles thereof will
neither be so readily washed thorough, nor exhaled by the influence of the sun.

WHEN lands which incline to be clayey or stiff are intended for HEMP, they
ought to be well broke up, and then thrown up in ridges, as high and narrow as
possible, which may be most readily done with a good plough, by throwing one
furrow to the back of another, and this work ought to be done in the fall,
before the frost sets in; the benefit that will arise from this operation is
too considerable to be neglected; in this situation the glebe is best exposed
to the action of the following season, the rains, the snows, and frosts of
winter penetrate to the center, thereby opening and dissolving its parts, by
which much of your future labor will be abridged, for, when this method has
been executed properly, and in time, the ground will be mellow and in good
order.

THOSE, who may not be furnished with ploughs fit for this purpose, ought to
have the ground well dug over with the spade, or the hoes, and either thrown up
into ridges, as before directed, or into high narrow hills, similar to those of
the first hoeing for tobacco.

AS soon as the severe season is over, in February or March, the ground may be
levelled, which is soonest and best done by running an iron toothed harrow once
or twice over it; soon after this it ought to be ploughed over, though,
immediately before it is ploughed, the manure you intend to put upon it should
be carried out and spread. This point of time is to be preferred, as the
nutritive particles, with which the manure abounds, will have full opportunity
to be sufficiently dissolved and blended with the staple, before they can
sustain any dissipation. The manure, or compost, when laid on at this time,
should be well rotted or mellow; it will then be in such a state as to mix
freely with the soil; if the dung is new, it will be far better to plough it
down in the fall. Stable dung, rotten wood, saw-dust, tanners bark, ashes, the
dung of sheep, hogs, pigeons and poultry, are excellent manures for stiff land;
as cow dung, rotten wood, the bottoms of wood pits and rotten tanners bark are
suitable for lighter soils. Dung, which has been blended with other
ingredients, and mixed together where it could lie secured from the weather
until it becomes mellow and rotted, is far preferable to that which is fresh.


From this time, it may lie till the season for sowing arrives, when it is
necessary to plough it again, not only that such weeds as may have sprung up
may be ploughed down, but that the dung may be more equally blended with the
earth. If this ploughing should not bring your ground into proper tilth, for it
is requisite that as few clods be left as possible, and that your field be
light and loose as may be, it will be proper to run the plough through it once
more, though, before it receives this ploughing, it is advisable to have the
lumps, or clods first broken in pieces, either with a wooden mallet with a long
handle, or with the eye of the hoes.

CHAP. III. Of the proper season for sowing HEMP.
THE season for sowing this seed rarely begins sooner, in our part of the
country, than the beginning of May, the weather seldom being settled till then,
and continues till about the middle, or even the last of June. However the time
of sowing ought to vary, according to the difference of weather which is often
times very considerable in the same province, and even under the same latitude,
the spring proving later as we leave the ocean, and approach toward the
mountains.

IT may be necessary to observe, that as the HEMP which is first sown, provided
it does not meet with any accident, most commonly, yields the heaviest crop,
those lands which are high or dry should be sown as soon as the season will
permit, provided they are in order; those which are low or moist, as they often
cannot be got in order so soon as the uplands, may lie a little later. It is
however by no means eligible to sow this seed, till you can reasonably expect
that no danger is to be apprehended from the frost; nor is it, by any means,
proper to sow when the ground is very dry, or that there is an appearance of a
continuance of dry weather, in either of these cases, it will be far more
prudent to delay the sowing for a little, until the season is more advanced, or
proves more mild and favorable; for HEMP sown, especially on upland, when the
ground is dry, or the weather cold, seldom proves good unless rain happens to
fall immediately. In short, as the success of your crop, in a great measure,
depends upon the state of the weather at the time of sowing the seed, attention
ought to be given to seize the most favorable season, and, as it has been
observed that early sown HEMP generally thrives best, provided that the season
does not prove too untoward, it is therefore prudent to have the ground made
ready by the time that the weather is expected to set in mild and settled; the
first opportunity ought then to be taken to sow the seed, either immediately
before a rain, or as soon after as the ground will admit; sowing before the
shower ought to be preferred, only because the seed will be covered much better
and more equally when the ground is dry, than when it is wet: immediately
before sowing, the ground must be laid level with the harrow, and the best and
quickest method of covering the seed is, either with a short toothed single
harrow, or a bunch of brush, which ought to be dragged once or twice over the
land, and, directly after, a wooden roller of about fifteen or eighteen inches
diameter ought to be run over it A wooden roller, of fifteen or sixteen inches
diameter, by means of a box fixed on the frame, may be increased to any weight,
by loading the box with stones. This is an instrument that no farm ought to be
with out; a light roller run over the wheat in the spring, as soon as it gets
tolerably dry, after the severe frosts are past, is of very considerable
benefit to the crop; it is also of great advantage to grass lands and meadow
grounds.
; when there is only a small piece of ground sown, the seed may as well be
covered with a garden rake. Any instrument that covers this seed unequally is
improper, proper, for as this plant shoots instantly, those seeds that lie
shallow will be up before those which are covered deep, and as its growth, in
seasonable weather, is most rapid, that which comes up first is very apt to
keep that under which is later in shooting,

CHAP. IV. Of the SEED, with the quantities proper to be sown.
THE usual quantity of HEMP, where the hemp is intended for the rope-walk,
seldom exceeds one bushel on the acre, which is rather too little, for, where
the land is in tolerable tilth, not less than one bushel and a half of good
seed ought to be put on each acre; but, when HEMP is intended for domestic
purposes, there ought not to be less than two bushels of seed on each acre, and
when the land is perfectly good and mellow, two bushels and an half, or even
three bushels, will be found a far better proportion. Upon the whole, an
allowance must be made for the difference of soils equally well labored; a
good soil will afford nutriment for a large quantity of seed, and bring the
plants to the utmost perfection, whilst a like portion of seed would dwindle on
a poorer soil. Upon land which is highly cultivated, and in the best order,
even the above quantity of three bushels may be exceeded, without any
detriment, or diminution to the crop, and often with great benefit.

IN recommending the above quantity of seed, it is supposed to be good, clean,
and fresh, for none but seed of the last crop ought to be used, provided such
is to be had; when this cannot be obtained, seed of two years, though not so
good, may be tried, and if it has been well cured, and carefully preserved, may
chance to succeed.

IT is an easy matter, for those acquainted with this plant, to distinguish
good seed from bad; when the seed seems light, with a number of white and
greenish colored grains amongst it, which, when cracked, are found either
entirely empty, or to contain but a small shrivelled kernel, it is not to be
depended upon: on the contrary, that seed which is heavy, of a bright gray
color, and when cracked appearing full of a white tender kernel, is assuredly
good, provided that the male or flower plants were not drawn out till the
proper time, this also may be known from a careful examination of the kernel,
for if the seeds have been duly impregnated by the farina, or dust from the
flower, the germ, or future plant, will appear to an accurate observer,
particularly with the aid of a magnifying glass, lying with its bud between,
and a little tendril, which pierces the ground to form the root, running along
the two lobes of the kernel; however, the best and readiest method to know the
quality of the seed, is to sow a small quantity on a border of light good
earth, and from the number that springs up, the goodness of the seed may be
very nearly ascertained.

THE usual method of sowing this seed is by broad-cast, but, in whatever way it
is done, all imaginable care must be observed to distribute the seed as equally
over the ground as possible: and as all kinds of birds, but more particularly
pigeons and turtle doves, are remarkably fond of this seed, and will, if they
are permitted to frequent the ground, destroy great quantities of it, even
during some few days after it is sprung up; it is necessary to keep them off
until it has gathered strength, and the leaves become expanded The time of the
birds feeding upon the seed is principally before sunrise: after this they are
less ravenous, till toward evening, when they feed again till near sunset.
: from this time no further attention is requisite, until the season for
pulling, unless it is to observe that your enclosure be sufficient to keep out
such animals as might trample or break it down.

CHAP. V. Of the time of pulling, and the different methods of watering and
rotting HEMP.
IN about six or eight weeks after sowing, according as the season has been
more or less favorable, the plant which bears the flower begins to blossom;
sometimes this happens when the plant is not much above two feet high; the
HEMP, when this is the case, seldom grows much higher, but continues weak; this
may be owing to different causes, but it most commonly proceeds either from the
weakness of the ground, or from the HEMP having been sown in dry cold weather.
At other times it rises to the height of four, and oftener five feet before it
blossoms, and grows greatly after. The plant which bears the flower usually
rises above that which produces the grain, and, by the time that it gets in
blossom, is generally several inches above it.

THIS superiority, in the order of nature, may be well accounted for, when we
consider, that the powder which issues from the flower of the male, serves to
convey fertility to the grain on the female stalks that produce the seed. When
the HEMP gets in full bloom, the flowers are loaded with the farina or dust in
such abundance, that, upon the first impression of the morning breeze, it
appears like a fog, or a cloud of smoke floating over the HEMP field.

AS soon as this phenomenon begins to disappear, and the blossom to drop, the
HEMP is at full maturity, and we may immediately begin to pull it.

THIS is best and easiest done when the ground happens to be tolerably dry.
When you begin to gather the HEMP, it will be expedient that each person
employed clear before him as many feet of ground as the HEMP is high, in order
that, after pulling it up by the roots, and beating off the earth that sticks
to them, by striking the roots against his foot, he may conveniently spread it
on the ground from whence he has pulled it, where it must lie until it is quite
dry; it is then to be tied up in bundles, and put under some cover, or
carefully stacked in the ground, in which case it must be well thatched with
straw, to prevent any wet from getting to it. Under this shelter it remains
till about the middle of November, when it is spread out to rot; it is laid out
in rows, taking care that it is spread so thin as that it may get equally wet,
and dry nearly alike; it will be prudent to spread it out in some enclosure,
for example on winter grain, that it may not be molested by the hogs or other
animals; from this time it generally lies till toward the beginning of
February, and sometimes a month later, before it is fit to be taken up, this
however depends on the weather; should the winter prove moist and open, and the
HEMP happened to meet with some showers whilst it lay out to dry when it was
pulled, in that case it may get rotted by the last of December or middle of
January. The proper time for taking it up may easily be known by cracking a few
of the stalks, or breaking a handful in the brake, and, if the bark is found to
separate readily from the stems, the HEMP ought immediately to be taken up,
which must however be done in clear weather, that the HEMP, when lifted, may be
as dry as possible.

WHEN it is intended that the HEMP should immediately be put through the brake,
it is commonly set up in the field in small parcels, the root end down,
gathering them together and binding them at the top, in which position it is
not apt to get injured, till the weather turns warm; but when it is not
convenient to brake it directly, it should be put under cover, so as to be
entirely safe from the weather.

THIS is the method generally used in this country, in place of watering, and
is called winter rotting.

WHEN HEMP is intended to be watered, it is tied with the short HEMP rather
toward the upper end, in small bundles as it is pulled, setting up about six
bundles in a parcel, root end down, spreading them wide at the bottoms, but
pressing them close at the tops; in three or four days, if the weather is good,
it will be dry enough to put into the water, where it lies seldom less than
nine days, but oftentimes before the operation is effected, ten or twelve days;
warm weather forwards the watering, and cold retards it; however, as the sooner
that the watering is effected there is the less danger of the HEMP being hurt,
it is better to put the HEMP into the water as soon as may be after it is
pulled, and whilst it is yet green; in this state it seldom or ever requires to
be longer in the water than five days, but it ought to be observed, that this
is in August, our month for pulling, when the weather is generally at the
warmest.

BEFORE placing the HEMP in the water, it will be necessary to take care that
the bundles have not been made too large, and that the HEMP is tolerably even
at the roots, and, when the HEMP happens to be very tall, it will be proper to
bind it with a single stalk or two near to the roots, as well as near the top;
care however must had not to bind it too close, an error, here, being of more
consequence than may be imagined, the watering never succeeding thoroughly when
the bundles are hard tied, the fermentation going on unequally in the several
parts, as they are more or less confined.

THESE precautions being used, there is little danger of waste from the bundles
breaking or tangling, and, that the HEMP may be prevented from getting quite to
the bottom, and not only be placed, but preserved in some order in the water,
it will be proper to lay two or three straight poles, or saplings, parallel in
the water, so as the two outside pieces may be about three or four feet
asunder, and, for greater security, they ought to be joined with a small cross
piece near to each end: across this frame the HEMP must be laid, interlocking
the tops, and placing the butts out, after this manner it is to be piled on
(sinking it under the water) till it is within a few inches of the surface, it
should then be covered over with straw, or green boughs, to keep the sun from
getting to the HEMP, and over this should be laid some logs of wood, or a few
fence rails, to keep it under the water.

WHEN we consider that the effect produced by watering, being a dissolution of
a certain quantity of that gum, or glutinous substance which serves to join the
fibers of the HEMP together, and attach them to the stem, we are apt to imagine
that a fine clear stream would be fitter to accomplish this end, because, at
the same time that it dissolved, it would also purge and wash it from that gum
and filth, thereby leaving the HEMP in a purer state, but experience, against
which there is no reasoning, convinces us, that the properest places for
watering HEMP, are deep ditches, or pits of stagnated water, such as
mill-ponds, or deep pools, where the water is seldom or never changed. The more
still and putrid the easier it ferments, and penetrates the HEMP more quickly,
as well as more effectually, and, though that which is (...) limpid stream will
appear far whiter, at the brake, than that which is watered in stagnated water,
yet, upon minute examination, the first will be found inferior in quality to
this last, it appearing in a manner exhausted and dead as it were, and of a
pale white, whilst the other appears with a fine lively gloss, with a bluish
cast which never quits it; for the cloth made of this HEMP most readily attains
a perfect degree of the purest white, whilst the cloth made of the river
watered HEMP, notwithstanding all the efforts of art, will still retain a
yellowish cast, and appear of a fainty disagreeable color, which never quits
it, and without great care, will increase as the linen is used.

SUCH persons as have not natural watering places convenient to them, may, with
great ease and very small expense, have a pit dug for the purpose, about eight
or nine feet in breadth, so deep as to have full five feet water, and in
length, according to the quantity of HEMP intended to be watered, and it may
not be amiss to observe, that this pit may be filled with HEMP two or three
times in one season.

THIS pit, if possible, ought to be in such a place, that no floods, or streams
of muddy foul water can flow into it, but at the same time so situated, that a
small quantity of soft water, free from any mineral, may, when clear, be let
into the pit, upon any occasion, and it will be very proper that this little
stream of water should, during the time the HEMP is in the pit, be permitted to
run through it; if the water but trickles or just runs it will be sufficient;
it is only wanted to effect a little change in the water in the pit, near the
surface, which, else, from the excessive power of the sun at this season, would
be much warmer at the top, and consequently the HEMP there would be sooner
watered than at the bottom. Where no fresh water can with convenience be
admitted, the pit may be shaded by means of a few more green boughs, which may
be thrown over it so as to obstruct the rays of the sun from the water.

AS such places may be made with little trouble, so no water has yet been
discovered more proper for this purpose, and it will be found that the HEMP,
watered in them the second year, will be preferable in color and quality, to
that of the first, which proves, that the older and longer the water has
remained in these pools, without being entirely changed, the fitter it is to
answer our expectations. It is certain, the longer the water settles or stands
the softer it proves, and the more kindly it ferments with the saponacious
juices of plants; and to fit these pools the better and sooner for the purpose,
it will be necessary to have them dug two or three months before they are used,
and to throw therein, to rot, any succulent weeds or plants, which may be taken
out immediately when the HEMP is ready to be laid in, by which means the water
will be stirred up from the bottom, and mixed with that at top. -- As
undoubtedly the future qualities of the HEMP depend greatly upon the manner in
which this process is performed, it therefore becomes of consequence to attend
to the different methods; next to the HEMP which has been watered in the pits,
experience gives the preference to that which can be safely rotted by the dew
in the fall, its strength and color being little inferior to that which is
watered in the pits, and superior in both to that which is winter rotted, which
nevertheless ought to be preferred before watering in a stream, therefore such
as do not choose to be at the trouble of providing pits ought to prefer the
method of dew rotting. The principal danger attending this method, is from the
too great heat of the sun, which is apt to injure the HEMP, if spread out too
early in the fall, and therefore is best guarded against, by not laying it out
till toward the first of October, which will yet leave time to ^ot the HEMP
before the snows set in.

IN whatever manner this operation is effected, we know, that the HEMP is
watered sufficiently, when the bark parts freely from the stem, therefore, if
the HEMP has been put into the water quite green, as directed above, it will be
necessary to draw out every day, beginning at the fourth at furthest, a few
stalks, which are to be well dried, if then the bark is found to separate
freely from the stems, the HEMP is sufficiently watered, and ought immediately
to be taken out; permitting the HEMP to lie a day longer than necessary, at
this season of the year, when the weather is commonly very warm, would be
greatly prejudicial to it, as the fibers of the bark, from being too much
macerated, would occasion not only great waste in handling, whilst wet, but,
from not having strength sufficient to sustain the effort of the brake, part of
the bark would remain with the stems. However, until experience teaches
exactness in this, it is the best way to lean to the safer side, and draw the
HEMP rather too early than too late; if a bandle of the HEMP is tried daily, as
directed above, no great error can be committed: when the HEMP is taken out of
the watering place, though it is by no means proper to water it in clear
streams, it would be well, however, for those who are convenient to such, to
wash the HEMP carefully therein. As the bundles are taken out of the water,
they may be laid on each other upon the bank with their tops sloping downward,
in which position the water will more readily drain off, by which means the
bundles will be more safely and easily moved to the place where the HEMP is to
be spread to dry, which is generally in some old field or piece of short grass
land. -- If it is perceived that the HEMP has been taken out too soon, it is
only permitting it to lie a few days longer where it is spread, and the dew or
rain will not only complete what the water has left undone, but it will also
take off some of the harshnes of the HEMP: as soon as it is thoroughly dry, it
is then fit for the brake, and should be gathered up, and tied with straw bands
in large bundles, and laid away under shelter, where it can receive no injury
from the weather.

CHAP. VI. Directions for raising and preserving the SEED.
WHEN it is intended to let seed plants remain in the HEMP ground, for the
purpose of providing seed, which is the method, though a very bad one, commonly
used, the blossom HEMP ought not to be pulled until the dust has entirely
fallen from the flowers, when they will begin to wither, and turn of a brownish
yellow, and the stalks white at the root; it may then be pulled without any
injury to the seed, and, if this is done with proper caution, it will give new
strength to those seed plants remaining in the ground, for, only the best and
strongest of this kind being left, the HEMP ground is delivered, not only from
a great number of plants that exhausted its strength, and injured and choked
one another, but the raising and loosening the ground, about those that remain,
will prove equal to a hoeing.

THOUGH this is the method, as has been observed, generally used for raising
seed, yet it is by no means to be approved of; separating the seed plants from
what you pull up occasions a great deal of trouble, and takes above double the
time to gather and secure the HEMP from off the same ground; for, as the stalks
of these plants left in the field, especially when it has been sown of a proper
thickness, being for the most part small and without any branches, yield but
very little seed, and even that none of the best, it will require a vast number
of them to produce but a very moderate quantity of seed; besides the bark of
this latter HEMP gets harsh from standing so long, and is not so fit for linen
as it is for cordage.

A FAR better method is to raise the seed apart by itself, either on a portion
of the ground allotted for the HEMP, or, what would be yet more proper, on any
other good spot that is convenient for this purpose, which must be reduced into
proper tilth, either by the hoe, or plough, in the same manner as directed for
the other. This ought to be done so as to have the ground ready to receive the
seed as soon as the frosts are over, for, provided that the weather is mild and
will permit, the earlier what you intend to raise seed from is put into the
ground the better, not only because the forward plants bring their seeds better
to maturity, and produce a greater quantity, but, in case of accidents, there
will be time to sow the ground again.

THE season for sowing being come, the ground should be laid off, either with
the plough or hoe, into flat hills, about four feet asunder, in each of these
hills from ten to fifteen grains of the HEMP seed may be deposited, and, as
soon as they are sprung to such a height as to be past danger from the frost,
or other accidents, the hills ought to be thinned, pulling up the superfluous
stalks, leaving about eight or nine plants in each hill.

THE remaining plants ought to be kept clear of weeds, and the ground loosened,
either by the plough or the hoe, until the HEMP grows to such a size that it
becomes inconvenient to work amongst it. About the middle or toward the last
of August, when the male or flower plants have entirely lost their dust, and
begin to drop their blossoms and wither, they should then be carefully pulled
up, so as not to injure the female plants, which must remain in the ground,
commonly for five or six weeks longer until the seed is ripe.

AS the seed of this plant does not ripen equally, or all together, attention
must be given to secure it in the proper time; should the seeds get too ripe,
and a wind happen when in this state, it might occasion the loss of the very
best of the grain. As that seed which ripens first is the best, so the danger
of losing it is the greatest, some, therefore, spread a sheet close by the side
of the plants, and bending their tops carefully over, beat out the ripe seed
into the sheet, by gently shaking or beating the bunches, by performing this
once or twice, permitting some days to intervene, the very best of the seed is
all saved, and the plants may safely be permitted to remain some time longer in
the ground, by which means more of the seed arrives to maturity.

AS soon, then, as the seeds begin to burst the capsules, or outer husks, and
appear well formed, and ready to drop out of themselves, some of the seed
bunches should be examined, and if it is found, upon opening the green husks,
which have not yet bursted of themselves, that the shell, which covers the
kernel, is firm and plump, of a gray color, and tolerably well filled, then is
the time for saving the seed; this is most safely and quickly done by cutting
down the stalks with a sharp reap hook, near the ground, and, before the husks
can have any time to dry, or shrink from the seeds, they ought to be carried
near to the barn, or the place where you intend to clean out the seed, where
they must be set up in small parcels, with their root ends down, and spreading
wide at the bottom, and the heads bearing the seeds compressed closely together
at the top; it will be eligible to cover these shocks, or parcels, with straw,
or afford them some other protection from the weather and the birds. It is
done, both expeditiously and effectually, by tying small bundles of rye straw
securely together at the top, and spreading its butts over the heads of the
HEMP, when it forms a roof shaped like a sugar loaf, which, being tied about
with a single stalk or two at the butts of the straw, safely secures the seed
from injury; in this position it may remain till the seed is cured, and it is
convenient to thresh it out; or it may remain until the middle of November,
when it is time to spread out the HEMP to winter rot, this being by far the
least troublesome way of treating this latter HEMP, which is too coarse and
harsh for linen, but exceedingly fit for many purposes in husbandry; the seed
may be threshed out in the barn floor, or on a strong cloth spread on the
ground, or it may be got off by means of an instrument called a ripple; this is
made in the form of a rake, only the teeth are placed closer together, through
these teeth the tops of the HEMP are combed until all the seed is pulled off,
and, after being cleaned, and as much of the light seed as possible separated
from it, that which is good may be put away in casks, or any other place, until
it is wanted, where it will be most secure from the vermin.

AN acre of ground, managed in this manner, will produce from twenty to
twenty-five or thirty bushels of seed.

THIS seed, besides being necessary for the propagation of the plant, possesses
other useful qualities; it yields an oil in large quantities, which is fit
either for the lamp or coarse painting; a bushel of good seed will yield about
six or seven quarts, it is therefore profitable to raise it for its oil; this
seed is also a proper food for fowls or birds, and, made into a paste, fattens,
in a very little time, hogs or other animals which are fed on it.

WHEN only a few bushels of seed are wanted, this may be as well procured from
a few hills, made as directed above, or on any convenient bye spot, such as
spare borders in a garden, where old tobacco or fodder houses have stood, or
even about the doors of tobacco houses, or indeed upon any spots where wood,
dung, or litter of any sort has lain to rot; upon such places oftentimes five,
six, or seven quarts of seed is produced from one hill.

CHAP. VII. Of the breaking and preparing of HEMP for the Hackle.
THE HEMP being safely watered, we now proceed to treat of the methods for
separating and clearing the stems from the bark; this is most expeditiously,
and most effectually performed by means of a simple instrument, called a brake,
which is constructed in the same manner as a flax brake, only larger, being not
only longer, but the fingers or swords should be stronger, and placed
considerably wider at the hinder end.

ONE need see HEMP or flax broken but once, to be immediately master of the
whole operation. The man or woman (for though this is a laborious work, it is
nevertheless often performed by women) takes in his left hand, near to the
middle, and so as that the root end may go first under the brake, as much of
the HEMP as can be conveniently grasped and with the other hand the upper jaw
of the brake is raised, the HEMP is instantly thrown between the two jaws of
the instrument, first toward the end where the brake is widest, when the jaw
which was lifted up is immediately let fall, and thus, by alternately raising
and letting fall the upper jaw, with all the agility and force that can be
given it, and, at the intervals of raising, shifting the HEMP into every
different position, moving it as it gets more broke toward the fore end of the
brake, where the fingers are closest, the stems are in a little time broke into
small pieces, which are made to quit the bark, by shaking it, or striking it
against the brake: when the root end is sufficiently broken, the other part is
put under, and treated in like manner; care must be taken to grasp the HEMP
firmly in the hand, that it may be kept as even at the butts as possible. When
this operation is carefully performed, there will be very little waste, and the
fibers will retain, as far as possible, their natural length.

THIS first performance, as it clears the HEMP from a great part of the dust
and gum, prepares it better for the next operation, than the method of peeling,
which is by no means to be used for this sort of HEMP: such as have not the
opportunity of using the brake, may perform this operation as effectually, by
holding the HEMP on a block, or a large smooth stone, and beating it with a
maul, until the stems, being thereby broken and ground into small pieces,
become easily separated from the bark.

INDEED the HEMP, from which the seed was raised, may properly enough be
peeled, and will afford fit employment for young Negroes, or such who are so
old as to be past other labor, and this is easily effected by breaking the
stalks at the root end, when the bark may be readily stripped entirely off the
stems to the top.

IN whatever way this work is done, it will be very much facilitated by having
the HEMP made as dry as possible.

IN those parts of England, where this plant is much cultivated, they make use
of ovens for this purpose, by means of which the HEMP is safely and effectually
dried through all its parts.

THE oven is heated over night to such a degree, that a person can just stand
in it without uneasiness, it is then cleaned and filled with the HEMP, and,
being closed up, the HEMP next morning will be fit to work off, and is taken
out of the oven, as it is wanted, and carried to the brake, quite dry and
crisp, by which means this operation is not only more expeditiously performed,
but, as the HEMP, when thoroughly dried, requires less violence to clear it
from the stems than when it is damp and tough, there will be little or no
waste, as very few of the fibers or ribbons of the HEMP will be broken in
passing through the brake: from these reasons it appears, that this method of
drying the HEMP is attended with considerable advantages, but when we reflect,
that they have a great deal more damp weather in England, than with us, ovens
for this purpose are certainly more necessary there than here, where we
generally perform this work during the cool clear dry weather of the spring,
when the HEMP commonly requires no other preparation than opening the bundles,
and exposing it to the sun for an hour or two, before it is put through the
brake; however, should the weather prove damp when this operation requires to
be performed, it will be necessary to have recourse to some other method to dry
the HEMP: this is sometimes done by sticking four small pieces of forked wood
in the ground, two on each side, with a small pole laid from the one fork to
the other, on these two side poles are laid a few thin laths reaching across,
upon which the HEMP is spread over a fire, that blazes but little. This method
will do in calm weather, but it is better and safer done by digging a hole
about eight feet into the face of a hill or bank, and about five feet broad.

THE earth out of this hole being thrown upon each side forms with the hill
three walls, from the side walls a few small pieces of wood, about the size of
tobacco sticks, are laid across, upon these the HEMP intended for the brake is
laid to dry, and turned from time to time over a small fire: in this place the
heat, being confined by the side walls, and the bank behind, acts more upon the
HEMP, which is more regularly and effectually dried than it can be the other
way.

WHEN the HEMP is broken, and cleared from the stems, if it is for the rope
walk, it is tied up with a few strands of the HEMP, about eight or nine inches
from the root end, into hands or stricks, of four or five pounds each, and is
then ready to pack up into bales or bundles: but a laborious operation remains
to prepare that for the hackle which is intended for cloth, this is beating, or
pounding, which is performed various ways: in those parts of the country, where
HEMP is much cultivated, mills are erected for this purpose, and, though they
will admit of great improvement, yet they prepare the HEMP much better, and far
quicker than can be done by the mallet. Where these mills are not to be had,
the hammers of the fulling mill will effect the same end; they are a little
more tedious in preparing the HEMP, but they do it full as well as it is done
in the mills built for the purpose; sometimes it is prepared under a bark mill,
but, where none of these assistances are convenient, it is laid in a stone or
wooden mortar, or on a block of wood, and either pounded with a heavy pestle,
or large mallet; precaution must be taken, that the HEMP be not injured during
this operation, by continuing to pound it after it becomes too warm, for when
it gets hot, which it soon will do, from the severe action of the mallet, it
ought to be laid aside until it gets cool, when it may be again taken in hand;
the HEMP is to be firmly twisted up, and the ends doubled in to prevent it from
tangling, and ought to be placed and turned in every different position, so as
to receive the impression of the mallet on all its parts. The intention of this
work is to divide and separate the fibers of the HEMP, and, by disengaging it
from the remaining gum and dirt, render it more soft and pliant, and fit it the
better for the hackle.

THIS operation, besides being a severe one, is often prejudicial to the health
of the work people, the gum, which in pounding flies off from the HEMP, fills
the air with disagreeable dust, which, being drawn in with the breath,
frequently brings on disorders, occasioned by obstructions in the lungs, to
such as are obliged to follow this labor for a livelihood: It is full as
disagreeable for those who attend the mills.

THE hackling is nearly as noxious when much of the remaining dust, in passing
the HEMP so quickly through the hackle, is rubbed off.

THE hackles used for this business are of different degrees of fineness,
agreeable to the quality of the manufacture intended.

THE whole of this operation, though it requires use and practice to dress HEMP
to the best advantage, may nevertheless be performed by any careful person.
There is another method which is made use of, on some occasions, to improve the
quality of flax, as well as HEMP; a large pot, with as much weak lie in it as
to cover the bottom, is placed over a small fire, just sufficient to keep the
lie boiling; a few narrow splits of wood are placed across each other, until
they are so far above the lie as to prevent the HEMP, which is to be placed
upon them, from touching it; upon these sticks the streaks, or parcels of HEMP,
are placed in layers, leaving a little space between each parcel; the layers
are to cross each other, so that the steam may thereby pass freely through to
the top or upper parcels; when the pot is nearly full it is covered almost
close, and, after that most of the lie has evaporated, the HEMP is hung up, out
of the wind, or spread on the grass to dry; when it is quite dry, it is twisted
up, and pounded a little, to separate the fibers, which get matted together in
drying.

CHAP. VIII. A new method of preparing HEMP by a second watering, together with
some observations on its qualities.
HAVING thus endeavored to communicate such methods as appear best adapted to
our climate, as well as those most commonly made use of amongst us at this
time, for cultivating and preparing HEMP for domestic purposes. Yet, after all
the fatigue, labor and pains in the preparation, it is found to produce but a
very coarse, ill colored thread, and so harsh, that, before it can be made fit
to be wove into cloth, it is necessary to boil it in several lies, and the
cloth, made of this yarn, is still so hard to be bleached, that it requires a
tedious operation, which is both laborious and expensive, before it can be
brought to any tolerable color, so that it has hitherto been deemed only fit
to make the coarsest kinds of cloth.

WITH a view of encouraging a general cultivation of this most necessary plant,
we shall endeavor to communicate a method, which not only abridges the most
laborious, and dispenses with the most disagreeable operations now used in
preparing HEMP, but, from numbers of experiments which have been made, will
evince that HEMP has many valuable qualities which we have hitherto but very
little attended to, and that it may be applied, with ease and great propriety,
to answer many elegant and considerable purposes in life, for which it has been
hitherto deemed utterly unfit.

THE bark of the HEMP, as it appears in its original state upon the stem, seems
surrounded, or entirely covered with a dirty glutinous oil, or gum, which not
only serves to attach the bark to the stem, but also to join, or glue the
fibers of the bark lengthways together: experience shows that this glutinous
substance has different degrees of resistance; the common watering serves to
dissolve so much of this gum as to fit the HEMP for the brake, but still, after
this operation, the bark remains in broad strings or ribbons, and it is
necessary, before a further separation of the fibers can be effected, to have
recourse to some other process to clear them from the remaining gum; the mill,
or the mallet, has been hitherto generally used for this purpose, by means of
which operation, part of the gum being beat off, the bark becomes more divided,
yet still the-fibres remain coarse and harsh. Experience, however, has
demonstrated, that a second watering, when performed with care, not only
accomplishes the work of the mill, but goes a great way further. The HEMP, by
means of this second watering, being washed and disengaged from the remaining
gum and dirt, becomes white and flexible, and its fibers easily divisible to a
great degree of fineness, by means of the succeeding operation of the hackle.

THIS method of preparing HEMP appears to have been practiced with success in
many parts of France, and is strongly recommended in a treatise published by M.
Marchandier, magistrate of Bourges, the capital of Berry, a province long
celebrated for its hempen cloth.

AFTER having long considered, says this writer, the various means that might
be found to relieve those who work upon HEMP, and observed those admirable
qualities, of which, hitherto, no improvement has been made, we found that the
common watering of HEMP was nothing but the dissolution of a tenacious gum,
natural to the plant, the parts whereof are joined together merely by means of
it, and that, in order to this first preparation, it was sufficient to leave
the HEMP in the water, in proportion to the quantity and tenacity of this gum,
that after having prepared it only for being peeled, or braked, it seemed very
proper to give it a second watering, to soften the bark, that still remains
hard, elastic, and incapable of being brought to a proper degree of fineness.
Accordingly, by the different experiments we made, in the presence, and under
the direction of Mons. Dodart, intendant of Berry, we have found means, easily,
and without expense, to give it those qualities which are natural to it, and
the uses whereof were not hitherto known.

THE water that has already had power to separate the bark from the stem,
serves also to divide, without trouble or hazard, the fibers from one another,
by a total dissolution of the gum that remains in them?

IT is needless to enumerate the many different methods and experiments which
have been tried, it will be sufficient to lay down the necessary directions in
as few words as will render them intelligible to the meanest capacity, for no
operation can well be more simple, plain and easy.

THE HEMP, being previously broke, and tolerably well cleared from the stems,
must be divided into smaller parcels, each of the handfuls from the brake may
be divided into two, or, if very large, into three parcels, these are to be
doubled in the middle, twisting them very slightly, and securing the ends by
doubling them in, or by wrapping the longest fibers of the ends two or three
times round, so that the parcels may not only be kept from mixing with each
other, but also that the HEMP of every individual parcel may be kept straight,
and in due regularity. The parcels thus prepared must be placed in regular
layers in the tub or vessel, which you have prepared for the purpose, which is
to be filled with water, the properest for the purpose is pond or rain water,
or the softest that can be procured; in this the HEMP may continue for twelve,
eighteen, or even twenty-four hours; by this time, if the weather is warm, the
gum remaining on the HEMP, though not dissolved, will be thoroughly moistened.
The HEMP is then to be taken out, and, that the gum may be the better loosened,
and more readily washed off, it will be necessary to wash the HEMP well in
clear water, as it is taken out; this may be most conveniently done in an old
tub, the staves of which are cut off within about ten or twelve inches of the
bottom; this tub should be placed in a run of water, or below a spring, so that
the water may continually pass through it; the HEMP is then to be trampled on
by the person's feet, who is employed in this work, and as there will be a
constant succession of clear water, the dirt and gum will be washed away as
fast as it is squeezed out of the HEMP; when the water appears to pass clear
from the HEMP, it should then be taken up, and, after the water is gently
wrung, or rather squeezed out, it is then to be laid on a block, and beat with
a beetle, the instrument used to beat clothes with, when washed: The edge,
which is commonly two inches thick, is better for this purpose than the flat
side; in this manner it must be beat, moistening and shifting the position of
the HEMP, until you judge that it is disengaged from the remainder of the gum,
and that its fibers begin to divide, and separate; it should then be thrown
into the water, untwisted, and by single parcels washed very clean, when the
good effects of this second watering will appear; the HEMP being purged and
disengaged from the gum and dirt, by the foregoing operation, its fibers will
appear fine, and as completely divided, as if they had already passed through
the hackle. When the HEMP is very well rinsed, it is to be carefully wrung,
and, after shaking it out, hung across a rope to dry; should the weather prove
windy, it will be best to spread it on the grass, as the wind is said to impair
the strength both of HEMP and flax.

THIS is the mode which we have adopted for performing this operation during
warm weather, which is undoubtedly the fittest time for this business, heat
being absolutely necessary to assist in clearing the HEMP from its gum and
filth, for which reason, it will not only be more tedious to effect this in
cold severe weather, but it is rather distressing to the persons employed to
stand or work in cold water, however, when we cannot find time conveniently in
summer, to perform this work, another method may be adopted during the cold
weather, which, though it occasions a little more trouble than the other,
enables us, nevertheless, to perform this process full as quickly.

A POT of weak lie is to be prepared toward the evening, and, after having
previously soaked the HEMP in warm water, for two or three hours, it is to be
wrung out and placed in the tub, as before directed, the lie, after having
settled, is to be poured as warm as possible over the HEMP, which should be
kept under the lie, by means of a cover nearly adapted to the size of the mouth
of the vessel, which will also keep the steams from evaporating, and enable the
HEMP to retain a warmth until morning, when it must be taken out of the lie,
and trampled upon and beat as before directed, using a little warm water,
occasionally, to temper the severity of the cold during the trampling and
beating, which are the most tedious parts of the process, as only the rinsing
will require to be done in cold water.

WHEN the HEMP is dry, four or five of the parcels may, as they are taken off
the rope, be twisted up firmly together, doubling in the ends, to prevent it
from getting loose in pounding; for as the HEMP, in drying, is apt to get
matted together, it is absolutely necessary, before it can be hackled, that the
fibers should be separated again; this may be effected altogether by the
mallet, though this purpose is answered full better by means of another
instrument called a clove.

THE HEMP, after being beaten until it begins to get soft, is then shook loose,
and one or two of the parcels being grasped in the right hand, near to the
middle, giving the HEMP a turn round the hand to keep the fibers more firmly in
their place, the woman, who works this instrument, sits on the bench or block,
in which it is fixed, and having hold with her left hand, of the handle of the
lower piece or jaw, which only moves, she causes it to open by raising her
hand; with the other, the HEMP is thrown between the two jaws, and then, by
lowering the left hand, the moving jaw is raised, the HEMP being thereby
inserted or forced into the groove of the upper piece, is immediately drawn
forcibly through, while the jaw is held fast. The HEMP, in its passage, being
severely rubbed against the edges of the instrument, is both softened and
separated; this work, being briskly repeated, in a very short time it softens,
disengages, and separates the fibers of the HEMP more quickly, and prepares it
better for the hackle, than the mallet alone. -- When the one end is done, that
which was wrapped round the hand is treated in like manner.

FROM this process, than which nothing can be easier, and which differs in no
essential point from the directions given by Mons. Marcandier, most of the
difficulties formerly attending the preparation of HEMP are removed, and, what
is of more consequence, its qualities appear very much improved. "This work
(says Mons. Marcandier) formerly so hard, on account of the strength it
required, and so dangerous, on account of the fatal dust the workman drew in
with his breath, will be, henceforth, only a business moderately severe. There
will be no occasion to look for machines to save the labor of men, and prevent
the dangers attending the work. The business of hemp-dressing, henceforward,
would be confined to an easy beating of the HEMP, and the common operations of
the hackle: it is so much the more easy that the materials are softer, and no
longer exhale unwholesome dust: and moreover there is scarce any waste in this
operation. If you want it to pass through the finest hackle, the HEMP thus
washed will afford dressed stuff capable of producing the best thread,
comparable to what is yielded by the finest flax, and you will have little more
than a third of very good hards.

"Now these hards, which were formerly an object of discouragement, and sold
commonly for about five farthing, the pound, by this new operation, becomes a
matter of very great advantage. By carding them like wool, they produce a fine
white, marrowy substance, the true use whereof was never discovered till now.
They may be spun alone into very beautiful thread. They may be also mixed with
cotton and silk, with wool, and even with hair; and the thread, that results
from these different mixtures, affords, by its vast variety, materials for new
essays, very interesting to the arts, and of vast utility to several sorts of
manufactures.

"IN HEMP, duly prepared, besides silk, hair, wool, and cotton, we find a new
material, which, till now, had never any existence in commerce, nor in
manufactures, but may be made extremely useful in both. By mixing it with wool,
for instance, half and half, we work it into caps and cloths, which are no ways
different from those that are made of wool alone, even in their greatest
perfection. By mixing the hards of it with cotton, we make cloth and stuffs,
and even coverlids, which, with regard to whiteness, softness, fineness, and
other qualities, may be preferred to those, which, at first, we only propose to
imitate. Nor is it to be doubted, but it may be also employed in manufactures
of hats, because it will be an easy matter to make felts of it, if we mix it
with wool proper for that purpose.

"IN a word, by the different combinations made with the hards of HEMP, they
assume the nature and properties of the materials with which they are mixed,
and the price of such materials will be lessened in proportion as they are now
dear, uncommon and rare.

"We have already given, in several cities of the kingdom, such samples of
these mixtures as have been demanded of us, that the first sight of them has
excited the surprise, and merited the approbation of the best judges."

FROM the above quotations we may form some opinion of the idea which Mons.
Marcandier entertains of the properties of HEMP, and the advantages which it
may be of to manufactures, when prepared agreeable to this new method; but,
notwithstanding so many new qualities are attributed to HEMP, when prepared by
a second watering, this method is attended with more waste of the HEMP than
when it is prepared in the mill, when it will doubtless yield more dressed
stuff, though not so fine in quality, and if the labor is not so severe or
unhealthy, it must be allowed to be more tedious and troublesome; however,
should this mode of preparation fail in producing all the advantages we are
made to hope from it, yet there are many very important ones to be urged in its
favor, and when we consider that the yarn, which is spun of the stuff hackled
from that prepared in the mill, loses greatly of its weight in boiling (a
process which all linen thread must undergo to prepare it for weaving) the
difference will not be so considerable, when the second watering is performed
with care.

A MOST considerable advantage results from the coarse tow, or hards, of the
first hackling, which, by means of the second watering, becomes an object of
great utility, being thereby excellently prepared to make the best sorts of
coarse linens, fit for clothing our laborers and negroes, and preferable in
strength and quality to imported osnabrigs, being greatly superior to the
coarse tow of the HEMP prepared in the mill, which is only capable of making a
very coarse, harsh, unprofitable cloth, and indeed, even the coarse cloth made
from the hackled HEMP, which has been prepared in the mill, will not do equal
service to the cloth made from the coarse watered tow; a large portion of the
gum remaining with the HEMP, is twisted up in spinning, therefore the cloth
continues harsh and stiff, whereby it cuts itself before it is fairly worn;
this reasoning may be further confirmed from knowing that coarse cloth, made
even of flax tow, will wear longer than linen made from yarn, spun very coarse
from dressed flax; therefore, as we find that very coarse linens, made either
from dressed HEMP or flax, are, from their stiffness, but ill calculated for
some sorts of service, we may reasonably expect that the linens made from HEMP
duly prepared by a second watering, as they are soft, flexible, and pliant, and
strong withal, will be found more durable, and therefore on every account to be
preferred.

WHEN the HEMP is intended for more elegant purposes, it still becomes more
necessary to prepare it by a second watering, as, by that means, it becomes
more suitable for such uses, than it possibly can be by the (...) its color
also being thereby greatly improved, both the thread and cloth made from it are
most readily bleached, and its dressed stuff most amply adapted to supply us
with linens similar or preferable to the dowlas and garlix of France, and the
Low Countries, as well as the white and brown linen fabrics of Russia.

ITS thread also, being so readily whitened, is not only proper for checks,
striped linens, bed ticking, etc. but it becomes a material, by this
preparation, most excellently calculated to answer as the warp for all fabrics
of wool and cotton, fine as well as coarse, and the tow produced from the
second, or finer hacklings, yielding a fine soft substance, in some degree
similar to wool and cotton, it seems reasonable to imagine that, upon being
blended and carded with these materials, the thread, resulting from these
different mixtures, may prove productive of a variety of new and profitable
manufactures, similar, and not inferior, to many of the various bleached and
dyed stuffs of Manchester, as the HEMP, after being thus prepared, will as
readily receive, and retain the tints of any dye, as the wool or cotton with
which it is blended.

AFTER the particular account that has been given of the nature and properties
of HEMP, and at the same time reflecting with how much ease and certainty it
may be cultivated, it is greatly to be wished, that the inhabitants of these
colonies would avail themselves of such advantages; the success which must
attend the undertaking will have a better effect than all that can be wrote in
its favor, as it would be an argument to the meanest capacity, and give
irresistible encouragement to this most useful branch of domestic manufacture;
the ideas here suggested will readily receive a better form from practice, and
be carried further (...) knowledge and experience. By applying ourselves (...)
of this plant, we shall most readily attain (...) of perfection in those arts,
the knowledge of which will be found as easy and necessary as the wants they
supply are real and extensive; we shall not only find resources, within
ourselves, to furnish those necessaries, for which we have hitherto been most
shamefully dependent upon others, but, at the same time, an easy and profitable
employment for our spare time and idle hands. After a short practice, the
coarsest of our goods will be manufactured in the family, and the whole of the
business, if it is prosecuted with economy, may be performed without
encroaching on our wonted avocations.

UPON calculating how much can be done at such times, and by such means, this
assertion will not be found exaggerated, and surely, if we can supply our
necessities, nearly, with the superfluities of our labor, we shall not only
procure such goods upon much easier terms than when we buy them of the traders,
that purchase them from the manufacturer, who has no other resource for a
livelihood, but, when we consider the vast sums such goods amount to, yearly,
we may then form some estimate of the advantages which must result to the
public, as well as to individuals, from prosecuting such schemes of industry
and frugality.

AS a further illustration of what is here advanced, a few calculations are
subjoined, and though they may not prove so exact as could be wished, yet
precaution has been observed, not to exaggerate, but rather to keep within
bounds.

An acre of land, richly dunged, Currency. Dollars at 7 s. 6 l.
sown with HEMP, will produce from 9 to 14 cwt. of clean HEMP, say 10 cwt. at 5
dollars per cwt. at 7 s. 6 d. each L. 18 15 0 Brought forward L. 18 15 0
Expenses of labor, etc. as follows. Dunging the first year, allow 10 dollars;
part of this charge may be sunk after the first year L. 3 15 0 Ploughing,
harrowing, and sowing 1 2 6 Seed 1 2 6 Pulling, watering, and rotting 1 10 0
Breaking, at two thirds of a dollar, or 5 s. per cwt. is 2 10 0 10 0 0 Profit
remaining, after allowing every expense 8 15 0 1000 pounds of HEMP will produce
as follows: Dressed stuff and fine tow 350 lb. at 1 s. 6 d. 26 5 0 Coarse tow
300 lb. at 0 s. 7 d. 8 15 0 Waste in washing, pounding, hackling, etc. a large
allowance 350 lb. 0 0 0 1000 35 0 0 EXPENSES. The price of the HEMP L. 18 15 0
The second watering and preparing for the hackle 5 0 0 Hackling 6 5 0 30 0 0
Profit on dressing 5 0 0 350 pounds of dressed stuff will yield 500 yards of
cloth, from 2 s. to 3 s. per yard 62 10 0 EXPENSES. The price of the stuff 26 5
0 A woman accustomed to such employment can spin, in one day, from eight to ten
or twelve cuts of tow yarn, and from ten to fifteen cuts from dressed stuff,
each cut contains 120 threads, three yards in cir umference. The tow yarn,
therefore, will make from two to three yards of linen of the breadth of
osnabrigs, and, when we consider the small quantity of linen allowed our people
in general, it is not absurd to expect that the negro women and children, if
once taught should be able to spin their own clothing, in the evenings after
work, and at such times as they cannot be otherwise more profitably employed;
this, and a great deal more, is done in some other parts of the world. In (...)
parts of Germany, where the taxes and rents are heavy, (...) are obliged to
spin cotton and linen yarn, after the (...) day is finished, to enable them to
discharge their (...) many of them are as dextrous at the wheel as the (...)
before, if gentlemen of fortune, who have numbers of (...), would provide a
suitable building, proportioned to (...) where they might collect their young
negroes of both (...) together, with as many of their other people as can be
conveniently spared, they might be instructed in spinning, etc. by one person;
and, as there are great numbers of women lately arrived in these colonies from
the north of Ireland, who in general are remarkable good spinners, there can be
no difficulty in obtaining a person qualified to undertake this office, who may
be hired for twenty, or at the most twenty-four dollars a year, and, as fuel
becomes scarce in many parts, if the building was properly constructed, even
different apartments could be warmed by means of a cast iron stove, with an
iron funnel or pipe, and, as this kind of stove, which differs from what is
called the Dutch stove, admits of a circulation in the air of the apartments,
there is no danger of its proving either unhealthy or disagreeable, and in a
few years would save nearly the expense of the building in firewood.
To spinning 350 lb. of stuff, from 10 d. to 14 d. 19 10 0 To weaving 500 yards
of cloth at 7 d. 12 0 0 57 15 0 Profit on weaving linen 4 15 0 300 lb. 300 lb.
of coarse tow will make 400 yards of osnabrigs, at 1 s. 2 d. per yard 23 6 8
EXPENSES. The price of the tow 8 15 0 To spinning 300 lb. of tow 7 10 0 To
weaving 400 yards osnabrigs at 3 d. 5 0 0 21 5 0 Profit remaining on making
osnabrigs 2 1 8

FROM the above state, in which, though ample allowance is made for every
particular species of labor, there nevertheless appears a profit, which,
though not very considerable, yet proves, that we can manufacture such articles
cheaper amongst ourselves than we can purchase them from others; and, when we
come to consider the superior quality of our own manufacture, in point of
duration, to that which is imported, and reflect how much of this sort of work
may be done by our people, at those times when they are wont to be idle, which
will all be clear gain, and for which no allowance is made in the above state,
the advantage which will then accrue must prove very considerable; but surely
it is unnecessary to enlarge further on this head, and indeed the author fears
that he may be thought too prolix, especially by those already acquainted with
the subject, but when it is considered that these instructions are intended for
the information of thousands, who have perhaps never seen the plant, he
apprehends that the directions could not be too minute or particular.

FINIS.

