LECTURES ON THE MATERIA MEDICA, AS DELIVERED By WILLIAM CULLEN, M. D.
PROFESSOR of MEDICINE in the University of EDINBURGH.

Now Published by Permission of the AUTHOR, And with many CORRECTIONS from the
Collation of different MANUSCRIPTS by the EDITORS.

AMERICA: Printed for the SUBSCRIBERS, by ROBERT BELL next Door to St. Paul's
Church, Third-Street, Philadelphia. MDCCLXXV.

PREFACE.
THE following Sheets are offered to the World as containing the substance of a
Course of Lectures on the Materia Medica, delivered by a celebrated Professor
at Edinburgh. As they are not alleged to be printed by his direction, it may
seem necessary to lay before the Public the reasons which induced the Editors
to this step, as nothing can be farther from their thoughts than the least
intention of injuring either the fame or interest of that Gentleman, for whose
mind and abilities they have the highest admiration and esteem. This is so far
the case, that they would think themselves extremely happy, if, on a sight of
this Work, the learned Author could be induced to favor the world with his
improved sentiments on this subject, which could not fail of being a most
useful, as well as an acceptable present to the Public. The Editors have no
other motive for making this Work public, than a concern to find a Performance,
which so far excels in method, copiousness of thought, liberality of sentiment,
and judgment, all that have been before written on the subject, in danger of
being lost to the world.

Near the end of 1761, and about the time when, by the academical rules of the
University of Edinburgh, the Lectures on Medical Subjects ought to begin, Dr.
Alston, who was at that time Professor of the Materia Medica, died. By this
unexpected event, the University would have received an injury, if Dr. Cullen,
who was then Professor of Chemistry, had not voluntarily offered to supply the
place of Dr. Alston, in reading Lectures on the Materia Medica for that season.

This was gladly accepted, and the offer was made with greater propriety, as
the study in which he was then principally engaged as a Professor, led more
directly to this subject, than any other branch of Physic whatever.

It is obvious to every one's understanding, how difficult it was for the
learned Author to acquit himself properly in this arduous task. Notwithstanding
this discouraging circumstance, our Professor attempted a plan entirely new and
original, and executed the same in a manner which gained universal approbation.
The substance of that Performance is the Work now offered to the Public, which,
during an interval of eight years past, has been much desired by the Faculty,
and it was long hoped that the learned Author himself would have been induced
to communicate them to the world: But, it is presumed, that his other
avocations and extensive practice have not afforded him sufficient leisure for
such an Undertaking.

The ensuing Sheets are printed from a correct copy, which has been carefully
compared with several others. If, after all, any inaccuracies in the style
should have escaped, they are not, in the slightest degree, to be imputed to
the Author, whose manner of expression is as pure and elegant, as the matter he
delivers is great and original.

In short, the merit of the Performance stands in need of no eulogium, and the
method is too clear to require explanation, especially as the original Syllabus
is subjoined, with the blank spaces filled up (in Italics,) as directed to be
done in the Course of the Lectures. This is the only material alteration that
the Editors have made, and the propriety of this will scarcely be questioned.

Additional PREFACE.
THE EDITORS, in publishing these Lectures, hoped they were not doing a thing
disagreeable to the Author, but in this they were mistaken, and, soon after the
Publication, found he did not approve of it; he complained that the Work was by
no means sufficiently perfect to do him honor; he said it was originally
imperfect, having been unexpectedly undertaken, and necessarily executed in
great hurry; and it was still more imperfect from the inaccuracy of the
Gentlemen who had taken these Notes of the Lectures. In short, the Doctor saw
all this in so strong a light, that, as soon as he was informed of the
Publication, he applied for, and obtained from the Lord Chancellor, an
Injunction, prohibiting the Sale of the Book. Upon this occasion the Editors,
who never meant to do any thing disagreeable to the Author, applied to himself
for leave to renew the sale. The same reasons, however, which made him
disapprove of the first publication, made him very unwilling to admit of it
again; but finding that many copies of the book had been dispersed before the
Injunction was served, being at the same time persuaded of the innocent
intentions of the Editors, and solicited by several of his Friends, he has at
length con^^^ted to the sale of the remainder of the impression, upon this
condition, that the Editors, by collating several other Manuscripts, should
endeavor to correct many errors. This condition the Editors have now complied
with as well as they can, and have received from several Manuscripts such
improvements as occasioned the reprinting of the first sheet, and enabled them
to give many corrections in other parts of the Work The whole of the European
Editor's EMENDANDA, which they inserted at the end, is carefully inserted at
each proper place, throughout the body of the Work, in this American Edition.
. They hope they have done enough to show what might be expected from the
accuracy of the Author's own hand put to such a Work, and for which they would
have willingly waited, but they are assured by himself, that his other
occupations, and time of life, make it very probable that he never will engage
in it.

LECTURES ON THE MATERIA MEDICA, 1761.
A Knowledge of the Materia Medica comprehends a knowledge of all the
substances employed in preventing or curing diseases, and therefore of all
those employed either in diet or medicine. Different authors have followed
different methods in delivering the knowledge of this part of science, all of
them liable to objections, which need not be here pointed out. I shall show you
the plan which I intend to ^ollow; and, if you shall be convinced of the
propriety of this, you will easily see the faults of others. Most of the
subjects will be considered under four different heads.

1st, The knowledge of the subject in itself, and the distinction of it from
every other. 2d, Its virtues in diet or in medicine. 3d, The foundation of
these virtues, so far as it can be perceived in the sensible or chemical
qualities of the subject. 4th, Its pharmaceutical treatment, and other
circumstances necessary to its application in medicine or diet.
With respect to the first head. The subjects are of two kinds, as immediately
produced by nature, or as farther prepared by art. The knowledge of the first
is to be got by the study of Natural History; the knowledge of the second, by
an acquaintance with the arts which have been employed on them. Under the
second head, the virtues shall be delivered, first, according to the several
general indications, and then as more especially applicable to particular
diseases. Here we must observe, that there is no very good foundation for many
of the virtues which are ascribed to medicines by the writers on the Materia
Medica. The doctrine of Signatures, the fancies of Astrology, and the mistaken
application of Chemistry, have very much corrupted this part of science. Even
what is pretended to be drawn from experience, as much of it has proceeded from
the errors and prejudices of the ignorant, and much from the falsehood of
designing men, it is very little to be trusted. The writers, however, on this
subject, have commonly copied from one another; but I hope I shall be pardoned
if I do not repeat after them; and indeed I shall willingly appear rather pauca
scire, quam multa opinari. Under the third head, we shall find still more
uncertainty. The sensible qualities of substances go but a little way toward
discovering their medical virtues. The Color is a very uncertain guide; the
Smell goes but a little farther; and it is the Taste only that is of any
extensive application. Sir John Floyer, in his Phytobasanos, was the first who
prosecuted this study to any length; and the industrious Linnaeus has since
bestowed some attention upon it; but both of them, in straining to form a
system, have carried the matter too far. The Chemical Analysis, strictly so
called, has been found of very little use; but the treatment, by the
application of different menstruums, has been of more service, and, by
resolving vegetables into their gummy or resinous parts, we have been able
sometimes to separate the salutary from the pernicious, and the efficacious
from the inert parts of many substances. Under the fourth head, we shall
mention the pharmaceutical treatment which medicines have commonly, or may
properly receive, and, therefore, the several compositions they enter into,
with some other particulars relative to their administration in diet or
medicine.

Of the several plans of a Materia Medica, that to be found in the treatise De
viribus Medicamentorum, imputed to the celebrated Dr Boerhaave, appears to be
one of the best. It treats of the several subjects as they occur in the order
of the Methodus Medendi; and it has premised some physiological doctrines that
are necessary with respect to the whole. I find it necessary to follow this
part of the plan, especially, as I have some peculiar notions on the subject,
which, as they are not common in our schools, it is necessary for me to explain.

In the first place, we adopt the proposition very well established,
Medicamentum non agit in Cadaver: That is to say, That the operation of
medicines does not depend on the laws of matter and motion, which take place in
inanimate bodies, but on a principle which subsists in living animals only. We
inquire therefore after this vital principle. It must be connected with the
primary and fundamental functions of the animal economy; but the functions of
the animal economy are mutually so much the causes and effects of each other,
and run so much in a circle, that it is difficult to choose where to begin. Many
think the circulation of the blood may be considered as the vital principle
upon which all the other functions depend; but we must trace this to its cause
in the action of the heart; and this again manifestly depends upon a certain
power acting in or upon the muscular fibers of this organ. When we consider
this power, we find it belongs, in common with those of the heart, to every
muscular fiber in the whole body. At the same time, we find, that the power of
muscular fibers every where depends upon the nerves; that these nerves, for
what power they communicate, depend upon their connection with their common
origin in the brain and medulla spinalis; the nerves and muscular fibers
therefore form a system, whose functions may be considered as primary and
fundamental in the animal economy. The principal part of this nervous system
is manifestly the common origin, which is properly enough considered as the
sensorium commune, as the more immediate organ of the soul. It is therefore
with probability supposed, that our intellectual part, or the soul, is the
vital principle of the animal economy. With regard to this, there is some
difference of opinion, which may be supposed to influence the system of physic,
and particularly the question, Whether our intellectual part depends on a
certain constitution of matter, or upon an immaterial substance connected with
our material part? We are of the latter opinion, and think it is fully proved,
by observing, that there are laws of the animal economy absolutely
incompatible with the ordinary powers of matter and motion. But, on this
subject, I refer you entirely to Dr Whytt, who, in his book on the vital and
involuntary motions of animals, has put the matter beyond all doubt. I will add
only one argument, which is, That the association of ideas, a very fundamental
part of all our intellectual operations, cannot be explained upon any supposed
organization of matter. There is indeed something analogous to it in sounding
strings, that are in a certain proportion to one another; but, if the
simultaneous motions of our intellectual part depended on such a mechanism, we
should find, that these simultaneous motions would be confined to certain
parts, and take place in these only; but, of the motions of living animals, any
one may be associated with any other; and the association depends entirely upon
the impressions producing them being made, and frequently repeated, at the same
time.

The existence of a Soul admitted, we must next inquire into the circumstances
of its operating in the system. With respect to th^^, we find, That the notion
of the soul's governing the whole animal functions is very ancient, as we meet
with it in the Timaeus of Plato. It has since been revived in different shapes
by Helmont, Wepfer, and Dolaeus, and especially by Stahl, who plainly
maintains, that the soul, as in a great measure independent of the body, and as
in itself a rational being, presides over and directs most of the animal
functions. In this he has been followed by many physicians in Germany, by Dr
Nichols in England, as appears from his dissertation, entitled Anima Medica;
and our countryman Dr Porterfield has also shown a strong bias to the same
opinion. We cannot, however, join in this with these respectable persons, as we
neither find it founded in truth, nor that it can have any good influence on
the system or practice of physic. Although the soul is certainly a distinct
substance from the body, it appears highly probable, that the soul, while
connected w^^^ the body, seldom acts, but it consequence of motions first
excited in the latter; and that it is generally true, that Nihil^est in
intellectu, quod non prius fuerat in sensu. Even our reflex sensations seem to
depend upon certain conditions of the organ of our intellectual functions; and
these conditions being given, the reflex sensations are always necessary
consequences of first impressions. The impossibility of a perpetual motion or
automaton being demonstrated with respect to matter, this is considered as a
proof, that the seeming automaton in a living animal must depend upon a soul
animating all its motions. That the soul is constantly necessary to the motions
of the body, we readily admit; but the argument is pushed too far, when it is
supposed that these motions are supported by the power of the soul alone; for,
it appears, that motions excited by the impulse of external bodies, are
absolutely necessary to that support. Take away all impressions on the external
senses, and most persons will fall asleep, and that sleep would probably
continue and end in death, were it not for impressions being renewed. The power
of the soul appears, especially in what are called the voluntary motions; but
these, properly considered, do not show that power exerted in an arbitrary
manner, or with any attention to the motions of the body. How the Will is
determined in all cases, we do not say; but, however determined, it is merely
the conception of an end or purpose to be executed; and, with this, certain
motions of the body are necessarily connected, without the soul's being
conscious, in many cases, even of the motions of the limbs produced, and in no
case of the action of the muscles which produces these motions. Anger makes me
Will to give a blow; I make a full inspiration; I continue it; I bend back my
body; I lift up my arm, and stretch it to the utmost; I close my fist, and
bring down my arm with force upon the part I would strike; and, with all this,
my limbs are set in a particular position, my eyebrows are knit, my eyes are
fixed, and the features of the face are set in a particular manner. Of these
several motions, the soul is very little conscious, and not at all of the
several muscles employed. The soul is indeed a necessary part of these motions,
but cannot be said to direct and govern them independent of the conditions of
the body. This is still more clear with respect to the internal, and what are
called Involuntary Motions, with which physic is more especially concerned. The
Stahlians would have us believe, that the increased action of the heart and
arteries which appears in fevers, does not arise from the physical power of the
cause of fevers, but from hence, that the soul, perceiving the noxious tendency
of some matter present in the system, excites the action of the heart and
arteries as a means of expelling such noxious matter. This cannot be proved;
and it appears to us more probable, that, analogous to a general law of the
system, the material cause of fevers has a physical power of exciting those
motions that are fitted to expel it out of the body. In short, whatever share
the soul may have in supporting the motions of the body, we can have no art of
physic, but in so far as we suppose, that the causes operating upon the body
act by a physical necessity; and that, by a knowledge of such causes, we can
produce certain changes in the state of the matter and organization of the
body. We agree therefore with Dr Boerhaave, that, when a medical problem is
prosecuted so far as to be carried to circumstances depending upon the
connection between the soul and body, it may be considered as solved for all
the purposes of physic. Upon the whole, therefore, we conclude with the same
celebrated physician, that the consideration of the soul is not necessary to
the system of physic; Inst. Med. Art. 696. And, laying aside the doctrine of
the Stahlians, we return to consider the animal economy under another view.

We have hinted already, that the functions of the sensorium commune are
fundamental in the system. It is connected with the extremities of the nerves
every where, so that, by an impression made upon certain of these extremities,
a motion is propagated from thence to the sensorium; in consequence of which, a
sensation arises; and, by sensations arising in the sensorium, a motion is
propagated from thence to certain extremities connected with muscular fibers,
whereby these are excited to contraction. Those parts of the body upon which
impressions made give occasion to sensation, are said to be sensible; and those
parts which are excited to motion by impressions made upon them, or upon the
sensorium, are said to be irritable. Now, it is pretty obvious, that most of
the motions of the body depend upon the action of irritable parts; and as in
many cases the action of these parts is only excited in consequence of
sensations, or other powers acting on the sensorium, it is plain, that most of
the functions of the body depend upon a communication of motion by means of the
nerves. This may be called the Nervous Power; and its nature has been variously
judged of. It is perhaps not very necessary to determine it; but we shall
venture to say, that it is probably a subtle elastic fluid inherent in the
whole medullary fibers of the nervous system; and that this is probably the
material vital principle of animals. Somewhat analogous to it appears in
vegetables, many of which are manifestly endowed with irritability. Perhaps it
is common to all nature, and only under different modifications by certain
conditions of other matter.

The sensibility and irritability of the system, as depending upon a nervous
power, being in general established, it is of importance to determine, what
parts are more especially endowed with these properties. Irritability is
evident wherever we can distinctly observe the presence of muscular fibers, as
in the organs of voluntary motion, in the heart, the bronchiae, and alimentary
canal; and in some parts, where the muscular structure is not quite evident,
experiment has shown the irritability, as in the lymphatic system, and in most
of the excretories. The irritability of these last appears in every excretion,
that of sweat excepted; for this seems especially, or only, promoted by the
increased action of the heart, while every other is by an irritation applied to
the excretories themselves; and not only by applications to the excretories,
but also by those applied to other parts having a sympathy with particular
glands: Thus, certain sounds can occasion an increased excretion of saliva, and
a fractured scull increases the evacuation of bile. The important question on
this subject is, Whether the arteries are endowed with irritability? It is
alleged by some anatomists, that what has been called the muscular coat of the
arteries consists only of fibers, such as are in the tendons or ligaments, and
which are no where else sensible or irritable; that, in experiment, the
arteries do not appear irrit^^^e by mechanical stimuli; and though they appear
to contract upon the application of strong acids, this is no more than what
happens to the veins, and even to the fibers of dead animals. But, on the other
hand, it is said, that, if the arteries are simple elastics, the state of the
circulation in every part of the body must, for the most part, depend upon the
action of the heart alone; and, if the impetus of the blood be increased in one
part only, while the action of the heart continues the same, it will be
difficult to account for it upon that supposition. Thus, in blushing, the
impetus of the blood is increased in the vessels of the face, and in those of
the cheeks more particularly. Now if this depended upon the increased action of
the heart, the redness produced should appear over the whole surface of the
body; and, if it depended on certain circumstances in the state of the
respiration, the effect should appear equally over the whole superior parts;
but neither of these happen; the effects are truly partial, and they are only
to be accounted for by supposing, that the arteries are endowed with
irritability and a muscular power, which can be increased in particular parts
of them, while the action of the heart and other arteries continue the same as
before. Dr Haller endeavored formerly to account for these inequalities in the
state of the circulation, by the contraction of the nerves surrounding several
arteries; but, perceiving that truly the nerves are endued with no
contractility, he has entirely given up that theory.

Having thus pointed out the extent of irritability, and of the effects of a
nervous power in the system, it is evident, that the laws by which the action
of the nervous power is regulated require to be attended to, and studied more
carefully than hitherto they have been. We shall not attempt to supply this at
present; but shall endeavor to do somewhat, as particular subjects may give
occasion to it. Just now we shall only make some general application of what
has been said. First, With regard to the solids of the body, the state of
laxity or rigidity in the simple solids has had a great share in our modern
pathology; and we think that the consideration is not to be neglected
altogether; but, at the same time, think, that the laxity or rigidity of the
simple solids being given, it is not readily or occasionally changed; and that
all sudden and occasional changes in debility or strength, contractility or
flaccidity, are more probably referred to the state of the moving fibers under
the influence of the nervous power: Quam facile mill res turbant.

Secondly, Every change in the state of the fluids poured out, has been
considered as depending upon the state of the fluids in the vessels; and it may
be so in some cases. But, as it is probable that the secreted fluids are
chiefly formed in the secretory organs, so it is certain, that the state of the
secreted fluids is changed by the relaxation or constriction of the secretory
vessels; and, therefore, the fluids poured out are more frequently a mark of
the state of the moving powers than of the general condition of the fluids.
Thus, the urine, which has been so long considered as a mark of the state of
the circulating fluids, is however, for the most part, no other than a mark of
the state of the secretory organ.

The third, and only other application we shall make of the consideration of
the influence of the nervous system, is to observe, that, as the whole of the
sensible and irritable parts have a connection with the sensorium, so certain
parts have a more particular connection with certain others. This connection,
sympathy, or consent, has been often taken notice of; but not so accurately and
fully as is to be wished. At present I shall mention only one instance, viz.
that of the stomach, as it is to be more particularly regarded in accounting
for the operation of medicines. Nothing affects the mind more than the state of
the stomach, and nothing draws the stomach into sympathy more than affections
of the mind. This is evident in hypochondriac people, whose disease being
chiefly seated there, has often grievous effects on the sensorium commune, or
the seat of it, the head. This is farther illustrated by wounds of the head.
Does not, in these cases, the vomiting of bile proceed from consent between the
stomach and liver? 2dly, The stomach has a considerable connection with the
viscera of the thorax, abstracting from its contiguity or distention. In
hypochondriac cases, the heart and lungs are often variously affected by the
stomach. Convulsions of the diaphragm are often occasioned by slight
irritations of the cardia. Many other morbid symptoms might be adduced in proof
of the same thing, were it necessary. 3dly, The stomach is connected with the
abdominal viscera, and first with the intestines; secondly, with the other
contiguous as well as more distant organs. 4thly, This viscus is connected with
the extremities. This I have often experienced in myself, by transition of the
gout, from the feet to the stomach, and vice versa. Cold and heat likewise
applied to the extremities, affect the stomach. 5thly, It is connected with the
whole surface of the body, and seemingly with the extreme vessels every where.
This is demonstrable by many observations; e. g. no sooner do some aliments
reach the stomach of particular persons, than spots and efflorescences are
occasioned on the skin. Van Swieten gives such an instance from crabs eyes. I
myself had a patient laboring under the malum hypochondriacum, who was
relieved of his complaints by pimples appearing between his thumb and finger,
and as immediately oppressed by their retropulsion, or disappearing. Vomiting
from constriction of the cutaneous pores is another instance of such sympathy.
Such symptoms, therefore, are falsely attributed to acrimony; and in general we
conclude, that the stomach has a very general consent with the whole system.

Operation of medicines depends somewhat on their own nature, but as much on
the particular modification of the system to which they are applied. Instead,
therefore, of spending time, in examining the different figure of the particles
of medicine, their sharpness, oilyness, etc. it will be more useful to say
somewhat on temperaments. Temperament is the general state of the system;
idiosyncracy the peculiar state of a particular part. The variety of
temperaments is prodigious. The ancients have confined them to four, and we,
through a blind attachment to antiquity, have made few farther advancements in
this distinction. It would be difficult to enumerate all the different
temperaments; I shall therefore consider, rather, the several particulars in
the system that are apt to be varied in different constitutions, and whose
varieties constitute diversity of temperaments. These particulars may be
reduced to five. 1. The state of the simple solids. 2. The proportion of the
fluids to the solids. 3. The state of the fluids. 4. The distribution of the
fluids: i. e. of particular determination to this or that part of the system.
5. The state of the nervous power.

1. As to the state of the simple solids, viz. their laxity, or rigidity. Under
the first is comprehended flaccidity, and debility; under the last elasticity,
and strength. It may be doubted, whether these should be taken in here, as they
are variable in every person, and, through the whole course of life, growing
gradually from lax to rigid, as age increases, and therefore might be supposed
not to affect temperaments. Something, however, depends on the primitive
stamina, in the formation of temperaments; e. g. two children, born at the same
time, brought up exactly under the same management, will differ very
considerably, as to the state of their simple fibers.

Universally, Physicians have taken their mark of the state of the simple
solids from the hair. In a case of laxity the hair is soft, and in small
quantity. In case of rigidity, it is copious, and liable to crispature and
curling. The paler colors are, in general, an indication of laxity; as the
black, in all its shades, is an evidence of rigidity. Thus, in children, the
hair is generally soft and pale, and gains, by age, hardness, and a darker
color. Another mark of distinguishing the nature of the simple fibers, is the
softness and hardness of the fleshy parts. When the body is fleshy, and the
muscles and tendons distinctly marked, and along with this a considerable
strength of system, we infer a rigidity of the simple fibers, with a
considerable exertion of the nervous power. Succulency, for these reasons, must
be a symptom of laxity.

2. The proportion between solids and fluids. There has been nothing so much
talked of as plethora, and yet it has been commonly confounded with obesity and
corpulency. There is, however, a manifest difference, though difficultly
distinguished by particular marks, and at the same time a connection. Plethora
implies a greater quantity of fluids circulating in the vessels,
distinguishable by ruddiness of color, and a number of veins distended over
the body. Of obesity, the greater proportion of it lies without the laws of
circulation. Obesity may cause plethora; as in obesity, though a greater
quantity is secreted, it is not let off from the body, and may therefore press
upon the vessels and cause plethora.

3. The state of the fluids. These, in my opinion, might be disregarded, as
they depend on the state of the solids and the nourishment. But we must not
disregard what the Ancients have assigned as the cause of the different
temperaments, which they made to depend on four different humors. This
doctrine, however, of the Ancients, is now almost entirely neglected. The
Chemists have delivered nothing clear or precise on this head, from the
different proportions of oil, earth, salt, etc. in the blood. They have even
added mercury and iron, as the latter is found in all human blood. But we are
not assured of other principles, besides those of red globules, coagulable
lymph, and serosity, which last is water impregnated with a saline principle.
These, I make no doubt, are in different proportions, from the nature of the
aliment or diseases. But I do not know how to make use of this, at least till
we be more fully acquainted with the nature and proportions of these, and the
proper methods of distinguishing them, which are at present very inaccurate and
imperfect; e. g. the proportion of red globules is not to be distinguished, as
the less or more florid color of the whole depends not on their quantity, but
on the state of diffusion. Again, the proportion of coagulable lymph is not
even evident from consistence as in persons where there is the same quantity of
serum, the consistence is different. Ligature on the vessels, childbearing,
etc. cause a different degree of separation of coagulable lymph, etc. so that
no person can make any accurate judgment from appearance of the blood. Density
is a more certain mark. The blood is denser in proportion to rigidity of the
vessels, and in the same species in proportion to the age; e. g. it is more
dense in cows than calves, etc. The quantity of saline matter may also affect
the density of the blood, and therefore we cannot positively determine whether
the fluidity of the blood, in particular cases, be owing entirely to the
abundance of a pure watery part, as saline matter may contribute considerably
toward the production of that quality.

4. Distribution of the fluids. This is different in the same person, according
to his age, owing to a difference in the structure and distribution of the
vessels. It seems to be necessary that the brain should be brought to its size
quickly; hence the head in a foetus is much greater in proportion to the other
parts, and then constitutes one-fifth of the whole; whereas in an adult it does
not exceed one-ninth, and, frequently, one-tenth only. After birth, a new
determination is given to the circulating fluids; the circulation being stopped
in the umbilical vessels, is determined to the iliacs, and hence the growth
afterward of the lower extremities is more remarkable. This accounts for
haemorrhages, etc. which happen in different parts of the body, at different
periods of life, e. g. bleeding of the nose in young persons. Again, if a tall
person have not hands and feet proportionate to the length of his body, he is
liable to diseases. Thus I have seen a phthisis pulmonalis, of which this
disproportion was the most probable cause. Hence if we could ascertain the
proportions of the human body exactly, we might form a notion how diseases
might arise according to the various deviations from it.

We shall now take notice of the different distribution into the arterious and
venous systems. The arteries are larger in proportion to the veins in the young
than in old subjects. Wintringham, jun. finds the density of the arterious
coats in proportion to those of the veins less in young than in old animals.
The arteries, therefore, from being laxer, grow more rigid, and are laxer as
nearer to the heart. All this is wisely ordered; for the arteries being more
exposed to the action of the heart, and the fluids, in their moving from a
greater to a lesser diameter, are sooner rendered rigid, than the veins, in
which the power of the heart is weaker, and the fluids move in a contrary
manner. Hence arises in young persons the arterious, in old the venous
plethora, a distinction commonly unobserved, though it gives a considerable
difference in point of temperament. Arterious plenitude is distinguished by the
florid complexion, the venous by distension of veins and paleness of the body.
This change of plenitude is gradually taking place in all people, though the
degree of it is considerably varied in different persons.

We consider here, very properly, the proportional capacity and force of the
heart in regard to the system, at different times of life, as also the
proportion of the lungs to the rest of the body: For as the same quantity of
fluids, in a given time, passes through them, as through the whole body, any
large proportion of fluids in the system must of necessity be very sensibly
felt there, and, consequently, have an effect in the production of temperament.
Thus narrow chested people are more subject than others to haemoptoe and
congestion in the lungs.

5. Different state of the nervous power, with regard to sensibility,
irritability, mobility, and strength. By sensibility we mean the fitness for
having sensation excited by external impression; and as different forces of
impression are necessary to move different persons, the sensibility is greater,
as the less force of impression is necessary to sensation. By irritability, we
mean the fitness for having motions excited in consequence of sensation, or
other causes; and this appears different, not only with respect to the degree
of force in the cause, but with respect to the extent of the effects in the
system. Thus, of two persons, not only one will be vomited by a much smaller
quantity of an emetic than the other, but also two persons taking the same dose
will be very differently affected, while, in the one, the effects will be
confined to the stomach, and the parts necessarily connected with it in
vomiting, and, in the other, the effects will be extended so as to produce
convulsions over the whole body. Of the difference of sensibility we are able
to judge but grossly, as it does not always depend on the degree of force in
impression, but in this respect is greatly changeable by custom and practice.
This is particularly to be observed, that there is a great difference between
the sensibility to a single impression, and the sensibility to the difference
of force in the same species of impressions, or to the difference of
impressions nearly akin to one another. Thus, there may be two persons equally
sensible to the smallest impressions of any sapid body on the tongue; but,
while the one may be able to distinguish only green from bohea tea in infusion,
and hardly any difference in the qualities of each, the other shall be able to
distinguish not only many different degrees in the qualities of either species,
but also, in the case of their mixture, be able to discern the proportion in
which they are mixed together. The same difference of sensibility occurs more
frequently still with respect to sound. A person may be exquisitely sensible to
the softest impression of sound, but, at the same time, may be very little
sensible to any difference of tones. Irritability must commonly be connected
with sensibility; for, as motion depends upon sensation, that, therefore, will
be generally in proportion to this: But they are not absolutely connected; for,
independent of the nervous power in the brain, the subject of sensations,
irritability is often varied by the greater or lesser tension, and perhaps
other circumstances, of the moving fibers themselves. Both sensibility and
irritability are often connected with the weakness of the nervous power, never
remarkably with its strength.

Another particular in which the state of the nervous power may be different,
is mobility, that is, the facility and readiness with which not only motions
are in general excited, but especially that also with which different motions
succeed one another. In the first respect, mobility is the same with
irritability; but, in the last, it is somewhat different. It is obvious, that
the nervous power or sensorium, is more tenacious of impressions in one person
than in another; and the change, therefore, from one motion to another, will,
in such persons, be in the same proportion; which amounts to this, that there
is a difference of mobility in the nervous power of different persons. However,
we observe that this mobility is commonly greatest in the most sensible and
irritable systems. Lastly, The nervous power, or energy of the brain, differs
greatly in point of strength. Some have supposed that the strength of the body
depended upon the strength of the simple solids; and I allow that it is often
connected with this. But, as the state of the simple solids cannot be suddenly
changed, those changes of debility and strength which are sudden and
transitory, must be owing to changes in the state of the nervous power. Thus,
at the invasion of fevers, we observe a considerable debility take place, more
suddenly than we can suppose any change to be made in the state of the simple
solids. Again, in maniacal persons, there is often an incredible increase of
strength, which we cannot suppose to proceed from an increased rigidity of the
simple solids so suddenly produced. This strength of the nervous power is
opposed to sensibility, as appears from a much stronger dose of any medicine
being required, to produce the same effects on the abovementioned maniac than
other persons. In my opinion it is also opposed to irritability, though not so
remarkably, for weakly systems are, caeteris paribus, more irritable. Strength
of nervous power is also opposed to mobility, for the more weakly the subject
the impressions are more transitory, whereas in strong people the contrary
takes place.

Having thus enumerated the different causes of temperament, we shall now
consider how these causes are variously combined, in order to form different
temperaments. Of particular temperaments, those are most strongly marked, which
are owing to the different stages of life. As changes in the system take place
very gradually, it were proper to assume a middle point, to and from which the
system is gradually advancing or declining, and at the same time to mark the
different gradation of decline and advance; but as this would be very
difficult, I shall only handle the matter grossly, and point out those stages
where the most remarkable changes occur. These may be reduced to four, Infancy,
Youth, Manhood, and Old Age. To begin with these, therefore, in their order.

INFANCY.
In Infancy occur remarkably lax solids, large proportion of fluids which are
watery and bland; large proportion of blood vessels in respect to cellular
substances: Head and heart large in proportion to the system: Arteries numerous
and large in respect to the veins: The secretory glands have not yet attained
to their full bulk, while the conglobate, or lymphatic, are larger than at any
other time of life. In the nervous system there is exquisite sensibility,
without accuracy of perception; remarkable irritability with weakness, great
mobility, the foundation of a great deal of levity. In general, the nervous
system is strong, with respect to the present time of life, but weaker than in
a more advanced period.

Secondly. Let us consider now

YOUTH approaching near to its ACME.
Rigidity and strength are now greater, but still, with respect to the middle
point, laxity prevails; a less proportion of fluids, with respect to the
vessels, but still prevailing humidity; increased cellular substance, on which
the growth of the body chiefly depends till the Acme, and long after; heart
less in proportion to the system than formerly, and more in a balance with it;
the arteries are diminished, in some measure, with respect to the veins, but
still exceed them; the whole viscera are larger, and particularly the lungs,
and, as the vessels are more rigid, consequently a greater determination of
fluids to that organ, which explains the diseases incident to the stage of
life, haemoptysis, etc. The same sensibility and irritability continue,
perhaps, as before, but the former is more accurate, from the tension of the
vessels, and consequently the fibers. The latter is rather increased, and hence
irascibility more frequently appears at this period. There is also great
mobility, but with much less levity.

Thirdly. We come to examine the state of

MANHOOD.
It is difficult to fix this period; different persons attaining their Acme at
different times. I would take the thirty-fifth year for a standard. The solids
are now tending to excess of rigidity, with respect to the middle point; the
fluids are less, in proportion to the solids, hence dryness begins to take
place; the heart is smaller, with respect to the arteries, and exerts less
force than formerly; hence slower circulation, more copious secretion of oil,
and obesity, with consequent succulency. Hitherto little change has happened in
the state of the fluids, but now they begin to tend toward acrimony. The
arteries, now become less, and the balance is turned to the side of the veins:
The secretory glands are now increased, while the lymphatic vessels are
diminished, as also the conglobate glands. Sensibility, irritability, mobility,
and consequently celerity and levity, gradually diminish from this time. Till
this period the strength has been gradually increasing, but is now at its
height, and afterward decays, chiefly on account of the rigidity of every part
of the system. In infants the muscles consist of truly muscular fibers, or with
very little tendon; but now the tendinous exceed the muscular parts, and in
proportion perhaps the force is diminished. This state of manhood is very
variable as to its period, happening in some sooner, in others later; but from
this to fifty, the changes are less remarkable than at any other state of life.

Fourthly,

OLD AGE.
When this comes on we cannot assign exactly, but when it aoes, appear,
rigidity is in excess. Dryness, proceeding from the small proportion of fluids,
both in the circulatory vessels and cellular membrane. Acrimony of the fluids
is in excess, perhaps to compensate for the want of fluidity in the blood, by
diminishing its cohesion. Instead of an arterious, a venous plethora obtains.
The lymphatic system almost disappears. Both from weakness of the nervous
power, and rigidity of the simple solids, sensibility, irritability and
mobility, formerly so remarkable, are now greatly diminished.

Thus have we pretty well distinguished the four grand stages of life, by the
changes which are observed to take place in the system. These different changes
do not happen so uniformly, but some peculiarities are remarkable through the
whole of life. Thus each sex is distinguished. In the female, there is greater
laxity, with humidity and thinness of the fluids, arterious plethora, more
sensibility, irritability, levity and weakness, so that in them the character
of youth continues longer than in the male. In every person are appearances of
a temperament peculiar to himself, though the Ancients only took notice of
four, and some have imagined these were deduced from the theories of the four
humors, or four cardinal qualities; but it is more probable that they were
first founded on observation, and afterward adapted to those theories, since
we find that they have a real existence, and are explicable on the doctrine
already delivered. The two that are most distinctly marked, are the Sanguineous
and Melancholic, viz. the temperaments of Youth and Age.

SANGUINEOUS.
Here there is laxity of solids, discoverable by the softness of hair and
succulency; large system of arteries, redundancy of fluids, florid complexion;
sensibility of the nervous power, especially to pleasing objects; irritability
from the plethora, mobility and levity from lax solids. These characters are
distinctly marked, and they are proved by the diseases incident to this age, as
haemorrhages, fevers, etc. but these, as they proceed from a lax system, are
more easily cured.

MELANCHOLIC HABIT.
Here greater rigidity of solids occurs, discoverable by the hardness and
crispature of the hair, small proportion of the fluids, hence dryness and
leanness; smaller arteries, hence pale color; venous plethora, hence
turgescency of these, and lividity; sensibility, frequently exquisite, but with
great accuracy; moderate irritability, with remarkable tenacity of impressions;
steadiness in action and slowness of motion, with great strength; for excess of
this constitution in maniacs gives the most extraordinary instance of human
strength I know. This temperament is most distinctly marked in old age, and in
males. The sanguineous temperament of youth makes us not distinguish the
melancholic till the decline of life, when it is very evident, from diseases,
(of the veins,) haemorrhoids, apoplexy, cachexy, obstructions of the viscera,
particularly of the liver, dropsies, affections of the alimentary canal,
chiefly from slower and weaker influence of the nervous power. So much for the
sanguineous and melancholic temperament; the other two are not so easily
explained. The Choleric temperament takes place between Youth and Manhood. In
the CHOLERIC, the distribution of the fluids is more exactly balanced; there
is less sensibility, and less obesity, with more irritability, proceeding from
greater tension; less mobility and levity, and more steadiness in the strength
of the nervous power. As to the PHLEGMATIC: This temperament cannot be
distinguished by any characters of age or sex: It agrees with the sanguineous
in laxity and succulency; it differs from that temperament, and the
melancholic, by the more exact distribution of the fluids. Again, it differs
from the sanguineous, by having less sensibility, irritability, mobility, and
perhaps strength, though sometimes, indeed, this last is found to be great.

These are the ancient temperaments, which we have brought in as instances of
the combinations which might take place. The temperaments, indeed, are much
more various, and very far from being easily marked and reduced to their genera
and species, not only on account of variety of temperaments themselves, but
also on account of Idiosyncrasy. The whole of this subject might be prettily
illustrated by considering the difference of genus, etc. and even morals, to
which the different temperaments are liable; but, as this disquisition is very
subtle, and does not properly belong to this place, I shall wave it on this
occasion.

To conclude; these circumstances, which we have observed to concur chiefly in
production of temperaments, were the more necessary to be taken notice of, as
they give indications in the cure of diseases, and so may influence what we
have to say on the subject of medicines; but as we have found that the nervous
power alone is capable of considerable and sudden changes, it is to this that
our medicines should be chiefly directed; for the state of the simple solids,
the proportion and state of the fluids, and the distribution of these, we have
little in our power. To this purpose observe, 1. That medicines which act on
the simple solids, cannot propagate far their effects on the system. 2. As to
the state of the fluids, I shall treat this more fully afterward, and shall
only say at present, that medicines can have but little effect upon them, and
any changes we can produce are produced by diet, and therefore must be slow. 3.
The distribution of the fluids is scarcely to be altered, but by the gradual
progress of life, and therefore is most of all out of the reach of medicines.
4. The state of the nervous power, is what medicines chiefly affect, and being
that part of temperament which mostly modifies their operation, we shall insist
upon it in particular. Haller, in 2d. vol. of the Elem. Physiol. has treated on
Temperaments; I therefore beg you would compare what I have said on this
subject with his observations. We now go on to consider the influence of
Idiosyncrasy and the effects of Custom, as the doctrine of temperaments is
every where perplexed and confounded with these.

IDIOSYNCRASY.
Idiosyncrasy is a peculiarity of temperament in a particular part of the
system; e. g. Error on the side of laxity, or rigidity, or having a larger or
less proportion of fluids to the solids. The state of the fluids also is often
affected by idiosyncrasy, being different in different constitutions, owing, as
I believe, to peculiar ferments operating in the system: Thus a putrefactive
ferment may occasion a greater alkalescency of the fluids even in a person who
lives on vegetable diet, than in one who seeds on animal food. Idiosyncrasy
chiefly shows itself, by a peculiar sensibility or irritability of a particular
part, which renders that part susceptible of weak impressions of one kind, and
not of another; thus I have known a person faint at the smell of mutton, which
we will allow to be a very singular idiosyncrasy. No part of the system is
exempt from idiosyncrasy: It is needless to enumerate them all, as you may do
it yourselves by examining the diseases on which they evidently depend. Nothing
is more necessary than to observe, that the operation of medicines is as much
or much more connected with idiosyncrasy than with temperament. In short, it
has such an effect on the operation of medicines, that we should never give a
dose of any efficacious one, without previously examining whether the patient
has any such peculiarity, that contraindicates either the medicine itself, or
its usual dose: And if the patient have not yet experienced this medicine, it
will be proper, as idiosyncrasy is often hereditary, to enquire if any such
have ever affected his parents.

We are next to observe, that both temperament and idiosyncrasy may be
variously affected by Custom, insomuch that by this any temperament may be
corrected, confirmed, obliterated, or even a new one induced.

CUSTOM.
Every body knows the effect of Custom, in the moral as well as the natural
world, and therefore, without regarding these effects, we cannot be said to
have fully handled the doctrines of temperaments and idiosyncrasy. Our time
will only, however, allow to give the great outlines of this subject, which you
afterward may fill up at your leisure. Custom is the frequent repetition of
impressions on the system. Custom is often confounded with habit. Habit is only
the effect of Custom, as when frequent repetition of impressions has given laws
to the system. The effects of custom may be reduced to five heads. 1. On the
simple solids. 2. On organs of sense. 3. On moving power. 4. On the whole
nervous power. 5. On the system of blood vessels.

1.
Effects on the simple solids. Custom determines the degree of flexibility,
which they are capable. By frequently repeated flexion, the several particles
of which these solids consist, are rendered more supple and moveable on each
other. A piece of catgut, e. g. when upon the stretch, and having a weight
appended to it is middle, will be bended thereby perhaps half an inch;
afterward, by frequent repetitions of the same weight, or by increasing the
weight, the flexibility will be rendered double. The degree of flexibility has
a great effect in determining the degree of oscillation, provided that
elasticity is not affected; if it go beyond this it produces flaccidity. Again,
Custom determines the degree of tension; for the same elastic chord that now
oscillates in a certain degree of tension, by frequent repetition of these
oscillations, it will be so far relaxed, that the extension must be renewed, in
order to produce the same tension, and consequently the same vibrations as at
first. The necessity of a certain degree of tension appears in many instances
in the animal economy, as when different muscles concur to give a fixed point,
or tension to each other; and thus a weakly child totters as it walks, but by
giving it a weight to carry, and by thus increasing the tension of the system,
it walks more steadily. In like manner the fullness of the system gives
strength, by distending the vessels every where, and so giving tension; hence a
man, by good nourishment, from being weak, acquires a great increase of
strength in a few days; and, on the other hand, evacuations weaken by taking
off the tension. These are the chief effects of tension on the system. What I
have here said must not be strictly applied to the simple fibers, as, perhaps,
it belongs partly to the moving fibers.

2.
Effects on the organs of sense. Repetition diminishes sensibility, and if,
upon occasion, it seems to increase it, it is only in so far as it renders
perception of the different degrees of impression more accurate. Repetition
alone gives lasting impressions, and thus lays the foundation of memory; for
single impressions are but retained for a short time, and are soon forgot. Thus
a person, who at present has little knowledge of cloths, will, by frequently
handling them, acquire a skill of discerning them, which to others seems almost
impossible. Many are apt to mistake this for a nicer sensibility, but they are
much mistaken; for it is an universal law, that the repetition of impression
renders us less acute. This is well illustrated by the operation of medicines;
for all medicines which act on the organs of sense must, after some time, be
increased in their dose, to produce the same effects as at first. This affords
us a rule in practice with regard to these medicines; it becoming necessary,
after a certain time, to change one medicine even for a weaker of the same
nature. Thus medicines, which even have no great apparent force, are found, by
long use, to destroy the sensibility of the system to other impressions. But to
this general rule, that, by repetition, the force of impressions is more and
more diminished, there are some exceptions. Thus I have known persons, by
frequent emetics, render their stomachs so irritable, that one-twentieth of the
first dose was sufficient to produce the same effect. This, I believe, oftener
takes place when the vomit is repeated every day, or oftener, as I have
sometimes seen; for if the same vomit be given at pretty considerable
intervals, the general rule is observed to hold good. Thus two contrary effects
of habit are to be noted; and it is proper to observe, that the greater
irritability is more readily produced when the first impression is great, as in
the case first given of the strong emetic. This may be farther illustrated by
the effect of fear, which is commonly observed to be diminished on repetition,
which can only be attributed to custom; while, on the other hand, there are
instances of persons, who, having once got a great fright, have for ever after
continued slaves to fears excited by impressions of the like kind, however
slight, which must be imputed entirely to excess of the first impression, as
has been already observed. The determining the force of impressions from the
relation they have to each other, is necessary to be taken notice of here. In
this manner the want of any particular sensation becomes uneasy. Weak
sensations approaching to this want are therefore disagreeable. Very strong
sensations are, on the other hand, disagreeable likewise, because pleasant
sensations are generally of a middle force of impression, though, no doubt,
they sometimes depend on the nature of the impression. The reflex sensations of
pleasure and pain are mutually exchangeable by repetition, in consequence of
the force being diminished or augmented. Thus tobacco, certainly at first very
unpleasant, by custom is rendered very soon agreeable. The pleasing middle
impressions become at last insipid by repetition. Hence the love of novelty.
Not only are our sensations varied in this manner, but they also, in some
measure, depend on relation. Thus, according to the state of the body, the same
thing feels cold at one time, and warm at another. Pleasing objects also vary
in the same manner. Much use has been made of heat and cold in philosophy, and
many endeavors made to establish a positive nature in each. What I have now
said contributes* among other arguments, to show they are purely relative. This
leads me to an observation I formerly made, that increased density and rigidity
of our fibers diminishes sensibility, which, caeteris paribus, is observable at
all periods of life; so that, in this view, cold not only operates on our
system by repetition, but also by contracting the solids and rendering them
more rigid: While beat has the contrary ^ffect, of increasing sensibility, by
relaxation. To this head also belongs ^he association of ideas, which is the
foundation of memory and all our intellectual faculties, and is entirely the
effect of custom; its influence even on morals is very great, but the
consideration of it does not properly belong to this place. With regard to the
body also, these associations often take place. E. g. A disagreeable medicine
will cause a nausea, or even vomiting, and ever afterward the sight of it will
produce the same effects. We shall only make one application of this in the
cure of diseases, which very much depends on avoiding irritation. It is
necessary, therefore in such cases, to avoid not only the irritating or
exciting cause, but also every other which have been any way connected with it.
Thus when maniacs are strongly affected with the sight of any one person, we
must not only keep the person out of their sight, but every other, who, being
often seen with that person, might recall him to their remembrance. Again, in
producing effects on the body, associations seemingly opposite are formed,
which, through custom, become absolutely necessary, e. g. A person long
accustomed to sleep in the neighborhood of a great noise, is so far from being
incommoded on that account, that afterward such noise becomes necessary to
produce sleep. It will be of use to attend to this in practice, for we ought to
allow for, however opposite it may seem at the time, whatever usually attended
the purpose we designed to effect. Thus, in the instance of sleep, we must not
exclude noise when we want to procure rest, or any causes which may seem
opposite to such an effect, provided custom has rendered them necessary.

3.
Effects of Custom on the moving fibers. A certain degree of tension is
necessary to motion, which is to be determined by custom, e. g. A Fencer,
accustomed to one foil, cannot have the same steadiness or activity with one
heavier or lighter. It is necessary also that every motion should be performed
in the same situation, or posture of the body, as the person has been
accustomed to employ in that motion. Thus, in any chirurgical operation, a
certain posture is recommended; but if the operator has been accustomed to
another, such a one, however awkward, becomes necessary afterward to his right
performance of that operation.

Custom also determines the degree of oscillation, of which the moving fibers
are capable. A person accustomed to strong muscular exertions is quite
incapable of the more delicate. Thus writing is performed by small muscular
contractions; but if a person has been accustomed to stronger motions with
these muscles, he will write with much less steadiness.

This subject of tension, formerly attributed to the simple fibers, is probably
more strictly applicable to the moving; for, besides a tension from extension,
there is also a tension from irritation and sympathy; e. g. The tension of the
stomach from food, gives tension to the whole body. Wine and spirituous liquors
give tension; e. g. a person that is so affected with tremor as scarcely to
hold a glass of any of these liquors to his head, has no sooner swallowed it,
than his whole body becomes steady, and after the system has been accustomed to
such stimuli, if they are not applied at the usual time, the whole body becomes
flaccid, and, of consequence, unsteady in its motions.

Again, custom gives facility of motion. This seems to proceed from the
distension which the nervous power gives to the moving fibers themselves. But
in what ever manner it is occasioned, the effect is obvious, for any new or
unusual motion is performed with great difficulty.

We have shown that sensation depends on a communication with the sensorium
commune, by means of organs sufficiently distended with nervous influence. We
have likewise found, that sensibility is diminished by repetition. I am now to
observe, that i^ some cases it may be increased by repetition, owing to the
nervous power itself flowing more easily into the part, on account of custom.
Attention to a particular object may also determine a greater influx into any
particular part, and thus the sensibility and irritability of that particular
part may be increased.

But with regard to facility of motion, the nervous power, no doubt, flows most
easily into those parts, to which it has been accustomed: But facility of
motion does not entirely depend on this, but in part also on the concurrence of
the action of a great many muscles; e. g. Winslow has observed, that in
performing any motion a number of muscles concur to give a fixed point to those
intended chiefly to act, as well as to others that are to vary and modify their
action. All this is assisted, not only by the influx into the several muscles
becoming more free, but also by frequent repetition, as it is only by such
experience that we learn the most proper attitude and concurrence of muscles
for performing any action with facility and steadiness.

Custom gives a spontaneous motion also, which seems to recur at stated
periods, even when the exciting causes are removed; and there are not wanting
instances of habitual vomiting, from the injudicious administration of emetics.
It is on this account that all spasmodic affections so easily become habitual,
and are so difficult of cure, as we must not only avoid all the exciting
causes, even in the smallest degree, but also their associations.

Custom also gives strength of motion: Strength depends on strong oscillations,
a free and copious influx of the nervous power, and on dense solids. But in
what manner all these circumstances have been brought about by repetition, has
been already explained. The effect of custom, in producing strength, may be
thus illustrated: A man that begins with lifting a calf, by continuing the same
practice every day, will be able to lift it when grown to the full size of a
bull.

All this is of considerable importance in the practice of Physic, though but
too little regarded; for the recovery of weak people, in great measure, depends
on the use of exercise, suited to their strength, or rather within it,
frequently repeated and gradually increased. Farther, it is necessary to
observe, that Custom regulates the particular celerity with which each motion
is to be performed; for a person accustomed, for a considerable time, to one
degree of celerity, becomes incapable of a greater; e. g. A man accustomed to
slow walking will be out of breath before he can run twenty paces. The train,
or order, in which our motions are to be performed, is also established by
Custom; for if a man has repeated motions, for a certain time, in any
particular order, he cannot afterward perform them in any other. Custom also
very frequently associates motions and sensations: Thus, if a person has been
in use of associating certain ideas with the ordinary stimulus, which in health
excites urine, without these ideas the usual inclination will scarce excite
that excretion; and, when these occur, will require it even in the absence of
the primary exciting cause; e. g. It is very ordinary for a person to make
urine when going to bed, and if he has been, for any length of time, accustomed
to do so, he will ever afterward make urine at that time, though otherwise he
would often have no such inclination: By this means some secretions become, in
a manner, subject to the will. The same may be said of going to stool: And this
affords us a good rule in the case of costiveness; for by endeavoring to fix a
stated time for this evacuation, it will afterward, at such time, more readily
return. It is farther remarkable, that motions are inseparably associated with
other motions: This, perhaps, very often proceeds from the necessary degree of
tension, but it also often depends merely on Custom, an instance of which we
have in the uniform motions of our eyes.

On Custom depends the strength and steadiness, perhaps, of all the internal
functions, as, e. g. the heart, which probably was once under the power of the
will This steadiness, produced by Custom, serves a good purpose, as otherwise
the heart, being under the power of the will, would be too liable to its
passions.
. So much for the power of Custom on the moving fibers.

4.
Effects of Custom on the whole nervous power. We have found that, by Custom,
the nervous influence may be determined more easily into one part than another,
and therefore, as all the parts of the system are strongly connected, the
sensibility, irritability, and strength of any particular part, may be thus
increased. Custom also has the power of altering the natural temperament, and
of inducing a new one. It is also in the power of Custom to render motions
periodical, and periodically spontaneous. An instance of this we have in sleep,
which is commonly said to be owing to the nervour power being exhausted, the
necessary consequence of which is sleep, i. e. a rest of the voluntary motions
to favor the recruit of that power: But if this were the case, the return of
sleep should be at different times, according as the causes which diminish the
nervous influence operate more or less powerfully; whereas the case is quite
otherwise, these returns of sleep being quite regular. This is no less
remarkable in the appetites, that return at particular periods, independent of
every cause but Custom. Hunger, e. g. is an extremely uneasy sensation, but
goes off of itself, if the person does not take food at the usual time. The
excretions are farther proofs of this, e. g. going to stool, which, if it
depended on any particular irritation, should be at longer or shorter
intervals, according to the nature of the aliment. There are many other
instances of this disposition of the nervous influence to periodical motions,
as the story of the Idiot of Stafford, recorded by Dr. Plot, (Spectator, No.
447.) who, being accustomed to tell the hours of the church clock, as it
struck, told them as exactly when it did not strike, by its being out of order.
Montaigne tells us of some oxen that were employed in a machine for drawing
water, who, after making three hundred turns, which was the usual number, could
be stimulated by no whip or goad to proceed farther. Infants, also, cry for,
and expect the breast, at those times in which the nurse has been accustomed to
give it.

Hence it would appear, that the human economy is subject to periodical
revolutions, and that these happen not oftener may be imputed to variety; and
this seems to be the reason why they oftener happen in the body than mind,
because that is subject to greater variety. We see frequent instances of this
in diseases, and in their crisis; intermitting fevers, epilepsies, asthmas,
etc. are examples of periodical affections: And that critical days are not so
strongly marked in this country as in Greece, and some others may be imputed to
the variety and instability of our climate, but perhaps still more to the less
sensibility and irritability of our system, for the exhibition of medicine has
little effect in disturbing the crisis, though it be commonly assigned as a
cause.

We are likewise subject to many habits independent of ourselves, as from the
revolutions of the celestial bodies, particularly the sun, which determines the
body, perhaps, to other daily revolutions besides sleeping and waking. There
are also certain habits depending on the seasons. Our connections, likewise,
with respect to mankind, are means of inducing habits. Thus regularity from
associating in business, induces regular habits both of mind and body.

There are many diseases, which, though they arose at first from particular
causes, at last continue merely through custom, or habit. These are chiefly of
the nervous system. We should, therefore, study to counteract such habits; and
accordingly Hippocrates, among other things for the cure of epilepsy, orders an
entire change of the manner of life. We likewise imitate this in the chincough,
which often resists all remedies till the air, diet, and ordinary train of life
are changed.

5.
Effects of Custom on the blood vessels. From what has been said on the nervous
power, the distribution of the fluids must necessarily be variously affected by
Custom, and with that the distribution of the different excretions; for though
we make an estimate of the proportion of the excretions to one another,
according to the climate and seasons, they must certainly be very much varied
by Custom.

On this head I may observe, that blood-letting has a manifest tendency to
increase the quantity of the blood; and if this evacuation be repeated at
stated times, such symptoms of repletion, and such motions are excited at these
times as render the operation necessary. The same has been observed in some
spontaneous haemorrhages. These, indeed, at first, may have some exciting
causes, but afterward they seem to depend chiefly on Custom. The best proof of
this is with regard to the menstrual evacuation. There is certainly something
originally in females, that determines that evacuation to monthly periods.
Constant repetition of this, comes to fix it, independent of strong causes,
either favoring or preventing repletion; e. g. blood-letting will not impede
it, nor filling the body induce it: And, indeed, so much is this evacuation
connected with periodical motions, that it is little in our power to produce
any effect by medicines but at those particular times. Thus if we would relax
the uterine system, and bring back this evacuation when suppressed, our
attempts would be vain and fruitless, unless given at that time when the menses
should have naturally returned.

MATERIA MEDICA.
HAVING now considered the subject to be operated upon, i. e. so much of the
animal economy as seems necessary for understanding the operation of medicine,
we shall now proceed to treat of medicines themselves. I told you I proposed to
range these according to the indications in which they are employed. However,
the plan given you is not so perfect as I could wish. But in the course of my
Lectures I shall observe its several errors and imperfections. These mistakes
were unavoidable, considering the shortness of the time allowed to make out my
catalogue, which is in most of your hands, and though not fit for the public
eye, yet, with all its imperfections, I believe it may be to you of
considerable use. Having distributed my medicines according to the several
indications, I find myself necessitated to explain that term. An indication is
declaring the change to be made in the state of the body necessary for changing
a diseased state to that of health. The remedies, by which these changes are
produced, are called indicat^, and the symptoms, which point out the changes to
be produced, the indicantia. In distributing medicines according to the
indications, they must be founded on a pathology, or doctrine of diseases. This
I have done; but to shun disputes which are unavoidable on so dark a subject, I
have rendered the division very general. I have, with the generality of
authors, divided medicines into two classes, viz. those which act on the
solids, and those which act on the fluids. Some have added a third class, viz.
those which act on both solids and fluids. This I have not done, because it
often happens that these actions are only secondary, proceeding from their
action on the solids or fluids. There are, no doubt, medicines which act on
both solids and fluids at the same time, as salts; but as no medicine whatever
is perfectly simple in its operation, I choose to class such medicines as seem
complex in their operation, under that head to which their principal action
belongs.

Thus far I have explained my general plan of indication. There may, indeed, be
started some objections, e. g. It may be said, if evacuants, instead of acting
on the fluids, as I have classed them in my table, produce their effect by
operating on the solids; I admit the force of this objection, though it appears
allowable to take the ultimate effect instead of the cause, and the more so as
it is consonant to the usual systems. I have made two divisions of the
medicines which act on the solids. The first comprehends those which act on the
simple fibers, the second those which act on the moving fibers, or, as Gaubius
calls them, solida viva. I have ranged the medicines which act on the simple
solids according to the diseases to which they are liable. My indications here
are taken from Boerhaave, who, in his chapter de morbis fibrae debilis and
laxae, begins with nutrientia, i. e. those substances which afford matter for
nourishing the weakened fibers. This indication, indeed, is not strictly
correct, for though in some measure it is applicable, yet it is not calculated
to bring about sudden changes. I now proceed to explain those technical terms
which I employ in order that my meaning may afterward be understood. To begin,
then.

By nutrientia, I mean every thing received by mankind as food. The second
indication in laxity comprehends such medicines as increase the cohesion of the
particles of the simple fibers, and so render them more dense. These we have
distinguished by astringentia. This term has been used more loosely, for every
thing that gives strength, and stops evacuations that are supposed to proceed
from laxity. In the case of rigidity of the simple fibers, there are also two
indications, viz. 1. To diminish the nutriment or application of new substance
to the solid fiber; but of this afterward. The second that is mentioned in the
table comprehends emollients, by which I understand such medicines as diminish
the cohesion of the simple fibers.

We next speak of those medicines which act on the solida viva. The diseases of
the moving fibers are very various, but taking a general view of them, we
reduce them to three kinds; 1. Where contractility or motion are diminished. 2.
Where they are too strong, or too much increased. 3. Where there is
irregularity of motions. In the first case, the stimulants are indicated, viz.
such medicines as excite more vigorous contractions. 2. Here are indicated the
sedativa, by which term I mean those medicines, in whatever manner they act,
which diminish too great contractility and motion. 3. In this case the
antispasmodica are indicated, under which term, to avoid cavil, I mean such
medicines as compose, or take off, irregular motions in our system.

Those medicine which act on the fluids, in compliance to general custom, I
divided into alterants and evacuants. By the first, I mean medicines which
produce changes in the circulating fluids, and are reckoned of two kinds, as
they operate on the mixture or consistence of our fluids; though perhaps these
cannot be separated, as we have already observed in the preliminary lectures.
With regard to the consistence of our fluids, they may be too thick, (which
property is called lentor and viscosity,) or too thin. Remedies for the first
are called attenuantia, for the last inspissantia. As to mixture we are well
acquainted with its variety only in one case, viz. acrimony There may, indeed,
be other faults, but these we neglect, as the doctrine of the fluids is very
incomplete. Medicines adapted to acrimony are of two kinds. First, those for
acrimony in general, the demulcentia. The second, are those suited to
particular kinds of acrimony. Some have entered with great subtility in their
enquiries into the different kinds of acrimony, but it appears to me, that we
are only well acquainted with two species, which are the source of the rest,
viz. the acid and alkaline. Most part of what our own fluids are formed of,
either are originally or have a tendency to become acid in the stomach, and,
therefore, we may suppose an acid acrimony even sometimes to enter the system,
and to prevail there. Medicines which correct this acrimony I have termed
antacid. Again, it is found to be the constant effect of the animal economy to
convert the acid into an opposite acrimony. Some affirm, that this is a perfect
alkali, but all agree it is of alkalescent nature. The medicines against this
acrimony I have named antalkalina. In the general indication for correcting
acrimony, I might have made a division; first, into those medicines which
correct, and, secondly, into those which obviate acrimony. Those that obviate
the too great acrimonious alkalescency of our fluids I have set down under the
title of antiseptica.

Having explained the different terms which occured under the head of
alterantia, we are now to consider those under evacuantia. By this term we
understand those medicines which increase the excretion of fluids to be thrown
out of the body. There may, indeed, be remedies which increase the internal
secretions, but we are as yet unacquainted with them; e. g. we have no medicine
which will purge the pancreas alone without affecting the intestinal glands. In
this explanation I shall begin a capite ad calcem. 1. Errhina, which increase
the mucus of the nose; 2. Sial^goga; these increase the quantity of the same
mucus, and also the saliva; in short, whatever is evacuated by the mouth and
nearly contiguous ^auces. 3. Expectorantia, those which increase the mucus by
the bronchia: I prefer this strict sense to the more general one of whatever is
evacuated by the lungs. 4. Emetica, those which evacuate the stomach. We shall
not enter nicely into what is to be evacuated; desiring it to be remembered,
that we only mean by emetics whatever evacuates that which may be in the
stomach. 5. Cathartica, those which in the same general way evacuate by stool.
6. Diuretica, those which increase the evacuation of urine. 7. Diaphoretica,
those which evacuate by the surface of the body, comprehending the insensible
perspiration or more gross sweat. All these excretions depend on secretion.
There is another evacuation in the human body which does not depend on
secretion, viz. the menstrual flux in women. Medicines which promote this are
called menagoga, which term is also applicable to the haemorrhoids in men, and
the lochiae in women.

Besides the terms which I employ, you will find many more in the Writers on
Materia Medica, which, though often used injudiciously, are nevertheless
necessary to be understood. I shall here explain them, and begin with the terms
synonymous to these I have used.

I. To nutrientia are the terms restaurantia and analeptica, for they are only
a species of nutrientia. Writers have extended the meaning farther, and ranked
under this head, many I comprehend under medicines: For if salep, satyrion,
etc. be restoratives, it is only so far as they are nutritives. Linnaeus names
analeptica those medicines, quae vires instant, or which quickly give a certain
vigor to the system, as wine, etc. but these properly belong to the stimulantia.

II. Adstringentia. 1. Exsiccantia; this term should be confined to external
medicines; for though laxity may depend upon moisture, they can only act in
external applications, for if there be such internal remedies they must act as
astringents. 2. Indurantia: This is also a complex term, for they harden, by
bringing the fibers closer together, and so are no other than astringents. 3.
Roborantia: This is also a complex term, comprehending medicines of different
classes, as nutrientia, etc. but in so far as these medicines act on the simple
fibers, they are the same as adstringentia. 4. When our fibers are endued with
a power necessary to perform the functions, they are said to be in tone;
medicines, therefore, which promote this state are called tonic, but they act
only as astringents. 5. Sistentia, or medicines which stop evacuations. These
are commonly astringent: But this term ought to be rejected, as it leads to an
ambiguity. Opium, e. g. is a powerful sistent, though it does not act by its
astringent quality, but by taking off the sensibility of the fibers, and so
diminishing their oscillations.

III. Emollientia. 1. Laxantia: This is synonymous to emollientia, and perhaps
the properer of the two* were it not ambiguous, by its being applicable
likewise to purg^^ives of a more gentle kind. 2. Humectantia: This term is also
synonymous, comprehending such medicines as add moisture to the fibers which is
perhaps the chief effect of emollients; but some extend the meaning of
humectantia farther, to increase the fluid part of the system in general.

IV. Stimulantia. 1. Calefacientia: As there is no way of increasing animal
heat, but by increasing motion, all the medicines comprehended under this term
are really stimulants. 2. Attrahentia: This term strictly means all those
topical medicines that determine a greater flow of the humors externally; but
these, in my opinion, are universally stimulants. The term attrahentia
comprehends three subdivisions; first, such substances as increase the heat of
the part; secondly, those which excite the heat with some degree of
inflammation, called rubefacientia; thirdly, those which raise blisters, the
vesicantia, and now frequently epispastica, though this term more strictly
implies attrahentia, and is synonymous to it.

V. Sedativa. I have formerly observed, that this is a complex indication: As
the substances which diminish motion in the system are very various, hence the
synonimes of sedativa must be so too; e. g. Antiphlogistic is a term very
generally used for substances which abate inflammation; but, as these depend on
an increased motion, in this sense the term is the same as sedativa.
Antiphlogistics are also such medicines as relax the solids, destroy
contractility, or attenuate the fluids; but here the term, being too loose,
ought to be rejected, 2. Refrigerantia: This term is more precise, meaning such
substances as diminish the motion of a particular part, or of the system in
general. I shall not here enquire into the manner in which these effects are
produced. 3. Anodyna: This term strictly means medicines which ease pain. It
would be difficult to determine whether there is an increased motion in every
case of pain; if so, which I think probable, all anodynes are sedatives.
Whatever be in this, anodynes, I may say, act first either by diminishing the
motion, or taking off the feeling of the pained part. Of late, anodyne has been
confined to medicines which act in this last way, and therefore is commonly
understood to be the same with hypnotica, or such substances as induce sleep,
though it would be more proper to make a distinction. Somnifera and soporifera
are the same as hypnotica, and all synonymous to sedativa. Lastly, Paregorica,
which, by the ancient Physicians, were considered as sedativa, and the strict
meaning of the term implies that sense.

VI. Antispasmodica. To this term, the only synonymous term I know, is
carminative, which strictly implies such antispasmodics as have the power of
taking off spasms depending on intercepted air in (...) ^^^^estines.

VII. Attenuantia. These act either, first, by increasing the quantity of our
fluids, or, secondly, by diminishing the cohesion, the quantity continuing the
same. 1. Diluentia: This term is synonymous to the first signification of
attenuantia, and diluents only act in proportion to the quantity of water they
contain, water being the only diluent: But writers on the Materia Medica often,
improperly, use this term in the same general sense as attenuantia. 2.
Incidentia: This is used in the second signification of attenuantia, and is
thus called from a supposed theory, that such substances break down the fluids
as with sharp edges or points. 3. Resolventia are properly such substances as
give fluidity to portions of our fluids, that had been formerly concreted.
Authors, however, use this term in the same general sense as attenuantia, and
not without propriety, as the same medicines answer both intentions.

VIII. Inspissantia. 1. Incrassantia: This term is, perhaps, equally proper.

IX. Demulcentia. Such substances as cover and sheath acrimony, are called
demulcents. 1. Antacria: Materia Medica writers use this term in the same sense
as I do demulcents, but improperly, as this term may employ every medicine
which destroys acrimony, as antacida, etc. and even those which obviate
acrimony, as the antiseptica. 2. Lenientia: This has been used for emollientia,
but it is properly synonymous to demulcentia. Other terms have been introduced
from theories, e. g. Acrimony has been supposed to depend on angular pointed
spiculae, hence obtundentia, and obvolventia, which mean such medicines as
break off and sheath these spiculae: But these terms should be avoided, as this
theory is neither clear nor well founded. Again, it has been supposed that
acrimony depends on the two great prevalency of any of the component parts of
the blood, and those medicines which brought it back to its own natural state,
which they supposed always to be bland, were called temperantia.

X. Antacida. Boerhaave has divided this class into absorbentia and immutentia;
by the first, supposing such substances as took the acid into their pores
without changing its nature; and by the last, those which did. But we now know
that nothing absorbs an acid, without a tertium quid resulting. In the first
intention, absorbent earths can only be used; in the last, alkaline salts.

XI. Antalkalina. This term has no synonymes.

XII. Antiseptica. I know no synonymous term to this but condientia, employed
by De Gorter. By antiseptics, we mean such medicines as obviate the too great
putrescency of our fluids; but condientia extends farther, implying such
medicines as, without obviating any particular changes, keep the fluids in
their present state. But the fluid circulating in our vessels being subject
only to putrescency, I cannot suppose that any such medicines, of that kind,
exist, except they are antiseptics.

XIII. Errhina. Synonymous to this term is ptermica and sternutatoria,

XIV. Sialagoga. To this is synonymous the Apophlegmatizonta, which is likewise
synonymous to errhina. It is needless to insist more upon these terms, as they
are plain from the very etymology; and, for the same reason, we shall pass
overthose that follow in the catalogue.

I shall next take notice of such terms as have been employed by other Materia
Medica writers, and are vastly too complex to give a distinct idea of the
indications they are intended to answer.

Many diseases have been supposed to proceed from obstruction, and so the cure
of the diseases must be effected by removing that obstruction: Hence the terms
aperientia, deobstruentia, deoppilantia. Aperientia has been used, in a more
vague sense, for every medicine which, in whatever manner, resolves
obstruction; and also for such as increase secretions, though no obstruction
subsists. Deoppilantia has a more strict allusion to the nature of the
obstruction, as when it proceeds from something stuffing up the vessels. But
none of these terms convey any strict meaning, as they do not explain the
manner of their action. The student, therefore, ought not to be satisfied, till
he has carefully evolved them, and reduced the medicines, which have these
terms applied to them, to their most simple action.

We now proceed to the terms employed in Chirurgical indications; and first, of
those in cure of tumors. Here the first indication is to discuss or resolve;
hence the terms discutientia and resolventia. Although I do not deny the
ultimate effect of these, yet the terms are too complex, as comprehending
medicines very various in their operations, as emollientia, antispasmodica,
etc. Reprimentia, repercutientia, repellentia, are all supposed, by many,
synonymous to astringentia, but they are too various in their operation to come
under any one head; for though sacch. saturni, oak bark, and opium, be all
repellents, yet their manner of operation is very different. When a tumor can
neither be repelled nor discussed, our next indication is to attempt
suppuration, which has given rise to the terms suppurantia and maturantia.
These terms are too general, and we ought to consider in what manner they bring
about their effects, whether by operating on the solids, or increasing the
putrescency of the fluids, and then give them names according to their most
simple operation.

Suppuration being brought on, our next intention is to produce, or continue,
good pus: Hence the term digestiva, which is equally complex with the former,
and therefore ought to be studiously evolved. Digestion often depends on
keeping up a proper degree of inflammatory motion in the part, and frequently
also on removing sungosities. Detergentia, abstergentia, mundificantia,
depurantia, are synonymous terms. Detergentia and abstergentia have been
transferred to internal remedies, and applied to such as have the power of
washing off, or destroying viscidities adhering to the vessels, and carrying
them off from the body; and therefore, in this sense, if there be any such,
they are no other than attenuantia. Depurantia have been defined such medicines
as cleanse the body, by promoting the excretion of the degenerated fluids;
therefore, in this sense, they are synonymous to aperients and at^^nuants.

The next indication commonly laid down by Chirurgical Writers, in the case of
ulcers, is to renew the substance, and they called medicines for this intention
sarcotica. This indication is entirely imaginary, unless in so far as it is
applied to medicines which remove obstacles to Nature's performing the
operation, and therefore are nothing but detergents or abstergents. Another
indication laid down by Surgeons, is to agglutinate or consolidate; hence
agglutinantia and consolidantia, as though these medicines united the parts to
which they are applied. But this indication is equally imaginary with the
former, being entirely the work of nature; therefore bandages are the only
applications which can assist here. These terms, agglutinantia, etc. have been
transferred to remedies given internally, and are then called vulneraria. This
indication is likewise entirely the work of nature, for I know no agglutinants,
and only two medicines which promote suppuration, mercury and peruvian bark;
and if writers on the Materia Medica do mean any thing by vulneraries, it is
astringents, but they are unfitly called so, astringents being never proper,
nor are they indeed ever employed in such cases, at least in this country, and
if abroad, it is rather in compliance with a rotten practice, and to amuse the
patient.

The last indication in the cure of ulcers is to cicatrize, or draw a skin on
the part. The medicines supposed to answer this end are called epulotics and
cicatrizers, but this is entirely an operation of nature, though charpie Dry
lint.
or dry powders, may assist it.

I am to mention some terms arising from a supposed specific property in the
medicines: These were supposed of two kinds; I. Such as were specific to a
certain part of the system; II. To particular diseases. The first division has
been carried to great excess, as there is scarce a part of the system which has
not had a medicine adapted to it; but at first sight this division must appear
false, as there is no disease of any particular part that is not common to any
other part of the system. I shall now mention the terms of this first division
in my usual order, a capite as calcem. 1. Cephalics: By these are meant such
medicines as are suited to diseases of the head; but these are very various,
and often opposite in their nature. By this term writers generally mean certain
substances, which, by an agreeable odor and fragrancy, were grateful to the
nerves at their origin in the head. If this were the case, the term might be
admitted: But I shall afterward show, that little virtue depends on the odor;
and all those remarkable for their odor are stimulants. A term synonymous to
cephalic, is, 2. Nervous; but this is still more ambiguous and extensive in its
signification, as comprehending medicines suited to all nervous diseases, e. g.
stimulants, sedatives, antispasmodics. 3. Ophthalmics are medicines supposed to
act specifically in diseases of the eyes; but as medicines good for diseases of
the eyes are also equally efficacious for the same disorders in any other part
of the body, this term has no proper meaning. Some medicines, as euphrasia,
have been extolled as specifics here, but I know they have no title to any
pre-eminence. 4. Pectorals, thoracics, pulmonics, pneumonics, are all terms
applied to medicines suited to diseases in the breast, but not one of them has
a specific virtue; for I imagine those medicines which increase the bronchial
mucus will also promote the secretion of mucus in any other part of the body.
But writers in general mean, by pectorals, all those medicines which promote or
correct the bronchial mucus, two very opposite effects, and therefore the terms
are confounding. 5. Cardiacs. Cordials act in general on the nervous system,
and not specifically on the heart. 6. Stomachics. Many of these medicines
excite appetite and promote digestion, but they are of such different kinds,
and to be used in such different circumstances, that no such term ought to be
admitted. With regard to the other abdominal viscera, the terms are applied
with even less propriety than in the former. 7. Hepatic. This term seems to
have no meaning at all, as we cannot conceive any medicine has a specific
operation on the liver preferable to any other part of the system. If any
medicine more directly promoted secretion of bile, it might be called hepatic.
Some such indeed have been supposed, but I am not acquainted with them. 8.
Splenetics. This is still more improper than the former. 9. Nephritics. It is
possible there may be medicines which act more directly on the kidneys, but it
is only in so far as they are diuretics. Nephritics are appropriated to
diseases of the kidneys, but they are here the same with demulcents, as they
act by defending the kidney from the acrimony of the urine, and sharp points of
the gravel. Nephritics have not only been supposed to act as diuretics, but
also to push out, and even dissolve, sand or gravel; but we know none of this
kind but such as are diuretics. 10. Uterines. This term is equally
exceptionable with any of the former, for I doubt even if the menagoga act
directly on the uterus. 11. Aphrodisiaca: The medicines which act on the
genitals, and stimulate to venery. I imagine this also a false indication; for
we know no medicines which do this by their immediate action on those organs.
Cantharides have been supposed to be of this kind, but they act only by being
received into the blood, and stimulating the bladder, and so communicating
their effects to the organs of generation. There are other aphrodisiacs, which
are supposed to increase the seminal turgescency; but these are imaginary, for
we know none but nutrients, which, by being long detained in the system,
distend all the vessels, and the seminal vesicles also. 12. Antaphrodisiacs. I
can say, with more certainty, that this is an unmeaning indication.

II. We now come to consider specifics, with regard to particular diseases.
Many, dissatisfied with the reasonings of dogmatic Physicians, have been led
into pursuits of specifics: If this could be done with success it would
certainly be very desirable; but at this day I know no medicine whose action I
do not think I can explain by its answering a particular indication, which
entirely destroys the notions of a specific.

I shall content myself with barely enumerating, in our usual order, the terms
of such supposed specifics, what we have already said superseding a farther
explanation: Anti epileptica, anti m^^^aca, anti melancholica, anti
hypochondriaca, anti catarrhalia, anti phthisica, anti hectica, anti
cachectica, anti dysenterica, anti icterica, anti strumatica, anti scorbutica,
anti podagrica, anti venerea, anti febrilia.

We now proved to another division of terms arising from superstition or false
notions.

Anti magica, anti pharmaca, anti toxica, alexeteria, anti galactophora, anti
lactifera, or lactifuga, ebolica, aristolochica, abortiva, lithontriptica,
catagmatica. I have put lithontriptica in this catalogue, though I allow there
are some medicines which deserve that name, as aq. calc^^ and alkaline salts;
but these have been but lately found out, and as the term is used in the
Materia Medica Writers, it is improperly applied.

Thus far have I thought proper to treat of terms, in order to assist your
understanding of different Authors, and to guard you against their ambiguous
and inaccurate expressions.

Before proceeding to our immediate business we shall mention two indications
omitted in the catalogue; the first erodentia, or medicines which destroy the
simple fibers; secondly, anthelmintica: This indication is a proper one, as
there are medicines which act specifically on worms, but it could not be
introduced into my plan.

NUTRIENTIA.
Perhaps the whole of our subject might be divided into food and medicine. The
first is implied by the term nutrientia, which comprehends every thing used by
mankind in their daily food, as well the substances which are strictly
nutrient, as those which are employed to obviate and correct the degeneracy to
which the nourishment is liable. But more strictly nutrientia are such
substances as are fitted by the vital power to be converted into our fluids and
solids, in order to sustain their growth and repair their daily waste. Here a
question arises, whether our solids and fluids are formed from one common
aliment, or out of a mixed, i. e. one containing a principle of nourishment
suited to each. The first opinion appears to me the most probable.

All aliment differs in two particulars; first, as it is already assimilated
into the animal nature, or requires to be converted into it, by a particular
process of the animal economy. Of the first kind are all animal substances,
which, if not similar, are nearly so to our nature, and require only for that
assimilation solution and mixture. The second kind comprehends vegetables,
which must undergo several changes before they can be assimilated. But as the
nourishment of all animals, even of those who live on other animals, can
originally be traced to the vegetable kingdom, it is plain that the principle
of all nourishment is in vegetables, and that, therefore, we ought to begin
with these.

VEGETABLE ALIMENT.
The first question that arises here is, What are the vegetables which are
peculiarly appropriated for food? Perhaps there is no vegetable but what
affords aliment to some animal. But I will venture to say, that in human
aliment a choice is necessary, and a distinction ought to be made. The first
distinction is, that those vegetables which are of a mild, bland, agreeable
taste, are proper nourishment; while those of an acrid, bitter, nauseous nature
are improper. Every body, en gros, will allow the truth of this. There are,
however, several acrid substances that we use as food, but the mild, the bland,
the agreeable, are in the largest proportion in every vegetable; whereas the
acrid, the bitter, the disagreeable enter in the least quantity; which last,
however, may prove nourishment, provided our system is capable of subduing
their nature. Thus we see that some animals live on what is poisonous to
others, which seems entirely owing to the particular conformation of these
animals. Of all these animals the human body is most delicate in the choice of
its food, and the acrid, bitter, and disagreeable can never be admitted as
aliment. There, however, seem some exceptions. Thus celeri and endive are used
in common food, both substances of considerable acrimony; but you must observe,
that when we use them, they are previously blanched, which almost entirely
deprives them of that suspicious tendency. Or if we employ other acrid
substances, we generally, in great measure, deprive them of their acrimony by
boiling. In different countries the same plants grow with different degrees of
acrimony. Thus garlic here seldom enters our food; but in the southern
countries, where they grow more mild, they are frequently used for that
purpose. Again, the plant which furnishes cassada, being very acrimonious, and
even poisonous in its recent state, affords an instance of the necessity of
preparation of acrid substances even in these countries; for by a particular
management they allow the acrimonious juice to run off, and the farinaceous
nutritious part of it is left behind. Upon the whole, therefore, I maintain,
that we use no acrid substances in our food that are not previously deprived of
their acrimony; or, if we do, they are only employed as condimenta. But if the
question still remain, if it is still urged, that acrid substances are employed
in our food, I allege they are only such as the human body, by its particular
conformation, is capable to subdue. Here then begins the division of plants,
into food and medicine, the mild, the bland, the agreeable plants, or their
parts, being fit for food; while the acrid, etc. are proper for medicine. For
this reason Linnaeus's aphorisms are well founded, insipida and inodora
nutriunt, sapidiora non nutriunt. The reason is very obvious, for unless
substances affect remarkably our organs of sense, they cannot be supposed to
operate powerfully on our system. And this very effect of operating powerfully
on our system, destroys their expediency as food. Again, as sapid and odorous
substances have the power of operating changes in our system, they must act on
the nervous power, the part chiefly changeable. The insipid and bland do,
indeed, act on our fluids, but the changes they produce must be very slow.

We shall now enquire what part of the mild and bland substances constitutes
the proper aliment. In general, the more sweet substances are all nutritious:
These are little known here as food, but in the warmer climates make the
greatest part of it. We have now facts to prove, that sugar alone is
nutritious, and we shall afterward endeavor to prove, that all fruits we use
are nutritious only from their sugar. Here, the farinaceous substances are more
evidently nutritious, as likewise the bland mucilaginous. These two are nearly
connected with each other, and both with the saccharine substance; for all
farinaceous substances, before maturity, are sweet, and, after maturity, can be
restored to their sweet state by malting. Again, in fruits we observe a change
from sweet to farinaceous, which last property many of them attain upon
maturity; and all farinaceous substances, when mature, abound in oil; so that
it appears that the saccharine and oily part, blended together, make the
mucilaginous and farinaceous matters, i, e. the intermediate states between
sugar and oil; so that I conclude, that sugar and oil blended together, and
forming the farinaceous substance, is the nutritious part of vegetables. You
will now see what I formerly asserted, that either oil may enter into the
nutritious substance, or that the nutritious substance, by animal process, may
afford oil.

We are next to consider on what the difference of nutritious substances
depend. This turns on two heads; 1. On the quantity of nutriment each substance
contains; 2. On its being more or less easily assimilated.

1.
This depends on two circumstances; 1. On their containing the proportion of
sugar, or oil, or both; and that proportion even being given, it may depend
also on the texture of the subject, which allows a quantity of nourishment more
or less easily to be extracted from it. Thus, e. g. if my stomach extract from
a plant, which contains a less proportion of nourishment than another, that
nourishment more easily, it will compensate for the quantity. As to the
difference, with regard to the quantity of nourishment each subject affords, we
refer that till we come to treat of each in particular.

2.
As to more or less easy assimilation. This difference arises not only from
quality of the substance taken in, but also as often from its relation to the
stomach, or state of the animal organs. Nothing is more common, or more
ridiculous, than to ask whether this or that substance be wholesome. As to the
quantity, indeed, the answer might be easy; but as to quality it entirely
depends on peculiarity of constitution. The changes our aliments undergo, are
of three kinds; 1. In respect of assimilation; 2. of solution; 3. mixture.

1. Assimilation implies a change of the nature of the subject, which
spontaneously is inclined to alterations, different from those intended to be
wrought by the assimilatory process; e. g. all vegetables are spontaneously
acescent, and as there is nothing of that beyond the primae viae, it is
necessary, therefore, that it should be overcome. Against this it may be
objected, that vegetables are both acescent and alkalescent; but I am ready to
prove them all of the first nature. Do vegetables then become acid previous to
their undergoing any other change? I confess this is my opinion, though it is
not the common one. For it is supposed, e. g. that in the stomach of a strong
healthy man the food instead of becoming acid, tends directly to the
putrefactive fermentation. The arguments adduced in favor of this opinion are,
1. That an acid fermentation cannot be carried on without a considerable
admission of air, and that the stomach, being a close vessel, excludes the
access of that fluid; 2. That the heat of the stomach is too great for the
acetous process; and, 3. That the admixture of the spontaneously putrescent
animal fluids would besides obviate this acescency.

As to the first objection, the stomach is not the close vessel alleged, for
it admits a large quantity of air along with the food, etc. Secondly, I have
found, by accurate experiments, that the acetous fermentation can be carried on
in a heat equal to that of the human body, I believe it even admits of the
vinous; although I confess that it will be difficult to conduct the process in
such degree of heat, yet it may be done, and indeed it always does take place,
although rapidly, and soon terminating in the acetous process. Third, as to
this objection, Dr. Pringle, I think, has sufficiently proved, that the
admixture of animal fluids cannot hinder the acetous process, but, on the
contrary, that in certain proportion they promote it. None of these three
circumstances, therefore, are sufficient to prevent the spontaneous tendency of
the vegetable aliment to acidity; and I am certain, from experiments, that the
vegetable aliment first turns acid in the stomach; for every stomach, human or
brute, is always, on examination, found to have an acid present in it. Hence
that acescency is not a disease, but a step toward assimilation: And if
Physicians observe diseases proceeding from this cause, they ought to be
attributed to the state and degree of it. As to the state or condition of it I
think, it is this: Whenever the aliment enters into a high vinous fermentation,
with copious generation of fixed air, commonly called gas silvestre, as of the
same nature with that produced in the ordinary vinous process, it becomes a
disease, and has the power of destroying the mobility and contractility of the
moving fibers, and even the tone of the stomach itself, producing there
flatulency and spasm from irregular motions of the nervous power, and, at last,
stupor, lethargy, apoplexy, and death. This happens chiefly from fault of
animal organs; for though it appears, by Pringle's experiments, that animal
fluids do not prevent fermentation, yet they have the power in their sound
state of moderating the generation of air.

When acidity is a disease, it always depends on the above, and on the degree
or quantity of it; for although I have said that acidity is necessary, yet it
should only be of such a degree as afterward to be overcome by the mixture of
the animal fluids. I have yet only mentioned the organs as the cause of
acidity; but it also depends on the quantity of acid naturally in the
vegetable, and its tendency to undergo the vinous fermentation. For the disease
consists not so much in acidity as in the vinous fermentation. For if we take
in vegetable matters, after having undergone the vinous fermentation, their
effects are not so much to produce flatulency, but depend on the quantity of
acid taken in. Hence farinaceous substances, naturally acescent, when leavened,
impede, though not prevent, the generation of flatulencies; and hence the same
quantity of vinegar does not produce equally bad effects, as of vegetable
unfermented juices.

Acidity, as a disease, depends on the aliment; 1. As it contains a large
proportion of saccharine matter. 2. When to that is joined a fresh acidity,
which renders it more liable to ferment. Instances of this in the fructus acido
dulces. 3. When, by a previous accident it is put into a state of active vinous
fermentation, and in its fermenting state is taken into the stomach, as new
wines, ales, etc. These are the qualities that are apt to be most hurtful in
their consequences. On the contrary, those substances, which have undergone
fermentation, are less liable to produce bad effects, and only do so from their
quantity.

In the next place, this morbid tendency in the aliment depends on the state of
the body, and chiefly on a weaker action of the stomach (for I pass over the
effects of the gastric liquors, as we are yet but little acquainted with them,
and as these effects depend on the state of the stomach.) To the more or less
brisk action of the stomach, may likewise be referred the greater or less
quantity of gastric liquor emulged, or squeezed out; and also in proportion to
the weaker state of the stomach, the food is longer retained there.

These are the circumstances which should be in view, with regard to aliments,
in different persons.

When the aliment is pushed into the intestines, its acescency is more
certainly overcome by the addition of the bile, and a supply of pancreatic and
intestinal fluids, analogous to the saliva and gastric liquor; and as the
aliment never rests in the intestines, it is always exposed to mixture of new
juices. Effects of the bile on the aliment are as yet little known. Vegetable
acids change the bile in color, consistence, and taste, which last is sweet,
and this mixture probably affords a new stimulus when the acidity prevails; and
in this way our vegetable aliment stimulates the intestines, produces purging,
and even a greater discharge of choler itself.

It has been imagined by Physicians, that aliments differ in their effects on
the bile, some increasing its acrimony, etc. but what they have said seems to
me loose and inaccurate. Whether there are substances which have different
properties with regard to the bile. I dare not determine, and I think whatever
is said by authors on this subject may be reduced to the greater or less
acidity of the aliment.

2. This is all that is necessary to be said with regard to the assimilation of
the aliment; we are next to treat of its solubility. Solubility always depends
on the more or less firm texture of the subject. We are apt to mistake on this
head; for animal substances, though seemingly of more cohesion, are found, to
be of easier solubility. Solubility, then, is more to be noted in vegetables
than animals; thus the husks of vegetables are of much more difficult
solubility than animal substances of apparently the same cohesion. In general,
the soft, pulpy, etc. vegetable substances are easily soluble, and the tough,
etc. the contrary, and these are also the longer retained in the stomach.
Almost all vegetable substances employed in diet are specifically lighter than
water, and consequently than the gastric fluids; hence they will float near the
cardia, and cause eructations. For some hours these firmer substances give no
uneasiness, but afterward begin to operate on the upper orifice of the
stomach. 2. The solubility of our aliment is diversified according to firmness
of texture; for, in proportion to the solubility, two substances, containing
equal quantity of nourishment, give more or less of it to the extracting
powers, and in proportion to the quantity of nourishment extracted, more or
less faeces are left. Vegetable aliments, caeteris paribus, give more faeces.

3. With regard to the mixture of the aliment. Whenever the oil and watery
parts of our aliment are naturally mixed, the stomach does little. But commonly
this is not the case, and the oil and water separate in the stomach, and must
be at least in that viscus intimately confounded. This previous mixture need
little to be regarded in strong stomachs, but in weak ones; in this case the
oil and water separate, the former floating near the upper orifice, and causing
uneasy symptoms. I have known many persons whose eructations were purely oily,
and would flame in the fire, and indeed, this is the strongest proof of a weak
stomach. Oil is liable to particular changes: Out of the body it checks
fermentation, but is apt in weak stomachs to turn rancid, and occasion
heart-burn, a disease more frequent from this than any other cause. Not only is
the aliment thus diversified, but the qualities of the food also often depend
on peculiar sensibility of the stomach, or idiosyncrasy, which here oftener
occur than in any other part of the system, e. g. With respect to honey,
though, indeed, I think, some reason may be given for this, such persons being
often affected with it who are affected with acidity, as honey consists of acid
and sugar, the matter of fermentation. This seems to be confirmed by such
persons eating it with impunity, when new, mixed with the comb, or when, by
boiling, its air is dissipated, and its acid more intimately mixed with the
saccharine part. I am not certain whether this theory be sound, but though it
be, it cannot extend to spasmodic symptoms, etc. produced by a small bit of
egg, crab, etc. which symptoms can only be explained from idiosyncrasy. These
extraordinary instances lead me to suspect the sensibility of the stomach
extends further than is suspected, and may be reckoned the cause of different
tastes, etc. The primary cause of the stomach's sensibility seems to be, that
it may extend this sensibility over the system.

That the stomach is sensible to different degrees of solubility and mixture,
is evident from what has been already said. Thus, a quantity of warm water and
oil is almost always thrown up. A small quantity of oil itself will produce
this effect. The different sensibility of the stomach will determine the stay
of the food in that organ. Hence peculiar flavours affect this longer or
shorter stay. To all these I have to add a peculiar effect of the sensibility
of the stomach, viz. whenever the stomach is employed in digesting the aliment,
it seems to be an established law of the animal economy, that there is more or
less fever excited during the time of digestion, necessary, indeed, in some
degree, but when it proceeds to a noxious one it ought to determine a change of
our aliment. These preliminaries being settled, I proceed to talk of particular
substances.

With regard to the vegetable aliments, I have thrown them into three
divisions. The first comprehends all the different kinds of nutriment; the
second the drinks; the third the condiments. Again, I have divided the foods
according to the quantity of nutriment they afford, setting them in the
following order, viz. fruits, herbs, roots, seeds; thus giving the least
nourishing first, etc. This, however, is not strictly true, as some fruits are
more nourishing than certain herbs, or perhaps roots, etc. but these exceptions
shall be marked as we go along. Fruits are subdivided into those we eat fresh,
or those we eat dry, or more concentrated. With regard to the whole, I have not
pretended to enumerate all the different kinds of aliment, as they differ in
different countries; and as of many of them I have little or no experience: I
shall, therefore, confine myself to those known in this country, and from what
application may be made to such as occur elsewhere.

In the Catalogue, several blank spaces are left, which shows that all those
which stand near each other are of similar virtues and qualities, and differ
more or less from those which are separated from them. Among the vegetables
these blank spaces indicate a natural order among the Botanists, which also
points out somewhat of resemblance in virtue of substances thus ranked
together. The letters a, b, c, d, etc. signify that somewhat of a general title
might have been inserted; e. g. at (a) fructus acido dulces, (b) cucurbitacei,
(c) herbae esculentae.

As to the first head, comprehending the fructus acido dulces; they are divided
into recent and dried. Of these the first division constitutes a natural order,
called by Linnaeus Drupac^ae, or the stone fruits. The virtues of these, and
all other recent fruits, depend on four qualities, acerbity, acidity,
sweetness, and difference of texture. By acerbity I mean acidity joined to
austerity, or stypticity; acidity and sweetness are simple qualities, though
some^imes joined, as in the acido dulces. These different qualities appear in
the same fruit, according to the progress of maturation.

First ACERBITY appears, then more pure acidity, and lastly, sweetness. In so
far as fruits are acerb, they should be rejected from our aliment into the
class of medicines, where we shall speak of them under astringentia. We ought
to observe here, however, that acerb fruits are less liable to an active
fermentation, and have, in some measure, the effects of acids in stimulating
the stomach and increasing appetite. Being of firmer texture they are of less
easy solution, apt to be retained longer in the stomach, and, though less acid
themselves, are more apt to generate a noxious one. They have the cooling
virtues of acids, but are more to be taken notice of for their astringency, by
both which qualities they diminish the peristaltic motion of the intestines,
retard the passage of the aliment, and occasion an accumulation and retention
of hardened faeces.

2. ACIDITY. In moderate degree acids are grateful to the stomach, and excite
appetite. Directly as acid they are refrigerant, i. e. they weaken the active
power of the animal fibers. This is not inconsistent with stimulating, which
afterward I shall show is often combined with a refrigerant power in one and
the same subject. Again, by weakening the stomach, they weaken the whole
system. The acid of vegetables is never pure, but commonly joined with a sweet,
and therefore in stomachs so disposed, is apt to produce there an active
noxious fermentation.

3. SWEETNESS. This is the only nutritious quality of vegetables, and as such
is perfectly innocent, but is liable also to bad effects from spontaneous
changes, which depend on its accompanying acid, and the weakness of the animal
organs. All these have, in the intestines, a purgative quality, from the
changes they produce on the bile, acerbity as acid, and sweetness as changed
into an acid.

4. TEXTURE. As of more aqueous and tender consistence they are more readily
dissolved, and hence, perhaps, are more liable to fermentation. If of a very
compact texture, by staying longer in the stomach, they, however, are apt to
generate a stronger acid.

These are the qualities of fruits; and one may judge from the taste what
nature they will be of, the state of the stomach being known. Let us then apply
these general principles to the stone fruits. These are of a soft lax texture,
and their juices dilute, by which means they are easily dissolved in the
stomach, and for this reason they are apt to be taken in large quantities: As
they are acido dulces, they are apt to ferment, perhaps more so than any
others, from the quantity swallowed; hence they produce a copious acid, which
irritating the intestines, causes diarrhoeas and cholera, taking their rise
more frequently from this than any other cause. Upon the whole, I endeavor to
assign virtues in general, and I beg it may always be noticed, I except
particular virtues: Thus there are plumbs of firmer texture, and therefore as
little liable to ferment as firmer fruits.

Of the four following kinds of fruits, the PLUMB is most refrigerant, and
liable to ferment and produce cholera, diarrhoea, etc. The CHERRIES are
commonly imagined less noxious, but to me there seems little difference. The
APRICOT is a sweeter, richer, and less noxious fruit. As to the PEACH, I have
less experience: In those countries where it comes to full maturity, it may be
safe, on account of the richness of its juice; but with us, its juice is poor,
crude, and watery, its taste acid, and almost acerb, its consistence lax. Here,
in general, we may observe, that the later fruit is always the richest.

The ancients alleged, that the stone fruits were disposed to produce fevers,
an effect seemingly opposite to their qualities. This they do by their
refrigerating power, and preventing digestion; and, perhaps, in those
countries, may be the primary exciting cause. It is imaginary, that stones of
fruits, swallowed with them, prevent their bad effects, and may sometimes be
noxious, as they have been the foundation of stony concretions, especially if
swallowed unripe, with an acerb crust adhering to them; besides, this should
not be confined to cherries, and, were it true, would extend to the other stone
fruits. Although I have mentioned only a few stone fruits, viz. such as occur
here, they are, if found elsewhere, of nearly the same qualities, and to be
presumed of much the same virtues.

The next set of fruits in the catalogue are APPLES and PEARS, the Pomaceae of
Linnaeus. These have the common properties of the other fruits, viz. being
liable to acerbity, acidity, etc. They are less dilute than the stone fruit,
have a less active acid, and so are less liable to a noxious fermentation; but
being of firmer texture, are longer detained in the stomach, and so produce a
noxious acid. Apples are, in general, of a more firm texture, and less soluble
than pears: Some pears, indeed, are firmer than apples, but commonly, when
ripe, are more pulpy; while apples, swimming near the top, elude the action,
and also, by irritating the cardia, produce uneasy symptoms. Again, pears have
more of sweetness than apples, on account of which they are more nourishing,
and, from the conjoined acerbity, are less liable to active fermentation.
Writers on the Materia Medica have ascribed, without foundation, cardiac and
pectoral virtues to these fruits.

I had an idea of arranging here a natural order, called by Linnaeus
Hesperideae, which takes in more than are here mentioned; but their acid is so
pure that they ought to be considered as condimenta. I have set down only the
China oranges, which, from their sweetness, are certainly nutritive, but from
their acidity they are subject to fermentation, and have, besides, the other
qualities of stone fruits.

The next mentioned are STRAWBERRIES and RASBERRIES, belonging to the
Senticosae of Linnaeus. These are very tender, and therefore easily dissolved,
passing off before a very active fermentation can take place, which likewise is
prevented by their sweetness, which is greater than in stone fruits; on all
which accounts they are very innocent.

In classing all substances, after giving those which belong to a natural
order, I throw together the miscellaneous by themselves, as here; the grapes,
currants, gooseberries.

CURRANTS, with us, may be always considered as an acid fruit, considerably
dilute and very pulpy, when kept clear of the acerb husk; they have very little
sweetness, very little nourishment, and are liable to all the bad qualities of
stone fruits.

GOOSEBERRIES are much sweeter, more nourishing, and more innocent, and without
the husks are very easily dissolved, and readily evacuated, and, on account of
their sweetness, are less subject to active fermentation.

GRAPES are a richer fruit, and preferred for the making of wines, as they
contain a great quantity of saccharine matter; on which account they also are
more nutritive than any we have mentioned, perhaps as much as the dates and
figs afterward to be taken notice of. In the unripe state they are acerb, in
their middle state they are apt to ferment, when perfectly ripe, and taken in a
moderate quantity, they are among the innocent fruits.

I shall conclude what I have to say on the recent fruits, with some
observations of the different method of using them. We have already observed
their effects when used fresh. Wherever we employ heat we change their
qualities, dissipate their active acid, and dispose them less to ferment. Thus
acerb fruits, by the dissipation of their acid by boiling, etc. are rendered
more so, and consequently not so liable to a noxious disposition. Hence
universally, roasted or boiled fruits are safer than fresh. We commonly also
join them with matters which dispose them less to an active fermentation. Thus
milk, or, more properly, cream is often used, having that effect from its oily
nature. We shall afterward see what effect acids have in coagulating the milk.
We also now commonly use aromatics, as pepper, which, by stimulating and
invigorating the stomach, by taking off spasms, excited from gas sylvestre, and
by their antiseptic virtue, enable them to resist fermentation, and prevent
their bad effects. Wine is used to obviate the bad effects of fruit, but this
depends on its spirituous part, and therefore pure spirit, were it not
otherwise noxious, would be most eligible. If wine be used it should be strong,
and such as has undergone its fermentation, and is ripe and mellow. Another
method still of using them is with sugar. This surely renders fruit more
nutritive; whether it prevents fermentation may be doubted; but, as I have
observed, that sweet fruits are safest, so must a moderate addition of sugar to
acid fruits; in order to supply their want of native sweet, sometimes we use
oily matters, as butter in apple pie. This is a very proper, though less usual
addition, from its antifermentative quality. But in a weak stomach, where the
inquiline humors are less in quantity, and less saponaceous, the oil is apt to
separate, and produce ill consequences, as heart-burn, etc. as we have formerly
observed.

It has been a question agitated among Physicians, whether fruits are safer
before or after meals. The answer of this seems to depend on a knowledge of the
stomach. In a weak stomach they are more apt to be noxious when empty, than
when distended with animal food. Here likewise they cannot be taken in such
quantity as to hurt. In strong stomachs there is little difference; there they
would seem to promote appetite. In weak stomachs, even when full, if taken in
too great quantity, they may be very hurtful, by increasing the active
fermentation of the whole. The ancients alleged, that the mild fruits should
be taken before, and the acerb after meals, as being fitter to brace up the
stomach, and promote digestion. And, indeed, if taken in moderate quantity, the
rule may hold true.

Upon the whole, if you observe the effect of the four qualities, acerbity,
etc. you are then in a condition to judge of these and any other wherever they
occur.

DRY FRUITS.
None are fit, or indeed are subjected to this process, except those which
abound, in their recent state, with much saccharine juice. It is true, that
fruits of every kind are preserved, but this is more for elegance than as a
part of food; any of the dried fruits I am to mention, are only such as are
nutritive. I have said that sugar itself was nutritive; nay, indeed, the very
principle of nourishment, of which we have various proofs: Thus the Negroes
employed in the sugar manufacture live almost solely on this, and fatten
exceedingly. Another chief proof is, from the fruits which I am to speak of,
which are remarkably fattening, but chiefly in their dried state. Again, birds,
in fruit time, when the fruits are ripe, increase in fatness; and at such time,
Dr. Robinson has observed, that their livers are enlarged; whence we see how
fat people are so much subject to diseases of the viscera, especially the liver.

The dried fruits I am to treat of, are the grape, date, and fig. They have the
common properties of ripe fresh fruits, but are not joined with so powerful an
acid, part of it being dissipated in drying. Hence they are less liable to run
into active fermentation; but if taken in too great quantities, they will run
into that, and the acid produced will have all the bad effects of fresh fruits,
in producing diarrhoeae, cholera, etc.

DRIED GRAPES, RAISINS, CURRANTS.
Of this are two kinds, the uvae passae majores, or raisin, and the uvae passae
minores, or corinthiacae, or currants; these last have more acid joined to
their sugar, hence more laxative. I do not doubt but sugar itself may stimulate
the intestines, and be a gentle laxative, but its stronger effects in purging
are to be deduced, from its conversion into an acid. Hence currants are more
purgative than raisins, and those than figs, on account of their acidity; and
for this reason prunes and currants are nearly similar in their effects. The
raisins will also have more or less of these virtues, in proportion to the
quantity of acid they contain.

DATE.
This fruit is now less generally known here, but is the common food of a great
part of Asia. Were I to give a botanical account of any production, it would be
this, as the palm tree, whence it is produced, is so curious in its vegetation,
and so extensively useful in life; but as I have nothing now to offer on this
subject, I shall omit it, referring you to books where such disquisitions are
particularly treated. The date is of different kinds: In their best state they
are a pure saccharine fruit, free from acidity, but with considerable acerbity.
Formerly they were much employed in medicine, but are now justly laid aside for
those fruits which contain all their qualities in a greater degree, viz.

FIGS.
These are the most nourishing of the dried fruits; they contain a large
portion of saccharine matter, united with mucilage. From their containing much
sugar, and from being viscid and less readily perspired, they are more fit for
nourishment. They are also, from their sugar and mucilage, used as demulcents,
as their juice is most fit for covering acrimony. The date and raisin were
formerly used in this intention: The first is now laid aside, but we retain the
raisin as giving a grateful acidity to the too luscious taste of the fig. The
fig is also nephritic from its demulcent quality. They have been said to
produce lice, but there is no foundation for believing this, either from
information, or from our experience of them in this country. It is true, that
in their native country they make the chief food of the poorest people, who are
generally dirty, and this may have given rise to the opinion.

The next class we are to mention is the cucurbitaceae, of which many more are
used in food than those here mentioned, viz. cucumber, melon, and pompion,
which are chiefly used here.

CUCUMBER.
This is taken in great cities by the lower people as nourishment, but by the
better sort is chiefly employed as a refrigerant, or condiment, to accompany
animal food. They have a bland insipid juice, without acidity or sweetness,
approaching, as appears by their ripening, to a farinaceous matter. When used
green they have little nourishment, so are they only to be used in the summer
season and by the sedentary. Although cucumber is neither sweet nor acid, yet
it is considerably acescent, and so produces flatulency, cholera, diarrhoea,
etc. I apply all these to their acescent nature, though indeed its coldness and
flatulency may be increased by the firmness of their texture. I have seen them
discharged with little change from the stomach, after being detained there for
forty-eight hours. By this means, therefore, their acidity is greatly
increased. Hence oil and pepper, the condiments commonly employed, are very
useful to check their fermentation. We have lately used another condiment, viz.
the skin, which is bitter, and may, therefore, supply the place of aromatics.
But let me observe, that the cucurbitaceae have, many of them, a very acrid
juice in their skin; e. g. the colocynth, which is of this kind, into a bitter
of which nature it is alleged that the cucumber, by particular management may
be converted. Hence it would appear, that, as the bitter in the skin of
cucumbers is of this kind, it should, therefore, only be used when young.

MELONS.
These have the same qualities we were just now mentioning, but being of a
tenderer texture, they are, on this account, less hurtful, and, as accompanied
with sugar, are consequently more easily digested from its bringing on sooner a
fermentation to hasten their solution. All our watery vegetables may be
considered as diuretics. Cucumbers and melons have been reckoned remarkably, so
much as to bring on bloody urine. But this seems to be without foundation. To
me, indeed, they would rather appear to have a contrary effect, by increasing
the watery part of the urine* POMPIONS Are only used when boiled, and therefore
are more safe, as their texture is much loosened; but at best they are a weak,
insipid food, except from the dressing, and therefore are now neglected. It
tends to show their nature, that when well ripened, or when kept long after
being cut from the stalks, they become mealy and farinaceous, and therefore
more nourishing, and likewise safer with respect to the effects I spoke of.

We now come to the Herbae esculentae. (c.) Oler^ has been used for every thing
put into the pot. Linnaeus has confined the term oleraceae to a particular
order of plants, to which the three first in the catalogue belong orach^, beet,
and spinach.

ORACHE.
This is of the coarsest texture of the three, insomuch as to be now hardly
known in our gardens.

BEET and SPINACH.
Beet is more tender, but less so than spinach, to which both this and the
former have almost entirely given place. They are all of a watery, insipid
taste, with little saccharine or mucilaginous quality, and therefore are of
weak nutriment. On account of their little acidity and loose texture they are
less flatulent than some of the other olera. They are said to be laxative, but
as they have little acidity or sweetness, this quality cannot be remarkable.
They are, however, acescent, and hence, if taken in considerable quantity, may
prove so.

Nothing is more common than the opinion that all these olera are of a nitrous
quality. This was Dioscorides's opinion, and he has been followed in it by
almost every succeeding Author. But from a strict examination of their
essential salts, I have found no foundation for such an opinion. The effects of
all the olera, as laxatives, are very dubious. In weak stomachs they rather
increase costiveness, having nothing in them to stimulate the intestines and
increase the peristaltic motion. They are, indeed, the most cooling and least
irritating of the aliments. What I have said of the beet belongs entirely to
the herb, for the root is very sweet, and, according to Margraaf's experiments,
contains a larger proportion of sugar than any other root he examined. But the
nature of this will be better understood when we come to speak of roots.

Brassica: These belong to an order of plants much used in food. Their general
character is, that they are remarkably acrid, but not poisonous; on the
contrary, their acrimony is of considerable use in medicine, and in their bland
state, being deprived of this acrimony in boiling, they are used in food. Hence
I took the general rule, that all our aliment is remarkably bland, and that the
acrimonious part has little share in it: Of these we only use the brassica and
turnep as food, the others only as condiment. Brassica is most frequent in use,
and of this there are many varieties, as colewort, cauliflower, brocoli, etc.
All these are sensibly sweet, and therefore more nutritious than most of the
herbaceous kind. The distinction we make of them depends mostly on their
texture. Formerly we only employed the colewort, which has given place to the
more tender savoy; and perhaps this last will give way to the still tenderer
cauliflower. Those of the brassica kind are more flatulent than the oleraceae,
as having more of a saccharine quality, which enables them to ferment, and, by
this means, to produce an acid in the stomach. I believe they produce these
effects in a milder degree, in proportion to the richness of their sweet, and
tenderness of texture. On this account cabbage is rendered more flatulent, and
hence a confirmation of the general rule, that flatulency is most owing to
firmness of texture: Thus cabbage itself, when very young, is tender, and less
flatulent, than when full grown.

NASTURTIUM
Is used merely as a condiment. Were it not of scanty growth, it might enter
into our food, for I know that, by boiling, it is deprived of its acrimony, and
affords an agreeable green.

LACTUCA AGNINA.
This is a species of valerian: It is an insipid plant, perhaps from its being
early taken up in the spring; for in its more advanced state it is somewhat
bitter, and then approaches, in some degree, to the four following. In general,
all early plants are either insipid or remarkably acrid: Lactuca, as we use it,
has the general qualities of the oleraceous plants.

CICHOREUM, DENS LEONIS, ENDIVIA, LACTUCA.
These belong to the semi flosculosae, or plano petalae. They will afterward
be mentioned as medicines, under the subdivision of amaro frigida. These are
all lactescent plants, and it is almost an universal rule, that all those which
afford a milky juice are remarkably acrid, and many of them poisonous. This set
has been excepted, and seemingly with reason, as we use them so much in food.
But they do not infringe so much the general rule as has been imagined: For one
species of them is very narcotic, and all are so, in some measure, when old;
for this reason we only use them when very young, or blanch them, to free of
their acrimony, which is done by depriving them of light. When young, they are
acescent, cooling, flatulent; when old, less acescent, less cooling, less
flatulent, which, perhaps, may be owing to taking the skin along with them. But
they are never used without a condiment.

CELERI.
This is an ^pium, or petroselinum. It belongs to a set of plants often
lactescent, but, independent of this, they have a poisonous acrimony, on which
account it is blanched, though it is never entirely deprived of its acrimony in
this way, but more so by boiling, when it acquires a mucilaginous sweetness,
and is then used in our animal broths, especially in winter, for which season
it is fittest, on account of its acrimony.

ASPARAGUS.
This is an intermediate substance between root and plant. In its adult state
it is remarkably acrid, so only esculent in its first stage of growth. This
serves to illustrate the different states of plants according to the time of
their growth. There are many other plants, which, by age, turn acrid, whose
first shoots we might use as food, as hops, thistles, bardana, etc. but
asparagus is the only one employed at present. This is somewhat sweet, more
remarkably mucilaginous; from both which qualities it is manifestly nutritive,
and more so than any of the olera mentioned, also on account of its
mucilaginous juice, though it be acescent, yet it is less flatulent than some
of them. It has often been supposed, even as we eat it, of very active parts:
These, however, appear to constitute a peculiar acrimony, quite distinct from
the nutritious matter, and which seems to give the smell which is perceptible
in the urine of persons who use it.

CINARA, ARTICHOAK.
The part in use is of a nature somewhat between herb and fruit, and is the
receptacle of the flower and seed. Artichoaks came early into use in Europe,
and came into England about Henry the Eighth's time, and then were considered
as the rarest delicacy, and sold at much the same price as pine-apples now.
When thus rare, many qualities were attributed to it. Among the rest it was
called aphrodisiac, but without foundation. In southern climates artichoaks are
eat raw, as sallad, with oil and pepper; but this practice is only fit for warm
climates. In this country we use them boiled; and, if young, they are of a
tender texture, and easily dissolved. They are little acescent, so not
flatulent. The taste of artichoaks is sweet, which bespeaks them remarkably
nutritious.

FUNGI.
Next to the herbs, I have set down these. These are, indeed, herbs only in so
far as some of them are above ground; but they differ so much from every other
herb and even vegetables, and besides their virtues are so different, as to
make it very difficult to class them. Of the fungi, three distinctions are to
be noticed, Truffle Morelle, and Mushroom, which take in the other fungi.

TRUFFLE.
This is as singular in its qualities as vegetation. It never rises above
ground, nor seeds, but shoots in the earth, being a single solitary ball,
somewhat firmer than mushroom. In this country they are never found, scarcely
in England. From Geoffroy I learn that it is not acescent, but yields at first
a volatile alkali, which shows it approaches near to the animal nature. Hence
its qualities may probably be deduced; and for this reason it is less
flatulent, more nourishing, and more stimulating to the system than any other
vegetable; and of the great variety of vegetables, commonly said to be
possessed of aphrodisiac virtues, is perhaps the only one which has any title
to them. In those countries where it is used it is never found noxious or
poisonous as the mushrooms. It has been alleged, that on account of its firm
texture it may be of slow solution, and so difficult to digest.

MORELLE.
This belongs to a genus, called by Linnaeus phallus. There are two species,
viz. the one here mentioned, which is not indigenous, and another remarkably
foetid, growing about hedges, the phallus foetidus penis imaginem referens. It
is of a porous cellular texture, not laminated as the mushroom. The morelle has
been said to approach in qualities to the truffle, but I consider it more as a
fashionbale ornament to our dishes, than as any proper food.

MUSHROOMS.
Physicians have disputed much about the qualities of these, some considering
them as a rich nourishment and perfectly innocent when properly chosen, others
asserting them to be extremely deleterious; most of the fungi are indeed of a
hurtful quality, and with respect to the whole tribe the esculent are very few.
Esculent mushrooms are very nutritive, very readily alcalescent, and more so
without intermediate acescency than any other vegetable; therefore a rich
nourishment, and much akin to animal food; on which account they may be
indulged in considerable quantity to strong persons. It requires, however,
skill to distinguish this esculent kind; and very few have studied Clusius, or
other authors, who have been at the pains to distinguish them, especially
those, viz. the servants who are employed to gather them. Perhaps our esculent
mushrooms, if old, acquire a dangerous acrimony; wherefore, as exposed to all
these accidents, I think it may be prudent for the most part to avoid them. In
the warmer climates, they may be used as a light kind of food, but here it is
preposterous to use them along with animal food, as they do not correct its
alkaline tendency.

ESCULENT ROOTS.
Radish, Turnep. These belong to the siliquosae, which we mentioned, under
nasturtium and brassica, to be an acrid class, but never poisonous, and often
good in medicine. This acrimony has given rise to particular opinions, some
asserting that they are cooling, while others call them alkalescent. Both,
however, seem to mistake. Their acrimony is diuretic and diaphoretic, and so
discharges all the parts of the blood which have degenerated to an alkaline
acrimony. On the other hand, I have said that all plants are acescent, and I
except only the fungi. Perhaps, indeed, the siliquoso do run on quicker to
putrefaction, but this is only a difference in degree, and not in quality. Thus
far of the siliquosae in general.

RADISH.
This, as being so acrid, is used only as sallad or condiment. When boiled it
becomes mild, and were it not for its slender state when young, and for the
difficulty of depriving it of its acrid skin when old, and its toughness, it
might be used this way in the kitchen.

TURNEP.
This is easily deprived of its acrid skin, and is also pretty large, which is
the reason why it is preferred in our aliment, but is a watery weak nutriment,
very flatulent, and purgative in consequence of its acescency.

SCORZONERA, TRAGOPOGON.
These belong to the semiflosculosae. The roots are remarkably free from the
acrimony which appears in the plant above ground, and of what acrimony they
have, they can easily be deprived, by boiling. They are sweeter than turnep,
and therefore less acescent and less flatulent, but yield to the three
following:

CARROT, PARSNIP, and SKIRRET.
Skirret is remarkable for being a plant from whose root Margraaf, of all the
plants he tried, extracted most grained sugar, except the white beet. The
carrot yields a considerable quantity of rich saccharine matter, in the form of
syrup. From the parsnips, a small quantity of grained sugar, and a large one of
syrup, is extracted, very viscid, with a copious mucilage. From the sweet
mucilaginous matter contained in all, they are considerably nutritious. The
quantity of nourishment is least in the skirret, and greatest in the parsnip,
from different mixture in each of the saccharine and mucilaginous matter. In
the skirret, the saccharine fermentable matter is most open, and therefore
this, of the three, is most acescent and flatulent. All three are taken from a
class of plants which abound in a deleterious acrimony; Parsnip, from its
ranker smell and taste, is most suspected and most shunned. And here I may
observe, that the bland nutritious vegetables are agreeable to all, but in
those of a mixed or suspicious kind we see many idiosyncrasies. It is said that
parsnips, when old, turn very acrid, insomuch as to have produced mania and
other dreadful effects: When old, they are called madnips by the English. These
effects, perhaps, might have proceeded from taking hemlock, or others of the
umbelliferous kind, by mistake.

LEEK, ONION, GARLIC.
These belong to the alliaceous kind, and are all species of one genus. In
their recent state they are acrid, but harmless to the human body: When, by age
or climate, this acrimony is too great, we do not use them as food. In Spain,
the garlic being equally mild with the onion, is used as common food. By the
ordinary culinary preparation, their acrimony is dissipated, and a remarkably
mild substance remains, promissing much nutriment, which those who can digest
them raw will certainly obtain. Though sometimes shunned as food, yet, on that
account, they are employed in medicine, uniting the two qualities of pectorals,
viz. on the account of their acrimony, being, in their recent state,
expectorant; in their boiled, on account of their mucilage, demulcent, provided
the quantity taken be sufficient. Some of late, in this country, have found in
the leek a somniferous quality; but this is not yet confirmed by a sufficient
number of experiments.

Besides the three here mentioned, there are several others, belonging to the
same tribe, that we use as condiments, but only the leek and onion as diet. In
its recent state the onion is most acrid, in its boiled one the leek retains
its acrimony most tenaciously. On account of this, and some difference of
texture, the onion is more easily digested, and more universally used than the
leek, being more easily broke down, and more generally agreeable.

POTATOE.
This is an intermediate substance, between esculent roots and farinaceous
seeds, and is now of frequent use, being of easy culture and plentiful product.
Some have alleged it has bad qualities, but experience shows the contrary; as
acescent indeed, it may be flatulent, but as it approaches more to the
farinaceous seeds, it is less flatulent, and more nourishing, than any of the
oleraceous herbs or roots I know: That they are farinaceous there are many
proofs, as they can be applied to all the purposes of the farinaceous seeds, as
for making starch, vinous liquors, etc. Though this plant belong to the genus
of nightshade, and though the seeds retain the acrimony of that genus, yet the
root is found to have no such qualities, being, in my opinion, of the most
innocent and safest nutriment. Hence then it would appear, that the rule of
plants of the same genus having the same virtues, is not so general as is
commonly imagined: This, indeed, is so far from being true, that different
parts of the same plant have often different virtues.

SALEP.
This is a preparation of the root of the orchis, which grows plentifully in
Turkey and Persia. The orchis of this country seems to be of much the same
nature, though not so convenient, as it does not grow to the same bulk. The
method of preparing salep is as follows, and given us by Geoffroy: First, they
throw the roots into water, in order to free them of the skin. My author does
not mention whether the water should be cold or hot; in my opinion the latter
would be preferable; it is afterward boiled in water, till, I fancy, it is
perfectly soaked with it; the water is then drained off, and the root hung up
on threads to dry, till it has acquired a gummy or resinous appearance. In
England, it is said to be imported in this form; but here we commonly have it
in a powder. Thrown into water it melts into a mucilage, of a smooth taste,
somewhat sweet. Both from taste and mucilage, it is plainly of a farinaceous
matter, and is liable to the same inconveniences, acescency and fermentation,
especially acescency. It is extremely convenient for affording an
extemporaneous mucilaginous drink, but, as we use it, it is too weak a
nutriment. Hence I have no faith in its aphrodisiac virtues; but it is very
fit, where acrimony abounds in the primae viae, as in dysenteries, as we find
confirmed by Degner, on that subject.

Many other roots, of the farinaceous kind, might be mentioned here. Several of
these roots are, in their recent state, remarkably acrid, as the cassada of
Surinam already mentioned. In the same manner the Laplanders use a plant of the
like qualities, which affords a mealy matter, with the same management. In this
country the arum seems to be of the same nature; being, when recent, very
acrid, by drying turned mild and farinaceous; and I make no doubt but it might
be used as a farinaceous substance in food. I know one purpose which it serves
in common with other farinae, viz. making a fine powder for the hair

SAGO.
It is the product of a species of oriental palm, called todapanna, etc. We
have long been acquainted with the substance, but often have disputed about its
origin. We are now assured, that it is the pith of the tree above mentioned.
When the tree is cut down, the pith is separated from its filamentous membrane,
and afterward farther cleaned by winnowing, and broke down into a fine meal,
and dried in the sun. Some say that this meal is made into a pulmentum with
water, dried, and afterward formed into the grains in which we have it. This
opinion I am apt to favor. Possibly, from some of our own farinaceous matters,
some such substance might be procured. Sago appears to be a pure, mild, bland,
farinaceous substance, having the oil and sugar intimately blended. Hence its
qualities may be understood, being demulcent, as other farinae, etc. It
dissolves in water into a viscid mucilage, and it is owing to its viscidity
that it is less acescent, and flatulent, than other farinae, keeping longer,
even for twenty years, than other farinae, and also in its mucilaginous state a
long time. Hence it is considerably nutritious, as the East Indians experience.

FARINACEOUS SEEDS.
These make the chief vegetable nutriment of all nations. They are subdivided
into three kinds, 1. Cerealia; 2. Leguminoso; 3. Nuces oleosae. The first is
the purest farina; the second is more oily; the third so much more so as to
have their oil separate, and easily extracted from them. The Cerealia are of
most universal use. Thus barley, rye, and oats are the food of the North. In
the Southern parts of Asia, Africa, and America, wheat, rice, and maiz. To
these millet may be added. All these substances belong to a distinct family of
plants, under the name of Culmifer^e, or Graminos^e. The whole of the gramina
are of the same nature, and furnish aliment to men and domestic animals. All
these might be used in food, but we employ those of largest growth and product.
The properties of all are much in common. They are all acescent and saccharine,
or by malting, convertible into a saccharine nature. Hence they are the proper
subjects of fermentation, and hence they are acescent, though less so than any
of the vegetables yet mentioned. And here, by the bye, I may observe, that in
my Catalogue I had in view to place the substances in the order of acescency.
To go on; we render them less acescent by a previous fermentation, as in the
form of bread: So much for their assimilation. They are not so readily soluble
in the stomach as most of the vegetables we have mentioned, especially when
made into a paste; but in this form they have an advantage, becoming not only
more nourishing for the robust, but, as I shall afterward observe, for all.
The first appearance of their solution, is to give a mucilage; hence they are
demulcent. Some call them astringent: I see no foundation for this, as any
appearance of their astringency is owing to their demulcent property. So far of
these substances in general. We now proceed to speak of each in particular,
very briefly.

BARLEY.
This is a sweeter grain than most of the others, its sugar being less covered
by the oil; hence it is the more common subject of fermentation. It is also
less nourishing, not only because the sugar is least covered, but also because
it breaks down into a very bulky meal, on which account when made into paste it
is least solid food, so that barely pottage, etc. makes a less solid, and
therefore a lighter nourishment. It is, however, preferable for decoctions, as
it renders them less viscid than any of the farinaceous substances I know.

MILLET.
This, from its sweetness, is manifestly of the same nature as barley, and if
as large a grain, would be used for the same purposes. As tender and sweet, it
is sometimes used in our puddings.

RYE.
This a sweet grain, and from accidents, as well as this, it has particular
qualities, being in the countries where it is used the food of the poor, and
therefore not cleaned accurately from its husks. Hence, and from its sweetness,
it is considerably acescent, so more liable to ferment in the stomach and
produce purging, which people on their first using it commonly experience.

OATS.
This grain is a stronger nutriment than the former, as the sweetness is less
obvious, the oil being more intimately blended with the sugar. This appears
from more nourishment being actually obtained than from the same quantity of
barley or rye. It is of a more (...) and compact texture, and from being less
soluble than the wheat, appears to me the reason why it gives less nourishment.
Oats have been supposed heating, and to produce itch, etc. It is absurd to
suppose any heating quality in any of the farinaceae. Heart-burn produced from
its use is given as an instance of its heating quality, but this is owing to
the acescent quality common with other farinaceae, taken unfermented. Even
wheat itself, made into unleavened cakes, as the oats are commonly here,
produces the same effects.

WHEAT.
This is a more perfect grain than any yet mentioned, particularly it affords a
finer farina than oats or barley, for I believe it is scarce possible to make a
scarce fine enough, in order to hinder its transmission. It is the grain of
most plentiful increase, even in this country, and, in proportion to the
quantity, gives a more plentiful nourishment. It is certainly the fittest for
bread of any, I mean the European grains, for I imagine it is excelled by

RICE.
This, both for largeness of produce, quantity of nourishment, and goodness, is
more excellent, being of finer farina and more tender texture, as is plain by
macerating the different grains in water; for as the rice swells to largest
size, so its parts are more intimately divided. Rice is said to affect the
eyes, but this is purely prejudice: Thus it is alleged a particular people of
Asia, who live on this grain, are blind eyed; but if the soil be sandy, and not
properly covered with herbage, and as these people are much employed in the
field, this affection of their eyes may be owing to the strong reflection of
the rays of light from this sandy soil; and I am more inclined to this opinion,
as no such effect is observed in Carolina, where it is very commonly used.

MAIZ.
Of this I have but little experience to speak positively of it. It is an
American grain. It is of a firmer, more solid texture than the rest; it may,
however, be broke down into a fine meal. With water, it forms the most gluey
viscid substance of any of the farinaceae, therefore should be well opened by
fermentation, to make it fit for tender stomachs. In our trials we have never
been able, when we imported it in times of scarcity, to make it undergo such a
fermentation as to have the friability of our grains.

BUCK WHEAT.
This is a farinaceous seed, but does not belong to the same class with the
former. It is employed as food in this country now very rarely. It is used for
some other purposes, particularly to give a thick mucilage, of use to give
tenacity to yarn in weaving, for which purpose it answers better than oats,
barley, or wheat. I am led to make the same observations on it as the maiz,
viz. that it is a hard, viscid, less soluble substance than any of the other
grains. It cannot be reduced to a fine enough meal. If we could open it by
fermentation, it might be useful in food.

Having thus treated of the principal species of the farinacea, I now come to
their preparations. By much the most common of these is bread, and without
somewhat of this form no nations seem to live. Thus the Laplanders, having no
corn of their own, make a sort of bread of their dried fishes and of the inner
rind of the pine, which seems to be used not so much for their nourishment as
for supplying a dry food. For this mankind seem to have an universal appetite,
rejecting bland, slippery, mucilaginous foods. This is not commonly accounted
for, but seems to depend or very simple principles. The preparation of our food
depends on the mixture of the animal fluids in every stage. Among others the
saliva is necessary, which requires dry food as a necessary stimulus to draw it
forth, as bland, slippery fluid aliments are too inert, and make too short stay
in the mouth to produce this effect, or to cause sufficient degree of
manducation to emulge that liquor. For this reason we use commonly dry bread
along with animal food, which otherwise would too quickly be swallowed. For
blending the oil and water of our food, nothing is so fit as bread, assisted by
a previous manducation. For which purpose bread is of like necessity in the
stomach, as it is proper, that a substance of solid consistence should be long
retained there. Now I have said that the animal fluids must be mixed with our
aliments, in order to change the acescency it undergoes. But liquid foods would
not attain this end, whereas the solid stimulates and emulges the glands of the
stomach. The bread then appears to be exceedingly proper, being bulky without
too much solidity, and firm without difficulty of solution. Although the bread
I here mention only of our own farinacea, yet in different countries others are
used, as sago, etc.

Bread is of two kinds, leavened or unleavened, i. e. subjected to
fermentation, or only simple dough made or water. Leavened bread is of two
kinds; first, as made of dough set to ferment naturally, and afterward
employed as a ferment to other dough; secondly, where we employ a ferment of
vinous liquors. The first is a precarious uncertain operation in itself, and
more especially so in its application to a fresh mass of unfermented dough.
This is the method used in the southern countries of Europe. The yeast used in
the second more preferable method is a more active ferment, and less liable to
accident than the leaven, even although it is subject to be used too old, etc.
and so we find British bread better raised than the French and more spungy; but
it has a disadvantage, especially to strangers, from the disagreeable
bitterness of hops often tainting our yeast, and so the bread as formed with
it. The advantages of leavened bread are to promote assimilation and solution.

As to the first, all vegetable food becomes naturally more or less acescent,
and it is the mode of this that forms a disease, viz. when the vinous
fermentation takes place. Indeed, I also own, that disease may sometimes depend
on the quantity of acid produced. One way of obviating the vinous fermentation
is, by giving our food somewhat of the acetous tendency, or throwing into the
stomach somewhat to have this effect. Unfermented, or too little fermented
bread, will cause heart-burn; when too acid from over fermentation it will
purge. This then explains the use of bread, and the degree of leavening
necessary, viz. that it should not be so much leavened as to purge, but
sufficiently so, in order to check the noxious vinous fermentation. The more
acescent grains, as barley and rye, are more especially purgative, and the
husks of all grain are somewhat of this nature, while the pure farina has loss
of it. Thus then the finest bread will be least purgative, and the coarsest
most certainly so. So far as to the assimilation, now with regard to the
solution.

In all bodies there is blended a certain quantity of air, and nothing promotes
solution more than the extrication of this air, which is particularly effected
by fermentation. Application of heat, of a menstruum applied, etc. would be of
little avail, unless assisted by a fermentation going on in the stomach, which
is particularly assisted by bread, which, besides the advantages of solidity,
etc. is of use, as having its own texture already opened, to prove a ferment to
other food. Bread is necessarily in a solid and dry form, and hence is less
soluble. To prevent this, and at the same time preserve the solid form, is the
purpose of baking. To make the bread cohere, water is used, and there is no
greater secret in the art of baking than the quantity of this used, which, if
too great, makes the whole concrete into a firm insoluble mass. Here we are apt
to be deceived, as meal, like clay, will absorb a considerable quantity, and
still retain its mealy form. This mixture must be made not with gentle
stirring, but accurate kneading, in order to make a small quantity of water
suffice; for if gentle mixture were used, it, like the clay beforementioned,
would take in too much water, before it would cohere. After the mixture is
made, we proceed to drying, which must be performed suddenly, all slow drying
giving to substances a tough compact form, while sudden drying gives a spongy
porous texture. This is illustrated in making of paper, which, slowly dried, is
of fine compact texture; whereas, if taken suddenly from the mill, it is
porous, sinking, and spungy. Hence we can apprehend what are the qualities of
bread properly dried; for the water, interposed as a gluten, is dissipated, and
leaves the bread in a considerable degree of friability. Its friability depends
also on the fineness of the meal, and quality of the ferment applied, rendering
it fit for manducation and solution in the stomach: Hence the difference
between new bread and stale; the latter being more friable, and more easily
soluble, is preferable, provided it has got none of the putrefactive taint:
However, in strong stomachs, this may too easily be dissolved and digested, and
therefore, in such cases, the other is to be chosen.

As to unleavened bread, which is used both here and in many other parts of
Europe; this necessarily comes into a firm and tough cake, not having the
advantage of fermentation to extricate the air. On account of this closeness of
texture, it will retain the water more tenaciously: Hence the reason of the
different form of unleavened bread being made out into thin cakes to favor
their drying, which the more expeditiously it is done, for reasons already
assigned, without burning, it is the more soluble, friable, and porous. People
obliged to use unleavened bread, have thought of adding butter, to render it
more friable; but from this, perhaps, it is less miscible with the watery
fluids, and those in the stomach; and hence, as we have said, it is more
acescent, and apt to produce heart-burn. We also sometimes use bread leavened
to a very great degree, under the name of ^our cakes. These are made by adding
a good deal of water to give them viscidity, that they may be thinly extended.
To obviate the effects of this viscidity, they are rendered proportionably more
^our, on which account, when taken in considerable quantities, they are
purgative. So far with regard to bread.

We now proceed to the other preparations of farinacea. These, when made into
paste with water, and exposed to a heat capable of coagulating our fluids, are
hardened into indissoluble masses; but when they are mixed with cold water, and
afterward exposed to a gradual heat, their solution is effected. This is
illustrated by the preparation of hasty-pudding and water gruel. The first
practice is the most common, probably from being more solid and longer retained
in the stomach, till it undergoes the proper acescent changes, while the
water gruel is little considered as a food, but rather as a drink, because it
passes quickly off. All the puddings are analogous in their preparation to the
hasty-pudding. The farinacea prepared by coagulation are of three kinds,
pudding, pancake, and baken paste; pudding is of two kinds as made of flour or
bread. The first is coagulated into a firm mass, which we should not be able to
dissolve unless mixed with other matters, as suet; on the contrary, that made
of bread, still remains, after being drenched with water, easily soluble. These
are the common forms of pudding, though sometimes they are made of grain, as
rice, millet, etc. In this case the grain is first boiled, and then dried to a
proper consistence, and mixed with variety of substances. In all of these forms
milk is commonly used rather than plain water, as giving a less tough
consistence. Eggs are also used to obviate acescency, as being of animal
nature. 2. Pancakes. Here somewhat of a firm texture is required, and they are
made out into thin plates for the same reason as the unleavened cakes. More
water is necessary to give them tenacity, and butter is added to prevent
fermentation. 3. Paste. This is sometimes made of fermented bread, but
ordinarily of flour. As it is to be converted into various forms, it is made
considerably tenacious. This is done by adding a large quantity of water, by
^low drying, and other means. It would, therefore, be very hard without the
addition of butter, and, after all, it is very indigestible, and apt to produce
heartburn and acescency. Perhaps this is increased by the burned butter, from a
certain sensibility in the stomach, which occasions all empyreumatic oils to be
long retained, and so turn rancescent and acid.

LEGUMINA.
These are unctuous and oily, and have the oil intimately blended with a
saccharine matter, so that they afford a pure and strong nourishment; and that
they do so appear from experiments made on domestic animals. It is observed too
that servants, caeteris paribus, living on low grounds, where the legumina grow
in great plenty, and are their chief food, fatten remarkably, and then when
transported to the higher ground, they turn weak and lean, living mostly on the
culmiferous farinacea, and sometimes cannot recover them without having
recourse to the former diet. That the legumina are intended for food, a curious
reason may be assigned. The culmiferous, indeed, are intended for food, but the
same ground cannot produce them above one or two years without being exhausted;
whereas the legumina have no such effect, and interposed between the
culmiferous crops, make these be borne more easily: And thus I have known a
field, by alternate crops of the culmiferae and legumina, after twenty-four
years, without any particular manure, capable to produce the same crop of
culmiferae as at first. This practice is very ancient, and therefore legumina
very early must have made a part of food.

Legumina are of a more firm texture and less soluble, therefore their use in
food should be confined to the hardy robust farmer. They are more flatulent
than most vegetables, at least than the farinacea. This depends not merely on
that quantity of saccharine matter (which appears to be considerable, as
appears from the rich sweet procurable from them) as the bad effects of this
are obviated by its intimate mixture with their oil, but on the great quantity
of air there is lodged in that texture, and which, during their fermentation,
is copiously extricated; and hence they are improper aliment for weak stomachs.
They are used in two different states, not only when fully ripe, (their effects
in which case I have just now mentioned,) but also when very tender and green,
at which time they have not attained the oil they afterward gain, approach in
their qualities to other olera, and are hardly more sensibly flatulent than
these; but after all, in compensation for these properties, their nutriment is
proportionably diminished.

In the Catalogue I have only set down of the legumina, peace, beans, and French
beans, though many more of the same kind might have been added, as lentils,
etc. but they are purposely omitted, as all of the same qualities, and I have
only mentioned the three most commonly used.

The phaseoli, or French beans, are here little known in their mature state,
but are used with their cod in the manner of olera, than which they are
somewhat more firm and more nutritious. The phaseoli, in their ripe state, have
a bitter disagreeable husk, deprived of which they are more tender, more
soluble, and less flatulent than other legumina, even the peace, and for the
purposes of peace, by the better sort they are, for this reason, sometimes
imported, as for puddings.

Peace, both raw and ripe, are of a more tender and soluble texture than beans,
and hence the better sort seldom employ the bean, but use the pea for culinary
purposes, as puddings, etc.

NUCES OLEOSAE.
This term is not strictly proper in a botanical sense, but common language has
authorized it. All these consist of a farinaceous substance by itself, and have
an oil in their composition, not mixed as in the legumina, but separate, and
easily obtained by proper expression. Though this oil be separate, yet, by
triture with water, it may be united with the farinaceous substance into an
homogeneous emulsion; and most of the preparations of nuces oleosae in food
should be made on this foundation. Nuces oleosae are less flatulent than the
legumina, and even than the farinacea, and, on account of their copious oil,
more nutritive, but hence more difficultly assimilated, and its effects appear
by stuffing the lungs, especially such as were formerly affected with any
disorder of the asthmatic kind.

Let us now proceed to treat of the Nuces oleosae in particular. I have ranked
them in the Catalogue according to alphabetical order, but according to the
proportion of oil they may stand thus: AVELLANA, CASTANEAE, JUGLANDES,
PISTACEAE, AMYGDALAE, CACAO.

HAZEL NUT.
This is less oily, and has its oil more intimately blended with the
farinaceous substance than in the rest, but all this is to be taken with
distinction, of those nuts in different countries, climates, and seasons. Thus
in the southern, drier and hotter climates, the oil is more copious and
separate. Before these arrive at maturity, they are more watery than the other
nuts.

CHESTNUT.
This I suppose was the food of the ancients, and not the acorn of the oak,
which is scarcely reducible to food. The later Botanists have very justly
reduced the chestnut tree to the genus of the fagus, and this was probably the
ancient esculent one. Chestnuts still, in some countries, make the chief parts
of food to the lower kind of people, as in the fertile plains of Lombardy. They
afford a copious nourishment, as somewhat of the nature of the legumina, having
their oil intimately blended, and much air being fixed in their substance, and
they are the most flatulent of the nuces oleosae.

WALNUTS.
These are more oily than the former, and have that oil more separate.

PISTACHIO.
This still more abounds in oil, and may give a more copious nourishment, but
it is scarcely possible to separate from them the terbinthinal acrimony of the
tree.

ALMONDS.
These are the most agreeable of the nuts, but are no where produced in such
quantity as to afford a food. They are divided into bitter and sweet, and the
oil is said to be obtained equally sweet from both. And, indeed, it appears,
that bitter and sweet almonds are only varieties, but it is a doubt whether the
bitter almond ought to be used in food. The farina and oil of it are exactly
the same, but its bitter makes it suspicious, as the laurel bitter, afterward
to be mentioned, may be procured from it, and as it is a poison to many
animals. Some men, indeed, use them with impunity, but I think it a dangerous
practice. They are, however, deprived of this acrimony by heat, and hence are
used in baking; but we should not from this infer, that the use of them, when
fresh, is allowable.

CACAO NUTS.
These contain the largest proportion of oil, and thence are hardly used
without preparation, by mixing the oily with the farinaceous part, and on the
accuracy of this mixture the quantity of their nourishment depends, as well as
its easiness of digestion. The chocolate made in Portugal and Spain is not near
so well prepared as the English, depending, perhaps, on the machine employed
here, viz. the double cylinder, which seems very well calculated for exact
triture. If perfectly prepared, no oil appears on the solution. London
chocolate gives up no oil like the foreign, and it also may, in some measure,
depend on the thickness of the preparation. The solution requires more care
than is commonly imagined. It is proper to break it down, and dissolve it
thoroughly in cold water, by milling with the chocolate stick. If heat be
applied, it should be done slowly; for if suddenly, the heat will not only
coagulate it, but separate the oil, and therefore much boiling after it is
dissolved is hurtful. Chocolate is commonly required by people of weak
stomachs, but often rejected for want of proper preparation. When properly
prepared it is easily dissolved, and an excellent food where a liquid nutrient
vegetable one is required, and is less flatulent than any of the farinacea.

OLIVES.
These might be referred to the head of Condiment, and they are even used only
picked in those countries where they are native, and their disagreeable bitter
is by this means corrected. I only mention them here, on account of the oil
they afford so copiously.

I formerly started a question about the use of oil, viz. Whether oil was
necessary for nourishment, or only for supplying the great quantity of oil in
the system? Though the latter opinion be granted, yet I imagine oils are also
directly nutritive, being copiously mixed and intimately blended with the other
parts of our aliment, and thus constituting a part of the proper nutritious
fluid. They are also necessary for assimulation; for the acescency of the
fructus acido dulces would be difficultly subdued without these. Hence the use
of oil and butter is almost as universal, and as necessary, as that of the
farinacea. They give an aliment which approaches most to that obtained from
animal food. They give a more dense elastic blood, and probably, too, a more
putrescent one than vegetables. Their viscidity also remains in some degree in
the blood vessels, on which account we shall mention them under the class of
medicines. Dr. Russel, in his Natural History of Aleppo, tells us, that in
certain seasons, when they use a great quantity of oil there, they are then
disposed to somewhat of fever, with remarkable infarction of the lungs, which
symptoms wear off on retrenching the use of oil. Considered as aliment, oil is
difficultly perspired, the meaning of which shall be afterward explained.
These are the properties in general of our oily nourishment, whether oil or
butter. Here a question arises, Whether the Northern or Southern countries are
supplied with the most agreeable substance of this kind? With regard to butter,
it has always a quantity of animal mucllage mixed with it, and hence is easier
miscible with water. But hence, although from the muscilage it receive
consistence and somewhat of miscibility with water, and hence more easily
digested, yet from this very mixture it is more rancescent, and does not keep
so long fresh as oil, and hence produces disorders in the primae viae. In the
Southern countries oil is procured little disposed to rancescency, and
therefore, where it can be used perfectly fresh, it is not so apt to produce
rancescent disorders as butter. But here it is not so equal advantage, and I
never saw any in this country but had some degree of rancidity, and therefore,
we ought not in any case, to prefer the imported oils to good fresh butter.
However, as fresh oil is certainly eligible, and as almonds, whose oil is
better than that of olives, afford it but in inconsiderable quantity, I think
we ought, as we have native seeds which will afford a pure oil in pretty large
quantity, to endeavor to procure it from them.

DRINK.
The general use of drink is to supply fluid, facilitate solution, in
consequence of that to expede the evacuation of the stomach, and promote the
progress of the aliment through the intestines; for, by the contraction of the
longitudinal fibers of the stomach, the pylorus is drawn up, and nothing but
fluid can pass, which, by its bulk, makes a hurried progress through the
intestines, and so determines a greater excretion by stool, as less than can be
absorbed by the lacteals. Hence a large quantity of common water has been found
purgative, and, caeteris paribus, that aliment which is accompanied with the
largest proportion of drink, makes the largest evacuation by stool. Here a
question has arisen, about where the feculent part of the aliment is first
remarkably collected? It is commonly thought to be in the great guts, but
undoubtedly it often begins in the lower part of the ileum, especially when the
drink is in small proportion, and when the progress of the aliment is slow; for
when the contents of the guts are very fluid, they are quickly pushed on, and
reach the great guts before they deposit any feculency. Another effect of drink
is, to facilitate the mixture of the lymph, refluent from every part of the
system, with the chyle. In the blood vessels, where all must be kept fluid, in
order to proper mixture, drink increases the fluidity, and gives tension, by
its bulk, without concomitant acrimony or too much elasticity, and so strength
and oscillatory motion; Hence drink contributes to sanguification, as sometimes
food gives too dense a nutriment to be acted upon by the solids; and hence also
we can see how drink promotes the secretions. These are the effects of drink in
general; but what I have said must be taken with some limitations, for the more
liquid the food, it is sooner evacuated, and less nourishment is extracted:
Hence drink is, in some degree, opposed to nourishment, and so, caeteris
paribus, those who use least drink are most nourished.

All the effects of drink abovementioned are produced by simple water, and it
may be said, that other liquors are fit for drink in proportion to the water
they contain. Water, when used as drink, is often impregnated with vegetable
and farinaceous substances, but, as drinks, these impregnations are of little
consequence; they add, indeed, a little nourishment, but this is not to be
regarded in a healthy state. Sometimes we impregnate water with the fructus
acido dulces, and then, indeed, it acquires other qualities of considerable use
in the animal economy. All drinks, however, may be reduced to two heads,
first, pure water, or where the additional substance gives no additional
virtue; secondly, into the fermentatae. Of the first we have already treated,
and the latter have not only the qualities of the first, but also qualities
peculiar to themselves.

Fermented liquors are more or less poignant to the taste, and better
calculated to quench thirst. Thirst may be owing to various causes; first, to
defect of fluid in the system, which occasions a scanty secretion in the mouth,
fauces, and stomach; the dryness of the mouth and fauces will also, in this
case, be increased, by their continual exposure to perpetual flux and reflux of
the evaporating air; secondly, thirst depends on a large proportion of solid
viscid food; thirdly, on an alkalescent aliment, especially if it has attained
any thing of the putrefactive taint; fourthly, on the heat of the system; but
this seems to operate in the same manner as the first cause, giving a sense of
dryness from its dissipation of the fluids. The fermented liquors are
peculiarly adapted for obviating all these causes, stimulating the mouth,
fauces, and stomach, to throw out the saliva and gastric liquor by their
poignancy; by their acescency they are fitted to destroy alkalescent acrimony,
to quench thirst from that cause; by their fluidity they dilute viscid food;
though here, indeed, they answer no better than common water. In two ways they
promote the evacuation by stool, and progress through the intestines; first, by
their fluidity and bulk; secondly, by their acescency, which, uniting with the
bile, forms the peculiar stimulus formerly mentioned. Carried into the blood
vessels, in so far as they retain any of the saline nature, they stimulate the
excretories and promote urine and sweat, correcting thus alkalescency not only
by mixture, but dissipation of the degenerated fluids.

Many Physicians, in treating of fermented liquors, have only mentioned these
qualities, rejecting their nutritious virtue, which certainly ought to be taken
in; though by expeding the evacuation by stool they make less of the nutritious
parts of the aliment to be taken up, and by stimulating the excretories make
these nutritious parts to be for shorter time in the system. All these, and
many more effects, arise from fermented liquors. Their acescency sometimes
promotes the disease of acescency, by increasing that of vegetables, acting as
a ferment, and so producing flatulency, purging, cholera, etc. so that, with
vegetable aliment, as little drink is necessary, the most innocent is pure
water; and it is only with animal food that fermented liquors are necessary. In
warmer climates fermentata would seem necessary to obviate alkalescency and
heat. But it should be considered, that though fermented liquors contain an
acid, yet they also contain alcohol, which, though it adds stimulus to the
stomach, yet is extremely hurtful in the warmer climates, and wherever
alkalescency prevails in the system. Nature, in these climates, has given men
an appetite for water impregnated with acid fruits, e. g. sherbet, but the use
of this needs caution, as in these countries they are apt to shun animal food,
using too much of the vegetable, and often thus causing dangerous
refrigerations, choleras, diarrhoeas, etc.

Of varieties of fermented liquors, I shall only mention here the chief heads
on which these varieties depend; first, they are owing to the quality of the
subject, as more or less viscid, upon its capacity also of undergoing an active
fermentation, although, perhaps, the more viscid be more nutritious. Hence the
difference between ales and wines, by the first meaning fermented liquors from
farinacea, by the second from the fruits of plants. It depends, secondly, on
the acerbity, acidity, nature, and maturation of the fruit. Thirdly, the
variety depends on the conduct of the fermentation. In general, fermentation is
progressive, being at first active and rapid, detaching the fixed air, or gas
sylvestre, at the same time acquiring more acid than before. These qualities of
flatulency and acidity remain for some time, but as the fermentation goes on,
the liquor becomes more perfect, no air is detached, and alcohol is produced,
so that fermented liquors differ according to the progress of the fermentation,
and have different effects on the system. When fermentation is stopped before
it comes to maturity, though naturally it proceeds in this way, yet by addition
of new ferment it may again be renewed with a turbid intestine motion.

CONDIMENTA.
Condimenta are such substances as are taken in with our food, to correct its
bad tendencies, or to give it more agreeableness to the stomach. They are of
different kinds.

1. AROMATA.
These are certain acrid substances that we take in to give more taste to our
aliment; for though I said our aliment should be bland, yet the system requires
it should be sapid. This we obtain from the aromata, which strictly are such as
are pungent with some degree of fragrancy, as cinnamon, cloves, nutmeg, mace,
pimento, etc. which are the produce of the warmer climates. Analogous to these,
in Europe are the umbelliferous seeds, anise, carraway, coriander, and the
sweet herbs. All these stimulate the stomach, and promote the peristaltic
motion, are antispasmodic, taking off the spasms arising from the flatulency of
our food, and antiseptic, moderating the putrid tendency of our aliment in the
intestines. From these qualities they are fitly conjoined with our vegetable
food, stimulating the stomach, promoting the mixture and afflux, in proper
quantity, of the animal fluids, and obviating the effects of flatulency. They
ought properly only to be used in those countries where they are produced,
because from the heat people there live chiefly on vegetable diet. They are
introduced here unfitly, and as a part of luxury, as any antiseptic virtue they
have would be overcome by their stimulus, etc.

There are certain acrid plants, the produce of our Northern climates, where
animal food is indulged most freely and safely, and where that being insipid,
is fitly conjoined with these acrid substances, as condiments, etc.

The cress kind, radish, i. e. horseradish, mustard, cresses themselves, and
indeed all the siliquosae. These give taste to insipid aliment, stimulate the
stomach, and increase the peristaltic motion; they have no considerable
antispasmodic virtue, are manifestly powerful diuretics and diaphoretics,
stimulating the excretories to throw out alkalescent matters. Hence they are
fitly conjoined with animal food. The garlic tribe have the same virtues,
stimulate the stomach, are diuretic and diaphoretic, and are used in our animal
food as condiments. These are the condiments taken from recent vegetables;
there are also others, salt, vinegar, and sugar.

SALT.
This is the most useful substance as a sapid, is most universally used, and
least apt to pall, but beyond that quality I am at a loss what to say, as its
effects are not yet well explained by Physicians. It is said to be antiseptic;
but this seems contradicted by observing, that it is often used with
vegetables, and that carnivorous animals are poisoned by it, where its
antiseptic quality would be most necessary; while the graminivorous seem fond
of it, and the husbandman often gives it to his cattle; and sure here it cannot
act by its antiseptic quality. Dr. Pringle says, that a small quantity of salt
is septic, and a large one antiseptic: But here I think the experiment was not
accurate, as the salt he employed was the common table salt, which is far from
being a pure common salt. How this impure salt acted in promoting putrefaction
may be easily conceived, viz. by the superabundant alkali, or earth of the salt
absorbing the acid, which would, in some measure, have prevented putrefaction.
Till once it be ascertained that pure common salt is, in small quantity, a
septic, we forbear accounting for this phenomenon. Common salt stimulates the
stomach, excites appetite, and promotes excretion of gastric liquor. The nature
of this body, as we take it with our a^^ment, is little understood. As it has
been found to be septic, we, apt to run into extremes, have concluded it
produces scurvy from that power. Although scurvy is apt to be produced from
salted means, yet experiments evince that the same effects will result from
animal foods alone, long continued, and salt alone has not yet been seen to
produce that disease.

VINEGAR.
This contains various substances, and among the rest a nutritious or a
saccharine one, which, however, in accounting for its effects, may be entirely
neglected, ^^d we only consider it here as a condiment. As such, it gives a
grateful taste to the aliment, stimulates the stomach, and excites appetite. As
an acetous ferment, it determines the acetous fermentation in foods, and hence
in degree is of use even with vegetables themselves.

It is enquired whether it is hurtful as an acid, and avoided by those who are
affected with recent acescent vegetables? In large proportions, like other
acids, it may have bad effects, and therefore in such quantity ought to be
avoided by these -- Will it produce spasms, flatulencies, etc. like recent
acescent vegetables? It may; for the acetous fermentation is never conducted
with such care as the vinous, and there is commonly in vinegar a saccharine
matter remaining, which has not yet undergone its first fermentation, which may
be excited in the stomach, and produce all its bad effects. Its antiseptic
virtue is proved by experiment, and therefore is properly used with animal
food. Its antiseptic property, however, is not very powerful.

Other acids are used as condiments with animal food, as juice of lemons,
which, as acerb, is therefore less liable to active fermentation* but as their
acerbity differs much in different lemons, the same quantity of vinegar is more
seldom found to have bad effects than of lemon juice, which, however, is more
universally preferred to the vinegar, which, besides its qualities formerly
mentioned, is often ropy, foul, and disagreeable. But in my opinion, if due
attention is given to the quality of the vinegar, it is a much safer condiment.

Glauber proposed the muriatic acid as a proper condiment, and has proved its
use in several alimentary purposes, and says, That it is incapable of
fermentation itself, and preventing acescency in vegetable as well as
putrescency in animal aliment. This, however, has not been tried, and as it is
a substance unconquerable by our assimilatory organs, it would seem rather to
be considered as a medicine, and never introduced as a condiment.

SUGAR.
This is one of the principal ingredients in vegetable aliment, and affords a
pure and copious nourishment; it is frequently employed as a condiment also,
but cannot be used for the same length of time, and in such quantity, as common
salt, as its taste soon palls on repetition. It may likewise be considered as
an antiseptic, and, as a vegetable substance, is capable of all the effects of
acescent vegetables. With vegetables it increases their quantity of nutriment,
but does not, I believe, correct their bad qualities, or hinder fermentation.
It is less actively fermentable than the acido dulces or olera, more so than
the dried juice of fruits, as figs, etc. it ought, therefore, to be used
sparingly with vegetables, and most with animal food: If not over expensive, it
might be used with the latter as an antiseptic, being more viscid, and less
liable to be decomposed by solution, than common salt.

Since sugar came to be commonly used, disputes have arisen about its
wholesomness. I have already laid the foundation of judgment on this subject;
and many faults, without justice, have been ascribed to it: It may indeed, by
its acescency, be troublesome in the primae viae, but no experiments prove its
bad consequences in the blood vessels. It has been said to spoil the teeth: Its
effects in spoiling the teeth may indeed, in some cases, be just, as where they
have a more than ordinary degree of sensibility; or it may perhaps, by what
adheres of it about them, turning acid, corrode them: But faults of this kind
are oftener imputed to it than it deserves, for raisins are more acescent, and
yet whole nations use them with impunity; and the mischiefs of what is called
in Scotland eating of sweeties, are wrongly imputed to sugar. When arts were in
a languishing state in Europe, men lived much on animal food, and then scurvy
was frequent; but now, when vegetables are more used, its is a rare disease,
appearing only in long voyages or long winters, where vegetable food is not to
be had. Putrid fevers, and epidemics, are also less frequent, as may appear
from Sydenham's and Pringle's Observations, which I impute to the more frequent
use of sugar. Having now spoke of sugar in general, we come to particular
sugars.

Coarsest sugar is most acescent, most actively and readily fermentable, which
is also increased by its ^^scidity; and other sugars, the finer and purer they
are, have less and less of these qualities. From the qualities abovementioned,
coarsest sugar is most laxative, and most productive of the disorders arising
from an active fermentation. Fine sugar never turns drier, nor ceases to be
nutricious, but is, however, always somewhat acescent. The lime employed never
enters into the composition of the sugar; and only renders it less acescent,
and less actively fermentable.

Having mentioned the Condimenta, we now come to aliments preserved by common
salt etc. But as animal food only is commonly preserved by common salt, I pass
it over till we come to these.

VEGETABLE ALIMENT preserved by SUGAR.
This preparation is so performed, that the saccharine matter i^ intimately and
every where introduced into the pores of the vegetable substance; so that
preparations of this kind may be considered as entirely sugar, participating of
none of the qualities of the vegetable, excepting those of the acrid kind, as
ginger. The same may be said of

VINEGAR PRESERVES,
As vinegar is applied only to insipid substances, or which, by boiling or
soaking with it, become so; and so preparations of this kind may be considered
as so many sponges containing vinegar, and may indeed be employed to increase
the flavor of food, and, as antiseptics, will go as far as vinegar itself
only. With regard to the small quantity of aromata joined to these, their
effects may be known from what we have said before.

ANIMAL FOOD.
We formerly distinguished animal from vegetable food, by saying, that it
required no assimilation, but only solution and mixture. But this is not so
clear as has been commonly imagined. What gives rise to this doubt is, that
carnivorous animals live on that without any vegetable mixture, or even salt,
by which they are even poisoned, living long without putrid accumulations,
which, though for a short time might produce little inconvenience, yet, in the
course of life, would certainly produce bad consequences. This accumulation is
obviated by particulars in their economy, as short intestines; whereas in the
phytovorous, long intestines are given to give rise to putrescency. Again, the
carnivorous animals are exposed to putridity, from their irregularity, taking
in water in small quantity, etc. They are said to be of quick excretions; but
this is contradicted from their being capable to bear long abstinence, being
glutted today with a full meal, and starved perhaps for several weeks after,
which would be in other animals as the surest means of pushing putrefaction to
the greatest degree. From all this we must suspect something in carnivorous
animals to prevent putrefaction.

Here let me offer a conjecture, viz. that the food in the stomach of
carnivorous animals suffers a decomposition in some degree, and becomes (...).
This appears probable, from the change which decocted or ^lixated animal
substances undergo, these broths becoming in time acescent: Besides, it has
been said, that an acid is always found in the stomach of these animals: If it
be really so, it can proceed from no other source but decomposition. However,
in accounting for the effects of animal food on the human body, we may neglect
this, and consider the diseases thence arising to proceed from putridity; for
no man, as has been proved from experiment, can bear animal food alone, without
nausea, for even a few days. Putrescency takes place in the stomach and
intestines, in the first producing nausea and thirst, which would oftener occur
unless obviated by the acid of vegetables conjoined with it; in the second,
violent purging, cholera, and dysentery, from putrid exhalations.

Next, as to the solution of animal food. This, though seemingly of greater
cohesion, is of more easy solubility than vegetables. However, I do not mean by
this a quicker but a more entire solubility; for very firm animal substances
are extracted and dissolved in the human body, and the firmest, as bones, in
stomachs similar to the human, though, at the same time, I am convinced, that
vegetables, which are not dissolved at all, have yet their juices more quickly
extracted than animal food, and pass sooner off. For easiness of solubility
does not depend so much on the firmness of texture, as on the viscidity of the
juice. Thus the more young and succulent animal food is less soluble than the
old, veal than beef, lamb than mutton, etc. And Dr. Robinson relates, that a
Gentleman who used to take an evening puke, would throw up chicken unchanged,
while of beef there were no remains. Animal food excites the fever mentioned as
consequent on digestion (...) greater degree than vegetable, giving a greater
stimulus to the stomach, and so to the whole system; and the difference of
animal foods depends on the putrescency and viscidity taken together. Thus
young food, being more viscid than old, though less putrescent, is yet less
soluble. Animal food differs also as to its perspirability, or passing of the
last concoction. Sanctorius found mutton the most perspirable, and Keil and he
call oysters least so, so animal foods differ in their perspirability,
according as in their nature they approach nearer or recede farther from these.

COMPARISON of ANIMAL and VEGETABLE FOOD.
First, With regard to their difference in the stomach. What we have said of
decomposition, or acescency of animal food, never comes to a morbid degree, but
the disease is always on the side of putrescency, which degree, however seldom
occurs, except when animal food has been repeated in too great proportion, or
too frequently, either from necessity, or too delicate luxury. The acescency,
then, of vegetable aliment is more frequent, and ought more to be attended to
than the alkalescency of animal, which last, even in weak stomachs, is seldom
felt; while acescency affects much both the stomach and system.

(2.) With regard to their difference of solution. Heaviness, as it is called,
is seldom felt from vegetables, except from tough farinaceous paste, or the
most viscid substances; while the heaviness of animal food is more frequently
noticed, especially when in any great quantity. Difficulty of solution does not
depend so much on firmness of texture, (as a man, from fish of all kinds, is
more oppressed than from firmer substances) but on viscidity, and hence is more
frequent in animal food, and especially in the younger animals; all which makes
it evident, that both slow solution, and the passage of the food from the
stomach, is more owing to viscidity than firmness.

(3.) With regard to mixture. There is no instance of difficult mixture in
vegetables, except in vegetable oils, while animal foods, from both viscidity
and oiliness, especially the fatter meats, are refractory in this respect. I do
not know whether the difference of animal and vegetable foods might not be
referred to this head, of difficult mixture, for though the vegetable food may
continue long in the stomach, it gives little stimulus to the system. Now the
system is (...) in proportion to the extent of this stimulus, which is
incomparably greater from the animal viscid oily food, than from the vegetable,
sinner, and more aqueous. However, let me observe here, that there are certain
applications to the stomach, which have a tendency to bring on the cold fit of
fever, independent of stimulus, merely by their refrigeration; and this often
arises from vegetables; as we see, in those hot countries where intermittents
prevail, they are oftener induced from a surfeit of vegetable food than animal.
A proof of this is, that when one is recovering of an intermittent, there is
nothing more apt to cause a relapse than cold food, especially if taken on
those days when the fit should return, and particularly acescent, fermentable
vegetables, as sallad, melons, cucumbers, fructus, acido dulces, etc. which are
in my opinion, those foods which are the most frequent occasional cause of
epidemics; therefore, when an intermittent is to be avoided, we shun vegetable
diet, and give animal foods, although their stimulus be greater; and this,
among others, is a proof that fever depends very much on the cold fit. Upon the
whole, in attending to these four heads, viz. Assimilation, Solution, Mixture,
and Stimulus, we shall be able to judge of the choice of food with regard to
the stomach.

Next, as to the intestines. When the putrescency of animal food has gone too
far, it produces, as I have said, an active stimulus, causing diarrhoea,
disentery, etc. But these effects are but rare; whereas from vegetable food and
its acid, which, united with the bile, proves a pretty strong stimulus, they
more frequently occur, but luckily, however, are of less consequence, if the
refrigeration is not very great. In the autumnal season, when there is a
tendency to dysentery, if it is observed that eating of fruits bring it on, it
is rather to be ascribed to their cooling than stimulating the intestines.

As to the effects of animal and vegetable food on stool. Wherever neither
putrefaction, nor acidity, have gone a great length, I allege that animal food
keeps the belly more regular, and vegetable food gives a greater proportion of
faeculent matter, and when exsuccated by the stomach and intestines, is more
apt to stagnate, and produce slow belly and costiveness than animal stimulating
food, which, before it comes to the great guts, where stoppage is made, has
attained a putrefactive tendency, and gives a proper stimulus, and thus those
who are costive, from vegetable food, when they have recourse to animal, are in
this respect better.

4. Effects of animal and vegetable foods in the blood vessels. They both give
a blood of the same kind, but of different quality. Animal food gives it in
greater quantity, being wholly, as the expression is, convertible in succum et
sanguinem, and of easy digestion; whereas the vegetable is more watery, and
contains a portion of unconquerable saline matter, which causes it to be thrown
cut of the body by some excretion. Animal food affords a more dense stimulating
elastic blood than vegetable, stretching and causing a greater resistance to
the solids, and again exciting their stronger action. It has been supposed,
that acescency of vegetable food is carried into the blood vessels, and there
exerts its effects; but the tendency of animal fluids is so strong to
alkalescency, that I cannot be persuaded an acid acrimony every existed in
animal blood. Animal food alone will soon produce an alkalescent acrimony, and
if a person who lives entirely on vegetables, were to take no food for a few
days, his acrimony would be alkalescent.

We are next to take notice of the quantity of nutriment these different foods
afford. Nutriment is of two kinds; the first repairs the waste of the solid
fibers, the other supplies certain fluids: The chief of these fluids is oil.
Now, as animal food is easier converted, and also longer retained in the
system, and as it contains a greater proportion of oil, it will afford both
kinds of nutriment more copiously than vegetables. A proof that corpulency is
produced most by animal food is, that in England there are more fat people than
in any country of twice the bulk in the world.

5. Lastly, As to the different degrees of perspirability of these foods. This
is not yet properly determined. Sanctorius constantly speaks of mutton as the
(...) perspirable of all food, and of vegetables as checking perspiration. This
is a consequence of the different stimulus those foods give to the stomach, so
that persons who live on vegetables have not their perspiration so suddenly
excited. In time of digestion, perspiration is stopped from whatever food, much
more so from cooling vegetables. Another reason why vegetables are less
perspirable, is, because their aqueo-saline juices determine them to go off by
urine, while the more perfectly mixed animal food is more equally diffused over
the system, and so goes off by perspiration. Hence Sanctorius's accounts may be
understood; for vegetable aliment is not longer retained in the body, but
mostly takes the course of the kidneys. Both are equally perspirable in this
respect, viz. that a person living on either, returning once a day to his usual
weight; and if we consider the little nourishment of vegetables, and the great
tendency of animal food to corpulency, we must allow that vegetable is more
quickly perspired than animal food.

Here I cannot avoid the question so often handled, Whether man was designed
for animal or vegetable food? This question has been managed unfairly; for in
all other animals they take it up as a fact, by observing what the animal
chooses; but they tell us man's reason leads him astray. For my part, I conceive
little in this argument; for if in th^se countries where no prejudice of custom
prevails, I see people live promiscuously on both, I conclude Nature has
designed both for them; and, indeed, when we examine the structure of man's
body, his, teeth, stomach and intestines, we find Nature has designed him for a
mixed aliment. He has dentes incisivi and canini like the carnivorous, and a
double row of grinders like the graminivorous. His stomach approaches to that
of the carnivorous animals, and his intestines in a middle between both, not so
long as the phytovorous, but not so short as the carnivorous animals. But I
would trust more to instinct producing practice, abstracted from artificial
opinions; and in these cases we find the use of animals and vegetables
promiscuously. The Pythagoreans, and their modern imitators, the Brachmans,
live on vegetables, merely from prejudice of opinion; and we need not heed
those mythologists, who tells us that man at first lived on vegetables, as
their accounts are not founded on fact. They are opposed by this, that there
are many nations still in a rude state, and whom luxury has not yet perverted,
who are so far from living on vegetable food, that, from climate, they are
obliged to live pretty entirely on animals; and the state of the Hunter and
Shepherd is more simple, and more ancient, than that of the Farmer or Gardener.

With regard to the effects of these foods on men, I would allege, there are
no persons who live entirely on vegetables; and the Pythagoreans themselves eat
milk; and those who do so mostly, as the Pythagoreans abovementioned, are
weakly, sickly, and meagre, laboring under a constant diarrhaea, and several
other diseases. None of the hardy robust laborious live on these, but chiefly
such as gain a livelihood by the exertion of their mental faculties, as in the
East Indies, factors and brokers; and this method of life is now confined to
the hot climates, where vegetable diet, without inconvenience; may be carried
to great excess. Though it be granted, therefore, that man is intended to live
on these different foods promiscuously, yet the vegetable should be in very
great proportion. Thus the Laplanders are said to live entirely on animal food;
but this is contradicted by the best accounts; for Linnaeus says, that besides
milk, which they take sour, to obviate the bad effects of animal food, they use
also calla, menyanthes, and many other plants copiously. So there is no
instance of any nation living entirely either on vegetable or animal food,
though there are indeed some who live particularly on one or other in the
greatest proportion. In the cold countries, e. g. the inhabitants live chiefly
on animal food, on account of the rigor of the season, their smaller
perspiration, and little tendency to putrefaction.

Of more importance is the following than the former question, viz. In what
proportion animal and vegetable ought to be mixed? First, I shall observe that
when I speak of animal or vegetable foods here, I mean those foods given in
great proportion. To go on, then; animal food gives most strength to the
system. It is a known aphorism of Sanctorius, that pondis addit robur, which
may be explained from ^he impletion of the blood vessels, and giving a proper
degree of tension for the performance of strong oscillations. Now animal food
not only goes a greater way in supplying fluid, but also gives the fluid more
dense and elastic. The art of giving the utmost strength to the system is best
understood by those who breed fighting cocks. These people raise the cocks to a
certain weight, which must bear a certain proportion to the other parts of the
system, and which, at the same time, is so nicely proportioned, as that on
losing a few ounces of it, their strength is very considerably impaired. Dr.
Robinson, of Dublin, has observed, that the force and weight of the system
ought to be determined by the largeness of the heart, and its proportion to the
system; for a large heart will give large blood vessels, while, at the same
time, the viscera are less, particularly the liver, which last being increased
in size, a greater quantity of fluid is determined into the cellular texture,
and less into the sanguineous system. Hence we see how animal food gives
strength, by filling the sanguiferous vessels. What pains we now bestow on
cocks, the ancients did on the Athletae, by proper nourishment bringing them to
a great degree of strength and agility. It is said that those men were at first
fed on figs, a proof of which we have said formerly of their nutritious
quality; however, in this respect they were soon found to fall far short of
animal food; and thus we see, that men, in some measure, will work in
proportion to the quality of their food. The English labor more than the
Scots, and wherever men are exposed to hard labor, their food should be
animal, Animal food, although it gives strength, yet loads the body; and
Hippocrates long ago observed, that the athletic habit, by a small increase,
was exposed to the greatest hazards. Hence it is only proper for bodily
labors, and entirely improper for mental exercises; for whoever would keep his
mind acute and penetrating, will exceed rather on the side of vegetable food.
Even the body is oppressed with animal food; a full meal always produces
dullness, laziness, and yawning; and hence the feeding of gamesters, whose mind
must be ready to take advantages, is always performed by avoiding a large
quantity of animal food. Farther, with regard to the strength of the body,
animal food in the first stage of life is hardly necessary to give strength; in
manhood, when we are exposed to active scenes, it is more allowable; and even
in the decline of life, some proportion of it is necessary to keep the body in
vigor. There are some diseases, which come on at the decay of life, at least
aggravated by it; among these I mean the Gout. This, when it is in the system,
and does not appear with inflammation in the extremities, has pernicious
effects there, attacking the (...), stomach, head, etc. Now to determine this
to the extremities, a large proportion of animal food is necessary, especially
as the person is commonly incapable of much exercise.

Animal food, although it gives strength, is yet of many hazards to the system,
as it produces plethora and all its consequences. As a stimulus to the stomach
and to the whole system, it excites fever, urges the circulation, and promotes
perspiration. The system, however, by the repetition of these stimuli, is soon
worn out; and a man who has early used the athletic diet, is either early
carried off by inflammatory diseases, or, if he takes exercise sufficient to
render that diet salutary, such an accumulation is made of putrescent fluids,
as in his after life lays a foundation of the most inveterate chronic
distempers. Therefore it is to be questioned, whether we should desire this
high degree of bodily strength, with all the inconveniences and dangers. Plain
it is, that those who are chiefly employed in mental researches, and not
exposed to too much bodily labor, should avoid an excess of animal food. There
is a disease which seems to require animal food, viz. the hysteric or
hypochondriac, which to me seems to be very much akin to the Gout, affecting
the alimentary canal. All people affected with this disease are much disposed
to acescency, and I have seen it go so far, that no other vegetable but bread
could be taken in, without occasioning the worst consequences. Here then we are
obliged to prescribe an animal diet, even to those of very weak organs, for it
generally obviates the symptoms. However, I have known several instances of
scurvy in excess produced by a long continued use of this diet, which it is
always unlucky to be obliged to prescribe; and when it is absolutely necessary
to prescribe, it should be joined with as much of the vegetable as possible,
and when a cure is performed, we should gradually recur to that again. If this
luxurious age could be persuaded, this disease might be removed with much less
danger, by exercise, fresh air, and avoiding warm chambers, venery, and late
hours.

Next, let us consider the vegetable diet. The chief inconveniency of this is
difficulty of assimilation, which, however, in the vigorous and exercised, will
not be liable to occur. In warm climates the assimilation of vegetable aliment
is more easy, so that there it may be more used, and when joined to exercise
gives a pretty tolerable degree of strength and vigor; and though the general
rule be in favor of animal diet, for giving strength, yet there are many
instances of their being remarkably produced from vegetable. Vegetable diet has
this advantage, that it whets the appetite, and that we can hardly suffer from
a full meal of it. Besides the disorders it is liable to produce in the primae
viae, and its falling short to give strength, I do not know any bad
consequences it can produce in the blood vessels, for where there is no
instance where its peculiar acrimony was ever carried there, and it is
certainly less putrifiable than animal food; nor without the utmost indolence,
and a sharp appetite, does it give generally plethora, or any of its
consequences; so that we cannot here but conclude, that a large proportion of
vegetable food is useful for the generality of mankind.

There is no error in this country more dangerous, or more common, than the
neglect of bread; for it is the safest of vegetable aliment, and the best
corrector of animal food; and, by a large proportion of this alone, have I
obviated its bad consequences, when used in a hypochondriac state. The French
apparently have as much animal food on their tables as the Britons, and yet, by
a greater use of bread, and the dried acid fruits, its bad effects are
prevented; and therefore bread should be particularly used by the English, as
they are so voracious of animal food. Vegetable food is not only necessary to
secure health, but long life; and, as we have said, in infancy and youth we
should be confined to it mostly; in manhood, and decay of life, use animal;
and, near the end, vegetable again.

There is another question much agitated, viz. What are the effects of variety
in food? Is it necessary and allowable, or universally hurtful? Variety of a
certain kind seems to me necessary, as vegetable and animal foods have their
mutual advantages, tending to correct each other. Another variety, which is
very proper, is that of liquid and solid food, which should be so managed as to
temper each other; and I formerly observed, that liquid food, especially of the
vegetable kind, is too ready to pass off before it is properly assimilated,
while solid food makes a long stay. But this does not properly belong to the
question, whether variety of the same kind is necessary or proper, as in animal
foods, beef, fish, fowl, etc. I indeed have never perceived any inconvenience
arising from this mixture, or difficulty of assimilation, provided a moderate
quantity be taken; when any inconvenience does arise, it probably proceeds from
this, that one of the particular substances in the mixture, when taken by
itself would produce the same effect; and, indeed, it appears to me, that this
effect is not heightened by the mixture, but probably obviated by it. There are
few exceptions to this, if any, e. g. taking a large proportion of acescent
substances with milk. The coldness, etc. acidity, flatulency, etc. may appear,
and it is possible that the coagulum, from the acescency of the vegetables,
being somewhat stronger induced, may give occasion to too long retention in the
stomach, and to acidity in too great degree. Again, the mixture of fish and
milk often occasions inconveniences. The theory of this is difficult, though,
from universal consent, it must certainly be just. Can we suppose that fish
gives occasion to such a coagulum as rennet? If it does so, it may produce the
forementioned bad effects. Besides, fish approach somewhat to vegetables, in
giving little stimulus, and are accused of the same bad effects as these, viz.
bringing on the cold fit of fever.

Thus much may be said for variety: But it also has its disadvantages,
provoking to gluttony; this, and the art of cookery, making men take in more
than they properly can digest; and hence, perhaps very justly, Physicians have
universally almost preferred simplicity of diet; for, in spite of rules, man's
eating will only be measured by his appetite, and satiety is sooner produced by
one than by many substances. But this is so far from being an argument against
variety, that it is one for it, as the only way of avoiding a full meal of
animal food, and its bad effects, is by presenting a quantity of vegetables.
Another mean of preventing the bad effects of animal food, is to take a large
proportion of liquid; and it is on that account the bad effects of animal food
are not so much felt here, on account of our drinking much with it, and using
broths, which are at once excellent correctors of animal food, and preventors
of gluttony.

Having now finished what we had to say on animal food in general, and
discussed several comparisons and questions which arose on that subject, I now
come to the particular substances mentioned in the Catalogue.

MILK.
Of the foods taken from animals, I choose to begin with milk, as it is a
connecting and intermediate substance between animals and vegetables. I do not
find it proper to enter just now into a minute chemical investigation of this
subject, especially as you will soon have an opportunity of seeing that subject
more fully treated than I can do here The Author here refers to a very
ingenious Thesis, published about that time* (...) the subject of Milk. -- De
Lacte.
. Milk seems immediately to be secreted from the chyle, both being a white
liquor of the same consistence: It is most copiously secreted after meals, and
of acescent nature. In most animals who live on vegetables, the milk is
acescent, and it is uncertain, though at the same time no observation proves
the contrary, whether it is not so likewise in carnivorous animals. If it
really be found of this nature it will solve the question about the
decomposition and acescency of the food of these last mentioned animals in the
primae viae. But whatever be in this, it is certain, that the milk of all
animals, who live on vegetables, is acescent. Milk being derived from the
chyle, we thence conclude its vegetable nature, for in those who live on both
promiscuously, more milk is got, and more quickly, from the vegetable than the
animal food. Milk, however, is not purely vegetable, though we have a vegetable
liquor that resembles its taste, consistence, color, acescency, and the
separability of the oily part, I mean an emulsion of the nuces oleosae and
farinaceous substances. But these want the coagulable part of milk, which seems
to be of animal nature, approaching to that of the coagulable lymph of the
blood. Milk, then, seems to be of an intermediate nature, between chyle taken
up from the intestines, and their albumen, or fully elaborated animal fluid.

Its contents are of three kinds; first, an oily part, which, whatever may be
said concerning the origin of other oils in the body, is certainly immediately
derived from the oil of the vegetables taken in, as with these it agrees very
exactly in its nature, and would entirely, if we could separate it fully from
the coagulable part. Another mark of their agreement is the separability, which
proves that the mixture has been lately attempted, but not fully performed.
2dly, Besides this oily, I have told you there is a proper coagulable part;
and, 3dly, much water accompanies both, in which there is dissolved a saline
saccharine substance. These three can be got separate in cheese, butter, and
whey, but never perfectly so, a part of each being always blended with every
other part.

Nothing is more common, from what has been said of its intermediate nature,
than to suppose that it requires no assimilation, and hence has been deduced
the reason of its exhibition in the most weakly state of the human body. But
wherever we can examine milk we always find that it coagulates, suffers a
decomposition, and becomes acescent. Again, infants, who feed entirely on milk,
are always troubled with eructations, which every body observes are not of the
same quality with the food taken, and therefore I would allege, that, like all
other food, milk turns naturally acescent in the stomach, and only appears in
the chyle and blood, in consequence of a new recomposition. It approaches then
to the nature of vegetable aliment, but is not capable of its noxious vinous
fermentation, and therefore has an advantage over it; neither from this
quality, like animal food, is it heating in the stomach, and productive of
fever, though at the same time, from its quantity of coagulable matter, it is
more nourishing than vegetables.

These are the general qualities of milk; now let us consider these as
applicable to food. Milk is the food most universally suited to all ages and
states of the body, but it seems chiefly designed by Nature as the food of
infants. When animals are in the foetus state, their solids are a perfect
jelly, incapable of an assimilatory power. In such state Nature has perfectly
assimilated food, as the albumen ovi in the oviparous, and in the viviparous
animals certainly somewhat of the same kind, as it was necessary the vessels
should be filled with such a fluid as would make way for an after assimilation.
When the infant has attained a considerable degree of firmness, as when it is
separated from the mother, yet such a degree of weakness still remains, as
makes somewhat of the same indication necessary. It behooves the infant to have
an alkalescent food ready prepared, and at the same time its noxious tendency
to be avoided. Milk then is given, which is alkalescent, and, at the same time,
has a sufficient quantity of acidity to correct that alkalescency. As the body
advances in growth, and the alkalescent tendency is greater, the animal, to
obviate that tendency, is led to take vegetable food, as more suited to its
strength of assimilation.

I observed, that milk was almost suited to all temperaments, and it is even so
to stomachs disposed to acescency, more than those substances which have
undergone the vinous fermentation; nay, it even checks vinous fermentation,
curing the heart-burn, and precipitating the lees, when, by renewal of
fermentation, the wine happens to be fouled. It therefore very properly
accompanies a great deal of vegetable aliment, although sometimes its acescency
is troublesome, either from a large proportion taken in, or from the degree of
it; for according to certain unaccountable circumstances, different acids are
formed in the stomach, in a healthy body a mild one; in the hypochondriac
disease, e. g. one sometimes as corrosive as the fossil acids. When the acidity
of milk is carried to a great degree, it may prove remarkably refrigerant, and
occasion cold crudities, and the recurrence of intermittent fevers. To take the
common notion of its passing, unchanged, into the blood, it can suffer no
solution. But if, with me, you admit its coagulum in the stomach, then it may
be reckoned among soluble or insoluble foods, according as that coagulum is
more or less tenacious. Formerly rennet, which is employed to coagulate milk,
was thought an acid, but, from late observations, it appears that, if it be an
acid, it is very different from other acids, and that its coagulum is stronger
than that produced by acids. It has been imagined that a rennet is to be found
in the stomachs of all animals, which causes coagulation of milk; but to me the
coagulation of milk seems to be owing to a weak acid in the stomach, the
relicts of our vegetable food inducing, in healthy persons, a weak and soluble
coagulum; but in different stomachs this may be very different, in these
becoming heavy and less soluble food, and sometimes even evacuated in a
coagulated undissolved state, both by stomach and stool.

As milk is acescent, it may be rendered sometimes purgative by mixing with the
bile; and I know some examples of this. More commonly, however, it is reckoned
among those foods which occasion costiveness.

Hoffman, in his Experiments on Milk, found, that all kinds of it contained
much water, and when this was dissipated, found the residuum very different in
their solubility. But we must not thence conclude that the same insolubility
takes place in the stomach, for extracts made from vegetables with water are
often very insoluble substances, and hardly diffusible through water itself;
therefore in Hoffman's extracts, if I may so call them, of milk, somewhat of
the same kind might have appeared, and these substances, which in their natural
state were not so, might appear very insoluble. However, we may allow that milk
is always somehow insoluble in the intestines, as it is of a drying nature,
and, as cheese, etc. is very costive. And this effect, I think, shows that milk
is always coagulated in the stomach; for if it remained fluid no faeces would
be produced, whereas sometimes very hard ones are observed. In the blood
vessels, from its animal nature, it may be considered as nutritious; but when
we consider its vegetable contents, and acescency in the primae viae, we find
that, it does not like animal food, excite that degree of fever in the time of
digestion, and that from its acescency it will resist putrefaction. Hence is
the foundation of its use in hectic fevers, which, whatever be their cause,
appear only to be exacerbations of natural feverish paroxysms, which occur
twice every day, commonly after meals, and at night. To obviate these,
therefore, we give such an aliment as produces the least exacerbation of these
fevers; such is milk, on account of its acescent vegetable nature.

There appears also somewhat peculiar in milk, which requires only a small
exertion of the animal powers in order to its assimilation; and besides, in
hectic complaints there is wanted an oily, bland food, approaching to the
animal nature, so that on all these accounts, milk is a diet peculiarly adapted
to them, and, in general, to most convalescents, and to those of inflammatory
temperaments. There is a certain disease whose proper salutary form is that of
inflammation, I mean the Gout. There is no method of curing, I had rather say
preventing this, but by avoiding this inflammatory tendency by a proper
regulation of diet. The inflammatory form, which I said was the salutary one,
is also attended with a weakness of the nerves, so that in our prevention we
should not weaken the system too much, as would be done by vegetables, and
therefore milk may be employed with advantage. However, it may be a question
how far, and in what cases, we ought even to obviate the gout, which is often a
constitutional disease, and has taken deep root in the system, and if prevented
in its native inflammatory form, as it may often be by weakening too much, and
so will appear in other more pernicious ones. But there can be no objection
against attempting this by milk. However, that attempt ought not be made but
very early in life, and then, if this diet be used with proper exercise,
temperance, and avoiding of venery, there may be expectations of success; for
in the decline of life, after one has been used to high living, this low diet
is often attended with pernicious consequences. So far of milk in general. We
shall now speak of the particular kinds mentioned in the Catalogue, and which
are in common use. I have set them down in the proportion of their solid
contents.

The three first agree very much in their qualities, being very dilute, having
little solid contents, and, when envaporated to dryness, having these very
soluble, containing much saccharine matter, of a very ready acescency, and when
coagulated, their coagulum being tender and easily broke down. From this view
you see they have less oil, and less coagulable matter than the rest.

The three last agree, in opposite qualities, to the three mentioned; but here
there is somewhat more of gradation. Cows milk comes nearest to the former
milks: Goats milk is less fluid, less sweet, less flatulent, has the largest
proportion of insoluble part after coagulation, and indeed the largest
proportion of coagulable part; its oily and coagulable part are not
spontaneously separable, never throwing out a cream, or allowing butter to be
readily extracted from it. Hence the virtues of these milks are obvious, being
more nourishing, though, at the same time, less easily soluble in weak
stomachs, than the three first, less acescent than these, and so more rarely
laxative, and peculiarly fitted for the diet of convalescents without fever.
The three first, again, are less nourishing, more soluble, more laxative as
more acescent, and adapted to the convalescents with fever.

These qualities, in particular milks, are considerably diversified by
different circumstances. First, Different animals, living on the same diet,
give a considerably different milk; for there seems to be something in the
constitution, abstracting from the aliment, which constitutes a considerable
diversity of milk, not only in the same species of animals, but also in the
same animal, at different ages, and at different distances after delivery:
This, you will easily perceive, applies to the choice of nurses. Secondly, Milk
follows the nature of the aliment more than any other juice in the human body,
being more or less fluid and dilute, more or less solid and nourishing, in
proportion as these qualities are more or less in the aliment. (a) The nature
of the aliment differs according to its time of growth, e. g. old grass being
always found more nourishing than young. (b) Aliment, too, is always varied
according to the season, as that is warm or dry, moist or cloudy.

The milk of each particular kind of animal is fitter for particular purposes,
when fed on proper food. Thus the cow delights in the succulent herbage of the
vale: If the sheep be fed there he certainly rots, but on the higher and more
dry side of the mountain he feeds pleasantly and healthy; while the goat never
stops near the bottom, but ascends to the craggy summit: And certainly the
milks of these animals are always best in their proper soil, and that of goats
is best on a mountainous country. From a dissertation of Linnaeus, we have many
observations concerning the diversity of plants on which each animal chooses to
feed. All the Swedish plants, which could be collected together, were presented
alternately to domestic animals, and then it appeared that the goat lived on
the greatest variety, and even on many which were poisonous to the rest; that
the cow chose the first succulent shoots of the plant, and neglected the
fructification, which last was preferred by the goat. Hence may be deduced
rules concerning the pasturage of different animals; e. g. Farmers find that,
in a pasture which was only fit to feed a certain number of sheep, an equal
number of goats may be introduced, while the sheep are no less nourished than
before.

RULES for the USE of MILK.
It is not easy to assign the difference between milk fresh drawn and that
detained in the open air for some time, but certainly there is some material
one, otherwise nature universally would not have directed infants to sucking;
and indeed it seems, better than the other, fitted for digestion and
nourishment. Physicians have supposed that this depended on the evaporation of
some spt. rector. but indeed I cannot conceive any such, except common water
here; and besides, these volatile parts can hardly be nutritious. A more
plausible account seems deducible from mixture: Milk exposed for some time to
the air, suffers more or less of spontaneous separation, a circumstance hurtful
to digestion, none of the parts being, by themselves, so easily assimilated as
when they are all taken together. Hence, then, milk new drawn is more
intimately blended, and therefore then is most proper to the weakly and infants.

Another difference in the use of milk exposed for some time to the air, is
taking it boiled or unboiled. Physicians have generally recommended the former,
but the reason is not easily assigned. Perhaps the reason is this, Milk kept
for some time exposed to the air has gone so far to a spontaneous separation;
whereas the heat thoroughly blends the whole, and hence its resolution is not
so easy in the stomach; and thus boiled milk is more costive than raw, and
gives more faeces. Again, when milk is boiled, a considerable quantity of air
is detached, as appears from the froth on the surface, and air is the chief
instrument of fermentation in bodies, so that, after this process, it is not
liable to acescency; for these reasons it is proper for the robust and vigorous.

Another difference of milk is, according as it is fluid or coagulated. The
coagulated is of two kinds, as induced by rennent, or the natural acescency of
the milk. The former preparation makes the firmer and less easily soluble
coagulum, though, when taken with the whey unseparated, it is less difficult of
solution, though more so than any other coagulum in the same case. Many nations
use the latter form, which is easier soluble, but very much acescent, and
therefore the former, in point of solution, should be confined to the vigorous;
the latter, in point of acescency, to those who live on alkalescent food; and
in the last case the Laplanders use it as their chief acescent condiment. From
the same considerations it is more cooling, and in its other effects like all
other acescent vegetables.

We now come to the examination of the parts into which milk separates; and
first, with regard to the

COAGULABLE PART.
This we use at all different ages, from fresh curd to old cheese. The whole of
this is chiefly animal; hence it is the most nutritive part, and much the most
insoluble, and hence gives most faeces, and therefore the common notion of
cheese's costiveness is just. So far of cheese in general. It differs in
proportion to the quantity of oily parts natural in or added to the coagulable
part. The more rich oily parts there are in cheese, the more it is nutritive
and soluble, lean cheese being among the most insoluble aliments. Cheese is
liable to rancidity and putrefaction, and then we must consider it as having
all the effects of animal food the farther advanced to putrefaction; at this
time it ceases to be nutritive, and is only to be considered as a fit condiment
for vegetable food. In general, cheese, as an aliment, is only fit for the
laborious and robust.

OILY PART.
We use this, in consequence of its immediate spontaneous separation, in the
state of cream. This is liable to acidity and rancidity, on both which accounts
it is of difficult mixture and digestion in the stomach, and I do not know but
all the bad effects of milk may be imputed to cream, the quarter part of which
is not pure oil, and the rest coagulable and saline parts. In the form of
butter the oil is much more pure, and then may be used with advantage in diet:
I have mentioned it as a strong nutriment, fit to accompany our vegetable diet,
especially to the leaner farinacea, in order to give them, in some measure, the
qualities of the rich nuces oleos^e. Butter is more rancescent than olive oil,
but as that cannot be had here, either pure or fresh, we use our own butter
with greater propriety.

WATERY SALINO-SACCHARINE PART.
This will be different, according as the milk has been coagulated by rennet,
or its own acescency. By rennet, the coagulable part is more purely separated,
and a proportion of oil goes along with the whey; but when the milk is
coagulated by its own souring, the watery part is almost purely acid, and
seldom used. The whey contains much saccharine part, and so is more acescent
than entire milk, and has even been said to be capable of vinous fermentation:
Certainly it approaches nearer to it than milk itself, and hence is more
capable of a noxious acescency, and hence is more purgative and flatulent than
milk. Of all ingredients in milk, there is a great proportion which goes along
with the whey, and therefore it will be a nutritious substance, though at first
sight, as that was supposed to be separated, it might seem otherwise. Different
milks yield wheys of different qualities; cows milk allows less of its oil to
be separated with the whey; from that of sheep and goats, there is more. In
some measure the whey follows the nature of the milk; goats whey is more
nutritious, and may be substituted for women's, asses, and mares, in hectic
cases, etc. Goats whey is a medicine of great use in many cases, and perhaps
its advantages are improved by the necessary reparation to mountainous
countries to obtain it, not only because it is there more perfect, but also
because of the change of the smoaky city air into light and salubrious. By
taking these substances in the form of whey, there is introduced into the habit
a bland, easily assimilated nourishment, passing off easily by the secretions,
and soon changing the state of the fluids. If it were not for regard to the
state of the stomach, liquid food would often be employed with advantage, as,
in many cases, increase of fluidity gives increase of nourishment; and thus a
calf is more effectually nourished by diluting its milk with equal quantity of
water, than if the milk were given alone. Quite analogous to this is the taking
in this bland and mild nourishment in form of whey, especially from the richer
milk.

BUTTER MILK.
Here the whey and coagulable part are more entirely separated from the oily,
but the coagulable part in butter milk is broke down, resolved, and of easy
digestion. As it is very saccharine it is very nutritious, but not without
acidity, and therefore is more cooling to the system, and more suited to the
inflammatory and alkalescent diathesis, than milk, but for the same reason it
is noxious where refrigeration is hurtful.

Condiments of milk, as liable to acescency and cooling in particular
constitutions. Where this tendency is apprehended, it may be accompanied with
some of the aromata, and cream and whey are there often attended with advantage
if used with these. Sugar is another condiment. If milk is liable to acescency,
this would seem to increase it, and indeed it does so in stomachs so disposed.
But sugar has another effect, viz. preventing the spontaneous separation of
milk, and therefore has many of the advantages of newly drawn milk. It is
proper, therefore, to give sugar along with milk to convalescents. Conserve of
roses is often employed, and acts only by its sugar, two-thirds of it being
such; and honey itself, the most acescent of all the sweets, is often employed
with advantage.

Having now finished what ^e had to say on Milk, the intermediate substance
between Animal and Vegetable, we come now to ANIMAL FOOD, strictly so called.

The first difference of animal food regards its solubility, depending on a lax
or firm texture of its different kinds. Solubility of animal food seems to
deserve less attention than is commonly imagined; for I have known persons of a
weak stomach incapable of breaking down the texture of vegetables, or even of
dissolving a light pudding, to whom hung beef, or a piece of ham, was very
grateful, and easily digested. None of the theories given for the solution of
animal food in the human stomach seem to me sufficiently to have explained that
process. Long ago has been discarded the supposition of an active corrosive
menstruum there, and also the doctrine of trituration, for which, indeed, there
seems no mechanism in the human body; and we now commonly agree with Boerhaave,
supposing nothing more necessary than a watery menstruum, moderate heat and
frequent agitation. This will account for solution in some cases, but not
entirely. Let us try to imitate it out of the body with the same circumstances,
and in ten times the time in which the food is dissolved in the stomach, we
shall not be able to bring about the same changes. Take the coagulated white of
an egg, which almost every body can easily digest, and yet no artifice shall be
able to dissolve it. Hence then we are led to seek another cause for solution,
viz. fermentation, a notion, indeed, formerly embraced, but on the introduction
of mechanical philosophy, industriously banished, with every other supposition
of that process taking place at all in the animal economy.

Many of the ancients imagined this fermentation to be putrefactive; but this
we deny, as an acid is produced; though hence the fermentation might be
reckoned the vinous, which, however, I have formerly proved to you to be
morbid. Neither, indeed, is the fermentation purely acetous, but modified by
putrescents; for Pringle has observed, that animal matters raise and even
expede the acetous process. The fermentation, then, in the stomach is of a
mixed nature, between the acetous and putrefactive, mutually modifying each
other; though, indeed, in the intestines, somewhat of the putrefactive seems to
take place, as may be observed from the state of the faeces broke down, and
from the little disposition of such substances to be so, which are not liable
to the putrefactive process, as the firmer parts of vegetables, etc. Upon this
view solution seems to be extremely easy, and those substances to be most
easily broke down which are most subject to putrefaction.

But solution also depends on other circumstances, and hence requires a more
particular regard. First, there is a difference of solubility with respect to
the manducation of animal food, for which bread is extremely necessary, in
order to keep the more slippery parts in the mouth till they be properly
comminuted. From want of proper manducation I have known many persons subject
to eructations, and this more frequently from the firm vegetable foods than
from the animal, as apples, almonds, etc. though, indeed, even from animal
food, very tendinous, or swallowed in unbroken masses, such sometimes occur.
Manducation is so much connected with solution, that some, from imperfectly
performing that, are obliged to belch up their food, remanducate it, and
swallow it again before the stomach can dissolve it, or proper nourishment be
extracted. Another proof of our regard to solubility, is our rejecting the
firmer parts of animal food, as bull beef, and generally carnivorous animals.

Its effects with regard to solubility I also take, secondly, to be the
foundation of our choice between fat and lean, young and old meats. In the
lean, although, perhaps, a single fiber might be sufficiently tender, yet
these, when collected in fasciculi, are very firm and compact, and of difficult
solution; whereas in the fat there is a greater number of vessels, a greater
quantity of juice, more interposition of cellular substance, and consequently
more solubility. Again, in young animals, in my opinion, there is the same
number of fibers as in the older, but these more connected; whereas, in the
older, the growth depending on the separation of these, and the increase of
vessels and cellular substance, the texture is less firm and more soluble,
which qualities, with regard to the stomach, are at that time too increased, by
the increased alkalescency of the animal. To this also may be referred our
choice of castrated animals, viz. on their disposition to fatten after the
operation.

3. It is with a view to the solubility, that we make a choice between meats
recently killed, and those which have been kept for some time. As soon as meat
is killed the putrefactive process begins, which commonly we allow to proceed
for a little, as that process is the most effectual breaker down of animal
matters, and a great assistance to solution. The length of time during which
meat ought to be kept, is proportioned to the meat's tendency to undergo the
putrid fermentation, and the degree of those circumstances which favor it:
Thus in the Torrid Zone, where meat cannot be kept above four or five hours, it
is used much more recent than in these northern climates.

4. Boiled or roasted meats create a difference of solution. By boiling we
extract the juices interposed between the fibers, approximate them more to each
other, and render them of more difficult solubility, which is increased too by
the extraction of the juices, which are much more alkalescent than the fibers;
but when we want to avoid the stimulus of alkalescent food, and the quick
solution, as in some cases of disease, boiled is not to be chosen. Of roasted
meat, it may be asked whether are more proper, those which are most or least
roasted. That which is least done is certainly the most soluble; even raw meats
are more soluble than dressed, as I know from a person who from necessity was
obliged, for some time, to eat such: But at the same time that meats little
done are very soluble, they are very alkalescent; so that, wherever we want to
avoid alkalescency in the primae viae, the most roasted meats should be chosen.
Those who throw away the broths of boiled meat do very improperly; for, besides
their supplying a fluid, (as I formerly observed,) from their greater
alkalescency they increase the solubility of the meat. Here we shall observe,
that pure blood has been thought insoluble; undoubtedly it is very nutritious,
and though out of the body, like the white of eggs, it seems very insoluble,
yet, like that too, in the body it is commonly easily digested. Moses very
properly forbad it the Israelites, as, in warm countries, it is highly
alkalescent, and even here, when it was used in great quantity, the scurvy was
more frequent; but to a moderate use of it, in these climates, no such
objection takes place.

5. Solubility is varied from another source, viz. viscidity of the juice of
aliment. Young animals, then, appear less soluble than old, not on account of
their compaction and firmness of texture, but rather on their greater viscidity
of juice. See Dr. Brian Robinson^ of Dublin, on this head. And nothing is more
common, as (...) observed, than to be longer oppressed from a full meal of
veal, (...) from the same quantity of beef, etc. Upon account too of their
greater viscidity of juice, are the tendinous and ligamentous parts of animals
longer retained than the purely muscular, as well as on account of their
firmness of texture. Even fishes, whose muscular parts are exceedingly tender,
are, on account of their gluey viscosity, longer of solution in the stomach.
And eggs, too, which are exceedingly nourishing, have the same effect, and
cannot be taken in great quantity: For the stomach is peculiarly sensible to
gelatinous substances, and by this means has Nature perhaps taught us, as it
were by a sort of instinct, to limit ourselves in the quantity of such
nutritive substances.

6. With regard to solution, we must take in the oils of animal food, which,
when tolerably pure, are the least putrescent part of it, and by diminishing
the cohesion of the fibers, render them more soluble. On this last account is
the lean of fat meat more easily dissolved than other lean. But when the meat
is exposed to much heat, this oil is separated, leaving the solid parts less
easily soluble, and becoming itself empyreumatic, rancescent, and of difficult
mixture in the stomach. Fried meats, from the reasons now given, and baked
meats, for the same, as well as the tenacity of the paste, are preparations
which diminish the solubility of the food. From what has been said, the
preparation of food by fattening it, and keeping it for some time after killed,
although it may administer to gluttony, will yet, it must be confessed,
increase the solution of the food.

The second difference of animal food is with regard to

ALKALESCENCY.
Of th^^ we have taken a little notice already under the first head of
Solubi^^^^.

First, (...) the too great alkalescency we commonly avoid the carnivorous
animal, and the ferae, and choose rather the granivorous. Some birds, indeed,
which live on insects, are admitted into our food; but no man, without nausea,
can live long upon these alone, for any length of time. Fishes, too, are an
exception to this rule, living almost universally on each other. But in these
the alkalescency does not proceed so far; whether from the viscidity of their
juice, their want of heat, or some peculiarity in their economy, I will not
pretend to determine.

Secondly, Alkalescency is determined by difference of age. The older animals
are always more alkalescent than the young, from their continual progress to
putrefaction. Perhaps this may depend on the nourishment of the younger
animals, milk, vegetables, etc. Homberg always found, in his endeavors to
extract an acid from human blood, that more was obtained from the young than
from the old animals.

A third circumstance which varies the alkalescency of the food, is the
wildness or tameness of the animal; and this again seems to depend on its
exercise. I knew a Gentleman who was fond of cats for food, but he always used
to feed them on vegetable food, and keep them from exercise; and in the same
manner did the Romans rear up their rats, when intended for food. In the same
way the flesh of the partridge and hen seems to be much the same; only, from
its being more on the wing, the one is more alkalescent than the other. Again,
tame animals are commonly used without their blood, whereas the wild are
commonly killed in their blood, and upon that account, as well as their greater
exercise, are more alkalescent.

Fourthly, The alkalescency of food may be determined from the quantity of
volatile salt it affords. The older the meat is, it is found to give the
greater proportion of volatile salt.

Fifthly, The alkalescency of aliment may also, in some measure, be determined
from its color, the younger animals being whiter and less alkalescent. We also
take a mark from the color of the gravy poured out, according to the redness
of the juices judging of the animal's alkalescency.

Lastly, The relish of food is found to depend much on its alkalescency, as
also the stimulus it gives and the fever it produces in the system. These
effects are also complicated with the viscidity of the food, by which means it
is longer detained in the stomach, and the want of alkalescency supplied.

Having mentioned Animal Food as differing in solubility and alkalescency,
which often go together in the same subject, we come to the third difference,
viz.

QUANTITY of NUTRIMENT,
Which is either absolute or relative; absolute with respect to the quantity it
really contains, sufficient powers being given to extract it; relative, with
respect to the assimilatory powers of those who use it. The absolute nutriment
is of some consequence, but the relative in the robust and healthy, and except
in cases of extraordinary weakness, may, without much inconvenience, be
disregarded. In another case is the quantity of nourishment relative, viz. with
regard to its perspirability; for if the food is soon carried off by the
excretions, it is the same thing as if it contained a less proportion of
nourishment. For, giving more fluid, that which is longer retained affords
most, and for the repair of the solids, that retention also is of advantage.
Now gelatinous substances are long retained, and are, besides, animal
substances themselves, dissolved so, that, both absolutely and relatively, such
substances are nutritious. Of this kind are eggs, shell fish, etc. In adults,
though it is disputed whether their solids need any repair, yet at any rate, at
this period, fluid is more required; for this purpose the alkalescent foods are
most proper, being most easily dissolved. They are, at the same time, the most
perspirable; on one hand that alkalescency leading to disease, while on the
other their perspirability obviates it. Adults, therefore, as Writers justly
observe, are better nourished on the alkalescent; the young and growing, on
gelatinous foods. All this leads to a comparison of young and old meats, the
first being more gelatinous, and the last more alkalescent. This, however, by
experience, is not yet properly ascertained. Mr Geoffroy is the only person I
know who has been taken up with the analysis of foods. See Memoirs de
l'Academie l'an 1731 and 1732. His attempt was certainly laudable, and in some
respects usefully performed, but in general his experiments are not
sufficiently repeated, nor, indeed, sufficiently accurate; and I would refuse
that beef and veal have been properly examined, for he has not been on his
guard against the various circumstances which affect meats; the cow kind liking
a moist succulent herbage, which is not to be got in warm climates; while the
sheep are fond of a dry food, and thrive best there. Again, some of his
experiments seem contradictory. He says, that veal gives more solution than
beef, while lamb gives less than mutton; which, I confess is much to be
doubted. If both he and Sanctorius had examined English beef, the result,
probably, would have been very different as to its perspirability, etc.
Besides, Mr. Geoffroy has only analised beef and veal when raw, has made no
proper circumstantial comparisons between quadrupeds and birds, and has
examined these last along with their bones, and not their muscles, etc. by
themselves, as he ought to have done, etc. If a set of experiments of this kind
were properly and accurately performed, they might be of great use; but at
present, for the purpose of determining our present subject, we must have
recourse to our alkalescency, solubilty, etc.

The fourth difference of animal foods is

The NATURE of the FLUIDS they afford.
The whole of this will, I think, be understood, from what has been said on
alkalescency, the fluid produced being more or less dense and stimulating, in
proportion as that prevails.

The fifth difference of animal foods is with respect to their

PERSPIRABILITY.
The sum of what I have to say on this matter is this, that such foods as
promote an accumulation of fluid in our vessels, and dispose to plethora, are
the least perspirable, and commonly give most strength; that the more
alkalescent foods are the most perspirable, though the viscid and less
alkalescent may attain the same property by long retention in the system. The
authors on Perspirability have determined the Perspiration of Foods as
imperfectly as Mr. Geoffroy has done the Solubility, and in a few cases only.
We must not lay hold on what Sanctorius has said on the perspirability of
mutton, because he has not examined, in the same way, other meats in their
perfect state; far less on what Keil says of oysters, as he himself was a
valetudinarian, and consequently an unfit subject for such experiments, and
probably of a peculiar temperament.

Having now finished the examination of Animal Food in general, we come to the
consideration of particular animals, of which much cannot be expected to be
said, after we have so fully delivered our general principles.

Animals are divided into six classes, the Quadrupedia, Aves, Amphibia, Pisces,
Insecta, Vermes. In my Catalogue I have entirely omitted the Amphibia, but
shall supply them in their proper place, The advantages of this division will
be known to any one who consults the first volume of Linnaeus's great Systema
Naturae. That it should often contradict common language, is not to be wondered
at, since that arose from a gross superficial view of things. Linnaeus, for the
term Quadrupedia, now uses that of Mammalia, on account of the former excluding
the cetaceous fishes, which, although they have not four feet, have yet the
other distinguishing properties of the Quadrupedia, an heart with two auricles
and two ventricles, lungs with which they breathe alternately, penis intrans,
and, besides, are viviparous and lactiferous, etc.

This class is subdivided into different orders, and it seems doubtful whether
any of them are rejected from our food, esculent animals, (if I may say so,) in
different countries, being taken from every one of them. The Pecora are the
order chiefly used here, and are distinguished by being hoofed, ruminant
animals, phytovorous, domestic, tame, and generally horned. These, from living
on vegetables, are perhaps the most proper food, and also from their being tame
and domestic. Of the Pecora, those more commonly in use are the cow, sheep,
goat, and deer or heart. In other countries the rest may be used, as the camel
in Africa; and if the musk-deer be taken in, we have then the whole order.

COW KIND; BEEF, VEAL.
This we use as others, in two different ways, young and old. Beef, compared
with mutton, is of a more firm texture, and less soluble, but I am persuaded is
equally alkalescent, perspirable, and nutritious: If, in the southern
countries, it is not esteemed so, it is on account of its imperfection there,
as already observed. With regard to young and old foods, a great deal has been
already said: I shall confirm that here, with an observation on our use of
veal. If we were purely to consider tenderness of texture, the youngest animals
certainly would always be preferred; but you observe, that we use veal at a
certain age, and perhaps the reason of it may be this; when an animal is very
young, although its fibers, taken by themselves are more tender, yet, on
account of their great connection and complication, they are less soluble;
whereas, in the space of a month or two, by proper nourishment, the fibers come
to be more and more separated, a greater quantity of cellular substance is
interposed, and they are rendered more soluble and nutritious: Now, after this
period, perhaps after the third month, the animal's nature tends toward
robustness, firmness, and rigidity, becoming more fibrous again, and more
difficultly dissolved. When an animal is very young, we commonly have an
aversion to it; the whole of it then is, as it were, a semifluid mass, which we
cannot take in sufficient quantity, and which, from its watery consistence,
must be but little nutritious.

SHEEP KIND; MUTTON, LAMB.
Mutton has commonly been preferred to all the fleshes of quadrupedes, and
indeed, besides its being more perfect, has the advantage over them of being
more generally suited to different climates; whereas beef, e. g. requires a
very nice intermediate state, which it seems to enjoy chiefly in England; for
although we supply what are reckoned the best cattle, it is in their rich
pastures they are brought to perfection. Now the sheep can be brought to almost
the same perfection in this bleak northern, as in the mild southern countries.
With regard to the difference between the young and old of this kind, the same
observations occur as under the former head. Lamb appears a more fibrous meat,
and, upon that account, is less easily soluble than veal. In this country,
house-lamb is never reared to advantage.

GOATS FLESH; KID.
The goat, from its own nature, and from its exercise in quest of food, is of a
firm fibrous texture, and, with all the advantages art can give it, of very
difficult solution, and so disused in those countries where delicacy of food is
introduced. Kid, from its natural rigidity, and the little care bestowed on its
feeding, has all the disadvantages of any young food in excess.

HEART, CERVUS; VENISON.
Cervus dama, or fallow deer, is that with which we are best acquainted, and
use most, known under the name of Venison. This, from the nature of its
economy, from its wild and exercised state, and from being generally killed in
the blood, is an alkalescent sapid aliment, considered as a very great
delicacy, and, though an exercised animal, of easy digestion. Its flesh
approaches very near to that of the sheep, though undoubtedly it is more sapid
and alkalescent.

The stag, or red deer, is another of the same kind, sometimes used in food,
and is a more intractable, robust, and exercised animal than the other, and
consequently more insoluble. Perhaps there are others of the Cervus kind used
in food, but I am not yet properly acquainted with them.

After the Pecora is set down in the Catalogue, after some interval, the term
Lepus, one of the genera of the Mammalia Glires of Linnaeus, comprehending the
hare and rabbit, which, although their specific difference be small, yet differ
a good deal in qualities as food.

HARE.
This animal is much exercised, and thereby acquires a great firmness of
fibers; and, though sufficiently alkalescent, and killed in the blood, is yet
of difficult solubility. As the tenderness of meats depends on the succulency
of the muscular parts, the hare killed after a long chase, when much of the oil
of the body is absorbed, is much firmer and tougher than when killed in the
seat.

RABBIT.
This animal is of very little exercise, moderately alkalescent, and one of the
white meats without viscidity. Whether on these accounts, or some particulars
in its economy, I have always found it one of the lightest and most soluble
animal foods.

Next Lepus, in the Catalogue, is placed the term, Sus, Hog.

HOG; PORK.
This animal is of a peculiar make, and difficultly reduced to any particular
order, placed, however, among the Mammalia Bestiae of Linnaeus. It is the only
domestic animal that I know, of no use to man when alive, and therefore
properly designed for food. Besides, as loathsome and ugly to every human eye,
it is killed without reluctance. The Pythagoreans, whether to preserve health,
or on account of compassion, generally forbid the use of animal food, and yet
it is alleged that Pythagoras reserved the use of hogs flesh for himself. The
Jews, the Egyptians, etc. and others in the warm countries, and all the
Mahometans at present, ^eject the use of pork. It is difficult to find out the
reason of this, or of the precept given to some of them, though commonly such
as are not given without a particular one. The Greeks gave great commendations
to this food; and Galen, though indeed that is suspected to be from a
particular fondness, is every where full of it. The Romans considered it as one
of their delicacies; and if some of the inhabitants of the northern climates
have taken an aversion to it, that probably arose from the uncultivated state
of their country not being able to rear it. Pork is of a very tender structure,
increased perhaps from a peculiarity in its economy, viz. taking on fat more
readily than any other animal. Pork is a white meat even in its adult state,
and then gives out a jelly in very great quantity. On account of its little
perspirability and tenderness, it is very nutritious, and was given for that
intention to the athletae. With regard to its alkalescency, no proper
experiments have yet been made, but as it is of a gelatinous and succulent
nature, it is probably less so than many others.

Many others of the Mammalia, or Quadrupeds, are used in different countries,
and it is not certain which of the Quadrupeds may be excepted from the rule.
Thus the Tartars eat horses, the Romans ea^ asses, dogs, rats, etc. but of
these, as we have no experience, little can be said, though their qualities may
probably be understood from the principles already delivered.

We now come to consider the Class of BIRDS, which is divided into six orders,
Accipitres, Picae, Anseres, Grallae, Gallinae, and Passeres. The Accipitres and
Picae are carnivorous Birds, and not used by us, or indeed much by any nation
in food. The other four are what are chiefly used, of which we have begun with
the Gallinae, as the chief of our domestic fowl; and of these the first, viz.
Gallus Gallinaceus, is comprehended by Linnaeus, under the general name of
Phasianus.

The COCK, HEN, CHICKEN, and CAPON, are entirely domestic animals, there being
no country, as far as I know, in which they are found wild. They take little
exercise, live mostly on vegetables, though sometimes, indeed, they pick up
insects, and are chiefly delighted with grain. Hence they are a food of tender
structure, easy solution, little alkalescency, and, as a white meat,
gelatinous. When very young, they are extremely viscid, when old, tough and
ligamentous; so that the proper time of using them is in a middle state,
between these two extremes, i. e. when about a year old.

A question here arises about the feeding of animals, it being doubted whether
a crammed, or barn-door fowl, is preferable. Many of our modern arts of
feeding, besides giving more succulency and tenderness to the food, increase
its alkalescency: As giving succulency, they are an improvement, but, as giving
alkalescency, a dangerous one, though even with that they make solution more
easy. Exercise, however, is necessary to give perfection, for, by this means,
the fat of the animal is equally dispersed through the muscular parts, whereas,
when the animal is fatted hastily, the fat is accumulated in a particular part,
viz. in the cellular texture, more strictly so called; so that an exercised
animal of equal weight, caeteris paribus, with a fed one, is much preferable.

The next bird mentioned in the Catalogue, is The MELEAGRIS GALLOPAVO. another
of the Galinae, under the generical name of Meleagris. The Meleagris Gallopavo,
or turkey, with regard to its qualities in food, is entirely the same as the
proceeding, being equally tender, soluble, and alkalescent.

The next bird we come to, is The PAVO CRISTATUS, or PEACOCK, which is somewhat
of a white flesh, but firm and rigid, and partly from the coarseness of its
texture, and partly from its not being prolific, is now properly enough
neglected. The Romans formerly used, but probably only for show, our Peacock as
food. It was remarked that the boiled Peacock would keep very long; but in this
there is nothing extraordinary, as was imagined; for the most putrescent part
of the food is the fluid, and this, by boiling, is extracted, and leaves only
the solid fibers behind. Now, if what is called jerking of beef in the
West Indies, or hand-roasting it, in both which cases the fluids are not so
accurately drawn out, have the effect of preserving meat for a considerable
time, how much greater must that effect be expected to be from the more rigid
texture of the Peacock, exsuccated by boiling.

PHEASANT.
Next the Peacock should have been inserted the Pheasant, as it is the first
among the wild fowl; but because Linnaeus has given Phasianus as his generical
name for the Gallus Gallinaceus, etc. it was omitted: Here, however, it shall
be mentioned, as it is in its proper place. The Pheasant is a wild fowl, is
more exercised, and hence, and from its living on the drier vegetables, and
insects, more alkalescent than the same fowl, and also, from its being capable
of fattening, is more soluble.

The five following belong all to one genus, the Tetrao of Linnaeus. The two
first, TETRAO PERDIX et COTURNIX, i. e. the PARTRIDGE and QUAIL, approach in
their nature to the tame fowl, but are more sapid, tender and alkalescent, the
chief cause of difference residing in the alkalescency.

The three last, viz.

The LAGOPUS, TETRIX et UROGALLUS, as living more on insects, are more
alkalescent than the two former, much more so than the tame fowl.

In following Linnaeus, I have omitted The GROUSE, or RED GAME, which, however,
I meant to comprehend under the term Lagopus; although Linnaeus does not seem
to be acquainted with our red game, which, however, is the Lagopus of other
Naturalists, and the Lagopus altera Plinii. The qualities of these are very
much in common. From its size, rather than any real difference, is, I imagine,
the black game thought more firm, though perhaps, from its living on very high
mountains, it is seldomer got young. I have mentioned young food as viscid and
gelatinous, but these of which we are speaking are not so, which is an
exception to the general rule, and which I impute to the greater alkalescency
of the kind.

ANSERES.
Next in order come the Anseres of Linnaeus, which term may properly be
translated Water Fowl.

From their nature, the water fowl are much exercised, and being generally
carnivorous, are more alkalescent than the tame; whether they are more so than
the wild fowl, is undetermined. Certain however it is, that, whether from their
less alkalescency, or peculiar nature, they are less soluble than these, so
that if we here apprehend a greater alkalescency, we must likewise suppose a
greater viscidity, which indeed they generally possess more than the wild fowl.

Linnaeus using Anseres for the generical term, uses Anas for the goose as well
as duck; but, for fear of confounding you, I have avoided the scientific terms.

ANAS DOMESTICA, the TAME DUCK.
Here Naturalists commonly have, although different in their manner of living,
considered the tame and wild animal as the same: However that may hold in
natural history, we must make a difference in their qualities, as food. The
wild duck is more alkalescent, more tender, and more easily dissolved than the
tame, and, in general, this difference takes place between wild and tame
animals, if they are taken at a suitable age and proper season. Old animals are
generally more alkalescent and more easily soluble than the young: Many
animals, however, are not viscid when young, so that, in this case, the rule in
contradicted. All wild animals too, differ according to the season, either from
the time of their molting or the quantity of food they then get.

The next mentioned, is ANAS ^OSCHATA, or MUSCOVY DUCK, which seems to be of
the same qualities with the former, but somewhat of a more firm and less tender
texture. First when these were known here, they were reared with very great
care, but are now more commonly neglected.

Of the Boschus major, or Wild Duck, we have already spoken, under the Anas
domestica. We go on to the others mentioned in the Catalogue.

The QUERQUEDULA, or TEALE, is very much of the nature of the wild duck, and is
the most tender and alkalescent, the least viscid and most savoury of this kind.

ANSER DOMESTICUS, TAME GOOSE.
This is no less alkalescent than the duck, is manifestly less viscid, but of a
firmer texture; its solution, however, is not so constant, depending more on a
difference of stomach.

CYGNUS, SWAN.
In food, this is now very rarely used; in its young state, it is by far the
most rigid of any of their order: It is of difficult manducation, and so far as
texture can occasion that, of difficult solution in the stomach.

Here I might have inserted a great many more of the ANSERINE tribe, but I was
not so well acquainted with them as to point out their difference: They are all
wild, and, from their economy or food, we may judge of their qualities. As
living on fish, they are viscid and alkalescent. I have set down two, the
Pelicanus Bassanus, or So^an Goose, and the A^catorda, the Murret, or, in
England, the Razor-bill, which may serve for the rest.

SOLAN GOOSE.
This is one of the most alkalescent foods we use here. It is an animal much
exercised, and, when old, insoluble, but, when young, it is very easily
soluble, and when it agrees with the stomach may be taken in large proportion,
even in weak ones, as I myself have experienced, and though alkalescent, gives
little inconvenience on that account. It is commonly talked of as a whet to the
appetite; but this must not be taken seriously, although, indeed, it is of
remarkably easy solution. All this illustrates what has been said on the
solubility of food depending on its alkalescency; and hence, in some measure,
may be understood the qualities of other sea fowl used in diet.

GRALLAE.
The GRALLAE, the next class I am to mention, are much connected with the
former, as being aquatic birds, though not always swimmers or diverse. They live
often in marshy grounds, catching fish, insects, etc. They have been called
Limosugae, or Mudsuckers, but improperly, as they take up the earth only as it
contains insects, or agitate it with their bills to bring up worms. For walking
in marshy places they are provided with long legs, called grallae, from their
likeness to those sticks on which people sometimes walk, whence their gradus
gralatorius. I have set down a number of different genera. Ardea, the Heron,
and Bittern; Scolopax, the Woodcock, Snipe, and Curlew; Tringa, the Lapwing, in
Scotland the Teachat, and Peaseweep, and Gray Plover; Charadrius, the Green
Plover; Haematopus, the Sea Pie; Fulica, the Coot; Rallus the Rail, in Scotch
the Corncraig; Otis, the Bustard, with a view to their qualities as aliment, I
shall begin with

The OTIS.
It is doubtful whether this ought to be ranked with the other Grallae, it
being a land animal, living on grain, and rather, I believe, should have been
kept with the Gallinae. Its flesh approaches to that of the partridge, and its
qualities are much the same with those of the wild fowl of the Gallinae.

I consider the RALLUS as likewise belonging to the Gallinae, though, indeed, a
species of it, the Rallus aquaticus, more evidently belongs to the Grallae. In
many countries they are considered as Quails; and in Italy called the King of
these, Il Re di Qualli. With exception of these two all the rest stand properly
in the same order; but, from certain circumstances, are of different qualities,
viz. being inland or not, etc.

Of the inland kind belonging to the Scolopax, are The WOODCOCK and SNIPE,
which, although insectivorous, appear to be less alkalescent, of a tender
structure, approaching to the white meats of the gallinaceous kind.

Here may be illustrated what we have said of exercise producing firmness. The
Woodcock is obliged to fly much about, while the Partridge walks more and flies
less. Hence it is observed, that the wing of the Woodcock is always very tough,
while that of the Partridge is very tender; and, on the contrary, the leg of
the Woodcock is very tender, while that of the Partridge is very tough. Hence
the proverb, Give the Woodcock the Partridge wings, he will be the most
delicate of birds.

CURLEW.
This also belongs to the Scolopax, but living on fishes, and at sea, is very
alkalescent, and approaches in quality to the Solan Goose.

TRINGA.
The Tringa are more alkalescent than the Woodcock, but less so than the
Scolopaces, who live on fish, as being inland birds. A difference occurs in the
species, the Lapwing using its wings much, being of a firmer texture; while the
Gray Plover, taking less exercise, is more soluble.

The CHARADRIUS, or GREEN PLOVER, is much more alkalescent than the Woodcock or
Snipe.

Next come

The ARDEA, HERON, and BITTERN.
These are of a firmer texture than those we have mentioned, and, when old, are
of little use. In their young state they are commonly fat, sufficiently
soluble, alkalescent, and of exquisite relish. It would be worth while to
examine accurately the qualities of the Heron and Bittern, as we should then
know what difference followed from animals of the same genus living on fish or
on insects.

Those which remain of the Grallae are entirely sea fowl. The Haemotapus, or
Sea Pie, and the Fulica, or Coot, with the Curlew, which we have mentioned
under Scolopax, are more alkalescent than the other Grallae, approaching in
their nature to the Solan Goose.

We now come to the AVES PASSERES of Linnaeus, of which we have a very great
variety. I have only set down four of the genera, which seem to me to be the
chief. It is difficult to say whether they have common qualities: Enquiry would
probably show us some difference, as they were granivorous or insectivorous.

The COLUMBA, or PIGEON KIND, are hot and alkalescent from much exercise,
perhaps more so than any other of these who live on grain. When young, they are
tender, and of easy solution.

With regard to the smaller birds, the Alauda, Turdus, and Emberiza, the Lark,
Thrush, and Yellow Hammer; of these I have but little experience, and of many
more which are comprehended under these generical terms. There is probably a
difference, according to their exercise and food. I shall only say, that when
taken at a proper age they are tender, succulent, and alkalescent.

I mentioned formerly my omission of the AMPHIBIA, which it is here proper to
supply; as they are of a middle nature between birds and fish, the meaning of
the term is doubtful. It is commonly applied to animals who live both on water
and land, and so includes both birds and beasts. Linnaeus's distinction is
this: The Beasts and Birds have a heart with two auricles and two ventricles, a
warm blood, and lungs which breathe alternately; whereas the Amphibia have a
heart with one auricle and one ventricle a cold blood, and lungs which breathe
arbitrarily. They are divided into three orders,

The SERPENTS, REPTILES, and NANTES.
Of the REPTILIA there are three genera employed in food, the Testudo,
Tortoise, the Lacerta, Lizard, and the Rana, Frog.

TESTUDO, TORTOISE.
Of this there are several species used in food. The green Turtle is now become
a famous delicacy. It is of a peculiar nature, having its fat of a green
color, of a remarkable odor, affecting the urine and sweat, the color of
which last is also altered. From this it has been supposed of peculiar
qualities. From its odor, etc. it might be medicated, but these have no effect
on its qualities as nutriment. From some particulars in its economy, from its
little motion, and its living on vegetables, it is less alkalescent than any of
its kind, of a very gelatinous nature, and highly nutritious.

Of the numerous Lacertae there are few employed in food. There is only of
which I remember, the Guana of the West Indies. This is there esteemed a great
delicacy, and of tender texture. From peculiar antipathy against the animal,
when in that country, I could not examine its qualities.

As to the FROG, one of its species is used in France, the Rana aesculenta. I
am ignorant of its qualities for want of particular experience. As far as we
can depend on Geoffroy, this animal, from affording little volatile salt, seems
not very alkalescent, nor, from others of Mr. Geoffroy's experiments, very
gelatinous. But, considering the class to which it belongs, and from any small
examination I myself have made of it, it would seem in its nature to approach
to the Tortoise and Guana.

VIPER.
Of the Amphibia serpents, I know only one species used in food, namely, the
Viper. It is still uncertain whether this is to be considered as food or
medicine. It has been much talked of in the last intention, though, in my
opinion, it can have little power as such; for medicines are such bodies as
alter the system suddenly, without being conquered by it. Now Vipers are
commonly used in broths, and prove very nutritious, being continued for a
length of time. Neither, indeed, is its volatile salt, which has been esteemed
a famous remedy, different from that of other animals. Upon all which accounts
I conclude that its virtues, as medicine, must only be in consequence of its
nutritious quality. As a food, from Geoffroy's experiments, I perceive it is
sufficiently soluble, approaching in this, and the quantity of juices it
affords, to Quadrupeds; and to Fishes, in the gelatinous nature of these
juices. Like all the Amphibia, it is of an intermediate nature between
Quadrupeds and Fish, though in its qualities approaching more to the latter. I
told you that, for want of other principles, I determined the alkalescency of
animal substances from the quantity of volatile salt they afford. The Viper, as
affording less of this, I conclude to be less alkalescent than Quadrupeds or
Birds.

As in Natural History we observe one ^ind by insensible degrees passing into
another, so here the Amphibia connect the Quadrupeds and Fishes. Of these the
Reptiles, on the one hand, approaching to Quadrupeds; while the Serpents, on
the other, come nearer to the Fishes. There is still another order of the
Amphibia, viz. the Nantes, the same which formerly went under the name of the
Cartilaginous Fishes. I have marked three of these at the end of the Fishes,
viz. the Petromyzon, or Lamprey; the Raia batis, or Thornback; in Scots, Scate;
and the Accipenser Sturio, or Sturgeon. There are two or three more genera
belonging to this order; and the Squalus, or Shark kind, is sometimes used in
food. I said they were formerly classed with the fishes; but Linnaeus,
considering that in their skin, lungs, organs of generation, and that in their
being viviparous, etc. they approached to the Amphibia, has very properly
ranked them in this class. With respect, however, to their qualities as food,
they are little difference from the Fishes, though indeed I should suppose they
approached to the other Amphibia. They afford a more gelatinous food than any
of the Quadrupeds, or Amphibia, and probably are more nutritious. As to their
alkalescency, from the quantity of volatile salt they afford, I conclude they
are less alkalescent than the animals above mentioned, and more so than the
Fishes.

FISHES.
After saying somewhat on the QUADRUPEDS, BIRDS, and AMPHIBIA, I come to the
FISH kind. I have only set down those which are commonly used, though in
England perhaps more may be used. The first of these in the Catalogue is the
Genus of the Salmo, of which there are six species. Salmo salar, the common
Salmon; Salmo trutta, is the river Trout; in Scots, the bourn Trout; Salmo
hucho, in the North of England, bull Trout; in Scotland the Lochleven Trout;
Salmo eperlanus, the Smelt; in Scots, the Sperling; Salmo thymallus, the
Grayling, or Umber, which is not known here; Salmo Alpinus, the Charr, which
lives in the coldest water in which any animal will live. After these follows
in the Catalogue another genus, the Cyprinus, of which eight are mentioned;
Cyprinus barbus, the Barbel; Carpio, the Carp; Gobio, the Gudgeon; Tinca, the
Tench; Caephalus, the Chub; Rutilus, the Roch; Alburnus, the Bleak; Brama, the
Bream. After these is mentioned the genus of the Perca, of which the Perca
fluviatilis, or common Perch. After this comes again the Gadus, of which six
are mentioned, AEglesinus, Haddock; Merlangus, Whiting; Morhua, a Cod; Molva,
Ling; Virens, in Scotland, Greenback; Callarias, in Scotland, the Codling, or
Redware, though of this I am not certain. After these is the Cyclopterus
lumpus, the Lump Fish, or Sea Owl; in Scots, the Cock Paddle. Next to this
follows in order the Scomber Scombrus, the Mackarel; Scomber Thynnus, the
Tunny, or Spanish Mackarel; Trigla cuculus, the Red Gurnard; Mugil, the Mullet;
and Esox Lucius, the Pike. Next to these come the Clupea, of which four are
set. Clupea harengus, the Herring; which I do not know if the Pilcher be the
same species; Sprattus, the Sprat; in Scots, the Garvey; Encrasicolus, the
Anchovy; Alosa, the Shad. After the foregoing are set down the Pleuronectes, of
which five are marked; Flesus, the common Flounder; Solea, the Sole; Platessa,
the Plaise, Maximus, the Turbot; Hypoglossus, the Holibut. In England, what is
called the Holibut, is in Scotland the Turbot, et e contrario.

Before we come to the Amphibia Nantes, which were placed here as formerly
ranked among the Cartilaginous Fishes, are set down A^^^dites, the Sand Eel;
Muraena Anguilla, the common Eel; Muraena Conger, the Sea Eel; and by mistake,
as supposed an aliment, Anarrichas, the Sea Wolf.

Of QUALITIES of FISHES in general.
Their texture is generally more tender than that of Flesh, and they have
nothing of a fibrous structure. With respect to their solution, after all, the
matter does not seem determined; for from Geoffroy's experiments it appears,
that they give less soluble matter out of the body than flesh. It is however
very probable, that the powers of our stomach, the fermentation which is
excited there, exceeds greatly any power we can apply out of the body; and, so
far as we are able to judge, they are of more easy solution than Flesh meats.
Broths, however, of Fishes do not form into a jelly, though there is somewhat
gluey and viscid, which, like the young meats, makes them long retained in the
stomach; yet, after all, I do not find, that even in this case of their longer
retention and difficult perspirability, that by ruminant men, if I may so call
them, they are so often brought up as other foods.

The alkalescency of Fishes seems less than that of Meats, their putrefaction
being flower, and their yield of volatile alkali less. There is in the solution
of this food something particular, which is not yet properly enquired into. We
use oil or butter sometimes with our vegetable aliment, oftener with meats, but
more frequently still, and in greater quantity, with Fishes. This certainly, if
properly understood, would throw some light on solution of this aliment, as it
seems to be a rule followed from some instigation of instinct, rather than
precept of reason. I formerly spoke of the stimulus given to the stomach by the
alkalescency of meats, which, at the same time, I told you might be produced by
viscidity and long retention there. In the fish kind this is more remarkable,
they being a very short time in the stomach before they produce heat, fever,
thirst, and sometimes efflorescences over the whole surface of the body.

You will easily see, from the difficulty of giving the general qualities of
fishes, how little you can expect to be said on particulars.

In order to the understanding the qualities of Fishes, they have been
considered as differing in being River or Sea Fish, Saxatiles or Limosae, i. e.
those living in gravelly bottoms, or such as, like the Lamprey, lie at the
bottom, in the mud, etc. But in neither of these divisions do I find any
certain foundation for ascertaining the difference of Fishes as aliment. Dr.
Cheyne was extremely fond of the distinction by Color, the White being
supposed less stimulant, and the Red more so. In Birds and Quadrupeds this,
indeed, will hold; but there are, except the Salmon, few Fishes but what are of
a white color, so that this distinction will go but a little way. As we found
a difference in other aliment from a difference of food, the same would seem to
take place in Fishes, all of whom are mostly carnivorous; nor does any
difference in the kind of animals they eat seem to make any difference in their
qualities: The Perch, e. g. who eats mites, fishes, insects indifferently, and
all of them rapaciously, and indeed, besides, water fowl, etc. is not more
alkalescent than those who live on insects alone, etc. Nor indeed are they to
be distinguished entirely from their different genera, though that indeed comes
nearest the truth of any other of the distinctions. Now we proceed to the
particular genera.

SALMON.
Most of this genus are fluviatiles, or lacustres, of a tender substance,
sufficiently succulent and nourishing. They are also alkalescent and heating,
and efflorescences, etc. are as frequent from them as any other fish. The red
kind are of a higher relish and alkalescency, the white are soft and
gelatinous. Here I may observe, that Linnaeus seems to have forgot what are
called our Salmon Trout, which are undoubtedly more stimulating and
alkalescent, and less gelatinous than those of the white kind.

CYPRINUS.
This genus is of greater variety than the former, drier, and less tendinous,
less sapid and heating, and among the fishes of a nature little gelatinous.

To these in nature approaches the Perch, which is of firm texture, but tender
substance, easily soluble, not glutinous, heating, or remarkably stimulant.

GADUS.
These are Sea Fishes, and those of them we are best acquainted with are the
Whiting, Haddock, and Cod. These give a gradation in tenderness, glutinosity,
and stimulus to the system, the Cod being the firmest, most viscid, and heating
of the three.

Fishes are often distinguished as being more or less squamous. All those we
have mentioned are the scaly kind. The Amphibia and Eel kind have no scales.
The Flounder is intermediate betwixt the two. The squamous are universally less
glutinous than those without scales, easier miscible in the stomach, though
less nutritious. Before the squamous I set down

CYCLOPTERUS LUMPUS.
The Lumpus Fish is remarkably glutinous, without scales, approaching in
^^^lity to the Eel, and remarkably nutritious to them who use it. The Mackarel
is a drier substance and less nutritious; the Tunny is mentioned here
inadvertently, as it is only known in the the Mediterranean, and is there said
to be more succulent and nutritious than the common Mackarel.

TRIGLA CUCULUS, RED GURNARD.
This is a remarkable sapid Fish, of the white kind, said to be considerably
nutritious, and much valued in those places where it is used.

MUGIL, MULLET.
I am not certain if our Mullet be the Mugil of the Romans. It certainly has
not the exquisite relish for which they valued theirs, and seems to me to be of
a middle between the Carp and Haddock, less dry than the one, and more
succulent than the other. It is sufficiently soluble and nutritious.

ESOX LUCIUS, the PIKE.
This, though rapacious and carnivorous, is yet a dry, little oily and little
alkalescent food, and one of the least heating of any we take in. We must
suppose, then, considering these qualities of this fish, that there is somewhat
peculiar in their economy which gives rise to them.

CLUPEA.
All this genus, comprehending the Herring, etc. are of an oily, succulent
nutritious nature, in their heating quality being next to the Salmon,
quickening the pulse to a considerable degree.

PLEURONECTES, the FLOUNDER KIND.
This genus comprehends several species: They are all of a tender, oily,
succulent nature, more glutinous than the preceding, but less so than the
following. They are set down according to their qualities, the Flounder and
Soal more tender, the Turbot and Holy but more glutinous.

EEL KIND.
Some here are without squamae, much of the same quality with the Viper,
viscid, nutritious, and difficultly perspirable; by long retention in the
stomach, heating and oppressive. As to the different species, I am not in a
condition to ascertain the difference.

INSECTA.
This is a class little thought of as food. In some countries the Locusts and
Grasshoppers are used as food. I can say nothing of the Grasshopper, but that
it approaches in nature to the Shrimp. The whole of the Crab kind, although
different in their class, approach in their quality to Fishes in not being
easily dissolved by decoction, to the Amphibia in giving a jellied broth, and
again to the Fishes in stimulating the system. They afford little volatile
alkali, and to some are a very peculiar stimulus, producing heat, anxiety, and
fever. The three mentioned in the Catalogue are, Cancer Pagurus, the Crab;
Cancer Gammarus, the Shrimp; Cancer Squilla, the Lobster.

VERMES.
These were formerly confounded partly with the Fishes; for the reasons of
classing them separately, vide Linnaeus, vol. I. Systema Naturae. They are of
five orders, two only of which are used as aliment, the Mollusca and Testacea.
Of the Mollusca, the first species in the Catalogue is the Sepia Loligo, in
Scotland, the Stocking Fish; in England, the Ink Fish. With regard to its
qualities, it has none but what is common to it with the rest of the Vermes. Of
the Testacea I have only set down such as are found on our shores, and give for
them Linnaeus's trivial names. After the Sepia, I have set down eleven of the
Vermes, viz. Patella vulgata, Limpet, Papshell; Helix Pomatia, the Garden
Snail; Buccinum undatum, the Welk; in Scotland, the Bakky; Turbo littoreus,
Periwinkle; in North of Scotland, the Black Welk; the Razor, in England;
Cardium edule, the Cockle; Cardium echinatum, prickly Cockle; Venus Chione,
Gawky in Scotland; Ostrea maxima, Scallop; Clam in Scotland; Ostrea edulis,
common Oyster; Mytalus edulis, common Muscle.

The qualities of the whole of the Vermes is nearly the same. They are of a
more tender texture than any other Animal Food, and thus would seem to be of
very easy solution. But they afford, perhaps, the most viscid gluten of any of
the Animal Foods, by this means affect the mixture in the stomach, and more the
last digestion, by which they are with very great difficulty expelled. By this
means they are among the nourishing of Animal Foods; and though as Animal
Substances they are alkalescent, yet they are among the least so, and least
heating to the system.

Sepia loligo and Solen siliqua, or Spout, appear to possess nothing but the
common qualities of the Vermes.

The four first mentioned of the Testacea are Univalves, and the animal
inhabiting them of the same genus; the last four are Bivalves, and the animal
inhabiting them of the same genus, in all called, by Naturalists, Tethys; so
that really we have only two animals to treat of. With regard to the snail, it
has the general qualities of the Worms in a high degree, of a tender texture,
easily soluble, but viscid and imperspirable. The Garden Snail is not known
here as food, but in some of the southern countries it is reckoned a delicacy,
and very nourishing food. Our own snails are sometimes boiled in milk and
employed as a medicine in hectic cases, and I myself have seen remarkable
advantage from them where there were no ulcerations, they soon recruiting the
emaciated habit; but in case of ulcerations, these, as well as all other animal
food, are very improper. A remarkable instance of the nutritious quality of
Snails appears in the famine, which happened in this country about sixty years
ago, of two girls being found to be remarkably nourished from snails alone,
while others of (...) sort were meagre and half-starved.

With regard to the other genera, they are more commonly employed, but seem to
be less tender, and therefore, perhaps, less nutritious.

BIVALVES.
Of the Bivalves, the most common is the common Oyster: It is among the few
Animal Foods we take in raw, and in that state can be taken in much larger
proportion, and more easily digested, than when dressed. Keil and Sanctorius
both agree in calling it a food of slow perspirability. Keil says it retards
perspiration of other food; but this I confess I do not understand. On this
account they are nutritious, and, though long retained, as little heating as
any to the system.

The rest of the Bivalves are less soluble and tender; some of them are said to
be somewhat poisonous, as the Muscle and Limpet, but in what part of them this
resides I cannot tell; something, however, is always rejected.

EGGS of BIRDS.
These might have been set down after the Birds, but, as they are somewhat
analogous to the last mentioned food, I have placed them here. It is obvious,
from their nature and use in the nourishment of the foetus, that they contain a
larger proportion of pure nutriment than any other aliment, as they give no
foeces; for every other kind of animal food has some of its juices gone farther
to putrefaction than the albumen, which is extracted in our stomach, which are
deposited in that form. After all, Eggs are not of easy digestion, and, from
the proportion of nourishment they afford, cannot be taken in large quantity.
Whether the difficulty of digestion in Eggs resides naturally in the viscidity
of the albumen, or, in the coagulated state in which we take it in, is a
question; it seems at least to be increased by coagulation, as the hardest Egg
is most difficult of digestion. I do not think the insolubility resides in the
Yolk, as some have supposed, for I have known persons reject the White, and
live on the Yolk entirely, which is of different qualities and designed for an
after-food. I have already mentioned the insolubility of the albumen ovi out of
the body, by heat, etc. and said it could only depend on fermentation. Eggs
approach to the Vermes in viscidity and difficult perspirability; they are less
alkalescent than Flesh, some of whose juices have always proceeded too far. A
proof of the little alkalescency of Eggs, is from their being the Animal Food
least apt to pall. Some have supposed bad qualities, but I know no instance of
any: They are sometimes noxious to certain persons, but this we must explain
from an idiosyncrasy.

This is all that occurs on the subject of Eggs. I should next go on to
consider medicines, but, before that, shall recapitulate a little what has been
said on the subject of Aliment. From the whole you will perceive, that Aliment
is divided into Vegetable and Animal, and that Milk is of an intermediate
nature between both, acescent as the vegetable, but not liable to its noxious
acescency; nourishing as the Animal, though not liable to its noxious
alkalescency. The acescent Vegetable Aliment seems absolutely necessary to the
human economy, and there are none of the human species but what employ it. How
far we could dispense with Animal Food is uncertain; it seems rather useful
than necessary, in order to give great strength, and for subsistence and long
duration of life little proper. Farther, the Vegetable Aliment is never
hurtful, except in the primae viae, and in these only of the diseased: Its
effects never appear in the blood vessels. On the contrary, Animal Food, which
is more nourishing, easily goes to excess, and exposes to danger, readily, by
its alkalescency, laying the foundation of diseases, and as well as its other
qualities, e. g. corpulency, obesity, and putrescent acrimony.

EFFECTS of ALIMENT on the MIND.
It is plain the delicacy of feeling, liveliness of imagination, quickness of
apprehension, and acuteness of judgment more frequently accompany a weak state
of the body. True it is, indeed, that the same state is liable to timidity,
fluctuation and doubt, while the strong have that steadiness of judgment, and
firmness of purpose which are proper for the higher and more active scenes of
life. The most valuable state of the Mind, however, appears to reside in
somewhat less firmness and vigor of body. Vegetable Aliment, as never
over-distending the vessels, or loading the system, never interrupts the
stronger exercise of the Mind, while the heat, fullness, and weight of Animal
Food is an enemy to its activity. Temperance, then, does not so much consist in
the quantity, for that always will be regulated by our appetite, as in the
quality, viz. a large proportion of Vegetable Aliment. So much in general.
Vegetable Aliment consists of sugar and oil, both separately nutritious, but in
that state liable to disadvantages. Sugar is of difficult assimilation,
especially if its acid is evolved; as then, like the recent fruits, it will be
a proper subject for the vinous fermentation. Oil is more difficultly mixed,
and oily foods more so in proportion, as that is more separate. The Farinacea,
where the oil and sugar are intimately blended, are the most perfect of
Vegetable Aliment, and of these the Cerealia, as you will now easily know from
their qualities.

Animal food differs in alkalescency and viscidity. The Quadrupeds and Birds
are the most alkalescent, the Fishes and Vermes the most viscid. Alkalescency
seems to depend on the heat of the animal. The Quadrupeds and Birds have the
greatest heat, the Fishes and worms least. A farther proof of the less
alkalescency of Fishes is, that with Animal Food we are constantly led by
instinct to take in Vegetable Aliment. The same instinct has never led us to
take it in with Fishes. For experiment sake, I have sometimes taken Apples
along with Fish, and found them to disturb digestion. The flesh of Quadrupeds
and Birds is, on account of its alkalescency, more easily dissolved, and sooner
assimilated into blood, giving easiest nourishment and strength, while on the
same account it is wisely ordained that it is sooner expelled. Fishes and
worms, on account of their viscidity, are more difficultly dissolved and
assimilated, retained longer in the system, and only heating from their
retention, and thus even accumulating the fluids, and affording nourishment to
the solid parts.

ON THE VIRTUES OF MEDICINES.
HAVING finished the subject of Aliments, I proceed in the next place to
consider Medicines. As introductory to this, I think it necessary to tell you
the manner of investigating their virtues. As the foundation of what I have to
say on this, I shall ta^e the following Canon from Linnaeus, in his Materia
Medica: Systemate, Qualitate, et Experientia cruitur omnis usus Plantarum.

What he here applies to Vegetables, will, in some measure, suit the other
Kingdoms. The two first qualities he explains more fully in his Philosophia
Botanica, where he employs the term Fructification, which is the same with the
term System; for according to the fructification, are plants systematically
disposed. (...) giving the qualities of Aliment, I have often alluded to its
place in Natural History, and shall be obliged hereafter to do so more in
giving the qualities of Medicine. This method of investigating the virtues from
the Botanical Divisions, was long since started by Hoffman, in his treatise De
compendioso methodo, etc. and before him by our countryman Dr. Blair, in the
Philosophical Transactions, etc. The Botanical Rules are, however, far from
being general; but, as far as they go, they serve very well for analogy, and it
is on this account we shall often have recourse to them. But before you can be
acquainted with these Rules, it will be necessary to give you an idea of Method
in Natural History in general.

Method in Natural History in general, is that by which a production of Nature
being presented, we can proceed to know how it can be distinguished from all
other productions of Nature, and the name by which Writers have distinguished
it, in order that, by this means, we may arrive at a knowledge of its nature,
qualities, and virtues. This is done by collecting natural productions into
Kingdoms, Classes, Orders, Genera, and Species. As to the first division, if a
subject were presented to me, in which I could observe no proper organization,
no difference between the containing and contained parts, I would conclude it
to be of the Mineral or Fossile Kingdom. A Fossile also has no appearance of
the vita multiplicata, or power of propagating its like. But if there be a
difference between the containing and contained parts, and if it have the power
of multiplying itself, I conclude it is either of the Animal, or Vegetable
Kingdom. Again, to distinguish these, if I find the subject fixed, or, when
moved, to have no locomotive power, or arbitrary means of moving itself, I
conclude our subject to be Vegetable; for Animals are organized bodies, endued
with vita multiplicata and a locomotive power, or, if fixed, have the arbitrary
power of moving their parts. These are the largest collections, and are called
KINGDOMS.

Each of these is again subdivided into Classes, etc. In order to give a notion
of these, it will be easiest to take examples from the Animal Kingdom; as with
that you must, in some measure, be already acquainted. The Animal Kingdom is
divided into six Classes. Linnaeus has first attempted a division of them into
three; from the structure of their heart, and the heat and color of the blood.
The first have a heart of two ventricles, and two auricles, and a warm red
blood; the second have a heart of one ventricle, and one auricle, with a cold
red blood; the third have a heart of one auricle, and one ventricle, with a
cold white blood, or, as Linnaeus calls it, sanies. If we were to examine these
strictly, I believe they would not answer so well; so I rather choose to take
the six subdivisions; viz. Mammalia, Aves, Amphibia, Pisces, Insecta, Vermes.

1. The Mammalia have a heart with two auricles, and two ventricles, with a
warm red blood, are necessarily breathing, having their respiration alternate,
succeeding in a short time; maxillae incumbentes, or jaws laid horizontally on
each other; in opposition to those which open laterally, and these jaws always
covered; penis intrans, or the parts of generation of the male entering the
female, who is always viviparous, provided with breasts, and suckles her young.

2. Aves, same heart and respiration as the Mammalia; maxillae incumbentes, but
not covered, exsertae, or having the maxillae stretched, without the parts of
the head; edentulae, or without teeth; the male, too, enters the female, but
are without external testicles. Their females are oviparous, and have their
eggs covered with a calcarious crust. The whole of them are always covered with
feathers, and have only two feet. I shall give the reason why I did not use
this in the distinction of the Mammalia, viz. that it did not suit to all of
them; some having, and some wanting, four feet.

3. Amphibia, have a heart of one ventricle, and one auricle, with a cold red
blood. There is some doubt with regard to the universality of distinguishing
them by one auricle, and one ventricle; but the exceptions are not certain.
When I say a cold, I mean one not much warmer than the surrounding medium,
whether that be air or water. They have lungs with which they breathe
arbitrarily; they agree with the two former in maxillae incumbentes; they have
two penises: The females are generally oviparous, though not always so; when
they are, their ova are covered only with a membrane. Their teguments are
neither hairs nor feathers. Their feet are too various to be characterised.

4. Fishes; one auricle, and one ventricle, with the same blood as the
Amphibia. They differ from the three former, in not being breathing animals;
but instead of lungs are provided with bronchiae, which alternately take in and
let out water, instead of air. They have maxillae incumbentes, no penis, all
are oviparous, and their eggs are said to want an albumen; a fact which I am
very averse to believe. As to their tegmenta, their skin is universally covered
with scales, and they have fins with which they swim.

5. Insecta; heart with one auricle and one ventricle, hardly a colored fluid
for blood. As to their respiration it is uncertain; they have no lungs, but are
supposed to have somewhat analogous to them, maxillae laterales, penis intrans;
they are generally oviparous, whether universally is yet undetermined. I
believe they are not. As to teguments, they are covered with a hard shelly
substance, cataphracta, or coat of mail. They are distinguished from all the
other Classes by their Antennae, i. e. horns, or feelers, for directing their
way, etc. but, indeed, we are not at all certain of their use.

6. Vermes. These have a heart with one ventricle, and one auricle, sanie
frigida. With regard to their respiration nothing is determined, as they appear
to have nothing analogous to it. As to their jaws they are various. As to their
tegmenta they are never covered with shells; sometimes, indeed, they have a
calcarious covering, separable from the body, and distinct from it; they have
neither feet nor fins.

This is a specimen of our method of distinguishing into Classes. These Classes
are divided into orders. Of the Orders we shall give you an example in the
Mammalia.

Of the Mammalia there are eight Orders. The first Order is, so many of
Quadrupeds, and others which are not, but instead of feet have fins with which
they swim, and are inhabitants of the water: They have the other general
qualities of the Mammalia. These make a distinct Order, the Cete. The
Quadrupeds are divided into the other seven Orders, according to the state of
their teeth. 1. Those which have no fore teeth below or above, are called
Bruta. Those which have them below and not above, are the Pecora. Those which
have only two fore teeth above and below, without laniary, are called Glires,
etc. etc.

But to take them in the order which Linnaeus has placed them: 1. Primates have
four upper teeth, single canini, or laniary. 2. Bruta have no fore teeth above
or below. 3. Ferae have fore teeth both above and below; six above, and all of
them acute and sharp, with single canini. 4. Bestiae; these have always more
then one canine tooth in each jaw. 5. The Glires we have mentioned already; as
also, 6. The Pecora. 7. The Belluae have several fore teeth, which are blunted
and obtuse.

After the Orders, the next division is into Genera; of which I shall give you
an example in the Pecora, with which you are best acquainted. The ordinal
character was taken from the teeth, etc. the generical characters are taken
from the horns. The Pecora comprehends six Genera, the Camel, the Musk Deer,
the Sheep, the Ox, the Stag, and Goat. The two first have no horns; the four
last are horned. The Stag has solid horns without a hollow, branching
backwards; the other three have their horns hollowed, and are distinguished by
the direction of these horns. The cow kind have their horns turned forwards,
(porrecta) etc. Vide Linnaei Systema Naturae, vol. I. Lastly, the Genera are
divided into species, which are individuals which Nature has created. Of these
I shall give you an example in the Camel. The whole species is not known. Four
are mentioned by Linnaeus: The Camel, Dromedary, Glama, and Pacos. The Camel
has only one bunch, the Dromedary two, the Glama has no such bunch on the back,
but one on the breast; the Pacos has no such tophy, or bunches at all, and is
more distinctly covered with wool. Now to go backwards, and give an example of
the whole. Suppose an unknown animal, e. g. the Pacos, was presented. From its
four feet we reduce it to the class of the Mammalia, from having no teeth in
the upper jaw, we trace it to the Order of the Pecora, from having no horns, we
range it in the first or second Genus of those, we determine it to the first of
these, from its having more than one laniarius, or canine tooth, and lastly,
from its being without tophi, and more distinctly covered with wool, we bring
it to the Pacos, the fourth species of the Camel. When we have thus got its
name, we look into books, and find its nature, history, and qualities. You see,
then, how useful and necessary, although seemingly laborious, this method of
Natural History is. From what I have said, you will understand what I mean by
deducing the virtues of Medicines, from the place they have in Natural History;
although to confirm you in it, more practice will be necessary.

We have now spoken of Kingdoms, Classes, Orders, Genera, and Species. This
last is divided into Varieties. That is a Variety where the differences or
marks by which it is known are not inherent in the subject, but depend on the
soil, climate, etc. This takes place in the Animal Kingdom, but is much more
remarkable in the Vegetable. In the last a variety is distinguished in this
way, viz. if the seed put into the ground does not propagate the same variety,
but comes up agreeing with the species. Now to go on with this subject a little
further. I must inform you, the Method in Natural History is far from being
perfect: For many disputes subsist among Naturalists, about the Classes and
Orders to which subjects ought to be reduced. This depends on the characters
assumed for arranging them at first; e. g. If I were to give flying as the
fundamental characteristic of a bird, this would not be perfect, because there
are flying Amphibia, etc. We much better than with Linnaeus fix the character
from the feathers, legs, etc. In the first method the Bat would be ranked among
the Birds: But when we find that it has four feet, is viviparous, etc. it is
properly placed among the Quadrupeds. Disputes of this kind have often occured,
and Linnaeus himself is an example of this. Formerly, e. g. the Cete was ranked
among the Fishes, as an inhabitant of the water, etc. but now, Linnaeus
considering that, excepting in this respect, it agreed entirely with the
Mammalia, he has very properly ranked it among them; in which opinion Ray long
ago agreed with him. In short, if we assume as the fundamental character of
Fishes, that they are inhabitants of the water, we shall take in many amphibia,
worms, etc. into the same Order. We must have regard to other qualities, as the
structure of the heart, etc. before mentioned.

There still subsist many such disputes among Naturalists, with regard to every
one of the divisions I spoke of; e. g. Klein, of Dantzick, divides Animals
according to their claws, while Linnaeus's division you know, is according to
the teeth. The Camel, with Linnaeus, is in the order of the Pecora; with Klein
among the Animals of two claws. Linnaeus very properly ranked the Camel with
the Pecora, for besides the external structure, it agrees with the rest of its
rank in the internal, viz. stomach, etc. whereas merely on account of an
agreement in claws, by Klein it is ranked among animals, otherwise essentially
different. This leads you to understand the difference between natural and
artificial order in Natural History. That method is artificial, which brings
together Classes, etc. merely from one single arbitrary mark, or one that
seemed most convenient in distributing these Classes, etc. That method natural,
which brings into Classes, etc. such subjects as have the greatest number of
marks or characters in common. The artificial method, although sometimes it may
more easily enable us to distinguish genera, is yet, on the whole, very
troublesome and confounding; and universally, the method which in Natural
History is most natural, will be in practice of the easiest application; for
besides collecting substances, which agree in external marks, it places
together those whose internal properties are in common. There are few systems
where we can preserve the natural method. The Mammalia of Linnaeus is a very
natural Class, as indeed most of his Classes are; but of this Class there are
no natural orders, but the Pecora and Cete. The Ferae are nearly so, but all
the rest are artificial distributions; e. g. in the Primates, which order
comprehends Man, the Monkey is properly enough set down; for, besides having
four teeth above, etc. it resembles in other internal properties; but the
addition of the Bat, which agrees with the rest of the order only by its teeth,
is certainly very unnatural. In his other Orders, the same difficulty is often
found, to which only the subject of Quadrupeds, by attempting to reduce the^ to
a few Orders (in which, indeed, he is much to be commended) he is perpetually
exposed. Other examples will occur to you, upon looking into the system, as in
his placing the Horse in the same genus with the Hippopotamus, merely on
account of its teeth, etc.

To apply all this to our present purpose, which was in giving this sketch of
Method in Natural History, chiefly to make you understand the difference
between natural and artificial method.

Vegetables, in the same manner as Animals, are divided into Classes, etc. In
every botanical method care has been taken to assume a natural one; but in none
has it yet been perfectly obtained: And plants of dissimilar qualities in
nature are often associated together, merely lege systematis as they speak. The
investigation of the virtues of plants, from the system, is thus spoke of by
Linnaeus, in his Philosophia Botanica. Plantae quae genere convenient virtute
etiam convenient, quae in ordine naturali convenient virtute proprius accedunt,
quae class naturali convenient virtutibus quodam modo congruunt. This rule is
more exact as you advance to the lowest distributions, for in Nature there is
no distribution certain, but that of species; even those of genera are much
more artificial; and the higher you arise always more so; and for the
application of this rule, as you see Linnaeus has carefully marked, you must
alone have recourse to the natural divisions. He has given these, independent
of his Classes, etc. in his Philosophia Botanica, in what he calls his
Fragmenta Methodi Naturalis. For our purpose, then, you must only study Natural
History in this way, and you may always allow, I mean mostly, that those
substances, which are in the same natural order, are somewhat of corresponding
virtues.

Thus Jalap, Mechoacan, etc. are very properly ranged together. In looking over
Linnaeus's list, I find the majority he puts together are of the same virtues,
and perhaps should find still more, if they were all employed in medicine. But
often there are exceptions, and Linnaeus ranges several, not without doubt, or
punctum interrogandi? So much may be said in favor of the general rule. But
although as an analogy it will serve to direct in the beginning of study, yet
afterward, on applying it to particular purposes, it is found to be
fallacious; so that always we should be on our guard in using it. Cinnamon,
Camphire, and Benzoin are ranged together under the genus laurus. All these,
indeed, agree in aroma, but their particular virtues are very different. Many
examples of the same kind occur Most of the Sedums are mild, but there is one
very acrid. Among the Cucumis, the Colocynth is by far the strongest.
, and no order is without exceptions, when even in varieties Of this the Bitter
and Sweet Almond is an example; one of which is an innocent, mild substance,
and very nutritious; the other, to some animals, poisonous.
the virtues are different, and often in the same part of the plant; as in the
aromatic rind, the bitter seed, and acid juice of the same Orange, etc.
Besides, in medicine we often use different parts of the plant of the same
species. Thus of Senna and Cassia, in the one we use the leaves, in the other
the bark; parts which are found of different virtues. If the leaves of Cassia
were employed, it is probable the general rule would apply The Potatoe, which
belongs to the Genus Solanum, is another instance of this kind; and perhaps the
same observation may be extended to it.
. Our preparation also of a plant will alter its virtues, by correcting,
destroying, or abstracting its acrid parts, an example of which you had
formerly in the Cassada.

In my Catalogue I have set down my Plants according to the natural order. In
how much they contradict the general rule, shall be mentioned when I come to
treat of them particularly.

There is nothing, about which Physicians have been more anxious, than in
finding the best method of investigating the virtues of unexperienced
substances. Various have been the methods for this purpose; many more than
these I have mentioned. All the methods I choose to employ, are expressed in the
aphorism of Linnaeus, which I have already set down. I have now explained the
first means of investigation, viz. Systemate. I should next proceed to the
second means, viz. Qualitate; but previous to that, I shall take notice of
several other aphorisms of Linnaeus; and first of that concerning the soil, or,
as he calls it, the locus of Plants. It is this: Locus ficcus sapidas,
succulentus insipidas magis, aquosus corrosivas reddit.

This rule, in some measure, may be admitted like other general rules, but,
like them, has also a great many exceptions. Thus Rice and Rye, both of them
bland nutritious substances, are exceptions to this rule. Rice must grow in
some measure in water; while the Rye delights in a dry soil. The Becabunga is a
very mild plant, the Hyoscyamus one of the most acrid, and yet the former grows
in watery, the latter in dry situations. Even plants of the same genus, will,
in the same soil, be very different; e. g. the Persicaria mitis and urens. Upon
the whole, this rule seems to have been taken from a few observations, and
those chiefly on the order of the umbellati. I imagine the two first loci
mentioned, the siccus and succulentus, will apply best to the same plant,
growing in different soils. Thus an Aromatic in a dry soil is in the greatest
perfection, while, transplanted to a rich moist one, it loses its fragrancy,
and becomes insipid. This does not apply so well to other species.

Another aphorism of Linnaeus is still more general: viz. Lactescentes plantae
communiter venenatae sunt. For my part, I have met with no exception to this
rule, and even those which have the milky consistence, though without the
color, generally agree with it. Linnaeus himself gives some exception: e. g.
the Semiflosculosae, an order of plants, which we had occasion to mention as
used in aliment. All these give milky juices, but are, however, no certain
exceptions; for several of the class are of deleterious qualities; and if those
we employed as food, were allowed to attain their full perfection, they would
probably be found of the same kind. It is on this account that we blanch them,
or use them only when young. Linnaeus, in a note, gives another exception, the
Campanulatae Some of these enter into our food.
, which in general are milder than the former; but as some of them are of
dangerous qualities, the general rule ought still to make us cautious
concerning them, and all other lactescent plants, which are unknown to us.

I now proceed to the investigation of the virtues of plants, ex Qualitate, i.
e. according to the taste, smell, etc. Linnaeus, 1. Aphorism* here is,
Insipidae et inodorae vim medicam vix exercent. This rule seems to be without
any exception; and it is on this account, and not on any proper experience,
that many plants are expunged from the Materia Medica; as having no taste or
odor, which should point out in them any active qualities; and most such, I
believe, are employed as aliment. His other general rule, Sapidissimae et
odoratissimae maximam vim posident, I cannot admit so indiscriminately; for the
odor of Plants often resides in a portion inconsiderably small, whose effects
must be very inconsiderable; neither must we take the medical virtues merely
from the poignancy of taste, as that often is deceitful. Thus Ipecacuana, a
medicine of active powers, has no smell; as to taste, it is very often latent,
and not found till long chewed. On the contrary, the Cress kind, though of
considerable poignancy of taste, are endued with very little medical powers, at
least not with a vis maxima. However, as the want of odor, or taste, rejects
the supposition of medical virtue, we may, on the whole, conclude, that those
which possess them, have more or less of such; the difficulty is to ascertain
the degree.

With regard to odours, I find this very difficult, as they are of such
infinite variety, and of so little resemblance, as makes it very difficult to
reduce them to any general heads, so that thence we might derive particular
virtues from the different kinds of them. Linnaeus has attempted a distinction
of this sort. The simply fragrant, as the Violet and Wall flower, etc. the
ambrosiaca, as the asperula. By ambrosiacae he means somewhat of a musk odor,
and gives us another example, the malva moschata; which, by the bye, I take to
be an evidence of very strong odor, being accompanied with little medical
virtue; for this plant is of very inert qualities. Another odor he mentions,
is the aromatic, comprehending under it Thyme, Lavender, Saffron, Cinnamon,
Sassafras, etc. all these are of a distinct odor, and any resemblance they
have, is found not to be supported by their virtues in medicine, which are
found by experience to be very different. Besides these, there is a kind
somewhat betwixt the fragrant and foetid, which I would call the graveolenta,
such as that of Cummin, Coriander, etc. The more directly foetid are as much to
be distinguished from each other as the aromatic, i. e. the difference of the
Rue, etc. is very different from the stupifying odor of Tobacco or Opium, etc.
etc.

Upon the whole, very little of the medicinal powers are to be determined from
the odor. Some degree of it, indeed, may be determined from a very strong one,
though even that is often fallacious.

Linnaeus's other general rule, Sapidae et suaveolentes bonae sunt; nauseosae
et graveolentes venenatae sunt, will be found often to be false; nay, in many
cases, the reverse. Thus, almost all the Lily kind, which are certainly
suaveolentae, are poisonous, as also the Jasmine; and on the other hand, the
nauseous and foetid are often without any dangerous powers, while those
altogether inodorous often possess them. Linnaeus also pretends to say, that
sapida non agunt in nervos, nec^ olida in fibras musculares, etc. This depends
on a nice, physiological distinction, and if, as I think, the moving fibers are
continuations of the nerves, or at least intimately affected by them, what acts
upon the one, will certainly do so on the other.

Linnaeus's next aphorism, Ambrosiaca analeptica, Fragrantia orgastica,
Aromatica excitantia, Tetra stupefacientia. Nauseosa corrosiva, is very
difficult to understand, and, were it necessary to comment upon it, might
easily be shown to have little foundation in nature.

So much with regard to Smell. Taste is of considerable more use than Smell in
determining the virtues a priori. Authors on this subject have generally stopped
at generalities. Linnaeus is very imperfect upon it. Our countryman,
Abercrombie, has also touched on the same subject; but from Sir John Floyer's
Treatise, though at first attempted with imperfection. I find I am able to draw
the most useful hints. Having then spoken on the Subject of System and Quality
so far as regards Odor (of which having said enough) I go on to

TASTE.
Taste labors under the same difficulties as Odor. The perceptions from the
same impression vary in Smell remarkably, in Taste considerably so. There is
not only the same difference of what is grateful to one being not so to
another, but also a difference with regard to impression, what is acrid to me
being almost insipid to another. It is not with regard to sweet and bitter,
etc. that men differ, it is with regard to compound tastes, in expressing which
there is no small difficulty; but as this subject leads farther than any other
to the knowledge of unexperienced substances, I shall attempt, as a foundation
for observations afterward to be made upon it, to give somewhat of an
arrangement of Tastes.

1. Insipid. This is of three kinds: The watery, mucilaginous, and oily; in all
of which we judge properly of the consistence, and not of the impression or
Taste. Of the Tastes that produce sapidity, I shall first take notice of one in
common to the whole vegetable kingdom, viz. the 2d, the Herbaceous. In many
plants we have this perception, joined with many others, so that, however, the
herbaceous lurks under the whole, and in common to the whole plant.

Sometimes again it is simple, as in Chickweed. The herbaceous is frequently
mixed with more or less of the oily, poignant, saline, called a nitrous taste,
as in raw Beets, and Spinach. Another difference of it belongs to the Legumina,
called the Pea Taste, found in the leaves of Pease and other Legumina.

3. Acid. This is simple and pure, in some fruits of a watery consistence, as
Oranges separated from the rind.

4. Next to this is the Austere, or Styptic Taste, as that in galls, or the
barks of trees: In which last it is as fundamental as the herbaceous Taste in
vegetables. Acerb is often confounded with acid or austere, but it is properly
a compound of both. All fruits in their unripe state are acerb, some of them
always remain so, as Sloes. Between the acid and acerb, there are intermediate
degrees. Lemons have a degree, e. g. of austerity along with their acid.

5. Sweet, e. g. Sugar. This is seldom pure, and commonly united and confounded
with acid, as in the acido dulces: And that again has commonly somewhat of
acerbity along with it. Sweet is also united with austere, producing what
Floyer calls the Fern Taste. This is obvious in polypody, ferns, etc.

6. The next simple Taste is the Bitter. This is seldom pure, often confounded
with acrimony, aromatic, or austere. To me an instance of the pure Bitter
occurs in Gentian.

7. The pure Acrid is difficult to find. An example occurs in Guinea Pepper.
When an acrimony is joined to fragrancy of odor it is aromatic. This is more
or less pure. Cinnamon is an instance of the purest aromatic. When an acrid is
joined with a disagreeable odor, it may be called foetid or nauseous. Some,
however, take the nauseous as a simple taste, an instance of which is given in
Opium, which is neither bitter nor acrid.

These are all the simple Tastes. Various are the Tastes compounded of these;
the austere bitter of Rhubarb; the aromatic bitter, as in Orange or Lemon peel;
the nauseous bitter, as in Assa Foetida; the peculiar bitter of Floyer, which
he calls the smoaky or sooty bitter, and Naturalists the amaro frigida, as
Lettuce, etc. the Laurel bitter, which is commonly enclosed in shells, as
bitter Almonds, kernels of black Cherries, etc. the balsamic or terebinthinate
bitter, as that of Turpentine, Resins, etc. are examples of compound bitters,
and probably the foundation of all their varieties.

Instances of compound Acrids occur in the bitter Acrid, as Curcuma, the
nauseous Acrid, which is commonly purgative, as Seneka, in chewing of which you
have a succession of Tastes, insipid, sweet, nauseous, acrid, which commonly,
as I said just now, serves to distinguish purgatives.

Compound aromatic Tastes occur in Ginger. Cinnamon, I have said, is purely and
simply aromatic; in Ginger the acrimony is more evident with less of the aroma.
It is thus we distinguish between the acrid aromatic and the aromatic acrid.

The Cress and Garlic Acrids occur in Cresses, Garlic, Onions, and others of
the Class.

This list of Tastes is very far from being complete. However, I found it
necessary to give it, in order for a foundation for more accurate distinctions,
as they are the leading experiments of judging by analogy. On the whole, the
virtues of substances accompany pretty constantly and regularly their peculiar
Tastes, especially if they are simple. In compound Tastes we ought always to
hesitate, for the virtues of a medicine are often found to reside principally
in a very small proportion of sapid substance, which, amidst the confusion of
other Tastes, will often discover itself imperfectly and obscurely, if it is
not hid altogether. As to the simple Tastes, the pure austere is astringent,
the sweet nutritious, and the pure bitter of the same virtues with the rest of
the kind; but more of this shall be observed afterward, when I come to treat
of particular substances, which in my Catalogue I have sometimes arranged,
according to their uniformity of Tastes.

COLOR.
Linnaeus has taken in Color, as varying the virtues of Medicines. His
aphorism is this, Color pallidus insipidum, viridis crudum, luteus amarum,
ruber acidum, albus dulce, niger ingratum indicat. All these of Color is less
useful than the Odor, much less so than the Taste, and is very far from being
general.

Luteus amarum indicat. I formerly observed, the lactescent plants, and even
such as were of milky consistence, were often poisonous, and had a degree of
acrimony and bitterness with them. If Linnaeus, then, had said, that the yellow
juices of plants were bitter, or acrid, his rule would have been much more
general. The yellow Plumb is an exception.

Rub^r acidum. This is not founded. It is applicable only to fruits, which, in
proportion to their redness, have often their acerbity turned to an acid; for
many flowers are red, which have no acidity. Several plants which are of a
green color are acid, as Sorrel, etc. but these Linnaeus says are only such as
turn red in autumn. But surely the Brassica, which is of this kind, has in it
no acidity, etc.

Viridis crudum. This observation is only relative, being applicable only to
fruits, which, in the progress of their growth, change their color with their
maturity.

Pallidus insipidum. This is a still greater mistake, for pale plants are far
from being generally insipid. Linnaeus means here those plants which, being
naturally green, attain, by blanching, a white color.

Albus dulce. This rule is relative to fruits. Thus the white current is
sweeter than the red. Whether it applies to apples, plumbs, rasps, etc. is a
question. Certain it is, that the red plumb is as sweet as the white, etc. This
rule, as well as the rest, is of very little use.

Niger ingratum. This is far from being conclusive, although when a general
rule of this kind leads to an important caution, it ought to be observed. Black
currants, in contradiction to it, are equally harmless with the red.

This finishes what I had to say on the sensible qualities. Another method of
examining and detecting the virtues of plants is by their chemical qualities.

CHEMICAL QUALITIES.
From chemical investigation much has been expected; but it is now known little
can be obtained. The first means of applying Chemistry to this purpose, is by
the distillation per se. It is now known, that the matters hence produced, are
the same in all plants; their proportion only being different in different
substances. It serves, however, to distinguish between animal and vegetable
substances; the first giving a volatile alkali, the second an acid, in the
first part of their distillation. The fungi, however, and esculent mushrooms,
according to Geoffroy, give out a volatile alkali in the first part of the
distillation. If any other such be found, we may conclude them among the more
putrescent vegetable substances, and of peculiar qualities. Chemical analysis
may be employed in such a case as the following, viz. of an expressed juice
presented to us, which has come from abroad. If such give out a volatile alkali
in distillation, we may conclude, that the substance was very nearly animal,
or, indeed, what is more probable, that it had undergone the putrefactive
process in transportation. With regard to the acid of vegetable, I do not know
whether it will bear any application; for not only is it varied in different
vegetables, but also is not regular, that is, in any determinate proportion to
the virues of the recent plant, that which in its fresh state has least of it,
affording sometimes most in distillation. The quantity of volatile alkali is
also much diversified, but from these I am of opinion we might determine the
different alkalescency of animal food.

If time were allowed me, it is very possible I should go through a great
number of distillations, in order to determine what influence the difference of
proportion might have. The experiments of the French Academy are not properly
compared on this subject, of the proportion of different principles by chemical
analysis. 1. With regard to spt. rector. some have given it without
decomposition, and allowed it to pass over unnoticed into the receiver, or
allowed to mix indiscriminately with the other parts. 2. Acid is grossly
estimated from the proportion of water; whereas in all cases it ought to have
been determined from a further rectification. 3. Alkali is still more
imperfectly computed, being never estimated but in so far as it appeared in a
solid form; whereas some of it is always in the phlegm, and some of it united
with the acid into an ammoniacal salt. Neither, 4. with regard to the oil is
the estimate fair. They have always neglected that which is in the charcoal,
whose blackness, etc. is often owing to this, and, in my opinion, the
diminution it suffers of weight in the open air, may always be reckoned as so
much oil of the subject.

Upon the whole, although this subject had been properly executed, it is
uncertain what inferences might have been drawn from it; but, as the matter is
at present, in talking of medicines I shall always neglect it.

Another less violent Chemistry has been proposed by Lemery, viz. Fermentation;
but that, in my opinion, would as much alter our subjects as Fire.

Another method of investigation has been proposed from the Essential Salts;
but this has been so little followed, that I do not know what can be drawn from
it; and indeed they generally arise from a decomposition: However, if they be
in very great proportion, some judgment may be formed, as, e. g. a large
proportion of Sugar may be inferred nutritious.

Lastly, Solution and Extraction by different Menstrua has been proposed, but I
am afraid on as weak foundations, for discovering the virtues of remedies, as
any of the former. The Menstrua used are commonly Water and Alcohol. The
resinous parts extracted by the Alcohol are ordinarily most active, although
this is far from being general, as the gummy often are so. But this, as leading
to, and being the foundation of, the pharmaceutical treatment, I shall always
insert from the best Authors, and give observations in consequence.

ADSTRINGENTIA.
The distribution of particular substances I have formerly explained: The
different Medicines were distributed according to the indications, and, if
these were one and the same, according to their common operation on the human
body. The order of the several indications was this: 1. According to their
operation on the Solids and Fluids. The operation on the solids is divided into
two kinds; first, as they act on the simple solid; secondly, as on the solida
viva, or the organs of animals, whose properties disappear with life.

With regard to these generalities, I need not hint that it is impossible
absolutely to be correct, for there is no distribution which is not liable to
very great difficulty: We have, however, given that which to us seemed the
best, for in the beginning of study we ought to acquire general propositions,
afterward finding out exceptions, or applying them to particular cases. We now
begin with those Medicines which act on the simple Solids: These are of two
kinds; first, as they increase; secondly, such as diminish the cohesion and
strength of the simple Solid. Those of the first kind are what are strictly
Astringents, called also Constringents, Styptics, Tonies, Roborants, etc. as we
have formerly mentioned: This is the simplest view of them, and what we must
here necessarily take. With regard to this, as well as all other heads, we
shall endeavor to show their manner of action on the human body, the diseases
in which they are required, the particulars wherein they are hurtful, in what
manner their virtues are discovered to be present, and along with that the
particular part or parts in which their virtue resides, which leads us, lastly,
to the Pharmaceutical Rules for their Extraction.

As to the Operation of ASTRINGENTS, some people have imagined to themselves a
very simple theory. Animal Fibers they supposed or considered as composed of
solid earthy particles, adhering together in a line, by means of a gluten
composed of water and oil; vide Boerhaave. Now, with regard to increasing the
Cohesion of the Fibers, it may be supposed to depend on the proximity of the
particles. If then we insinuate between each particle another of the same kind,
we increase the Cohesion of the Fiber, and in this manner have Astringents been
supposed to act. This theory is very uncertain, and there is no instance in
other parts of Nature, of increasing the Cohesion of Bodies in this manner:
Even in the Coagulation of Fluids, which is analogous to this, we cannot
certainly say it is performed by the interposition or insertion of particles of
another of the same kind. Some appearances, however, seem to contradict this:
Thus the coagulation of White of Eggs by Spirit of Wine may be supposed to be
by the insinuation of the particles of the Spirit of Wine between those of the
Albumen, and so attracting them to each other. To me it seems rather owing to a
decomposition, the Spirit of Wine attracting the Water, and so the solid parts
running together. Coagulation seems to be a-decomposition, or a detraction of
some parts, in the same manner as a fluid volatile alkali forms with Spirit of
Wine an Offa Helmontii, by attracting the water of the volatile alkali.

A simple fiber, then, being composed of fluid and solid, the cohesion of the
whole may be increased, by diminishing the watery substance, or by addition of
solid. It appears to me, that Astringents act more in the first way, by
exsiccating or absorbing the fluids interposed. Thus the operation of tanning,
which is entirely analogous to this, is carried on almost entirely by
abstraction of fluids. So much for the action of Astringents on the simple
solid fibers. I must now observe, that it is impossible to keep to our first
resolution of separating bodies, which act on the simple solids, from those
which act on the moving fibers. Astringents, then, must have a double action,
first, on the simple solid; secondly, on the solida viva, or the fibers of
living bodies. If the action was only on the simple fibers, it must be confined
to the part, to which the substance was directly applied, by absorbing its
fluid, or increasing its solid parts; whereas we see the effect propagated to
the rest of the body. Thus, Alum applied to the tip of the tongue, does not
stop in its action there, but, independent of diffusion, induces cohesion and
corrugation over the whole mouth. If then Astringents taken into the stomach
extend, in a short time, their action over the system, I maintain it is owing
to their effect on the moving fibers. If then we look to an Astringent's action
on a particular part, and then its operation over the whole system, it is
inconceivable, and almost impossible to allege, that the dose can be so
divided, as to be conveyed to every particular part, or, far less, to the
morbid part. We must, therefore, suppose some other reason, and the effect on
the system is in consequence of the universal sympathy of the stomach; as when
we give an Astringent internally in an Haemorrhagy of the Uterus, it is
impossible that a small portion of an Astringent can be so divided as to be
carried there, far less that the whole of it should be so, to produce this
effect. The propagation of virtues, then, as all other effects on the nervous
power is scarcely explicable, but as innumerable instances of it occur, we must
admit it as a fact.

Hitherto we have only considered Astringents as acting on a particular part,
but they also may be considered in different lights, e. g. certain Stimulants
may be astringent. These increase the contraction of the moving fibers, and are
either tonic or clonic, producing a simple contraction which remains, or
alternate oscillatory motions. If such then as produce only that simple
contraction exist, they must be astringents. Of this I shall afterward speak
under the head of stimulants. There is another view in which Astringents have
been taken, viz. that of stopping increased evacuations. Whatever diminishes
these, must be astringents; and it is almost impossible to separate the
stopping of Evacuations, from the operation of astringents in this view.

This introduces some confusion, as the means of stopping Evacuations are
various; 1. Increasing the contraction of the lax simple fiber; 2. Of the
moving fibers; 3. By lessening the impetus of the blood on a particular part.
Here, then, Sedatives are Astringents, and Astringents Sedatives. Sedatives
operate either by diminishing the influx of the nervous power, or its mobility,
and so are what is called refrigerant. In this view farther, then, as
Evacuations depend often on too great influx of the nervous power, and that
often on mobility induced by acrimony, Demulcents may be astringent, as
sheathing the acrimony. There may be farther means of stopping increased
Evacuations that may be referred to this head. All Obstructions may depend on
two causes; either a Contraction of the Solids, or a Coagulation of the Fluids.
If any medicines be introduced into the body, which coagulate the fluids, they
are certainly Astringents.

So much I thought necessary to say on the different views in which Astringents
may be taken. We now go on to consider

The DISEASES in which ASTRINGENTS are indicated.
These naturally follow from what we have been saying; 1. They are indicated in
laxity of the simple solid. This is the object of their operation, which has
been most commonly considered. However, I have a doubt whether this laxity so
often takes place as is imagined; for the state of the simple solids seems
permanent and fixed, or varied so insensibly and slowly by the age of the
animal, that for the course of a year, far less that of months, etc. we can
conceive very little change of laxity or rigidity of the simple fibers
produced, or, indeed, remedied, in the same time. Wherever we see weakness, we
deduce it from laxity of the simple fibers, but this never occurs, except in
very few instances. These, I think, are scarcely more than the following, viz.
application of Emollients in over proportion to a particular part, an overflow
of moisture, as the dissolution of even the bones by the Rickets, or an
overstretching, destroying the tone of the part. These, however, are but rare
cases, and such laxity of the simple solids as is commonly imagined, I can
neither suppose or believe; so that this indication from the laxity of the
simple solids, very seldom takes place. I think Astringents seldom act by
restoring this cohesion: I admit, indeed, that they do externally in topical
application; but with regard to internal action, I cannot conceive them capable
of being applied to the ultimate fibers in the common course of circulation.
Nor, indeed, can I easily suppose this distribution through the sides of a
small artery, whose sides again are supposed to consist of these, disposed
along its sides, etc. To me, the Nerves seem the ultimate fibers of the human
body, through which a fluid is distributed by filtration along their substance,
in the same manner as in vegetables; so that in this view a very small
proportion of Astringent may produce a very great effect.

2. Astringents are indicated in debility of moving fibers. This manifestly
often takes place, and may be induced in a month, or a moment, for the motion
of the nervous fluids may be arrested by the least affection. These are the
cases where most universally Astringents are necessary, and in which they most
commonly act.

3. Astringents are indicated in increased action of the solids. I explained
before how an increased action of the solids may depend on irritability, and
not on increased strength. In all these cases, where increased action depends
on the irritability or mobility of the part, Astringents act by diminishing the
impetus of the nervous fluid, and so taking off the increased irritability and
increased action. As spasmodic affections often arise from increased mobility
or irritability, Astringents, as taking off these, have been reckoned
Antispasmodics.

4. Astringents are more universally indicated in increased evacuations
depending on laxity of the simple solids, or mobility and irritability of the
moving fibers, in which last case their action has been commonly confounded
with their action on the simple solids.

5. Another indication is, when Astringents have been employed, as in the case
of wounds. There is no term more frequent than that of Vulneraries, which are
commonly Astringents. I said formerly, that most Vulneraries were built on an
imaginary foundation; but considering the matter more nearly, I now see a case,
where they may be used in some such view, viz. in those ulcers which are
consequent upon wounds. It is but a late discovery that internal medicines
promote the formation of pus in ulcers; for this purpose the Peruvian Bark has
been effectually employed, which I constantly consider as more or less of an
Astringent; for in other cases where Peruvian Bark is used, as in severs, etc.
other Astringents have been successfully substituted, so that I imagine in them
somewhat of a common virtue, and hence we may suppose, that our Astringents, as
well as the Bark, may be favorers of suppuration in wounds, and that we may,
in some measure, restore the term of Vulnerary.

DISEASES, or CASES, where they are contraindicated.
1. They may be hurtful by inducing too great a degree of constriction in the
system, and thus have I known a sense of fullness brought on by their use, which
must either depend on an over quantity of fluids in proportion to the solids,
or on a constriction of the solids.

2. Excess in the use of Astringents may destroy the mobility of the moving
fibers, and it is from this effect that they have perhaps been justly accused
of a deleterious poisonous quality, bringing on palsies, etc. and weakness and
flaccidity may as well appear from taking off the mobility too much, as by any
other means. These effects appear in the suppression of the natural and
necessary excretions; so that in the use of Astringents, we should never
proceed so far, as to hazard the stoppage of these. I formerly mentioned one
principal use of Astringents to be in stopping increased evacuations. Here, by
the use of Astringents, if we proceed carelessly, we are apt to run into
extremes; and there is nothing more difficult in the practice of physic, than
to judge the degree in which Astringents are to be given, without injuring the
healthy evacuations, as well as the kinds which are proper. Materia Medica
writers are very imperfect upon this head, and commonly under each Astringent,
they tell us it is anti-dysenteric, and a medicine for the diarrhoea, etc. but
they always ought to have added these two cautions; 1. That Astringents never
ought to be employed where the morbid stimulus or acrimony, which produces or
continues the disease, has not been previously evacuated; for then occasion is
given it to ferment, to multiply itself and assimilate other fluids to its
nature, which will cause the disease to return with accumulated violence; or,
if the Astringents have been so strong as to prevent this effect, it will cause
the acrimony to fall on other parts of the system; perhaps with more dangerous
consequences. This general rule requires some nicety in the application. Too
great an attention to the acrimony is not always necessary.

Another view of this matter is, that these increased evacuations often depend
on a determination of the fluids to particular parts, as in a plethoric habit
to the nose, uterus, or lungs, which may be established by laws of the system,
or by habits which are equal to these laws. If then we use Astringents here, we
may perhaps lose our labor, or, which is of more importance, by suddenly
stopping the flow of fluids to these vessels, and so suddenly changing the
balance, a determination is made to places of more consequence, where disease
is of more danger.

Evacuations often take place also, in consequence of a constriction of the
surface, determining a greater flow to the intestines. There is no method of
remedying this, but by giving way, in some measure, to the evacuations, or
causing the determination some other way, and till this be obtained,
Astringents ought never to be used. If their determination have not continued
so long as to establish a law, then we should endeavor to return it by the
skin, its proper emunctory.

These are the chief cautions in the use of Astringents. There are still two
others. One arises from this observation, viz. that although I have said that
Astringents, when taken into the mouth, extend their action over the whole
system, yet that their effects must be greater in the primae viae, to which
they are immediately applied; so that in the exhibition of Astringents, we must
take care not to suppress the natural evacuations, while we only endeavor to
check the morbid. Another caution is, that in all these cases, where these
Astringents are to be employed as Roborants, they ought to be thrown in only in
small doses, and at proper intervals; for in this indication we only intend to
give such an astriction, as by increasing the strength of the vessels, they may
be enabled to propel their fluids properly. Thus when we use Steel as an
Astringent, we must observe this caution; for if we give it in large
quantities, such a sudden constriction may be induced as entirely to counteract
our intention. We now go to the

MEANS of discovering the VIRTUES of ASTRINGENTS.
1. One method of knowing Astringents is by their experienced effects in arts,
particularly in the art of tanning leather. Several Societies have been
employed in finding a variety of substances, which may be employed in this way;
and have accordingly produced a large list of vegetables employed, or which may
be so, in this way, besides the oak bark. We may allow that all the plants
which are found in those lists, may be concluded Astringents, and in proportion
to the effect they had in the tanning process, may we infer their astringent
virtue in animal bodies. Here, however, a caution is necessary; for such
substances, besides their Astringency, may often be accompanied with other
matters, which may render their use noxious. Perhaps it may be said that
several of the substances, given by those Gentlemen in their lists, were
employed on a previous knowledge of their Astringency; but this does not
contradict what we have said of substances which answered in tanning, being
capable of being used as Astringents, if they possess no other noxious quality.

2. Another method of discovering Astringents is by their decoctions, which,
thrown into a solution of green vitriol, strike a black color, and form an
ink; and those substances which thus give the blackest ink, provided they are
not accompanied with any peculiar acrimony, which discharges their use as
Astringents, may be reckoned the strongest and best.

3. Astringents are discoverable by an austere, or acerb taste. Some are endued
with an odor, but this is a separate matter, accidentally accompanying them,
and adds nothing to their astringent virtue; for true and pure Astringents have
an acerb, austere taste, without odor; for when the odor is great, and joined
with other substances, we must reject their use as Astringents.

PARTS of VEGETABLES where ASTRINGENCY is lodged.
I think the austere Astringents are lodged universally in the solid parts of
vegetables, most commonly in the bark, frequently in the woods, and sometimes
in the roots, and indeed I imagine there is an Astringency in the solid parts
of all vegetables, and that in most it is only accompanied with other parts
which prevent our perceiving it. The acerb Astringents are found in the fluid
parts of plants, and that commonly in the juices of unripe fruits, or perhaps
in other unripe juices of plants. The Chemists have gone further in
ascertaining where the astringent part is lodged. They allege, perhaps with
some propriety, that it always resides in the earthy parts, which they have
supposed, in order to form this Astringency, to be joined with an acid. In the
acerb Astringents some acid is found, but in austere Astringents none such has
been found, even on chemical trials, and these are indeed substances which
themselves attract acid. In what part the astringent virtue resides is
uncertain. Here, however, I may observe one fact, namely, that all Astringents
act more powerfully in substance than in decoction, or any other method of
preparation; for our stomach has powers of solution, which out of the body we
cannot imitate. Here saline Astringents are excepted, e. g. the vitriols, for
it is indifferent in what form they are introduced. It is however, often
necessary for the more con-convenient exhibition, to extract our Astringents,
and employ them in a fluid form, which leads me to the pharmaceutical treatment.

PHARMACEUTICAL TREATMENT of ASTRINGENTS.
By Newman's and Cartheuser's Experiments, it appears, that Astringents are
equally soluble in water and alcohol. They say a spiritous menstruum is best,
and that though water extracts more, all is not astringent which is extracted,
but much of other matters adhering. The proof of this, say they, is, that the
residuums of both are equally insipid. That a spiritous menstruum does it most
properly appears from this, that whatever water takes up when boiling it
deposits a part of it when cold. This leads us to a rule in the exhibition,
viz. that all our astringent decoctions should either be given when warm, or
agitated well together when cold.

I am now to speak of particular astringents. These I have referred to two
heads of Fossile and Vegetable; absolutely of different natures.

FOSSILE ASTRINGENTS.
These are subdivided into three Classes: The Earthy, Saline, and Metallic.

1. EARTHS.
These are a set of substances, which formerly entered into the Materia Medica
in a considerable number, but of late this number has greatly diminished, and
very few of them are now employed. All of them may be reduced to these three
heads: Bole, Clay, and Absorbent Earth. In the distribution of earths,
Naturalists have hitherto been pretty much divided. Those who are averse to
employ the chemical qualities in Natural History, have sought for other marks
to distinguish them. Thus Dr. Hill, and some others, have distinguished them,
according as they are more or less diffusible in water, into Boles, Marles,
etc. But this being only a difference in degree, is not a proper distinction.
Whatever this may be in Natural History, certainly in Medicine the division
into Absorbents, and those which are not so, is much more convenient. Of the
non-absorbent are the Boles and Clays, of the last kind the Absorbent Earths,
of which I have given Osteocolla for an example.

BOLES.
With regard to the term of Bole, the application of it has been various at
different times. The Boles of the Ancients, e. g. the Boles of Galen, seem to
have been our absorbent Earths; whereas the Boles we employ, are not
absorbents; for they are neither soluble nor effervesce with acid in the cold.
Their variety is very considerable, but we need only make one distinction of
them, that those of the greatest purity are best, and only fit to be employed.
They are frequently adulterated; for our Druggists seldom take the trouble of
bringing Boles from Asia; for we have Boles at home of the same quality and
virtues, only wanting their color, which we give them, by making a mixture of
the purest white Clay and red Ochre, which, however it may be a fraud in trade,
answers equally well in Medicine. We have been retrenching the Boles; for my
part, I think we might altogether reject them. Their virtues are very
inconsiderable. Applied to the tongue they give a certain rough taste, and
appear astringent. But, in my opinion, it is only an exsiccating quality,
drinking up the moisture of the tongue, for when pure Bole is diffused in water
no such taste is observed. With regard to Earthy Medicines, which are not
soluble in our fluids, little effect can be expected from them; and in order to
render them fit for medicine they must be previously combined with acids,
either by nature or art; or if intended to exsiccate, they must be given in
^uch a monstrous quantity as entirely to overload the stomach. As to Boles they
may contain several other substances, which may make them act more powerfully
as Astringents; e. g. Iron, which most of our red Boles contain. Perhaps they
are already combined with an acid, or if not may be dissolved by that in our
stomach, becoming in this way medicated. Many also contain Alum, and on this
account may be medicated substances; but in these cases it is only on account
of the Vitriol and Alum they contain, and certainly it would be much better to
use these substances by themselves, than in such an uncertain manner as they
must be in those combinations.

I forgot to mention, that Boles were hardly dissoluble in acids, except when
very concentrated or assisted with much heat, and the Earth of Alum is now
known to be furnished, by every Bole and Clay, which may be extracted by every
acid, even the weak vegetable, and so likewise by the acid in our stomach, in
which view likewise they only act as Alum.

Another virtue has been attributed to them, chiefly I believe on the authority
of Van Swieten; viz. that of absorbing Alkalis, which is deduced from their
supposed power of stopping the Dysentery. But upon frequent trial I have found
them to answer no better than calcined Hartshorn. Let us consider this theory.
He says, that, as containing a vitriol, they contain a vitriolic acid, of which
part may be got by distillation. This, however, is very inconsiderable: I have
not yet tried how far they may be considered as Antiseptics, in the manner of
Dr. Pringle's Experiments.

CIMOLIA.
This, like other terms, has been left undetermined. As it stands in our
Dispensatories, it implies a pure white pipe Clay, and the Cimolia purpuracea,
a Fullers earth. These are more purely argillaceous than Boles, and freer of
any foreign matter. Their effects in Medicine were never remarkable, and they
are now disregarded in present practice, though as possibly they may furnish
aluminous matter, they may act as Astringents.

OSTEOCOLLA.
I have set down this as an instance of Absorbent Earths, many more of which
will be found under the title of Antacida; I am here only to consider them as
Astringents. Osteocolla is a calcarious earth, which has been suspended in
water, and afterward deposited and concreted in a powdery form, on different
substances, especially the roots of plants, and, from the other matters being
separated by putrefaction, or otherwise, called Osteocolla, from its then being
like a hollow tube. Hence also it was employed in the cure of fractured bones,
and hence, probably, too, the supposition of Absorbent Earths being astringent.
In no one instance do I think this is well founded. With vegetable Acids they
even form a laxative substance, nor to the taste do they show any austere or
styptic quality. Formerly we employed an animal Earth procured from bones, etc.
especially Hartshorn, which was, when calcined, particularly used in astringent
decoctions, as the Decoctum album. Here I shall observe, that this is an
insoluble substance, hardly yielding to Acids, and only as uniting with Acids
do earths seem to act in the human body. Instead of calcined Hartshorn, we have
introduced into the Decoctum album, Chalk and Crabs eyes, though I am afraid on
no very good foundation, as Chalk, united with Acids, has no astringent
quality, but is rather laxative. Besides, Dr. Pringle has found them to have a
septic quality, viz. by absorbing the acid in the stomach, etc. which, in some
measure, obviates the putrescency. If, instead of these, we were to throw in a
Cimolia, no such effect would be produced; for all clays contain an aluminous
Earth, which, although it extracts the Acid in the stomach, yet with this forms
an Alum, and thus acts as an Astringent. However, on the whole, I believe the
calcined Hartshorn preferable to Chalk, etc. which we now employ, for although
it unites sparingly with acids, yet part of it is still corroded by them, and
acts as an Alum.

SALINE EARTHS.
The chief, and perhaps the only one of these, is Alum. This is a substance
with whose chemical history we are but lately acquainted. Formerly it was
supposed the vitriolic acid in Alum was joined to a calcarious earth, and this
perhaps, as well as the reasons before given, contributed to give rise to the
opinion of calcarious earths being thought astringent, when joined with acids.
But we now know that clay is a compound earth, part of which may be united with
acids, and that it is with this part and the vitriolic acid, that Alum is
formed.

Alum is found native in a fine fibrous form, called then Alumen plumosum. This
is so scarce as to be mistaken for Amianthus, which often in our shops is
substituted for it. For the most part, Alum is extracted by art from earths, in
which nature has lodged it, viz. from pyrites, slates, etc. Extracted from
pyrites, etc. it is called Alumen rubrum. Alum is of two kinds. The first is a
pure transparent Alum, the Alum of the northern Countries. The second is of the
same nature, with reddish streaks in it, called Roman Alum, as brought us from
Civita Vecchia. Wherein the difference of these two consist, I do not find that
chemists have determined. The manufacturers certainly find one; the Roman Alum
with Dyers answering purposes which the English will not. Physicians, too,
think the former better in medicine. As to the taste, it shows rather more
stypticity, but this is inconsiderable, and I make no doubt, that, for medical
purposes, the common Alum answers equally well with the Roman.

VIRTUES of ALUM.
From experience, Alum is found to be a powerful Astringent, and perhaps one of
the most safe. Being readily dissolved, it acts quickly, and is one of those
Astringents, which extends its action over the system; its effects appearing
much sooner than we possibly could suppose them to be, (in consequence of the
circulation) in the part affected. It acts more quickly, and in a smaller dose,
than the vegetable Astringents, and is less deleterious, less stimulant, and of
more general use than the metallic. Alum is one of those Astringents which we
can most conveniently employ externally. It is often employed in Inflammations
of the Eyes. Alum not only contracts the fibers, but diminishes the mobility,
so that it here acts in two ways, by correcting the laxity of the vessels, and
at the same time diminishing the impetus of the fluids. The white of egg, with
which it is commonly joined for this purpose, has been thought to have
particular virtues, but in my opinion it has no other in this case, than that
of giving consistence, and contributing to more convenient exhibition. Alum is
also used for bracing lax and flaccid gums in scorbutic habits, for which
purpose the vegetable Astringents have little effect, and the metallic, on
account of their bad taste, strength, etc. are improper. Alum is applied with
advantage in inflammations of the throat, and anginas, where there is much
laxity. Sydenham here formerly proposed the vitriolic acid alone in strong
doses, but besides the too great strength of his doses, the vitriolic acid,
mitigated by the earth in Alum, answers much better.

Externally Alum has been employed to dry up excessive excretions of the skin,
as sweat in the armpits, with success. But here I need not repeat what I have
said formerly about the drying up such excretions at all.

Internally it is used in Haemorrhages as an Astringent. In Haemorrhages of the
uterus it is the substance we can most depend upon. For this purpose it is
generally employed in the Pulvis stypticus. The Sanguis draconis, with which it
was there joined, has been imagined an Astringent, but to me it seems to have
very little of that power, as not being soluble in our fluids, and I think an
improvement is made in the last edition of the Pharmacopoeia Pauperum, in
substituting for this the Terra Japonica. We have lost the original intention
of Helvetius in addition of the Sanguis draconis, viz. that of forming the Alum
into pills, which is often required for more convenient exhibition. It is done
by melting the Sanguis draconis on the fire, and mixing with it a proper
proportion of Alum, and this is the only means of reducing Alum into this form,
and the only proper use of the Sanguis draconis.

Alum may be employed in all cases where Astringents are used. In diarrhoeas,
etc. it has been little used, but here it might not only act by bracing the
intestines, but as an antiseptic, especially if exhibited in small doses.

Alum is also employed in Intermittent Fevers, as I myself have seen with
success. When joined with aromatics, as nutmeg, and given before a fit, I have
seen it entirely prevent it. Astringents have also been used in Continued
Fevers, and here Alum is preferable to the metallic astringents.

DOSE of ALUM.
For different purposes it has been used in different doses. The highest is
half a dram. In this large dose it excites vomiting. It is seldom, therefore,
advisable to give it in such quantity, and doses of of gr. x. will answer
better, repeated at half an hour's distance, or an hour, and in this way have I
seen it given to the length of one dram, without vomiting, etc. and I have
been told of instances where it has been carried further. In haemorrhages,
where astringents are used, which should be when they are very violent, our
intention ought to be to moderate, not to suppress the flux; so that in this
case the less dose of an astringent medicine we use the better.

LAPIS HIBERNICUS.
This is a peculiar slate. Most of the slate kind contain Alum, which we know
by their being deliquescent and mouldering in the air, which depends on their
containing the matter of pyrites, whence Alum may be got. Wherever this slate
has any of the aluminous taste, we may employ it as a medicine; but Alum itself
is much preferable, as we can ascertain the dose; for here we must give our
Lapis Hibernicus, encumbered with a load of useless earth, and therefore it is
now properly neglected. The virtues ascribed to it scarce deserve our
attention. It has been said to be used with success in contusions with internal
haemorrhagy. Here, indeed, it may act as well as Alum, but certainly that is
much better employed; but in resolving contusions, neither this, nor any
medicine used by Materia Medica writers, is fit for the purpose.

METALLIC ASTRINGENTS.
COPPER.
This is a metal soluble in our fluids and in any saline substance. It may be
combined by chemistry with acids, alkalis, and neutrals. The combinations are
all of the same virtues. If there is any difference, the combination with the
muriatic acid is more astringent, and with alkalis in general more stimulant
than with acids The preparation from neutrals and particularly ammoniacal salts
are much the mildest.
.

VIRTUES.
It is a powerful stimulant, very immediately and in small doses exciting
vomiting, insomuch as to make it difficult to exhibit it without this effect.
Here, then, we have reason to be anxious in the choice of the preparation. We
should mostly avoid the combination with acids, universally that with alkalis,
and prefer the neutral salts. In the intestines, Copper acts as a purgative,
and may be used with advantage in hydropic cases, not only on this account, but
also on the diuretic quality it possesses when properly managed. Whether Copper
exerts this diuretic quality in the primae viae, or by being assumed into the
mass of blood, I shall not determine.

Copper, too, acts as an Astringent in stopping Evacuations; but we seldom can
throw it in, without its stimulating effects. For this purpose, Ens Veneris was
recommended by Boil; but afterward neglected. There has been a dispute among
the Chemists, whether Mr. Boyle's Ens Veneris was procured from Iron or Copper.
Boil himself tells us, that he used a pure venereal vitriol, and besides, it
is impossible to imitate the properties of the Ens Veneris by any preparation
of Iron. This preparation is to be considered as a combination of Copper with
an ammoniacal Salt, and sometimes with a portion of muriatic acid. This
preparation may be obtained in Chrystals in the following manner, viz. by
adding gradually to a solution of blue vitriol in water, a volatile alkali,
till no longer any cloud appear in the addition; after which, to the diaphanous
liquor, pouring on as much alcohol as is sufficient to separate the water;
after which, very elegant small sapphire colored By being chrystallized thus,
it is freed from all adhering acid, and is rendered more astringent. Vid. Dr.
Russel, de Cupro Edin. 1757.
chrystals will concrete. Vid. Nov. Act. N. Curios. tom. i. observe. 67. This
preparation has all the advantages of the other preparation of Boyle's, and
never has any of the Copper united with the muriatic acid. Wherever Copper is
introduced in this form, it acts as an Astringent, and destroys the mobility of
the nervous power, and so is very useful in that disease of universal laxity,
the Rickets, as Boil observes. It is also antispasmodic, and has been
prescribed in the Epilepsy, as I myself have sometimes observed, with
appearance of success; where its action would seem to depend on giving a
tension to the system, and destroying that irritability on which Epilepsy seems
to depend. Boil also recommends Ens Veneris as an anodyne, when he says it
acts without the inflammable qualities of opium, the restlessness, etc.
produced. Experience, however, does not seem to confirm this.

Boil recommends Copper in petechial fevers, with subsultus tendinum, etc. and
found that it stopped these, and brought the fever to a happy issue. Van Swieten
tells us of a preparation of Copper, which, immediately after taking, produces
a formicatio over the whole body, without any of the bad effects which occur
from the stimulating power of Copper, and that it is an efficacious medicine in
the Epilepsy. The method of preparation of it has not yet been discovered.

Out of the body, Copper kills Worms; but from its stimulating powers, it is
very difficult to exhibit it internally for that purpose. A single drop of it,
dissolved in a solution of vol^ alkali, was found to vomit a child to whom it
was exhibited.

In external use, as a stimulant, it acts as an escharotic, and, stimulating
the vessels, brings on that degree of inflammation which favors good pus.

The ancients employed very commonly Copper in this intention, as a digestive
in ulcers; but on the restoration of learning, Mercury being found out, was
almost only employed for that purpose; and so has continued to this day. But
there are certainly variety of cases where Copper is more proper than Mercury,
and perhaps still other cases of ulcers, where another metal will answer better
than either. I shall here mention one particular instance of a disease not
known in the books of Physic, where the effects of Copper were remarkable. A
disorder in this country appeared a good many years ago, with exulcerations of
the mouth, and fauces, with ulcers in the tongue, about the anus, and in
different parts of the body, resembling the venereal disease; but distinguished
by the different sloughs of the ulcers Pinnated to it.
, by the different manner of its appearance, its want of infection from carnal
communication, etc. Mercury in this disease was tried with no success; but
Copper almost always effected a cure. I used a solution of Verdigrease, which,
applied to the tongue, very easily cured the ulcers there, by inducing a good
suppuration, but as more difficultly applicable to the tonsils, also less quick
in procuring a cure. This then ought to prompt all Surgeons never to dismiss a
difficult ulcer without trying this remedy.

DOSE of COPPER.
This cannot be ascertained properly, as some persons will vomit from an
exceedingly small quantity. We can only say, then, that the doses should be
small, and then, when used as an Anthelmintic, still smaller.

As to the Preparations of Copper, set down in the Catalogue, their uses will
be understood from what has been already said on Copper itself.

IRON.
This is a metallic substance, which is of more frequent use than any other. It
combines with most saline substances, and is dissolved by all acids. The
vegetable acid, Vegetable acid is now found to dissolve Iron.
however, only corrodes it, but extracts all the medical virtue. Iron, then,
may be given in substance, as its medical virtue may be extracted by the acid
in the primae viae. But this is always an uncertain method, as the dose
extracted depends on the quantity of acid in the primae viae, and as sometimes
so much must be given, as by its mechanical action to be productive of bad
effects. It is always, then, preferable to have the combination made before we
exhibit this medicine. With regard to the preparation of Iron in books of
Pharmacy, no difference of virtue has been discovered by any experiments yet
made. There may be, perhaps, some difference, if Iron is combined with alkali,
but even here no experiment has proved it. All the preparations of Iron, then,
turn upon convenience, or elegance. It is often wanted in a powdery form.
Lemery's method for this purpose is the best, viz. letting water, about an inch
deep, digest upon the iron filings, by which means part of them will be
converted into a fine black powder, and more, if the operation is continued.
This may be separated by shaking the vessel, when the uncorroded filings will
separate. Iron combined with the muriatic acid, is the foundation of the
tinctures in the shops, and suits every purpose to which Iron may be applied,
v. P. L. It is very convenient as dissolving in alcohol, and making a sort of
dulcified spirit of salt, which gives the combination a very fine flavor.
However, the dose is here uncertain, as a part of the Iron precipitates in
keeping. But then the same incovenience attends other solutions.

VIRTUES of IRON.
Iron is purely astringent, without the stimulating qualities of copper, or the
deleterious ones of lead. However, neither is it so powerful an astringent as
the one, nor so powerful an antispasmodic as the other. The aperient and
astringent preparations of Iron are the same, differing only in degree of
virtue. In all cases of laxity and debility, and in obstructions and slowness,
proceeding from these causes, Iron is employed, though other simple astringents
might also answer the effect. Here we ought to beware of a sudden astriction,
which may be attended with bad consequences, and, therefore, in exhibiting it
in these cases, we should give it in small doses, and trust to length of time
for a cure; and by this means we shall avoid those inconveniences, of which
Physicians often complain in preparations of Iron.

Mineral waters often produce cures, which we in vain attempt to perform by the
combinations in our shops; even although these waters contain nothing but Iron.
This is manifestly owing to the weakness of the dose; in proof of which we
find, that the strongly impregnated water seldom answer so well, as those weak
ones we commonly reject. Iron may be employed as an antispasmodic, and then
must be used in small doses. Hysteric cases are those in which it is commonly
used, and then sometimes bad effects attend its exhibition. Different reasons
have been given for this. That given by Carthuser seems not without foundation,
viz. that often in these cases there are obstructions of the viscera, which are
confirmed by the use of Iron, but that if these are removed, it proves a
valuable cure. There is another distinction which I would make between the
Hypochondriac and Hysteric diseases, which influences our practice very much.
The Hypochondriac disease often depends on a rigidity of the solids, is a
disease of the habit, and occurs in the decline of life; whereas the Hysteric
disease is often attended with a laxity of the solids, is often incidental, and
is more purely spasmodic. In Hysteric cases, the Iron may be employed with
success, while in the Hypochondriac it is hurtful.

Iron has also been employed in Intermittent Fevers. Stahl and his followers,
laying it always down as a rule, that a fever being an effort of nature to
throw off from the body some morbid matter, thought they very seldom ought to
be stopped; and even in Agues, on this account, they have been very sparing of
the Peruvian Bark. They used, however, for this purpose of Intermittents a very
subtle Crocus of Iron, obtained by applying nitre to the martial regulus of
Antimony in fusion. We shall afterward find that this acts in the same manner
as other Astringents, and even as Peruvian Bark itself.

Iron, as astringent, is improper in inflammable cases. Some Astringents are
employed in Continual Fevers, but Iron ought to be avoided, (...) the
inflammatory diathesis. This applies to other cases, where (...) is more
commonly used, viz. in Haemorrhages, e. g. in the Haemopto^sis. This sometimes
may depend on a laxity of the solids, but much oftener owes its rise to an
increased impetus of the fluids. This case, if not inflammatory, is very nearly
akin to it, and the same crust occurs in the blood as in other inflammatory
cases. Iron, then, in these cases, ought to be given with great caution, for
Haemoptoes are often the causes of Phthisis, or Consumption of the Lungs. Iron,
in these cases, by its sudden astriction may stop the flux, but then the
inflammatory diathesis is continued, and often a suppuration brought on. Even
Alum, etc. are not very proper, and bleeding and the antiphlogistic method is
much preferable.

DOSES of IRON.
These are uncertain, small doses ought always to be employed, and if a strong
astriction is necessary, we ought rather to manage our Iron in giving it
frequently at proper intervals, than by increasing any particular dose.

The virtues of Green Vitriol will be understood from what has been said of
Iron itself.

HAEMATITES.
This is one of the principal Ores of Iron, which may be extracted from it by
the several acids, and employed in all cases where Iron is useful; but as it is
only Iron which is extracted, and to which the Haematites owes its virtues,
that substance may be rejected as superfluous.

The same observation applies to the Rubrica fabrilis, another Ore of Iron.

LEAD.
This is not used in medicine, except when combined with other bodies. With oil
its calces combine and form the common plaster, which is the foundation of most
of the rest. To this plaster, Lead gives no other property, but that of
consistence. Lead unites with the several acids. For medical use the vegetable
is commonly used, and acts on it as well as the others. The preparations with
this acid and lead in common use are the Saccharum Saturni, Acetum Lithargytes,
and common Cerusse.

Externally Lead is used as an astringent. It diminishes the mobility more than
alum, e. g. in sore eyes. But let it be observed here, that Lead absolutely
destroys the mobility of our fibers. Lead has been used in erysipelas, but in
general astringents are often improper in this case, and great caution is to be
enjoined in the use of Lead, as it often brings on palsy in our fibers. I
myself have seen it produce gangrene in the erysipelas.

In burns it is often employed in the Unguentum album; but if long used, it
induces flaccidity of the part, and makes the ulcers difficult to heal. Mercury
and Lead, combined, have cured scrophulous ulcers, where other means had
failed; but a caution ought to be observed here, viz. that if the scrophulous
ulcers are very numerous, and the Lead be used too freely, its exhibition may
be attended with bad effects.

Internally Lead is a powerful Astringent, and is employed in Haemorrhages. We
must, however, always be aware of its deleterious effects.

Every body knows its bad consequences to the Miners; and the custom which some
Vintners had formerly of mixing Lead with their wine, in order to obviate its
acidity, which indeed it did powerfully, showed sufficiently its poisonous
effects. In Haemorrhages, its action is on the nervous power; for it is never
given in such quantity as to stop the Haemorrhage by corrugating the fibers, or
coagulating the mass of blood. Its effects being of this kind, have made it to
be employed in Diarrhoeas and Dysenteries, in the Fluor albus and Gonorrhoeas.
In all these cases its effects are powerful, so that I could wish to be able to
inculcate its use. For a few doses, if we have occasion for it, may sometimes
be used without bad effects; but if its use is continued for any length of
time, its bad consequences will certainly appear.

Saccharum Saturni and Tinctura antiphthisica, into which that certainly
enters, have been employed in Continual Fevers, with remarkable success, not
having such a stimulus as the copper, and taking off the nervous symptoms, the
Delirium, Subsultus tendinum, etc. as may be seen in the Acta Naturae
Curiosorum. I have no manner of doubt of its efficacy in this respect as an
Astringent, and consequently an Antispasmodic, but as its effects in any large
quantity are so pernicious, in spite of the recommendations of several Germans,
we should always use such a remedy with very great caution.

ZINC.
This is a substance very little known in medicine. Its effects are certainly
not merely astringent. Flowers of Zinc have been said by some to have been
employed, but not by any Authors of note.

As to Lapis Calaminaris, the ore of Zinc, and Tutty, which has been supposed
the Flowers of Zinc, the Cadmia fornacum, which, however, Neuman raises very
great doubts about, they are inert substances; for, boiled in water, they give
no impregnation, and with acids have no virtues. In our ointments they have no
effect, except as joined with Vitriol and other substances. The Lapis
Calminaris, in Turner's Cerate, serves no other purpose but taking off the
unctuosity, which in itself is hurtful. But for this purpose any other subtle
powder would have the same effect.

White Vitriol is a combination of the Vitriolic Acid and Zinc; but has always
along with it some copper, or iron. It is used in sore eyes. As it contains
Zinc, we should be very cautious in its internal exhibition. It has been given
as a vomit, and said to have a very sudden operation, but I have never been
able to observe this, and certainly its use in any considerable quantity must
be attended with very bad consequences.

VEGETABLE ASTRINGENTS.
We now proceed to these; for the Animal Kingdom scarcely furnishes any
Astringents, except the Animal Earth, commonly called calcined Hartshorn, be
reckoned as such.

With regard to Vegetable Astringents, they are of less sudden operation than
those of the Fossile Kingdom.

I imagine Vegetable Astringents, as well as all others, act in the primae
viae; but the stimulus of metallic Astringents, makes their effects much more
propagated over the system, than those of the vegetable. Applied to the tongue,
Vegetable Astringents give a much weaker impression, and there is no Physician
will have recourse to them for stopping Haemorrhages, upon any exigency. They
may indeed exert their powers over the system, but then they do so, only slowly
and gradually. Vegetable Astringents, when we want them to be efficacious, must
be exhibited in substance. This has been little attended to. The reason for
this method of exhibition is, because we have no powerful menstruums for their
solution. We have, indeed, water and alcohol, but the former will not dissolve
one ounce of any astringent without repeated affusions and decoctions; and with
the latter a very great quantity of the menstruum is requisite; and, after all,
in either case, the impregnation is inconsiderable, We do not choose to use
these solutions for another reason, because the means used for solution have an
effect upon the medicine; much heat and long boiling actually destroying the
astringent quality and vegetable texture. Water, too, although it washes out
the astringent quality, when boiling, and seemingly suspends it, yet upon
cooling, deposits much of what it had taken up. Upon these accounts, Vegetable
Astringents should, if possible be given in substance.

Another reason not commonly given, why the Vegetable Astringents are weaker
than the Fossile, and why they should be always administered in substance, is,
that the Vegetable Astringents may have their texture destroyed in our stomach,
from the fermentation going on there; whereas the Fossile Astringents are not
liable to this effect, and can only be hurt by mixture.

There is a curious observation of the late worthy Dr. Alston, viz. that the
Peruvian Bark, operating in the stomach, remains for a long time in the solid
form in which it is exhibited, and there is great reason to believe, that all
Vegetable Astringents act in the same manner. I myself have seen Peruvian Bark
thrown up, unchanged, after having remained in the stomach eight days. Hence if
we throw in this, or other astringents, in a fluid form, both because they are
liable to pass easily off, and because they are thus more subject to the
fermentative process, we may often be disappointed in their success. Here also
is an additional reason for the sudden operation of the Fossile Astringents,
viz. because they are more quickly dissolved than the vegetable. But wherever
there is danger from a sudden astriction, and wherever a slow operation is
required, the Vegetable Astringents are preferable, and are universally used in
all such cases.

Vegetable Astringents are recommended in Haemorrhoidal Swellings and
Bleedings, but it is extremely doubtful, how far their use is proper. Wherever
these are the effects of plethora, and Nature attempting a discharge, we must
be very sparing in the use of Astringents. But this is not always the case;
they are often in consequence of a habit induced of costiveness, where the
blood, hindered in its passage, is poured out into the cellular membrane, and
the ecchymoses there kept up on account of laxity; for it is not owing to a
varicous distention of the veins, as some have imagined; for inspection proves
the contrary. In this case, where the swelling is kept up from laxity,
Vegetable Astringents may be of considerable service. But sometimes, although
these evacuations are not natural, yet they are habitual, and when suppressed
suddenly, may bring on equally bad effects, as if they were critical; so that
Fossile Astringents are not to be used here, on account of their being apt to
induce a sudden astriction. Vegetable Astringents, then, are preferable,
because they operate slowly and gradually on the constitution; but even these,
from a long continued use, are liable to bring on a costiveness, which is
absolutely inconsistent, with the cure of Haemorrhoidal Fluxes. In the
exhibition, then, of these Astringents, we should always take care to obviate
this costiveness they are so apt to produce.

Having said thus much of Vegetable Astringents in general, I now proceed to
talk of particulars; where, indeed, properly we shall have little to say upon
each. If you look into Materia Medica writers, you will find them, under each
particular Astringent, telling you, that it is fit for Spitting of blood,
Diarrhoea, Dysentery, Fluor albus, and every other fancied increased excretion;
in order to swell up their volumes. They do not always, however, put all of
these under each particular simple, but distribute their diseases to peculiar
ones, and say, that this is good in Dysentery, that in Fluor albus, etc. All
this, however, is not always merely for ostentation; for it sometimes happened
that one, accidentally being prescribed in a particular case, was afterward
always used for the same; although the others might have answered equally well.
You will not, then, expect that I shall follow these writers in this method of
procedure. I shall only mention where a particular Astringent is accompanied
with some other peculiar property which modifies its operation.

You will observe here, that I have thrown the substances into distinct
fasciculi, with blank spaces and letters between. Many of these spaces may be
filled up with the name of the natural order of Linnaeus.

The first eight at a belong to the Senticosae of Linnaeus, and is the
thirty-fifth order of his Fragmenta. This natural order is better established
than many of the others. They are all of one common quality, but some of them
are not used in medicine. I have only set down such as are to be found in our
Dispensatory lists. If in any place of the world these I have mentioned are not
to be found, we may safely substitute for them any others of the same natural
order. With regard to this order, as all the genera agree, so do each of the
species in virtue; so that besides the officinal species we may take any one
species of any of these genera, for the same purpose. Whence we see the
extensive use of distributing plants according to their natural order in
Botany, if this is made up with sufficient accuracy. It has been common for
Materia Medica writers to introduce the variety of names, etc. under each
particular substance; but I think it is much better to refer you to the late
Authors, especially to Linnaeus's Materia Medica, where you will find his own
name, Caspar Bauhine's name, etc. by which means you will be enabled to get the
names of other authors.

These preliminaries thus settled, as to the eight plants, at the head of which
is Agrimonia, they are all of the same virtues, which are shortly summed up in
their Astringency. They may possess different degrees of this, but that
difference is not ascertained; in quality they hardly differ. Some of them have
annexed to their Astringency some other qualities, e. g. Argentina root has a
sweet with its Astringency; Fragaria more Bitterness than any of the others; in
Tormentilla, Caryophillata, etc. some aroma. Except from Sir John Floyer, I
have got very little assistance in the sensible qualities; for Lewis has copied
him very inaccurately, or, when he has advanced any thing of his own, has done
it imperfectly.

With regard to these plants, as they stand in our shops, the first five stand
in the Edinburgh, and not in the London Dispensatory. But neither in the former
are they inserted from any particular virtue, but only from a timidity of
rejecting too many substances; thinking it better, as in some editions of the
Dispensatory it is expressed, copia quam penuria premi; neither again have the
London College expunged them from any noxious quality, but only from their not
being used in present practice; which, by the bye, is far from being a test of
the inefficacy of medicines. However, it is certainly true, that the three
which the London College retain, are certainly the most powerful; for we use
only the herbs of the first, whereas the Astringency resides most in Barks.

The London College still retain the Rose, on account of its fragrancy; but
certainly Quinquefolium and Tormentilla are the most powerful of the eight set
down; whether we trust to experience, or their sensible qualities. As to the
sensible qualities, in the leaves there is a mucilaginous quality, in the roots
the Astringency is more pure and entire. Quinquefolium and Tormentilla are both
remarkable Astringents, and have the same virtue with these. The first has been
used by Hippocrates, and since his time in the cure of Intermittent Fevers.
Many other common Astringents have been used for the same purpose. The
Quinquefolium has a Bitterness with its Astringency, which is perhaps necessary
in the cure of Intermittents, as the Bark possesses it so much. The Germans use
Tormentilla for the same purpose, but join it with Gentian and other Bitters,
which they say answers equally well with the Bark in the cure of Intermittents.
Tormentilla, and other Astringents, have also been spoken of for their
alexipharmic virtues in pestilential disorders; that is, in putrid continual
Fevers. In Germany, Tormentil, etc. have been used in the Small pox; so that
hence we may suppose, that other Astringents, besides the Bark, may be useful
in Fevers, in bringing on suppuration.

Tormentilla and Quinquefolium may be extracted by water or alcohol, but from
either, a slight impregnation is procured, and much boiling in water deprives
them of somewhat of that astringency.

DOSE.
Materia Medica writers have commonly under dosed these substances. The medical
virtues of the roots are almost all lodged in the cortical parts; so that when
the roots are so large, that you can throw away the pith, the dose may be in a
smaller quantity, than if we employed the entire root. When thus prepared, they
may be given in a dose of half a dram or one dram, and where a more sudden
astriction is wanted, we repeat the dose so often, as to give one ounce in
twenty-four hours, as in the use of the Bark.

The next set mentioned in my Catalogue, are the Stellatae of Linnaeus; the
forty-fourth number of his Fragmenta. It is but a small order, even among the
Botanists. The three set down are what are retained in the Edinburgh List. The
London College only retain the Rubia. They all possess the astringent quality
so weakly, that they may be rejected. They are constantly marked by Materia
Medica writers as Diuretics. We might reject this as imaginary, were it not so
constantly repeated, and, indeed, by authors of some credit; so that we should
always have this quality in contemplation. To other Astringents the same
property has been attributed; but for my part, I am able to give no reason for
it. Rubia has been lately observed to color the bones of animals who feed upon
it. Long ago it was observed to have the power of coloring the urine, and by
some experiments of Dr. Young, it has been also found to color the milk. This
shows that vegetable substances penetrate farther, unchanged, into the system,
than has been imagined. It seems to contradict what I was saying, of Vegetables
undergoing a change in the primae viae, and having their peculiar qualities
destroyed. Here we see the coloring substance of the Rubia carried through the
circulation, and deposited in the excretions, but how far this retention of
color implies a retention of virtue, I shall not say. Often the coloring
matter resides in a very small quantity, and diffusion of substances often
prevents their operation; so that the reuniting of the coloring substance in
the excretions is no proof of its being in such quantity in the blood, as to
produce any considerable effect. Madder is found to change the health of the
animal who takes it, making it dispirited, sluggish, etc. Hence, then, we see
it certainly exerts powers over the system, and whatever has the power of even
hurting, may be of use in medicine. But with regard to the Rubia, as it
requires very large quantities, it cannot be used, and its dose is uncertain.
Rubia has been recommended in the Jaundice, but may safely be rejected, with
many other medicines recommended for the same malady; and there is no tribe of
Medicines which may more safely be so, than those recommended for this purpose.
Now we know that this disease depends so often on stones in the biliary duct,
and can only be cured by solution or evacuation, and as very few medicines can
produce this effect, we cannot suppose the Rubia of any consequence in this
disease. The cure of the Jaundice is almost always sudden, from the stone being
evacuated, and hence it is that many medicines have been supposed to cure the
Jaundice, from their being luckily given when that effect happened. The cure,
then, of this disease, must depend on solution, or evacuation. For the former,
we have yet no remedies; for the latter, the Rubia can have little effect, and
it must be attempted by Emollients, etc.

The next order in my Catalogue, is the Vaginales, the twenty-seventh order of
Linnaeus. The first plant of this order mentioned by him (the Laurus) is
improperly arranged; as it differs from the rest both in habit and virtues;
indeed, the whole Plants of this order Some species e. g. of the P^^s^^ar^a
(which is but a species of the Bistort) are extremely acrid, while others are
more mild.
do so pretty much; for which reason I have given those of my list officinal
names.

With regard to this set of Plants, they differ also in another way, many of
them containing an Acid beside their Astringency, and in this set of plants we
have the different gradations of acid, austere, and acerb. The Astringency is
lodged chiefly in the roots, the more pure Acidity in the leaves. In the roots
also there is frequently, more or less of a purgative quality, most remarkably
in the Rheum, though in some degree also in the Lapatha, or Dock kind, so much
akin to it. There has been a dispute about this purgative quality in the Dock
kind. Their Astringency in this country is often so great, as to overpower that
effect, but this does not at all refute the truth of that assertion; and I
myself have seen Monks Rhubarb* given in sufficient quantity, produce that
effect. The Bistorta of all these Plants contains the simplest and purest
Astringency, and therefore is of most frequent use as an Astringent.

Astringents are frequently of use in Scurvy. The Vaginales are more frequently
employed for this purpose, though at the same time there are instances of the
others being employed in the same way, which prevent our thinking that this
virtue in them is peculiar. In these, however, their Acidity may add to their
effect; for that, either separate or conjoined into Acerbity, is found most
appropriated to the Scurvy. Here the vague and undetermined notion of the
Scurvy has occasioned confusion in the Materia Medica. This term has been
transferred to many cutaneous diseases, which are of a very different nature,
and with whose nature we are not so well acquainted. When I speak of the
Scurvy, I always mean the Sea Scurvy.

The Itch has been supposed one of the Scorbutic disorders, and Astringents
have been accordingly applied, as the Oxylapathum in our Ung. Antipsoricum; but
on repeated trials, I maintain it has no such virtues. In general, Astringents
are improper in all those cutaneous eruptions, which are in the least degree
critical, or an effort of Nature to throw out the offending cause to the
surface.

PHARMACEUTICAL TREATMENT.
All these Astringents may be employed in substance, but they are, too, among
those which may most properly be given in solution. Water in decoction extracts
their virtues, Spirit has little effect. As to Rhubarb, and its treatment, we
shall afterward talk of it.

FILICES.
These are the sixty-fourth of the Fragmenta. Of these, I have only set down
what remain now in our Dispensatories; though formerly, many more of the same
order were inserted. As to their sensible qualities, I know little of them.
Floyer has distinguished a taste, inherent in this order, called the Ferny
taste; by which he understands more or less of a Sweetness, joined with
Astringency. If it be true, as is by some alleged, that this Sweetness is so
great, that the roots have been employed in times of scarcity, as food; we
cannot suppose them very efficacious, as medicines. But, though some of these
may thus be employed, yet many are too astringent to be nutritive, and many
have a sensible acrimony. Polypody, one of these, on account of its acrimony,
is transferred to the purgatives; and as this quality is very sensible in one,
we should always consider that it may be in the others. It is said, and in some
measure vouched, that the roots of some of our plants have been useful in
destroying Worms. At first view, this would seem to be owing to their acrimony;
but we know that simple sweets, as wort, e. g. have been efficaciously employed
for the same purpose. From their Astringency they strengthen the tone of the
intestines, so that it is doubtful whether Ferns are an Anthelmintic, from
their sweetness, acrimony, or astringency. The Ferns seem to me chiefly to be
considered as Astringents, of which, in general, they have had all the virtues
ascribed to them; as curing Rickets, Scurvy, Spasmodic complaints, etc. All
these effects are intelligible, and may be explained from their astringency.
Some others are ascribed to the Filices, or capillary plants, which I cannot
understand, e. g. their pectoral virtue. Thus the Adianthus has been constantly
reckoned; for which we have substituted our native Trichomanes. However,
although I cannot explain the virtue, to reject what has been so constantly
affirmed, would be dangerous. We may with more safety reject their hepatic and
splenetic virtues. How medicines act on these viscera, is at all times very
difficult to explain, and a specific virtue is perfectly unintelligible. If the
liver or spleen are spasmodically affected, the Ferns, as Antispasmodics, may
be useful, but that they can take down the Spleen, or make it disappear
altogether, is a mere chimera. Other Astringents have been employed in checking
^^^arrhs, and indeed there is one ^ase afterward to be mentioned, where
Astringents are the only efficacious medicines. A third effect ascribed to the
Ferns, and many other Astringents, is that of acting on the urinary passages as
nephritic Diuretics, Lithontriptics, etc. It is enough here to mention this: I
shall afterward talk of it more fully.

MUSCUS, LICHEN KIND.
This is not in our present Dispensatories, but was formerly in all of them.
The term is ambiguous. If we take it in the botanical sense, as comprehending
all the Mosses, it will not apply; as many of th^se have a strong acrimony,
etc. Here the term Muscus stands for the several species of what are called
Lichens, which are plainly astringent, and recommended in diseases of the
breast. I have set it down chiefly for an observation on the Cup-moss, or
Muscus Pyxidatus. I take this from Willis, a man much employed in practice,
who, on account of his exploded theories, is, perhaps, too much overlooked. He
heartily owns, that the Chin-cough is a disease, in which the Physicians, he
says, seldom, the old women often succeed. The Cup-moss, he says, is the chief
of the empiric remedies, and I myself have seen it used with success. Other
Astringents have also been employed for the same purpose. The Bark has been
recommended by Burton, and, on trial, I have found it to answer with success,
but it is generally very difficult to make the child swallow the proper
quantity; and it would be much easier to exhibit the simple Astringents, where
there is no bitterness, as the Cup-moss.

ACIDO AUSTERE, or ACERB.
We have now finished those Astringents which can be ranged in botanical order;
I have, therefore, next pursued the analogy of the sensible qualities. The
number of the Acido austere might have been much increased, by adding all
unripe fruits; but I have confined myself to such as have this quality in their
ripe state. If more had been added, we might still have said, that they had all
the same virtues, and only differed in degree. The one most easily procured
(which will always be a cause of preference, especially as I imagine it is one
of the strongest,) is the Prunus sylvestris, or common Sloe. Indigenous plants
should always be preferred to exotics, on account of our certainty of their
genuineness, which is far from being the case with the other; and, indeed, in
most cases, they are of sufficient efficacy; though from all this I would not
have you conclude, that I think the general rule, of Nature's having given to
every particular country remedies adapted to all its diseases, to be true. I
shall only mention the Sloe, as I think it may serve for all the rest. In the
Edinburgh Dispensatory, an Extract is ordered to be made of this; in the
London, a Conserve. As it is a substance that acts more on the primae viae,
than in remote places, its acerbity will, perhaps, make it preferable, in the
Dysentery, to the more pure austere. Diarrhoeas, though seldom epidemic ones,
may be brought on by eating too much ripe fruits; to obviate whose effects the
acerb will be proper; but then they must be such as are not liable to a
fermentation; so that when sweetness, the cause of fermentation, is joined,
those will be improper, and they should be more acerb than sweet. The
preparation, then, of the London College, by adding three parts of sugar, is
certainly wrong; neither is that of Edinburgh without its disadvantages; for,
by long continued coction, the astringency is apt to be destroyed, and, if the
extract be dried, toward the end of the process, it is rendered a very
difficultly diffusible substance. In my opinion, a medium is best. It ought to
be made like elder-rob, boiled to a certain height, and then some sugar added,
to keep it diffusible. This method of treatment will apply to other substances.

Next follows in my Catalogue a miscellaneous list, containing substances that
have been employed for the same indication, which have no particular analogy,
either in botanical characters, or sensible qualities. Astringency is a very
universal property in vegetables, and in all the solid parts of these, as I
formerly hinted, there is more or less of this quality. The list here might
have been very much increased, but I have only inserted those substances that
have it in the greatest purity, and little of any counteracting quality.

ANCHUSA, ALKANET.
These belong to the Asperi folia. I imagine all these have more or less of an
Astringency; in few, however, it is considerable. From their conjoined
mucilaginous quality, they have been transferred to the class of Demulcents
This is the most sensibly astringent of all this order.
.

BALAUSTINA, BALAUSTINES.
These are the flowers of the Pomgranate. These are very pure and simple
Astringents, though not supposed one of the strongest. With regard to its use,
it is one of those that give out an elegant tincture, which, in general, is
more easily extracted from flowers than from wood; this it yields to water, and
scarcely at all to spirit, so that Decoction is the best preparation of it.

BRUNELLA, SELF-HEAL.
This is a very weak Astringent, though recommended by Materia Medica writers.
Both from its taste, and the class to which it belongs, viz. the Verticillatae,
the most of which are acrid and stimulating, etc. we must not expect from them
any material Astringent.

HYPERICUM, ST. JOHN's WORT.
Although, formerly, repeated testimonies have been given in favor of this
plant, yet it is scarce at all regarded at present. I think we should not be so
audacious as to neglect it, for by the sensible qualities it appears active,
which always must be a rule to suspect and enquire into its virtues. To the
taste it is astringent, with a bitterness, which is commonly very consonant to
an astringent virtue. With these sensible qualities, it manifestly contains a
large proportion of a subtle essential oil. Held to the light, it seems full
of small holes, and hence is called Perforatus. These, however, are only cells,
in which the subtle essential oil is lodged. Somewhat of the same kind appears
around the sides of the flower. All these are presumptions of its utility, and
there are many well-vouched testimonies of its virtues, particularly of its
diuretic powers. This virtue is said to depend on its terebinthinate oil, but
it also exerts the same (where much of that oil must be lost) in dry powder,
and in decoction, so that its diuretic quality seems to depend on its
astringency. I have often intended to make trial of that substance, and if any
person has a design of prosecuting the experiment, it is necessary he should
learn to extract the subtle essential oil, upon which, perhaps, its active
virtues depend. Alcohol does this best. Neuman tells us, that the first
affusion of that gave him a pure red tincture, but that a second gave a green,
less impregnated one. Hence, then, I would recommend extraction by one affusion
of Alcohol, bringing that to proper strength, by applying it to fresh (...) of
the plant. As after this combination the Alcohol rises with less heat than the
oil, we may obtain our impregnation much stronger by evaporation.

This oil is much recommended in Epileptic and Maniac cases, where, I confess,
I do not understand how it can act, though, indeed, there are testimonies of
its virtues.

LYTHRUM.
This was formerly known under the name of Lysimachia, but now it is properly
referred to different genera, as Epilobium, etc. They are all of the same
natural order. Lythrum is applied to the genus of Lysimachia by Linnaeus.

I insert it here from De Haen's authority, who says it was communicated to him
by an Army Physician, and that he, in conjunction with Van Swieten, had
experienced its good effects, in ten different cases after Dysentery. After
exhibiting a purge, he gave it in doses of a dram, night and morning, and
says, that if the disease be recent, it will cure it in three days; he cured an
old Dysentery (annosa) in three weeks, which had resisted every other remedy.
We seldom employ Astringents in Dysentery. It is commonly said they ought not
to be used before the acrimony is evacuated. I explained it in another way,
viz. that before the determination to the intestines was taken off by other
remedies, Astringents ought not to be used. De Haen should have told us the
cases and circumstances of Dysentery where Lythrum was proper. He says it ought
not to be used where the intestines are full of sordes, and in cases of laxity.
By this I understand nothing. If in recent cases he talks of laxity, it is
merely from theory. In his fourth part, however, he says, that the Lythrum is
chiefly of use in old Dysenteries; and here I think that this and other
Astringents are extremely proper, and we are generally too late in their
exhibition; strong ones would be improper, but certainly such as will bring on
astriction by slow and mild degrees, ought to be used.

MILLEFOLIUM.
This is much used in Germany, where it is considered not only as an
Astringent, but a Sedative and Antispasmodic. It was strongly recommended by
Stahl, and those of his school; whose authority, however, I should not much
regard, (as they often give high commendations to very insignificant remedies,)
had not Hoffman also recommended it. It is a very doubtful plant to appearance.
The herb seems to be a weak astringent with acrimony. The flowers are
remarkably acrid, and contain a very acrid essential oil. It is doubtful (as
the part of the plant employed is not specified) whether it is antispasmodic
from its astringency, or essential oil. In this country I have seen the powder
of the flowers used with success in flatulent cholics; and from its aroma, it
probably may be useful in hysteric cases; from all which, however, I must
suspect, that it ought to be thrown out of the list of Astringents, and put
into that of antispasmodics.

MYRTUS, MYRTLE.
Both the leaves and berries have been used, and by their sensible qualities
they are evidently astringent; but they are properly neglected here, as neither
being native, nor of such peculiar virtues, as should make us import them from
foreign countries.

PLANTAGO, PLANTANE.
This plant has many virtues imputed to it, but from its sensible qualities, I
imagined it of little efficacy, till I was informed by the late Dr. Clerk, that
he had seen several Haemorrhages yield to this, which had resisted seemingly
more efficacious medicines. If such effects are to be expected from it, it must
be used in large doses, and continued for a length of time. I have seen it used
in Haemorrhages and Haemoptoes, but without any manifest effects; and any that
appear, might probably be owing to the other remedies employed along with it, a
low diet, and repeated bleedings. The Leaves and Seeds of this plant are in
use. The Seeds are of little use, being a mild farinaceous substance, the
Leaves are the principal part, and the Husks have most astringency.

POLYGONATUM, SOLOMON'S SEAL.
Here is an instance of the necessity of taking notice of the particular part
of the plant to be used. The Flowers, Berries, and Leaves of Polygonatum are of
a very acrid and poisonous nature. The Root is the part only to be used. It is
remarkably mucilaginous, with little acrimony, which is of the same nature with
that of the flowers, etc. but may be dissipated by boiling. By mistake, the
whole of this plant has been spoken of as an Astringent, but it ought to be
confined to the Roots. The Root I have often known used with success in
Haemorrhoidal Swellings, and Bleedings. The dose is half an ounce boiled in
milk from one pound to half a pound, and continued every night; and in many
instances have I seen it remove the pain and swelling. Several other remedies
of the astringent kind have been employed with success in Haemorrhoids.
Wherever these evacuations are critical, Astringents are improper, but they are
not always so. They are often accidental, from hardened foeces pressing upon,
and causing a fullness of the neighboring vessels; and here, certainly, when
we obviate the costiveness, the habitual determination to the part should be
taken off gradually, by the proper and mild use of Astringents. Some have
alleged, that the Haemorrhoids serve the same purpose in men, and are equally
necessary and critical with the menstrua of women. But I know that as many, nay
many more women are affected with the Haemorrhoids than men, and at the same
time have their menses regular, which shows that it is often a disease, and not
always a critical determination. In this disease we should employ only such
Astringents as act in the primae viae, and such are the vegetable; for if we
employ those of a stronger kind, as Alum, etc. we shall at the same time be in
hazard of having their action extended too far, and of suppressing menses, and
necessary evacuations.

SANICULA.
Materia Medica writers constantly consider this as an Astringent, but it
belongs to the Umbellatae, a very acrid class, and many of them poisonous; and,
therefore, a priori, we are not to expect any Astringents from this class. I
find it has some of their qualities, and that its astringency is very doubtful;
and therefore I reject it as an astringent.

SEDUM.
In the eye of the Botanists this is an ambiguous term. It is the name of a
genus comprehending a variety of species, of very different, nay, many of them
of opposite qualities. What I mean here, is the Sedum majus, or Sempervivum. It
is a vegetable of moderate astringency, and has been constantly considered as a
cooler. As it has no sensible acidity, or saline poignancy, I can see no
foundation of its cooling qualities. It has been recommended as a cure for
corns. Some, for these, have sought a remedy in acrid substances, but these are
very improper. This, merely from its succulency, may be useful; for I know no
cure for corns, but such as will obviate the hardness in the neighboring
parts, and, by softening, dispose the corn to separation; and this intention
the Sedum answers remarkably well, applied as a poultice.

VISCUS QUERNUS, MISLETOE.
Much superstition has been mixed with the use of this medicine; so much, that
its real qualities have been supposed false. But in this I cannot agree. It has
been particularly famous in the cure of Epilepsy. When Epilepsy proceeds from
an increased mobility, allowing the spasmodic affection to recur upon slight
occasional causes, Astringents are certainly useful, and in this case have I
seen the Misletoe used with success. It has Bitterness joined with its
Astringency; and Sir John Floyer says, that he has seen it in some instances
cure Quartans, where the dose was considerable, and continued for a length of
time. This remedy gained great reputation in England, where several treatises
have been written upon it; and Cartheuser now gives his testimony in support of
its virtues. I make no doubt of the virtues, but not on Cartheuser's authority,
because in the cases where he used it, he employed several other remedies at
the same time.

As to the choice of the plant, we now know that we need have no regard to the
tree on which it grows; for it is precisely the same as obtained from the Oak,
Apple, Hazel, etc. This shows that plants do not differ so much from the juices
they take in, as from their different assimilatory organs. The whole of the
plant has been employed, but the virtue resides in the Bark, which may be used
in the dose of half a dram or one dram, and if continued for some time, it
will be found an efficacious Astringent, especially where a slight Bitter is at
the same time required. It is best employed in substance, for it does not give
out its virtues in solution.

URTICA, NETTLE.
The sensible qualities of the Nettle are not equal to the virtues attributed
to it. Whatever be in this, the testimonies in its favor are very strong, and
I have them confirmed by experience. The great use of it by some, in diet,
shows it is not a medicine of great activity. Its recent juice should be
employed, or a strong decoction of a handful of it, i. e. the herb, and thus
have I seen it have immediately effect, in taking off the swelling of the Piles.

It has been much spoken of for diuretic virtues, as well as other astringent
plants. This is very difficult to explain, though it would seem they
undoubtedly possess it.

UVA URSI.
This is a title which has seldom appeared in the Materia Medica, and never in
any officinal list. Uva Ursi is not the proper botanical appellation. From the
Practitioners at Vienna, we have accounts of very extraordinary virtues imputed
to this plant. If these turn out to be true, it will show us that very curious
virtues may be lodged in unsuspected substances. I cannot say what has led them
to make use of it. It has been recommended by some as an Astringent. The
Physicians of Montpelier have hinted in general, that it is good in calculous
cases. Van Swieten recommended it to De Haen, who tells us, that it has been
found a certain cure in all cases of purulency, and also in any ulcers of the
urinary passages; secondly, in calculous cases, it enables them to retain their
urine, and obviates the strangurious pains. It also changed the appearance of
the urine. In some of these cases, where it was bloody, alkaline, and purulent,
nay so strongly alkaline as to effervesce with acids, it brought the urine back
to its natural appearance, and made it deposite a healthy sediment. In some
cases, indeed, he say (...) failed, but these were such, that in them the
urinary passages were in such morbid state, that it was past the power of
Nature to have effected a cure, or even Lithotomy itself to have (...). Where
all the (...) the stone seems to be removed, we are very apt to (...) stone
itself is dissolved, but here there was no such appearance, and the catheter
always found the stone of the same size and roughness as before. The plant was
always used in substance. At first, De Haen's dose was half a dram of it
powdered, once a day; but he now tells us, in his last volume, that he uses the
same quantity three times a day. He makes no observation on the operation of
the medicine, whether it bound the belly, palled the stomach, etc. neither does
he mention the remedies which accompanied it. He only says, that opiates in the
beginning were given, to ease the pain, and that only injections were thrown
in; but that soon both these were superseded as unnecessary. To leave without
doubt the efficacy of this remedy, De Haen tells us, that, as it required a
length of time, many, when their symptoms were a little alleviated, tired with
the disagreeable dose, laid it aside, but that soon the same symptoms recurred,
which were again relieved by returning to this remedy, and that this renewal of
the symptoms from laying aside of the remedy, and relief of them from
reassuming it, happened to the same persons five or six times. Taking all these
circumstances together, with the authority of two such remarkable persons,
acting under the eye of so many people, I think we can hardly doubt of the
facts. From some difficulties in theory, and instances where such like
testimonies have failed, some doubts may arise; but certainly these should not
prevent our making a trial of the medicine.

De Haen has attempted the rationale of this medicine's action, but after many
attempts, has at last given it up, as uncertain. Till we have an opportunity of
making the experiment, it is worth while to attempt the rationale. It may be
observed, and De Haen assists me in the observation, that in the Annals of
Physic there have been many instances where calculi have been carried in the
kidneys and bladder without inconvenience. This is difficult to account for.
Some may think the smoothness of the stone to have been the reason; but it is
found, and I have seen stones as smooth as polished marble, give great
uneasiness; while, on the other hand, rough ones gave none; and even this would
not obviate the inconveniences, from the weight of the stone. Instances have
been given of limewater relieving the symptoms of the stone; while at the same
time, the catheter showed the stone still remained in the bladder. Dr. Whytt
thinks the limewater acts by dissolving the stone into a mucus state, i. e.
its surface, and so taking off the asperity. These, I imagine, will not answer
entirely, and in the Uva Ursi, the stones have been found equally rough as
before; though the symptoms have been relieved; and besides, if the limewater
acted in the way alleged, the dissolved mucus must be carried away by the
urine, and if the limewater continued to act in the same manner, the whole
stone would be dissolved, which, in stones of any considerable largeness, has
not been found to be the case. We must, therefore, endeavor to find some other
explanation.

The symptoms of the stone do not so much depend on the size or surface of the
stone, as on the acrimony of the urine, which constantly accompanies the stone.
This is certainly the case in the Uva Ursi, it removing the bad state of the
urine, with little effect upon the stone, which, except the symptoms of the
stone depended on the acrimony of the urine, would be inconceivable. In stones
of the kidneys, the consequent strangury has been supposed to proceed from
consent of the urinary passages, but much more probably does it arise from
acrimony of the urine. Here let me throw in an observation, by the bye. It has
been supposed a specious proof of the efficacy of Limewater, that out of the
body it dissolves stones; but in these cases the very alkaline urine must be
supposed to do the same. In changing the urine, I imagi^^ ^he Uva Ursi may act
in changing the state of the secretory organ, inducing a stricture and strength
of the part; so that you see there might be some foundation for the so often
repeated nephritic and lithontriptic virtue of Astringents, by Materia Medica
writers. The last I thought impossible to reside in any vegetable, but now you
see there may have been a foundation for supposing it, as the symptoms of the
stone were relieved. As Limewater and Caustic Alkali out of the body dissolve
stones, so they relieve its symptoms in the same manner. If it comes out that
the Uva Ursi has the effects alleged, we must certainly then think, that the
Limewater acts more as an Astringent than a Solvent; for there are many
objections with regard to the solution.

The Uva Ursi is not a native of Great Britain It has since been found in great
plenty in the Highlands of Scotland, by Dr. Cullen himself; so that there is no
occasion to have recourse to the substitute here proposed.
, and in the Southern countries is only found on the highest Alps, where the
snow continues the whole year; so that we should, if the facts be confirmed,
endeavor to find a substitute for it; for if it be imported, it will certainly
be adulterated. I imagine some other of the astringents, formerly mentioned,
might answer; but I had rather choose to proceed on the Botanical analogy, and
take a plant of the same genus, and as near akin to it in habit as possible.
This plant is a species of the Arbutus of Linnaeus; what is most akin to this
genus, is the genus of Vaccinium. The Arbutus is a genus not very consistently
made up, and it is still a dispute among Botanists, whether several should not
be taken from the Vaccinium and put into this. There is in Britain only one
species of the Arbutus, found in the Isle of Mull, by Floyd, but this is so
rare, that we must have recourse to a species of the Vaccinium; and certain it
is, that there are several plants in the Arbutus, which were formerly in the
Vaccinium. The plant I would choose as a substitute for the Uva Ursi is the
Vitis Idaea semper virens foliis, etc. It occupies high grounds, and is to be
found not unfrequently in the Highlands. I have already got a specimen of it;
and shall endeavor to procure more, and make proper experiments. The next list
in the Catalogue contains.

The INSPISSATED JUICES.
Acacia and Hypocistis are almost now unknown; by the accounts we have of them,
and by what I have seen of them, they seem to be simple and pure astringents,
but without any peculiar property which should give them the preference to any
astringents in present practice.

CATECHU, JAPAN EARTH.
The name Terra Japonica is very improper, for Catechu is a vegetable
inspissitated juice, and that which is most frequently employed. It is a
tolerable powerful astringent, and I have often experienced its effects in
Diarrhoeas and Dysenteries. I never used it in Fluor albus, profusion of the
Menses, etc. so that I do not know whether its effects are propagated over the
system. Its virtues are equally extracted by water and spirit, and it has no
disagreeable smell or taste; so that the use of it is very proper. Though a
substance of no great value, we never get it pure, but adulterated with earths,
etc. which may be discovered by elutriation, and more effectually by solution.
All this would lead us to endeavor to find for it a substitute of our own
growth.

SANGUIS DRACONIS, DRAGONS BLOOD.
This is still employed, but is no astringent. It is a pure resinous body,
insoluble in aqueous menstrua, and probably in our primae viae. It was probably
introduced first by its signature, as all red plants were employed to stop
haemorrhages. It may be conveniently employed for forming Alum into pills,
being melted with the Alum. For this purpose it should not be powdered, and
only enters as a fourth of the whole. Our next list is

The BARKS.
Cortex Granatorum and Querci are substances extremely astringent, with very
little of any sensible Bitterness. Their astringency is confirmed by their use
in tanning, so that I believe them, efficacious as any Astringents externally
applied. They have the convenience of being soluble in water, but then they
afford but a weak impregnation, and long boiling destroys their astringent
quality.

CORTEX FRAXINI.
This has a Bitterness conjoined with its Astringency, resembling the Peruvian
Bark, for which, both it and the Hippocastaneus, which ought to have been set
down, have been employed as substitutes; and, as I have seen, with success. We
have here Sir John Floyer's testimony of their being useful in Fevers, where
they acted by promoting sweat.

The seeds of the Ash, too, have been employed in medicine, which have likewise
a kind of Bitterness, joined with their Astringency, called by Haller aromatic
Acrimony; and may be a medicine of considerable efficacy. Both the Bark and
Seed have been recommended as nephritic and lithontriptic. Glauber seems very
confident in recommending them; and Dr. Bowls adds his testimony to the same
virtues. If I have an opportunity, I shall endeavor to make trial of them as a
substitute for the Uva Ursi.

CORTEX SIMAROUBAE.
This is an instance of the fate of medicines, which in spite of being
recommended with confidence, and testimonies given of their success, often
remained without a fair trial. The fault is commonly in calling them specific;
so that when they are not found to answer in all cases, they are thought to be
useful in none. From its sensible qualities, it is not astringent, and from the
French writers, it does not appear to be so. Generally in large doses it
vomited and purged, and in small, was without any sensible operation. It has
been recommended in Dysenteries, but I refer you to the French writers. Next
follow

WOODS.
Of these I have only mentioned one, though several others are common. All of
them contain somewhat of Astringency, but have other qualities joined, which
render them unfit for this intention.

LIGNUM CAMPECHENSE, LOGWOOD.
Logwood, like other vegetable Astringents, is very difficult of solution. It
discovers its astringency, by somewhat of an austere styptic taste, more
manifestly by its making an ink. Both from the sensible qualities, and its
making but a weak ink, I conceive it to be but a very weak astringent, and also
from its being used only in decoction. We endeavor to obviate this by bringing
it into an extract, but the process is difficult, and seldom well executed, and
the long boiling commonly destroys the astringency, as much as we endeavor to
increase it by concentration. Some, however, think its weakness recommends it;
but on repeated trial I have never found it of any efficacy.

GALLAE, GALLS.
This is an excrescence arising on trees, from, the puncture of insects. In
practice we confine ourselves to the excrescence of the oak, and commonly get
it from foreign countries. However, all the galls have a stiptic quality, and I
think the term ought to be made general, and we should employ any excrescence
of any tree produced in the same manner. That Galls are a powerful Astringent,
appears from their being universally preferred in making of ink, and very much
in ^^^ning. Galls are remarkable for giving out their Astringency more
copiously in solution than any other vegetable Astringent, and therefore for
external use, as in fomentation, etc. I have always used them preferably to any
other. They are certainly good Astringents, and nothing but the doubts which I
gave in general of the propriety of the use of vegetable Astringents hinder
their internal exhibition. They have used them in Intermittent Fevers, as you
may see in the Memoirs of the French Academy; and as they are purely
astringent, it gives a doubt whether Peruvian Bark acts from its Astringency,
or other qualities.

Having finished particular Astringents, I have set down in my list, terms more
or less general, in Italic character, comprehending medicines more or less
suited to our intention.

1. ACIDS as ASTRINGENTS.
These were formerly mentioned in the Nutrientia, at a, in my list, and will
afterward be so more particularly in my eleventh head, the Antalkalina, at 1,
and 2. I shall only just now say somewhat on them as astringent.

That all Acids are Astringents is pretty manifest. Applied to the skin they
produce contraction and corrugation. Nothing is more common than for the
weakest Acids so much to contract the lips, as to take away their color,
hindering them to receive so much red blood as they received in their natural
state. With regard to the Astringency of Acids, it may be a question whether it
is naturally connected with particular Acids, or whether it is common to all,
and only differs from the different concentration. Thus some have imagined that
the vitriolic and perhaps the muriatic Acid are stronger than the nitrous or
vegetable. Whatever is in this, to me there is certainly a difference between
the fossile and vegetable acids. The vegetable Acid, in opposition to the
fossile, is capable of being changed in the primae viae by fermentation, and of
having its acid nature destroyed before they enter the blood. Again, the
fossile Acid stimulates the excretories; and if this effect is to be expected
from the vegetable, they must be given proportionably in greater quantity. I
shall go farther with this observation, and say, that of the vegetable Acid
even a difference is to be made. The native Acid is more liable to undergo
changes than the fermented, having both the vinous and acetous fermentations to
go through, which are past in the fermented Acid. Hence a question arises,
whether the acid fruits be recommended properly in the Dysentery? To me,
indeed, in such cases, vinegar would seem preferable, unless the native Acid
had so much acerbity with it, as to have the power of checking the putrefactive
fermentation. Hence I imagine there is some propriety in the practice of the
German soldiers in the Dysentery, of taking vinegar and cream. As Astringents
in the primae viae, the fermented Acid may be proper, but wherever we want to
have the effect of the Acid extended farther, as in Haemorrhages, there we
should prefer the fossile Acids. These have not only the power of producing
contraction, but also diminish the mobility, acting as sedatives. With regard
to the use of Astringents in Haemorrhages, it has been objected to its
propriety, as their Astringency may often increase the impetus of the blood.
Now the fossile Acids obviate this objection, for they not only constringe, but
also take off the increased impetus of the blood, both as acting like
sedatives, by diminishing their moving power, and on the fluids, as far as they
enter into them, by allaying their intestine motion.

2. AUSTERE WINES, as ASTRINGENTS.
These act as acerb; but are liable to the same objections as the native Acid.
They have, indeed, gone through the vinous fermentation, but that generally
imperfectly, and have still the acetous to undergo. By this means they may be
troublesome in the primae viae, and may there be changed before they enter into
the blood. Burnt wines are properly employed as Astringents, because by this
means their austerity is increased, and they are rendered less liable to
ferment. Upon the whole, astringent wines are of little efficacy, and austere
wines are only to be preferred where a choice of wine is necessary. In the
choice of wines, often more nicety than judgment is shown; and the color,
which is often artificial, directs more than the qualities. Red wines, however,
are commonly preferable as acid and austere. All the others, except the Moselle
and Rhenish, are of a stronger body, more stimulant and heating, with less of
the Astringency.

3. BITTERS as ASTRINGENTS.
Bitterness is often conjoined with Astringency, and it is doubtful whether
Bitters themselves are not astringent. When combined together they have been
universally considered as Tonics and Roborants. Whether this be owing to their
Astringency, or Bitterness, shall be afterward considered.

4. SEDATIVES as ASTRINGENTS.
These are more indirectly so than any of the former. I told you, that a chief
use of Astringents was in checking evacuations. Now this may be done either by
the Astringents, as contracting the vessels, or by the Sedatives, as
diminishing the impetus of the fluids.

5. BALSAMICS as ASTRINGENTS.
These are enumerated under my fourth class of medicines at f. They are set
down here, because they are frequently prescribed in preternatural and
increased secretions of the urinary passages, in gleets, gonorrhoeas, etc. In
the primae viae, however, their effects seem opposite to astriction, and under
the head of Stimulants, you will see them considered as laxatives, and, indeed,
they often make excellent ones; so that, on the whole, they are improperly
considered as Astringents. I allow, indeed, that they will act in stopping a
gleet; but that, I imagine, is from exciting an inflammation in the urinary
passages, to which they have a natural tendency, and a proof of this may be
alleged, that Cantharides are employed in the same intention.

EXSICCANTS as confounded with ASTRINGENTS.
Materia Medica writers commonly class these as Astringents. Every dry powder
may be employed for this purpose, but none of them have their effect
internally. There is one indication of Exsiccants which occurs in practice.
viz. in absorbing moisture on the surface of the body, as e. g. in cases of
disagreeable and troublesome sweats, etc. Astringents here would be dangerously
employed, as checking, perhaps, critical evacuation, of which exsiccant powders
will take off the disagreeableness, without oppressing the discharge. In
Erysipelas, and affection of the rete mucosum, these powders do not act as
repellants or astringent, but by absorbing an acrid mucus, which is often apt
to exsude and taint the neighboring parts. Powders of boles and chalks have
been employed; but these make a hard crust with the mucus, and mealy powders
have a better effect, which never should be too fine, and thus oatmeal answers
better than flour, as it absorbs the mucus better, and is not so apt to harden.
These I have frequently seen answer, after spirituous and oily medicines, and
Saccharum saturni, etc. had been applied, without effect, in allaying and
discussing the inflammation. If the meal be fixed in the cloth applied, it
answers so much the better, and hence the proper practice of the poor people,
in using, as an application, the inside of the meal sack.

Astringents being now finished, we shall next proceed to our third general
head, viz. Emollients.

EMOLLIENTIA.
These are such medicines as diminish the cohesion of the simple solids, in
opposition to Astringents. The operation of Astringents is difficult to
explain, and is still doubtful, that of Emollients is hardly so. Whether we
consider the simple solids as composed of earth, interspersed with gluten, or
take them as a mixed, they may be softened by the interposition of fluid parts,
or by thinning the gluten. Possibly the term laxative would be more proper than
emollient, but we are obliged to retain the latter, as the former would be apt
to be confounded with eccoprotics. Emollients are applied with a double
intention, not only to diminish the cohesion, but to soften; and may act,
either by dissolving the gluten, or by introducing a larger proportion of fluid
parts into the composition of the fiber. Perhaps their action ought not to be
entirely confined to this. Around every solid fiber there is a proportion of
cellular membrane; nay, (...) have supposed, that the whole solids of the body
are only condensed cellular membrane. Hence, then, Emollients, without entering
into the composition of the solid fiber, may act upon them, and produce
relaxation, by more fluids being interposed in the cellular texture.

We can hardly say, that Emollients act upon the moving fibers. They can only
do so, in so far as tension and firmness of the simple fibers is connected with
the oscillatory power of the solida viva. It is not the same with the
Emollients as with the Astringents; for these last always extend their action,
and have somewhat of a stimulating power. If the Emollients propagate their
action, it is only in so far as they alter the equilibrium, i. e. in causing an
increased flow of fluid to the part relaxed. Hence they have been supposed
Derivatives, but they are very seldom used simply in this intention. Thus we
seldom use plain oil, e. g. as a Derivative, but commonly assist our Emollients
with warmth, which here acts as a stimulant, and determines a greater flow of
humors to the part. The operation of Emollients occurs only externally; for we
can have but little conception of internal Emollients; We cannot suppose them
given in any quantity, sufficient to be introduced in such proportion, to every
solid fiber, as to bring on an universal relaxation. Indeed, by simple water,
we may diminish the density of the blood, and bring on laxity, and debility of
the system; but that this is purely by applying as Emollient to the simple
solids, is hardly conceivable. Emollients may have some effect in the primae
viae, and relax the stomach and intestines; but even there, I am persuaded,
their operation is perfectly different from simple relaxation; for the
intestines are lined with a mucus, which will hinder their immediate
application to the solid fibers. The effect of warm water on the stomach is a
very difficult problem. After reflection, I have not thought of any thing more
satisfactory than this, viz. that Nature has given us an inclination for cold,
and an aversion for warm water, which, though a most mild substance, is often
rejected in vomiting, etc. This is all that can be said with regard to the
operation of Emollients; we now proceed to

INDICATIONS of EMOLLIENTS.
1. They are indicated in every case of too much dryness of the simple solids.
Here they can only be applied externally, where there are fissures, chaps, and
indurations of the surface. 2. Emollients are indicated in all cases of
rigidity, whether it exist in the simple solids, or in the moving fibers. Where
the first are within our reach, the effects of Emollients are evident; with
regard to the moving fibers, Emollients may act in so far as they fill the
cellular texture with water, oil, or mucilage; thus taking off the tension of
the solid fibers, and so diminishing the oscillation of the moving. 3.
Independent of a morbid rigidity, Emollients are indicated in cases of
inflammation. 4. Emollients are indicated, wherever we want to induce a greater
laxity, for the sake of derivation or revulsion. I will not determine here,
whether they operate in this case by the heat commonly joined with them, or by
their moisture; or whether the relaxation is confined to a particular part, or
extended over the system. Certain it is, that tension is necessary to the
system, and that this tension depends on the tension of the neighboring parts,
and so of the whole system; and it is to be imputed to this, that relaxants,
applied to a particular part, will sometimes induce a relaxation of the whole
body.

(...), however, probable, that they go commonly to this degree* (...) all
these cases, Emollients are externally applied. Internally, by these we cannot
conceive any considerable relaxation induced ^n particular parts, which must
only be effected by a general relaxation of the system, which must be very slow
and gradual. They ^ay act, indeed, internally, not as Emollients, but as
Demulcents, ^overing acrimony, which, as Emollients, they would only dilute.

PARTS of EMOLLIENTS in which their VIRTUES reside.
Wherever any substances act as Emollients, it is in consequence of the water,
oil, or mucilage they contain; which, wherever they occur without acrimony, are
emollient; and wherever that virtue takes place, it is in consequence of one or
more of these. Water, as penetrating more immediately, is, perhaps, most
considerable in producing relaxation; but then it has the disadvantage of being
soon dissipated, of taking off with it part of the animal gluten, and of
leaving the solids more friable than before. If oil could be as easily
introduced, its effects would be much more durable, without the inconveniency
of water. The extremities of the apertures of the vessels on the surface are
extremely apt to be affected with any thing blocking them up. In warm
countries, where sordes are very apt to adhere to the skin, warm bath is used
to clean them off. At the same time unction is used to obviate the crispature,
to which the skin would be liable, to prevent its chapping, etc. Mucilages,
composed of oil and water, are of a mixed nature, more approaching to water,
perhaps, in its penetration, and certainly in its leaving the part more dry and
friable. With regard to the use of oil, it is supposed an improper Emollient,
as from its tenacity it may stop perspiration; on which account it has been
thought that it ought to be rejected in Surgery. All of this theory seems to be
unsound. If such was its property in warm countries, where perspiration is so
necessary, it would not be much used. I imagine, that, unless where it is so
thick as to dry on the skin, and entangle the dust in the air, and the sordes
of the skin, it can hardly affect perspiration. Hence, then, the practice of
the warm countries should always be taken together, unction and warm bathing.
Perspiration flows with some force from the skin, as any one may observe, who
will take the trouble to render it visible. This velocity is so great, that it
would seem to be capable of overcoming the resistance of any such fluid as oil.
Nay, I have supposed that oil may excite perspiration, by relaxing the orifices
of the vessels, at least some of its effects seem to say so. I cannot account
for this phenomenon otherwise, e. g. in a Coryza, where the inner membrane of
the nose is so swelled and tumified, as hardly to allow of breathing, which
complaint is so frequent in children, as often to prevent their sucking. I have
seen relief given by oil or butter rubbed on the outside of the nostrils. In
the Angina, it was formerly the practice to employ a bland oil externally, but
camphorated oil, with caustic alkali, are now commonly employed. The common
people still use butter, or oil, which gives a considerable relaxation to the
internal swelling, by producing a relaxation externally, and promoting the
perspiration of the part. It may, indeed, act, in some measure, by changing the
equilibrium; but it is very plain that it must, chiefly, in the manner observed.

3. Sensible qualities which discover Emollients. A bland, mucilaginous, or
oily taste, without acrimony.

4. PHARMACEUTICAL TREATMENT.
Emollients are always extracted by water, in opposition to spiritous menstrua,
whose effects are opposite to relaxation. In some cases they may be extracted
by oil, where an oily matter is to be obtained; but I would allege, that
vegetable matters, which contain much oil, will not give it out to oil, and
that it would be much better obtained by expression.

PARTICULAR EMOLLIENTS.
With regard to these, they are ranged under three heads, of Water, Mucilage,
and Oil.

1. AQUA, et AQUOSA BLANDA.
With regard to the emollient virtue of these, we have already spoken; and of
their other virtues shall speak afterward. In practice, Water is what they
chiefly derive their effect from; we indeed endeavor to impregnate this, but,
while the water is in considerable proportion, this impregnation adds or
diminishes little from its virtue. We must not, however, neglect to talk of the
vegetables which have been employed.

COLUMNIFERAE. Vide Catal. letter a.
This is a natural order, as much so as any, and comprehends a great many
genera and species. I have only set down two of the genera, which enter our
Dispensatory List, though I make no doubt but all the others might be equally
employed, in deficiency of these; for, as far as they are exposed to our
examination, they all agree in being bland and mucilaginous. The most powerful
we know, are the roots of Althaea, which afford a mucilage of very great use as
a Demulcent. Externally it may be of some use as an Emollient, but as it is
commonly so much diluted with water, the emollient effects of it are chiefly to
be imputed to that.

Both for an Emollient and Demulcent, the root should not be employed as
recently dug up, nor, at the same time, too much dried. In the one case it is
too much diluted with water, in the other the mucilage is not easily extracted,
so that an intermediate state, between both these, is to be chosen, which, I
imagine, is seldom the case in our shops. Althaea root might be prepared in the
same manner as Salep, and, in a powder of that kind, it would yield its
mucilage much more easily.

The Malva has nearly the same qualities, but inferior in degree.

FARINOSA.
The chief of these have been enumerated under the Nutrientia. I have (...)
here (...) not so commonly known. With regard to these, th^^^ (...) fit for
(...), as containing much oil. I mentioned their difference (...) regard to
their oil under the Nutrientia. Hence you will see, how the Farina of the
Legumina is an Emollient, preferable to that of the Cerealia. Sometimes these
meals are employed in poultices externally. Those made of the Cerealia soon
dry, while those of the Legumina are more oily, and retain their moisture much
longer. They have been employed as favorite applications to the eyes. For this
purpose bean-meal is better th^^ oat-meal, and that again than wheat-meal, as
attracting more moisture, and not being so apt to harden. Thus much said with
regard to Farinosa in general, I proceed to the particular substances set down
in the Catalogue.

SEMEN CANNABIS, HEMP SEED.
In some countries this is employed as food. It is here doubted whether it
ought to be applied externally, as medicine. The plant is very acrid, the
seeds, contrary to the opinion of some, farinaceous and mild. A Physician here,
fond of refinements, used to employ it as food to his patients, and I have
never seen it, in valetudinarians, even in considerable quantity, produce any
bad effect. With regard to its use as an Emollient, it is an oily seed,
affording its oil by expression; but not in any such quantity as the Semen
Lini, and therefore may be disregarded.

SEMEN CYDONIORUM, QUINCE SEED.
It approaches the Cerealia, and might be used in the same manner, as a food.
It affords a mucilage without separation of oil, which is very easily
extracted, on the account of its being diffusible in water; which has made me
lament our not having it in this country. It is remarkable of Salep, that a
small quantity of it thickens much water, but the Quince-seed has this effect
more remarkably. Infused in water it does not ^it heavy on the stomach. They
would not answer imported into this country, as they do not keep long without
turning rancid.

SEMEN FAENUGRAECI, FAENUGREEK SEED.
This contains an oily mucilage, conjoined with an acrimony and disagreeable
rank odor, which has confined its internal use to the farriers practice. It is
a firm compact substance, difficultly extracted. It may be good in poultices,
but then must be accurately powdered, and if kept in this state, is very apt to
be adulterated, as we find in the Farina Faenugraeci of the farriers. All the
foregoing I neglect for the following, viz.

SEMEN LINI, LINT SEED;
which has every advantage of mucilage and oil in its seed, and both externally
and internally answers every purpose of the rest. From its large proportion of
oil it is disagreeable to some stomachs, and cannot be introduced in sufficient
quantity. Hence, in these cases, as a substitute for it, the frequent and
proper use of the Althaea root.

SEMEN PSYLLII, FLEAWORT.
This is the seed of an acrid plant, which contains some mucilage, with
somewhat of the same acrimony; which renders it nauseous and disagreeable. For
these reasons, and as a foreign plant, it may very properly be neglected.

So much with regard to the particular Farinosa as Emollients. Many more of
this class might have been mentioned; but I doubt; whether even those set down
are properly employed. In short, any mild plant, with much water, might have
been added to the list; but except they contain much oil, or mucilage, they may
be neglected as Emollients.

OLERACEAE.
Physicians, sensible of the necessity of oil, or mucilage, for constituting an
emollient virtue, have explained the effects of these as Emollients, from a
saline nitrous quality. With regard to any saline quality softening our fibers,
I take it to be impossible; allowing it were, the neutral, in the small
quantity contained in these plants, could not have this effect, and if a large
one were used, its stimulus would counteract the intention; and therefore, from
any supposed nitrous quality, the effects of the Oleraceae, or miscellaneous
list, are purely imaginary. One case, given in proof of this manner of action,
is a deception, viz. their use in emollient clysters, which are commonly mere
Emollients, combined with a moderate stimulus, which these naturally afford
from the ^alt they contain.

ATRIPLEX, BETA, ARRACHE, BEET.
These contain no active qualities; so that nothing particular can be said upon
them.

BONUS HENRICUS, ENGLISH MERCURY, I mention, as an instance of the necessity of
acquiring the various synonyma in Botany. The botanical name has been applied
equally to this and French Mercury which is an acrid plant, and is commonly
mistaken for the Bonus Henricus, which is mild, and kept for it in the shops.
Perhaps the mistake has been useful, as it may succeed better in clysters; but
as an Emollient, its effects are very wide of the Bonus Henricus.

MISCELLANEOUS LIST. Vide Catal. letter d. ALSINE, CHICKWEED.
This is a mild, insipid plant, ranked sometimes as Astringent, sometimes as
Emollient, but in either intention its virtues are inconsiderable.

BRANCA URSINA.
This is somewhat mucilaginous, but inconsiderably so.

MELILOTUS, MELILOT.
This commonly stands as an Emollient, but its acrimony prevents this virtue.
It belongs to the mild class of the Legumina, which are employed as food to
domestic animals; but (...) much more acrid than any of its class. It was
formerly introduced into our plasters, but even here, I have seen bad effects,
from its acrimony. Hence, and for its being so apt to be adulterated with
AErugo, it is very properly rejected.

PARIETARIA, PELLITORY.
There is no foundation for the emollient quality of the Parietaria. If any, it
is on the same footing as the Oleraceae, from its having somewhat of a nitrous
quality. It has, too, somewhat of Astringency. It may be safely, but
ineffectually employed. Any inconsiderable pectoral and diuretic virtue it has,
must be owing to other qualities than that of emollient.

SAPONARIA, SOPEWORT.
This has probably entered into the list of Emollients, from the soapy
smoothness of its leaves; but its juice has no pretension to such quality,
being rather acrid. Hence it has been recommended as aperient and diuretic.

VERBASCUM, MULLEIN.
This, too, seems to have been reckoned emollient, from the softness and
smoothness of its leaves. It surprises me to see it has been called emollient,
and demulcent; for it has no sensible mucilage, belongs to the acrid class of
the Luridae, and, when chewed, gives no taste at first, but afterward
discovers a considerable latent acrimony. In these heads, you see, I have often
been obliged to deal in negative virtues. I however, thought it proper to mark
some substances, in order to give you my reasons for rejecting them.

RADIX LILIOR. ALB. and CEPAE COCTAE.
Bo^^ contain a gluey, mucilaginous matter, with some acrimony, which is
dissipated by boiling; so that they are extremely proper ingredients in all
emollient poultices.

OLEA PRESSA BLANDA.
Vegetable oils, if equally bland, have all the same virtues; so that there is
no making a distinction of them as (...) they may sometimes be extracted by
decoction; but more commonly by expression.

EMOLLIENTIA EX ANIMALIBUS.
The same may be said of these as of the former. Milk is set down first as
containing oil, but it rather belongs to the watery liquors, and I imagine is
emollient chiefly from the water it contains. All the others mentioned, are
only different forms of mild and bland oils.

They are much of the same consistence; and if equally bland, I cannot imagine
they have different virtues, which are the same as those of the vegetable oils;
although, sometimes, their consistence may vary their use, and make them keep
longer. The Axungia, or fat of the Viper, has been recommended as a peculiar
remedy applied to the eyes, but any mild animal, and equally fluid fat, would
answer the same purpose.

We have now finished the consideration of the Medicines, which act on the
simple Solids. We shall next consider those, which act on the living Fibers. I
shall here repeat an observation formerly made, viz. that the medicines which
act on the simple solids do not deserve all that notice they have commonly had
in our systems. The observations indeed on the Nutrientia are unavoidable, but
those which alter the simple solids occasionally, are of very little
importance. I observed the Emollients were almost confined to external
application, and even there, did not propagate their effects much beyond the
part affected. The Astringents were of more considerable and more extensive
operation, but then their effects were not entirely confined to the simple
solids, and if they were confined to medicines acting merely on the simple
solids, we should make but very inconsiderable and very ^low changes. The
Medicines, we are now to consider, are of more extensive operation; but as the
operation is more extended, so the theories are more doubtful. The laws of the
nervous power are little known, and the explanation of any operation, depending
on it, must be involved in the same obscurity.

STIMULANTIA.
These are such medicines as excite the action of the moving fibers in living
animal bodies. On the dead body they have no operation. Whatever excites motion
in an animal body, is a Stimulus; Medicines, which have this effect, are called
Stimulants: First, with regard to their*

MANNER of OPERATION.
Here Stimulants, perhaps, may be considered as of two kinds; First, Those
which are indirect, i. e. which act on the organs of sense, by which means a
perception is excited in the Sensorium commune, which, acting there, determines
the nervous power to flow more copiously into the whole, or a particular part
of the system. Secondly, Those which are direct, i. e. because they are
imagined to act directly on the moving fibers. The indirect are the most common
and universal; insomuch that it has been a question, whether the direct action
of Stimulants ever takes place, and whether it is not always in consequence of
impressions on the organs of sense. But there is nothing more evident, than
that Stimulants may excite motion in the moving fibers themselves, independent
of any connection with the Sensorium commune. Thus we may separate a single
moving fiber from the body, where there cannot be any connection supposed with
the Sensorium commune; and yet, while heat remains in it, it is capable of
having a motion excited in it by Stimulants. Hence I would allege, that when
the living body is entire, that medicines may act directly on the moving
fibers, because in many instances, no effects on the Sensorium commune are
previously evident. The metaphysical Physiologists have supposed the absolute
necessity of a sentient principle present in every action; and if, sometimes,
there is a want of consciousness, they say that this is destroyed by repetition
and habit; and, indeed, in many instances, this seems to be the case. Thus the
motions of our eyes are owing to sensations excited by the impressions of
light; but custom has so familiarized this, that motions come to be excited
without our direction. But surely there is no habit of emetics or purgatives,
and these do not produce their effects on the sense till the evacuation is
made; and if they are sometimes attended with pain, this is not produced
directly by the medicine, but by its effect, the spasmodic contraction.

From these, and other considerations, we must admit of two kinds of
Stimulants. With regard to their operation, in both cases the theory is
difficult. In cases of sensation, some kind of mechanical impulse is
sufficiently evident; but we can hardly suppose, that from this we must deduce
its effects. The motions produced, are not to be so accounted for. The effects
are not at all proportional to the force of impression, i. e. the force of
mechanical impulse. Weak impressions often produce strong sensation, and strong
impressions oftener extend no farther than the part to which they are applied. I
own it is to be wished, and the Physiologists are in the right to endeavor to
account for motions, as near as may be, from mechanical operation. Thus it is
common to observe, that sharp pointed bodies stimulate, and justly, in some
measure, such effect may be attributed to the figure, and motions thus excited
may properly enough be said to be produced from mechanical stimulus. However,
Stimulants are not alone sharp or pointed bodies. Every thing impressed on the
fibers, which stretches them out, whether it be blunt or not, proves a
Stimulus, and causes contraction. From this effect of stretching, joined with
that of points, have Physiologists laid down a rule, viz. that whatever
approaches to produce a solution of continuity i^ a Stimulus. But it is
extremely difficult to prove this; and ou^ fibers may be put in motion by such
causes as will not act in this manner. However, let us grant this for the
present, yet it will have little effect in accounting for Stimuli; and it is as
difficult as to account for the tremor of the air producing sound, or that of
the rays of light our ideas of light. Nay, it is thought by Physiologists. that
we might have been so constituted, that what now produces odor might have
produced light, et contra, etc. Thus you plainly see, we cannot account for
such effects from a mechanical operation, and, indeed, impressions on our
senses, with regard to the ideas produced, and their effects, are by no means
mechanical, or explicable upon any theory we know. Even the changes made on the
simple fibers cannot be thus explained. The operation of cold is directly
contrary to the solution of continuity, for it acts by condensing or
increasing, and yet this is certainly a Stimulus. In short, we are sensible to
every mode of motion, if sensible at all, and to every condition in which the
fibers may be in.

Hence the difference Physicans have made between mechanical and chemical
Stimuli; the first, where the operation can be explained from the figure; the
second, where it depends on the operation of small parts of bodies upon each
other, from a peculiar property which we do not know. I mention all this, not
for any assistance it will give us in our discussion, but in order to avoid
foolish theories. Whatever we see stimulates the body, we call it acrid, or
sharp. The former term is very proper, but where we say the operation depends
upon figure, we can explain nothing from it; so that the Corpuscularian
doctrine is very frivolous. The operation of Stimuli requires a chemical
theory, with which we are not yet provided; but although we cannot explain the
direct operation, yet we have some observations to make concerning it.

1. The operation of Stimuli is of two kinds; first, that which is in common,
or general to the system, and is liable to affect every fiber; secondly, that
which is confined to a particular part of the system only. Impressions, made on
our senses, give us a notion of specific Stimuli. There are plainly certain
parts of the body liable to be affected with particular Stimuli, as the eye
with the rays of light, etc. The organs of sense are not ascertained. Five
principal are supposed, but many more are comprehended under the Touch* All
this leads us into the notion of specific Stimuli; but we are often apt to be
mistaken, and conceive specifics, where there is only a common and general
operation. Thus we are very apt to consider as such, those medicines which are
necessarily first applied to, and obliged to act on, a particular organ. Thus
every medicine which is swallowed, must first thus necessarily act on the
throat and stomach, but is no specific. Thus emetics are substances of
considerable acrimony, and ready solution; in consequence of which they
stimulate the stomach, and are thrown out before they arrive at the intestines;
but we know that, if from difficult solubility they do not act upon the
stomach, they will arrive at the intestines, and will also act upon these. We
are very ready to imagine here, that there is a specific action. Many think
that emetics are specifically disposed to operate on the fibers of the stomach,
and purgatives on those of the intestines; and it is alleged, that, when mixed
with the blood, their operation is only upon these parts: But, the experiments
adduced in proof of this fact are very fallacious; and it is still probable,
that the effects of these medicines, as commonly exhibited, depend entirely on
the quantity and solubility of the medicine, and sensibility of the different
parts.

2. There is another ca^e, in which we may be deceived in the specific action
of medicines, Viz. when they are carried into the blood vessels. Here we are
very ready to call such medicine as operates more on one secretion than
another, a specific. But here we are apt to be deceived from any circumstances
which may determine the operation to particular organs, viz. from particular
alliances to certain menstrua, as, e. g. that of saline substances with the
watery part of the blood, by which means they go off by the kidneys, and thus
prove a Stimulus to them, without acting specifically: For these very
substances may also, by other means, be determined to other secretions. Thus,
if the pores of the skin are shut, these medicines will go off by the kidneys;
but if by any means, as lying in bed, they are rendered open, these medicines
will be determined to that more general excretory, the skin: And it is a common
observation, that the same medicine may be indifferently diuretic, diaphoretic,
or pectoral; the last in so far as they promote the secretion of mucus in the
lungs, the reason of which effect, however is not so easy to explain.

3. Medicines have been supposed to have a specific virtue, on a supposition
that they have a peculiar power of altering the texture of our blood,
inspissating or attenuating it, viz. by preparing a great quantity of matter
for particular secretions. Thus the operation of Mercury has been supposed to
be specific with regard to the salivary glands. Others, however, suppose that
proceeds from the Mercury being more particularly associated to such parts of
the blood as pass by the salivary glands, and that hence it exerts its Stimulus
more particularly there; which otherwise it does in common to the whole system.
These are the arguments which are brought against specific Stimuli. If
medicines, applied to the external part of the body, be absorbed, and then act
always on a particular part, such may be supposed specific. Again, if in
injecting substances into the blood vessels, such medicines are always seen to
exert their effects on particular parts, as, e. g. if jalap always purges, and
ipecacuanha vomits, such may be reckoned specific, for such medicines must be
poured out promiscuously on all the glands at once, and should therefore
stimulate them all alike. At the same time, there are still difficulties to
obviate the various causes, which may determine the operation to peculiar
parts. There are who, not considering these difficulties, have been very ^ond
of specific Stimuli. Some thus have supposed different effects of different
medicines acting in the nervous power, and affecting the Sensorium commune.
Some they have supposed acting on the organs of voluntary motions, others more
particularly on the heart and blood vessels. Hence has arisen the distinction
between Cardiac and Cephalic. But I know no instance where such effects take
place.

4. Another difference of Stimulants has been made from the degree of force.
Linnaeus's definition of Stimulants is, Stimulantia secretiones incitant. This
certainly very often they do, by acting on the excretory organ. Formerly, when
I talked of my division of medicines, which acted on the fluids, into the
Alterantia and Evacuantia, I observed that in these the medicines act on the
moving fibers, and only from their more direct application to the fibers of a
particular organ, excited that evacuation. Here let me add, that, taking any
particular part of the body, to which a Stimulant is applied, if excretory
orifices be the part, their secretion will be produced; and perhaps the action
of the Stimulus will extend to the moving fibers of the secretory organ. If the
stimulant externally applied acts only on the nerves of the skin, it will cause
a greater flow of blood to the part, and prove rubi^aciens, which is the first
appearance of inflammation; and, if the Stimulus be strong, inflammation
itself; and if in a certain degree of inflammation the rete mucosum be
affected, raise blisters, and perhaps gangrene. These effects have given
occasion to a particular term applied, Epispastica, in Latin Attrahentia.

None of the manuscripts we have seen make any tolerable sense of the following
paragraph, and it should therefore, perhaps, be left out altogether; but we
shall venture to give here what we conceive to be the Doctor's sense of this
matter.

Abstracting from the effects of the increased action of the moving fibers upon
the motion of the fluids, we think it proper here to consider more simply the
effects of stimulants on the moving fibers themselves. These are, in general,
the increasing the influx, or exciting the action of the nervous power in the
fibers; and this, according to the different degrees of force in the stimulus,
may be in different states; as, 1. An increase of tone only. 2. Involuntary and
convulsive action. And, 3. Spasmodic contraction. The tone or constant tendency
to contraction which subsists in the moving fibers of living bodies under any
degree of extension, is partly owing to the elasticity of the simple solid, but
more considerably to the constant energy of the brain, in determining the
nervous power into the moving fibers; and it is owing to the various states of
this energy of the brain, that we observe such sudden vicissitudes of debility
and strength in the moving fibers of whole body. Hence, stimulants applied to
any part, often have their action communicated to the sensorium, and may
increase the energy of the brain so much, as to increase the tone of the moving
fibers over the whole system. These stimulants, therefore, may be employed as
tonics, but seldom with convenience, as they are apt to increase too much the
action of these parts, which are otherwise exposed to a constant stimulus. Such
is the sanguiferous system; and, as the inflammatory diathesis consists in the
increased tone of the heart and arteries, our stimulants are very apt to induce
or increase this diathesis. However difficult it may seem to distinguish
between the tonic effects of astringent, sedative, and stimulant medicines; it
is certain that the stimulants are more remarkable than the others for their
inflammatory powers, and are therefore, upon many occasions, inconvenient. The
influx of nervous power capable of giving tone, we suppose to be in a less
degree than is necessary to excite contraction, and it is only when the
stimulus is stronger, that contractions are produced. In these it is observed,
that they are not naturally of long continuance, but are necessarily succeeded
by a relaxation; and so far is this a law of the system, that, in many cases,
though a stimulus is constantly applied, it does not produce a constant
contraction, but a number of contractions alternating with relaxations. In this
case, the motions are called convulsions. The motions appearing in this shape
depend probably on the force of the stimulus, and the degree of contraction
produced; for there is a contraction of muscles which does not alternate with
relaxation. It is what modern Physicians more strictly call a spasin; and, as
the contraction is not only more permanent, but appears also to be in a more
considerable degree, we think it may be considered as the effect of a stronger
stimulus. From the whole, it appears, that the effects of stimulants, as
operating on the moving fibers only, are, increasing tone, exciting
convulsions, or producing spasm; and that these will arise according to the
degree of force in the stimulus and the irritability of the parts taken
together.

EFFECTS of STIMULANTS.
Stimulants extend their effects to parts very distant from those to which they
are applied; in most of them to some ^^stance, in others to the whole system.
In different Stimuli, their effects differ in degree and kind. Some are
disposed to affect distant parts, but those very slightly. Thus a pimple on the
knee affects, as has been observed, the opposite shoulder; and I myself, if a
dog with his tongue a little rough licks my hand, feel an uneasy tickling in
the soles of my feet. The difference in the effects of Stimuli in the parts to
which they are applied seems to depend on arbitrary laws of the animal
economy. Thus sneezing is produced from tickling the nose, coughing from any
part of the trachaea, etc. People here may talk of consent of nerves, but this
will not answer to explain the effect. From these instances, we can only
observe, that the effects of Stimuli may be strangely diversified. I entered
upon all this, chiefly for this observation, that many, and perhaps most
medicines act on the stomach, and, in consequence of their Stimulus there,
propagate their effects over the system. It is no objection to this, that we
are not able to explain the method of their action, on these distant parts. The
action of Stimulants are very much regulated by habit and custom; in so far as
they act on the organs of sense, repetition diminishes the force of the
impression; so that to produce the same effect after a short time, a greater
impression is necessary, and an increased dose to produce the same effect. A
difference here occurs in practice, which we do not know very well to
distinguish in theory. There is a difference in the action of Stimuli in
producing motion or sensation. Wherever motions are excited by Stimuli,
repetition renders them more easily so, and upon slighter causes; but
Sensations again upon repetition, are rendered more ^light. In other words,
custom increases the facility of active motions, and diminishes that of
passive. From what I have said of the effect of Stimuli producing different
motions, they may easily be conceived of great number, and considerable
variety; of greater than I can here enumerate. I have in my list neglected the
Evacuants, and only set down such Stimulants as produce general motions without
regard to particular Evacuations.

INDICATIONS of STIMULANTS.
They are indicated in all cases of languid motion, i. e. not merely in
weakness; but in all cases where the motion of the system is inert, weak, and
^low.

1. INDICATIONS with RESPECT to the SYSTEM of BLOOD VESSELS.
1. They are indicated, where the motion of the blood is suddenly stopped, as
in fainting, etc. 2. Where the degree of languor is neither so sudden, nor so
considerable, but more permanent in its kind, e. g. in the Chlorosis, a disease
often arising from affections of the uterus; but may also sometimes from other
causes. Analogous to this is the Cachexy, a complicated term, where in
consequence of various obstructions of the viscera, a languor and inertia is
induced on the system. Stimulants here are especially of use, where that
inertia is manif^^^ly so great, as to be attended with stagnation of the fluids
in particular parts; as in Cachexy with Dropsy; or, as Materia Medica writers
observe, in Phlegmatic habits. 3. Where the languor and inertia are especially
in the extreme vessels, here, and in the following case, the inertia of the
blood vessels is of a more subtle kind. Stimulants are indicated in Gangrene,
which is the effect often of motion and inflammation; but in particular cases
comes on from and Oedematous Swelling, Hydropic and Cachectic state of the
body; and in these cases are Stimulants necessary. In some cases, even where
Gangrene proceeds from Inflammation; i. e. when afterward an inertia succeeds,
are Stimulants ^ound useful. 4. They are indicated in Intermittent Fevers,
where the returning fit is often obviated by their use. I shall not here enter
into the theory of Fevers, nor consider whether the inertia liquidi nervosi be
that cause. It is enough to say, that the attack of the paroxysm is always
attended with inertia, where it is easy to see how Stimulants will act. They
are also recommended in cases of Continued Fevers, but here their use is more
uncertain than in Intermittent. Our theory of Fevers renders it difficult to
know, when we ought to commence the stimulant, or lay aside the antiphlogistic
method.

2. INDICATIONS with RESPECT to the NERVOUS SYSTEM.
There are cases where the inertia is confined to this. 1. Palsy certainly
consists in a weaker flow, o^ interruption of the nervous power into the part
affected. The nature of the obstructing cause there, is not explained. Possibly
the nature of the Palsy may be such as to be hurt by Stimuli; but certainly
there are cases, in which it may be cured by them. 2. Connected with this are
other diseases of the brain, Vertigo, Apoplexy, Lethargy, etc. all which
consist in a weaker flow through the Sensorium commune. Apoplexy is generally
distinguished into sanguineous and serous. The application of Stimulants have
been confined to the latter. There may be some foundation for this distinction,
and there may be cases where there is an obstruction only in the serous
vessels. However, I do not know if this should always make a distiction in the
application of Stimuli. It is commonly thought the sanguineous Apoplexy only
returns three times; but I have known cases where it has returned oftener, and
have seen an approaching paroxysm, indicated by stammerring, etc. obviated by
Stimulants, as a little mustard, etc. and even the paroxysm itself relieved by
them. If, in consequence of repeated attacks, those patients to whom I gave
Stimulants in such cases, happened to die, on dissection there was found all
the appearance of sanguineous Apoplexy, distension of the veins of the brain,
and extravasated blood. 3. Some species of Headache have been cured by
Stimulants, viz. such as are attended with paleness, coldness, and languor of
the whole body. We cann^t here determine the particular part affected;
sometimes, it appears to be external, and ether, or blisters, have given
relief; sometimes, too, it appears to be internal, and an affection of the
brain.

INDICATIONS with RESPECT to the ALIMENTARY CANAL.
Here those symptoms we call nervous, as often appear as any where else. These
are attended with paleness, etc. Sometimes they are observed to arise in
consequence of a bad Chylification and Acescency, manifestly depending on
inertia, and languid action, which are ^elieved by Stimulants. Sometimes they
appear in the whole track of the (...) from a slow motion, occasioning habitual
costiveness, in which ^ase, (...) are ^ound frequently of use. I had occasion
to observe, that (...) causes spasms, which frequently occur in inertia of the
alimentary Canal, and may be taken off by Stimulants, promoting stronger
action. When we come to Antispasmodics, we shall explain what concerns this
head. These symptoms, acescency, flatulency, etc. appear in hysteric and
hypochondriac cases, and therefore Stimulants here are frequently indicated.
There is another species of languor when Stimulants are indicated, viz. the
Gout. The nature of this disease is still involved in much obscurity. Whatever
disposition it has to appear in different parts, it is certainly connected
peculiarly with the stomach. It manifestly seems true, that to produce the Gout
in the extremities, (its proper form,) a strength and tone of the stomach, and
primae viae, is necessary; for whatever weakens the force with which the Gout
is sent to the extremities, must make it return upon the stomach.

The difficulty of the application of Stimulants, in these cases, shall
afterward be noticed, when we come to particulars.

CONTRA INDICATIONS of STIMULANTS in the SANGUIFEROUS SYSTEM.
1. As in cases of languid motion Stimulants were indicated, so in cases of
increased motion these are improper. There is no doubt of this, where
Haemorrhage, Inflammation, etc. depend on an increased impetus of the fluids,
and in every diathesis where there is a tendency to these. In the case of
Fever, this contra-indication is more complex. Wherever the Fever is in an
inflammatory state, Stimulants are hurtful.

Wherever Fever is accompanied with languor and weakness, Stimulants are
useful; but we are not to exhibit them in all cases where the pulse sinks, for
that is often attended with inflammation; but where the disease manifestly
appears without inflammation, and where its long continuance has weakened the
patient, then Stimulants may be useful. In general, Stimulants are improper in
the beginning of Fevers, and, in the end, allowable.

2. Stimulants are forbid in all Obstructions, which, though attended with
inertia, yet from the nature, duration, and degree of the Obstruction, we know
that it is not to be overcome by suddenly increasing the impetus of the blood,
but that, by this means, we are in danger of fixing it more, or even of
destroying the structure of the part. If Stimulants, here, be slowly thrown in,
they, however, may be useful; but here the most necessary means are relaxing
the spasms, and dissolving the fluids.

3. Stimulants, wherever the solids are over-stretched, or wherever, from other
causes, they are rendered tender and friable, rupturae proxima, as it is
called, are contra-indicated. This they are in all cases where the fluids are
remarkably thin and acrid. Here I have in view two cases, Cachexy and Scurvy.
By the former, if Physicians mean any thing at all, they generally mean
obstructions in the lower belly, where, in many cases, Stimulants would rather
have the effect of fixing the Obstruction, and destroying the part, from
tearing the solids already over-stretched, and rendered friable by acrimony.
This gives a caution to what we said of the use of Stimulants formerly in
Cachexy. In the Scurvy, where the fluids are so acrid as to have eroded the
vessels, are poured out, and have caused Obstructions, Stimulants are entirely
hurtful. We do, indeed, sometimes use Stimulants in this disease, but they are
of such nature as only to promote some excretions, without producing motions,
and extending their effects over the whole of the system. In general, I may
observe, that I do not extend what I have said on the subject of the
contra-indication of Stimulants, to their effects on the secretions.

REMARKS with regard to the USE of STIMULANTS.
The frequent use of Stimulants destroys the tone of the moving fibers, and
diminishes the mobility of the nervous fluid. Whatever may be in this last
effect, there is one observation which serves to confirm the first; Nature
seems to have adapted our organs to the relish of the mild and bland, for such
are the substances we employ in food, and universally has she given ^s an
aversion to the poignant and stimulant. With regard to the mild and bland, with
them no person is naturally palled, but there are always instances, through the
whole of life, of persons entertaining an aversion for the stimulant. Medicines
are distinguished as active, acrid substances, and an aversion to such is
universally established, and therefore Stimulants are suited to the body as
medicines, but, in the main, they are hurtful to the system, and tend to
destroy its tone. Hence, then, we should avoid Stimulants as much as possible,
since, so produce their first effect, they always require a stronger and
stronger dose; so that, at last, so much is necessary as will destroy the tone
of the stomach, and that of the whole system. In the first part of life, Nature
has wi^ely given us most aversion to these, as then they would be most hurtful,
and, before the natural duration of life was at an end, would require to be
given in such quantity as would totally destroy us; in the latter part of life
we come to relish them m^re, as then the time we have to live is shorter, and,
consequently, the danger less.

As to their use, therefore, in general, we ought, wherever they are necessary,
to b^gin with small doses; so that if a long continuance of them is necessary,
we may increase the dose without danger. Whatever disease requires Stimulants,
we at first reap good effects from them, but afterward, from habit, these
effects are destroyed. Hence, then, when we can, we ought frequently to
interrupt their exhibition, in order to interrupt the habit by which their
effects are lost. Nothing is more common than Physicians prescribing a medicine
for years, etc. but certainly it would be much better to order an intermission,
and perhaps by this means we should attain our purpose better at the last, and
besides could frequently recur to the same course with advantage.

There is, however, one exception to this rule of beginning with small doses,
and that is, wherever a sudden effect is to be produced. This I have frequently
seen in the use of Opiates; where considerable effects might have been
certainly obtained by a ^ull dose at first, which could not be attained by
^mall ones frequently repeated and increased. This exception most generally
takes place with regard to Stimulants, which act as antispasmodic.

The principal purposes of Stimulants have been now marked out, but these
effects are seldom obtained by the Stimulants, we are to talk of. Debility is
much better remedied by cold air, cold bath, exercise, diet, etc. These,
indeed, might be called Stimuli, but surely there is a great difference between
these, and the stimulant medicines we are to talk of; so that unless very
immediate effects are wanted, these may be neglected; for by the means just now
mentioned, we shall obtain the same effects, much more durably, and with much
less hurt to the system. Hence the use of Stimulants has declined of late, and
does so daily, and many are marked in our Catalogue, which are disregarded in
practice, and known only in our Dispensatory lists.

FOUNDATION of STIMULANT VIRTUE in SENSIBLE QUALITIES.
In general, a Stimulant virtue is discovered by a strong taste, and odor; and
all substances, which make a strong impression on our senses, may be considered
as such. It is difficult to distinguish them all here; as some of these may be
sedative, and some antispasmodic; but even th^se have always more or less o^ a
stimulant virtue. From fragrancy of odor, o^ even strong poignancy, we are not
immediately to in^er a stimulant quality. Fragrancy of odor often depends on
the volatility of a small part of the whole; Poignancy on the extreme
volatility of the p^^t, which may be in so inconsiderable quantity, as to be a
medicine of little virtue, though at the same time so volatile, as in this
manner to affect our smell. From an acrid taste more is to be inferred.
However, here we must be aware, that from the operation on the tongue, we
cannot always judge of what it will be in the stomach. Some medicines which are
not acrid, will seem sedative to the tongue, and within the stomach prove
stimulant; and again, some are stimulant to the tongue, which prove sedative in
the stomach. Different Stimulants have different qualities, which possibly
might be discerned by a difference of acrid taste. This we re^er to
particulars, as we are not in a state to give any general rules with regard to
it.

We shall next enquire into

What PART the STIMULANT VIRTUE is lodged.
Very universally in the essential oil of plants. The saline part of plants is
not remarkably stimulant. Wherever, therefore, we have means of discovering
essential oil, we also in some measure have the power of judging of a stimulant
virtue. Here we are apt to be dec^^ved. We must not imagine, that because a
plant gives out an essential oil by distillation, that these plants are
stimulant; for many such are of a very mild nature. Again, substances acrid to
the taste give out a m^ld oil; as that of Cloves, h^nce the acrimony would seem
not always to (...) in the essential oil. It is said to be lodged in a rasin,
which I ^^^tend is the same thing; as the medical virtue of (...) depends on an
essential oil. Acrimony often seems to be lodged in a gummy matter, soluble in
water. The acrid part is said to be extremely volatile, and not to be obtained
in the form of essential oil; as in the Siliquosae, Mustard, and others of the
Cress kind; in which it is supposed the acrimony is not lodged in the essential
oil, but in a subtle volatile part diffusible, in water. But I find that, on
proper examination, an essential oil may be obtained from these, containing all
their acrimony; and I am inclined to believe their acrimony is lodged in an
essential oil; though that be extremely volat^l^, and in some measure mixed
with water. Because the acrid part is sometimes fixed, some think it is not in
the essential oil. This is not conclusive, as some oils are fixed, not rising
with water or boiling alcohol; e. g. Cloves, a very acrid substance, gives over
a very mild oil, even with alcohol, and leaves in the distilling vessel an^
acrid extract, of considerable virtue, and too much neglected in the practice
of Physic, which probably has its virtue depending on an essential oil; though
some think it resides in a gummy matter.

PHARMACEUTICAL TREATMENT.
Most properly, and very universally, are our acrid Stimulants to be extracted
by alcohol. In some it may be extracted by water, but there is a suspicion that
the same impregnation is not to be obtained as by alcohol. We should first
digest with the alcohol, and then concentrate our impregnation, by distilling
off part of the alcohol. By this means, much purer and finer extracts are to be
obtained than any in the shops. Dr. Boerhaave directs this method for Saffron;
but it may be applied to many other plants.

There is a very common preparation in the shops, viz. an impregnation of water
with essential oil, in what is called distilled waters. This impregnation with
water is not always obtained, and the oil is often so fixed as not to r^se.
Although the sti^^ulant power may reside in the particular part of the plant, yet
we often find the substance of such texture, that we cannot procure its
essential oil, without giving more acrimony than before; which, though not a
formal empyreuma, is often so great, as to render the medicine unfit for
internal use. All this would lead us to use our Simulants in substance, since
we find there is in the plant a virtue not to be procured by any extract, and,
in many cases, we can make a better solution in our stomach than any where
else. With regard to using the Stimulants in substance, we must be aware of the
method of preparing them; for, in drying and powdering, the volatile part, and,
with it, the virtues are often lost; so that, indeed, it seems to be a doubt
whether stimulants should be exhibited in this manner. If the oil is of a fixed
nature, there may be cases where this method is preferable, and some Stimulants
I have often seen answer in this manner better than any other way.

PARTICULAR STIMULANTS.
After having said that every substance, which had smell or taste, might be
reckoned a Stimulant; you will easily see they must be of great variety.
Perhaps we have already delivered their virtues, but there is a greater variety
and difference in quality, than is commonly imagined. Many Evacuants and
Antispasmodics have been introduced under this title by Materia Medica writers.

In my list, I have followed, in arranging my plants, the botanical analogy,
and then that of the sensible qualities. At first, I had set down a list of
fossile Stimulants, but I now find that these will better come under the heads
of Antispasmodics, or Evacuants. Opposite to a is placed the term

VERTICILLATAE.
This is a very natural order, well known among the Botanists, and a very
complete one; easily known, as they agree in many common marks. Their virtues
are very much in common, and might be given in very few words, but that Materia
Medica writers have distinguished, and, as usual, distributed their virtues. To
this I have had a view in the blank spaces left between some of this list,
intending in one to comprehend the Cephalic, etc. In general, all are
antispasmodic, and may be useful in frigidis cerebri morbis. All may be
antispasmodic in affections of the breast, may stimulate the stomach, and be
antispasmodic there, may stimulate the system in general, and be alexipharmic.
Some however, are peculiarly adapted to each of these heads, and distributed
accordingly, according to the method of Materia Medica writers; my first set
are the

CEPHALIC VERTICILLATAE.
These are, in general, grateful to the nerves, exciting the nervous power, and
adapted to all cold diseases of the head, Lethargy, Apoplexy, Palsy, etc.
Weakness of Sight, Giddiness, and Weakness of Memory, and many other diseases.
All this I give you as an instance of the method in which Materia Medica
writers lavish out their virtues. In general, they are ranged in alphabetical
order, except where two corresponding species are put together.

BETONICA, BETONY.
Materia Medica writers, in spite of the want of sensible qualities, or
testimony of Physicians, have been lavish of their virtues. Geoffroy gives us a
catalogue, about a page long, merely on the virtues of Betony. After all, very
little virtue is found in it. It is a mild Sternutatory, and, as such, will be
mentioned in the class of Errhines. It has been said to to be hypnotic and
anodyne, by Pauli; and, by better authority, Bartholine. Not any such virtue
appears in the bark, or leaves. The root is an acrid, emetic substance, and
perhaps may contain virtues of some consequence. The Veronica is joined by
Cartheuser in the same section with Betony, though of a different natural
order, and sensible qualities. Perhaps he was led into this by confusion of
names, as the Betony has been called Vetonica. This confusion of names has,
perhaps, also occasioned a confusion of virtues.

MELISSA, BALM.
Many virtues have been attributed to this. In sensible qualities it is the
weakest of its class. It gives a weak distilled water, and a weak solution.

LAVENDULA, MAJORANA, MARUM VULG. ROSMARINUS; LAVENDER, MARJORAM, MASTIC,
ROSEMARY.
All these yield a large proportion of essential oil, and are of a fragrant
odor, whence their ascribed cephalic virtue. In any quantity in which we
employ them, or any impregnation which we obtain from them, their virtues are
not remarkable. Wherever the virtue depends on essential oil, it may prove
inflammatory, and hurt the stomach.

STOECHAS ARABICA, DICTAMNUS CRETICUS, FRENCH LAVENDER, DITTANY of CRETE.
As the growth of warm countries, these contain more acrid essential oil, and
more powerful virtues. They cannot be brought into this part of the world
without losing much of these qualities, so that they are properly neglected in
our shops.

CALAMINTHA, CALAMINT; A species of Melissa, which should, perhaps, have been
placed among the stomachics. It is a weak, insignificant plant.

PECTORAL VERTICILLATAE. HYSSOPUS, HEDERA-TERRESTRIS, PULEGIUM. HYSSOP,
GROUND IVY, PENNYROYAL.
Various have been the acceptations of the term Pectoral. I mean by it, such as
have the power of promoting the secretion of mucus in the bronchiae. In
innumerable instances I have been able to observe no pectoral virtues in these,
they giving no relief in pectoral cases by promoting the expectoration. Ground
Ivy has been much talked of. Some tell us it will alone cure diseases of the
breast, and, what to me seems impossible but by the Surgeon's instrument, and
Empyema. I can find no foundation for those properties. Hyssop is a medicine of
more virtue, but properly now neglected, as of the same class of the more
active Pulegium. Hyssop In one of the original copies no mention is made of its
virtue in dizziness, which word, I apprehend, was mistaken for discuss. The
whole sentence stands thus: Hyssop, when softened with warm water, is said
effectually to discuss Ecchymoses. Riolan goes so far, etc.
is said to prove effectual to dizziness, when softened in warm water. In
Ecchymoses, Riolan goes so far as to say, it sucks the blood out of the part,
which was seen on the cloth. You see how difficult it is to trust Materia
Medica writers. I have tried Hyssop in such cases, and found no other effect
than from the application of any other aromatic. Pulegium is a powerful
Antispasmodic, but has little pectoral virtue. It is said to have been useful
in the Chin-cough, which is a disease purely spasmodic, where, from its
antispasmodic virtue, it may be of advantage. Some women have their menses with
difficulty, which have spasms, etc. excited in their stomach, where I have
found Pennyroyal tea to be of real service. Hence I have placed it next to,
and perhaps it should stand in, the next division.

STOMACHIC VERTICILLATAE.
MENTHA SATIVA and NEPETA, COMMON and CATMINT, are considered as Stomachics,
but are weak.

MENTHA PIPERITIS, PEPPER MINT.
This is a chief Aromatic and Stimulant, and one of the few substances for
which we have been obliged to the attention of the Botanists. It is one of the
most subtle and penetrating of its class. Its action is quick and vivid, and
(...) quickly diffused over the system as any I know. There is a difference in
the action of Stimuli; some act on the part to which they are immediately
applied; some, like the Pepper-mint, do not affect that part so peculiarly, but
in a more equal manner extend their action over the system. Those which act
chiefly on the part to which they are first applied, are apt to excite
inflammation. The Mentha piperitis, as not having this inconvenience, is a
valuable medicine. Its virtues are, to be antispasmodic in the stomach, and, in
some measure, over the system.

The Spear-mint, and other species, have all the same qualities, only in less
degree; are less extensive in their action, and more apt to produce
inflammation. The Pulegium, in a dry soil, comes nearest to the Pepper-mint.
Nepeta approaches, to the Mint in appearance and virtues. All, you see, are
antispasmodic, whence you understand their stomachic quality. I can see no
foundation for the Astringency ascribed to Mint, much less for its anti
venereal qualities, it being, as possessing such, supposed to restrain the
seminal secretion, and its irregular excretion in nocturnal pollutions. As such
cases occur, at least to me, in lax, moveable systems, I have found
Antispasmodics, especially Camphir^, useful; and, possibly, Pepper-mint, if it
could be rendered as durable in its operation, might have much the same effect.
Here is an instance of the weakness of Materia Medica writers, in collecting
the virtues of plants. S^mon Pauli says, that if a vein of the foot be cut, and
the part immersed in decoction of Mint, no blood will flow from the orifice.
Nobody can doubt but that the vein was improperly opened. This shows the frail
^oundation on which stand many of the virtues of the Materia Medica.

MARUM SYRIAC. SATUREIA, SERPILLUM, THYMUS. SYRIAN MASTIC, SAVORY, MOTHER of
THYME^THYME.
These four are not peculiarly adapted to any particular part of the body.
These are the most acrid and considerable Stimulants of the class, good
Antispasmodics in the stomach, but more liable to produce inflammation. The two
first are the most penetrating of them. The Serpillum is the warmest our
climate affords. In slight infusion, as te^, it is grateful to the stomach.
This showed me the difference of Indian teas from warm water, which, of itself,
has relaxing effects, which may be obviated by this, and other such Aromatics.
Serpillum affords an agreeable distilled water, which should be in common use;
it is more durable, but less active and penetrating than Pepper-mint. The Thyme
is less aromatic, and contains less essential oil, with more bitterness, and
more manifest astringency. Its use in medicine is not ascertained. It is
commonly mentioned as alexipharmic, but on what grounds (...) dubious.

SALVIA, CHAMAEDRIS, SCORDIUM. SAGE, GERMANDER, WATER GERMANDER.
These are commonly said to be alexipharmic, the meaning of which is not clear.
That they are useful in promoting sweat, may be in common with them, and others
of the class, when given with much warm water. That they expel the morbific
matter of contagion, or of fevers, I will not allow, as I do not understand it.
Chamaedris enters into our gout powders. That such a bitter aromatic may be
useful I will not deny; but how it comes to prevent the appearance of the gout
in the extremities, we shall talk of when we come to the other ingredients
which enter our gout powder.

The use of these plants I have found hurtful by long continuance. From the use
of Sage tea, I have several times observed a stiffness of the eyes ensue, the
palpebrae not moving on the ball of the eye, and the eye liable to suffusion
and inflammation. There are many other bitter plants to whom this quality has
been ascribed.

Opposite to b stands the title

2. UMBELLATAE.
This order is an entire and strictly natural as any other. Here the botanical
analogy, applied to the Materia Medica, does not answer well. All that are set
down, are safe and innocent; but there are many of the same class, which we
know to be of a poisonous nature. The former order mentioned, the
Verticillatae, and the following, the Siliquosae, have no exceptions of this
kind. The whole of those two orders have more of a common property, and none of
them have a poisonous quality. This is not the case in the Umbellatae, where it
would be dangerous to push the botanical analogy beyond those substances which
we have experienced. I have set down here most of this class, which are
employed in medicine. In this list I have chosen to set down only those which
are more simply stimulant; without any evacuant or antispasmodic qualities. Of
most of those set down, the part in use, and in which their virtue resides, is
the seed. I imagine most of the seeds of the Umbellatae are of the same kind,
but of this am not certain, but at any rate the analogy cannot be drawn to the
leaves and roots. The Coriander seeds are agreeably aromatic, but come from a
plant foetid, and suspected of poisonous qualities. This has made people afraid
of the seeds, but practice shows that they are perfectly innocent, when freed
from any taint of the odor of the leaves. What is the effect of the leaves of
the plants is not known. Some of the leaves have less acrimony than the seeds.
The leaves of the Daucus Creticus and the roots of the Foeniculum, are neither
of them remarkably acrid.

There are four plants in this list whose roots are remarkably medicated, viz.
the Angelica, Levisticum, Pimpinella saxifraga, and Seseli Massiliense In
another Copy, the Hippos^^^ ^um is mentioned, instead of the Seseli M^ssiliense.
. The roots of these four contain much of a warm aromatic resin, which they
afford in an elegant form, when wounded in the spring, and it is to be
lamented, that pains are not taken to collect our native resins of this kind.
The Pimpinella saxifraga stands in the alexipharmic powder of Stahl, so much
commended by him and his followers. For my part, I am uncertain as to its use,
but certainly it might be applied to useful purposes. The seeds of the
Umbellatae are what are chiefly known in medicine. These have all one common
virtue. They are all in the common language carminative, i. e. antispasmodic in
the primae viae, assisting digestion, relieving head-achs arising from crudity,
dispelling flatulencies, and curing cholics. These virtues are certainly real,
depending on an essential oil manifest in all these plants, which is remarkably
aromatic, with little acrimony, and with little suspicion of being of an
inflammatory nature, and are, therefore, the safest of the aromata we can use
in these intentions. As natives of Europe, they seem intended by nature for
these cold climates, where there is so great a tendency to Inflammation. Hence
they are very proper condiments for animal food, for which we improperly
substitute the aromata of the Torrid Zone, which are designed for vegetable
aliment, and are of an acrid inflammatory nature.

The seeds of the Umbellatae seem peculiarly adapted in the case of children.
These, from the acescency of their milk, are liable to cholic pains. Spirits,
and weak punch, are often very improperly employed by the nurses. Anise seeds
are very effectual for the purpose, as they act in an inconsiderable small
dose, and therefore are sa^e, either as they are not in hazard of inducing bad
habits, or stimulating too much. These are their real virtues. Many others are
attributed to them. They are said to increase the milk of nurses. They do,
indeed, come off unchanged in it, and sometimes, by condiment of this kind,
given to the nurses, I have seen them so far conveyed to children, who labored
under Cholics (either from their natural disposition, or from the nature of the
milk) as to obviate entirely these complaints. It may be supposed, that as they
pass unchanged, they may stimulate the excretories, and give milk; but for my
part, I think this is injudiciously attempted, by any thing but proper
nourishment, and if this fails, the complaint lies too deep for any medicine,
by stimulating the excretories, to have effect. They are said to be diuretic,
and the Daucus sylvestris has been employed for this effect; but I could never,
even in considerable doses, observe its diuretic virtues. Though it may be said
that it passes unchanged, yet its stimulus is so small that it would not
produce the effect, much less in the small quantity in which it is given; and
besides, I doubt the fact alleged, of its passing unchanged. Many others of
the same class are said to be diuretic. As Antispasmodics, they may be useful
in relieving the symptoms of Gravel in the kidneys, which may be considered as
a spasmodic affection. This is an instance of the method I would choose, in
endeavoring to find out the mysterious virtues applied to medicines. These
seeds, as diuretic, are said to be pectoral. I believe that if they were
diuretic, they might also promote the secretion of mucus in the lungs; but as I
suspect their diuretic virtues, much more must I do this. Here I would give you
a caution, viz. that surely in inflammatory cases, the mischief they would do
by their stimulant quality from their essential oil, would do much more than
compensate any good they might effect from their evacuant virtue. Several of
this tribe have been called Emmenagogue. When I come to the operation of these
medicines, I shall show, that there is scarcely any medicine specifically
stimulating the uterus. As we have said before of the Verticillatae, so the
Umbellatae may, from their antispasmodic virtue, be accidentally useful, in
spasms of the uterus. With little judgment have these seeds been distinguished
into the Calida majora and minora. The Foeniculum, though one of the mildest,
is ranked among the majora; the Daucus Creticus, though one of the most acrid,
among the minora. What is precisely the rank of the different species, here
mentioned, is not ascertained. It will not be difficult to do it from their
taste, and the quantity, and the acrimony of their essential oil.

Opposite to c is placed the title.

3. SILIQUOSAE.
This is another natural order, without any exception from some of them having
poisonous or deleterious qualities, and in general more exactly agreeing in
quality, than the plants of any other natural order. I have confined myself to
those which stand in our dispensatory lists. The others, as containing less of
the common virtue, are neglected. They are all substances of acrimony, and so
are properly ranked among the Stimulants; but this acrimony is in so small a
quantity, as to be so easily dissipated by boiling, that many of them enter
into our food, and are properly, in these northern climates, employed as
condiments with our animal food Promoting those secretions which take off the
alkaline part of our blood.
. The share these substances have in aliment, I have formerly mentioned. As
Medicines, they act suddenly and powerfully, and their Stimulus is quickly
diffused, so that they are useful in all those cases where the motion of the
nervous power is languid, weak, or obstructed, as in paralytic and apoplectic
cases; where I have found no Stimulus better (as I formerly observed) than a
little Mustard. Habit wears off these effects, and I have frequently seen
Horseradish, when Mustard failed, substituted with advantage. Used internally
for any length of time, their effects, through habit, come to be trivial.
Externally they are used with better effect, as we can increase their power, by
increasing the surface to which they are applied; but it is difficult to get it
with its proper qualities in that powdery form, which is here necessary. They
have likewise an inconvenience, that, retained long on the skin, they are apt
to be inflammatory, which is not near so useful as their first extensive
impression. In most cases we should seek for the first operation, and avoid the
last. As confined to a particular part in their action, we shall talk of them
under the head of Attrahentia. They prove particular Stimuli, not from any
specific virtue, but according to the place to which they are applied. Thus, in
the stomach, while they act as promoting digestion in general, and as
carminative in dispelling crudities, if strong they will prove emetic,
Accordingly Mustard and Horseradish are employed as gentle emetics, as they
are substances thrown up at first, and without continuing their effects. When
the stomach is once set in motion, the vomiting, if that be found necessary,
may be continued by repeated draughts of warm water, or with some of these
Stimuli in it. The best method of exhibiting Mustard, as a vomit, is, first to
give a table spoonful of it, diffused in a glass of warm water, and afterward,
to add a little Mustard to every subsequent draught. Others are fond of
Horseradish in a strong infusion, of which a spoonful is given in warm water.
In my opinion the mustard is preferable; for the Horseradish, as very
volatile, loses its virtue, when kept, and, even in infusion, is liable to the
same inconvenience, except that is performed in very close vessels; nor when
the infusion is obtained, can it produce the effects proposed without large and
nauseous draughts frequently repeated. If the emetic virtue of these substances
does not take place, they are carried into the intestines, which they
stimulate, and promote the evacuation by stool. In order to obtain the
purgative effect, the seed is given entire; i. e. in the Mustard, commonly in
the dose of a table spoonful. Of the same seed powdered we could not give one
dram, without vomiting, whereas I have seen even two table spoonfuls
unbruised, which is one ounce, given without that effect. In this manner,
Mustard seldom fails to move the belly, and answers very well for keeping a
costive habit regular. Its effect in this case is difficult to explain. We can
only suppose, that it is not extracted in sufficient quantity in the stomach to
act as emetic, but is carried into the intestines, whose contents it stimulates
them to discharge, in consequence of its quantity and successive action. Upon
the same footing it may go farther into the system, before it has exerted any
Stimulus sufficient to throw it out of the body. If given entire in such
quantity as neither to vomit nor purge, it will enter into the blood vessels,
where it is directed to the kidneys, and shows diuretic powers. All diuretics,
by proper management, may be rendered diaphoretic. If the surface is kept warm,
the medicine goes off by the skin; if it is cool, an increase of urine is
effected, and the medicine is determined to act upon the kidneys. In this
manner some of the Siliquosae have been employed as sudorific, and a
Mustard-whey has been given for this purpose. Here, by its general Stimulus the
warmth of the whey to which it is joined, and the diaphoretic regimen, are its
effects to be explained. All the Siliquosae are somewhat of the same kind.

In consequence of their diuretic and diaphoretic powers, and their promoting
the excretion of the acrid parts of our blood, have the Siliquosae generally,
and not improperly, got the title of Antiscorbutic, which every medicine is
supposed to be, which promotes urine, without any considerable heating quality.
The only cure of scurvy is from throwing in a large quantity of vegetable
aliment. As this class, then, are used in food, as they can be taken in
considerable quantity, and as they are likewise proper as medicine, they are,
without doubt, peculiarly adapted to this intention. As diuretic and
diaphoretic, it is probably not without reason they are called pectoral.
Something seems to be in common with the surface of the lungs and the skin; and
Dr. Hales has shown, that a good deal of what we call insensible perspiration,
goes off by that organ. As then the kidneys have an intimate connection with
the surface of the body, and as that again is connected with the lungs, it is
probable that medicines which stimulate the kidneys and skin will likewise have
effect upon the lungs, by causing secretion from their surface. Although it is
difficult to explain, they seem to have a power of stimulating the mucous
glands of the lungs, and it is probable, that in this way they are so often
useful in diseases of the breast. Externally applied to the excretory ducts of
these glands, they stimulate them, and hence are so often mentioned as curing
hoarseness. Eruca and Erysimum, when fresh, are famous for this use. In
producing this effect, they are said to add more than natural clearness to the
voice: Whence, in French, one of them is called Herb aux Chantres. The method
of using them is to make them into a syrup, a small quantity of which is laid
on the tongue, and swallowed slowly, by which means they come to be applied to
the mucous glands of the Fauces, whence we may suppose their action extended to
the Bronchiae. These virtues I have had confirmed by experience, but have not
confined myself to the Eruca or Erysimum, but have used the Horseradish with
the same advantage. These are the common virtues of the order. The particular
species of this order only differ in degree of virtue, that is, in proportion
as they have their acrimony more o^ (...) in comparison to the other parts.
With regard to their order in point of strength, it does not appear to be
properly determined by experiment. We shall only observe, that the Mustard, as
a seed, the Horseradish, as a root, and the Scurvy Grass, as a plant, are
probably the strongest of the kind, and those we are best acquainted with.

The virtue of these Stimulants (as of most other classes) are not accompanied
with other qualities, Bitterness, Astringency, etc. The Siliquosae have indeed
a bitterness in common to the whole class, from their peculiar acrimony. Some,
however, are said to be astringent. The Bursa pastoris has been said to be so,
but, upon trial, I have found no such qualities in it. The virtue of the
Siliquosae is not only more in common, but more equally diffused over the
plant, than in any order I know. If there is any distinction to be made, I
think the strongest acrimony is lodged in the seeds, the next strongest in the
roots, and the weakest in the leaves. Hence these last are the most proper
Antiscorbutics, as they can be thrown in both as a food and as a medicine, in
the greatest quantity. The virtue of all these resides in a very volatile
substance, for it is dissipated in drying. When fresh, this volatile principle
comes over from the plant, in distillation with water. Hence it has been
supposed of a saline nature, but more accurate enquiry now shows us, that it
resides in an essential oil of this peculiar property, that, though extremely
volatile, it is yet specifically heavier than water. It remains (for I have not
tried it) to enquire whether this oil has the same volatility when separate, as
in the plant. It must not only be stopped with common stoppers, but kept with
water under ground. It may be a subtle spiritus rector, a smaller portion of
the oil that is thus disposed to fly off. With this acrid, volatile, essential
oil, these plants show they also contain an expressed oil, which is not only a
curious fact in chemistry, but also in the anatomy of the plant, and which we
should not have expected a priori. These two oils are lodged in different parts
of the seed, otherwise, on expression, a part of the essential oil would always
come away with the expressed.

As to the exhibition of these substances, they always ought to be given in
substance entire, especially in the Scurvy, in order that we may give a
vegetable aliment along with our medicine, without which the Scurvy cannot be
cured. The essential oil of the plant, though diuretic, etc. would not answer,
unless also the expressed oil were joined with it, in the entire state, to
assist in affording the aliment we spoke of; and I am persuaded, that though
the essential oil were never so well extracted and preserved, it could never
cure the Scurvy. Though this be really the case, yet if the essential oil could
be extracted at a moderate expense, or give a strong impregnation to spirit, it
might serve for other purposes in which these medicines were recommended,
especially in paralytic cases. In the mean time, we know no other preparation
but the syrup, which answers not only for hoarseness, but in paralytic cases,
and, as I have seen, in pectoral. In making this, we should confine ourselves
to the seeds and roots. Horseradish is the most fit of any. This is not so
succulent as that it can be extracted by expression. As a very volatile
subject, it should be taken fresh, scraped down quickly, and let fall into
water, to prevent the effects of air, then shut up in close vessels, and set in
balneo, and, after standing there for some time, be taken out, and expressed
upon a sufficient quantity of sugar, with which it may be again committed to
the bath, with the same precautions, and afterward corked up in small vessels,
in order that, when it is opened, it may be quickly consumed, and have as
little of the bad effects from the air as possible.

Opposite d is placed the term

ALLIACIAE.
Though of a very different botanical tribe, I have set these down immediately
after the Siliquosae, as agreeing with them very much in medicinal virtues and
chemical qualities. Even in sensible qualities there is a resemblance, and one
of the Siliquosae is called Alliacia, from its alliaceous odor. The Alliacia
and Siliquosae agree, too, in having their virtue residing in a volatile
principle, and in having that volatile principle residing in an essential oil,
which sinks in water. The only difference is, that the Alliaciae contain more
of a mucilaginous matter, which, when their acrimony is dissipated by boiling,
shows more of a nutritious, and, if you will, demulcent quality. Neither,
indeed, is their acrimony so volatile, or so immediately active as that of the
former class, nor so extensive in the propagation of their stimulus, if they
are equally acrid. Hence they are not so frequently employed in paralytic
cases; but, bating these differences, their diuretic, diaphoretic, and pectoral
qualities, stand upon the same footing as those of the Siliquosae. There is,
too, a farther analogy, that, if exhibited in the same manner, they are apt to
affect the stomach with pain and vomiting. If intended to be conveyed into the
mass of blood, they ought to be exhibited in their entire texture. Thus the
cloves of Garlic ought to be dipped in oil, and swallowed entire, for the
common Garlic pill will seldom prove diuretic. Sometimes, indeed, that pill
grows pectoral, but never so considerably as in the other manner. The Syrup of
Garlic is the only preparation which is a good one; and proper directions for
it may be seen in the London Dispensatory. The Garlic, like Mustard, will act
as an external stimulus, and, except from its disagreeable odor, answers
equally, and may likewise be very properly applied to the extremities in low
fever. The Garlic is not so liable to ulcerate the part, but is more apt to be
absorbed and to extend its effects to distant parts. Some say, that this is
pectoral externally applied, but I have never been able to observe this effect.

As to any difference in the Alliaciae, it is only a difference in impregnation
and strength. The Allium, ^epa, and Porrum, are placed in the order of their
virtues, the Allium, the strongest, etc. A peculiar virtue has been attributed
to the Porrum, viz. a narcotic quality. This quality, however, is doubtful: I
know one or two instances which seem to favor it, but I have also known it
given in considerable quantity without that effect.

Opposite to e is inserted the title,

5. CONIFERAE
The virtues of these are manifestly as much akin as their botanical
qualities, I mean of those here set down; for it is not known, whether, we can
extend the analogy to other plants or trees of this order. The Taxus, e. g. is
suspected of a poisonous quality, which indeed I shall not determine if it
possesses; but certainly it must be granted, it is more acrid than the rest.
All the three of this order set down, the Fir, the Pine, and the Juniper,
possess that peculiar acrimony, which is called, by Floyer, the Terebinthinate;
and indeed their virtue seems to depend on a Turpentine. There seem to be some
exceptions, but either in medical or chemical qualities there is little
difference, except in odor. They all afford the same essential oil as is
extracted from Turpentine. It is on this account that I have set down that
substance, and other which are akin to it, under my next title, which should
be placed at f, viz.

6. BALSAMICA.
The title of Balsam has been applied to oily or resinous bodies of a middle
consistence, betwixt oil and resin. These are commonly obtained from the
Coniferae, and all approach to the nature of our Turpentine. Of Turpentine, and
the four Balsams that follow, I am apt to think the virtues very much in
common, and nearly the same in all. All have manifestly the power of
stimulating the intestines, whether thrown in by injection into the anus, or
swallowed by the mouth. Hence the Peruvian Balsam has been recommended in that
dry belly-ach, which is called the Colica Pictonum. We know the daily use of
Turpentine in clysters, and, indeed, in my opinion, it is one of the best
substances we use for that purpose. Wherever there is an obstinate costiveness,
Turpentine answers much better than saline matters; not that it is a stronger
stimulus, but that it is more durable, and more certain, remaining longer than
the salts, which are soon thrown out, from their stimulus. The Turpentine, too,
is much better than acrid purgatives, which often increase the disease. This
effect is not peculiar to the Turpentine, but also exists in greater perfection
in the Balsam Copaibae. Guiac, too, has been used as a purgative, and I make no
doubt but the Balsams of Gilead and Tolu would act in the same manner. All
carried farther, seemingly into the mass of blood, are diuretic, diaphoretic,
and pectoral, perhaps on the ordinary footing of stimulating excretions, which
have so much in common. More especially do we observe their diuretic effects,
in so far as we can perceive them passing off in substance, by the urinary
excretion. Turpentine, and the other Balsams, give what is called a violet
odor to the urine; but several times have I found it the same as that of
Turpentine itself. Fuller tells us, that Balsam Copaibae gives a bitterness to
the urine; but on having this tried, I did not find any such effect, but just
the same as is given by other Balsams.

All these substances contain somewhat saline, resembling much such an acid
substance, as is got from Benzoine. Such a saline matter I have seen concreted
in oil of Turpentine, Which some have said they extracted by itself, and the
same thing is observable in Peruvian Balsam. Possibly their diuretic virtues
may depend upon this Salt, and all of them contain an acid of the same kind.
Constantly, by Materia Medica writers, have they been recommended in the
Nephritis, but the propriety of the exhibition here is very doubtful; as these
cases are generally attended with an inflammation, which would be rendered
worse by stimuli. Surely if sand is impacted in the tubuli uriniferi, or
ureters, we must use antispasmodics and relaxants; for in such cases the use of
stimuli would be very dangerous. If it be confirmed, that the Uva Ursi, and
other astringents, have such good effects in diseases of the kidneys, we may
very safely say with Ovid, Parce, puer, stimulis, and fortius utere loris. I
myself have seen the bad effects of Stimulants in such cases, in producing
inflammation in the neck of the bladder. These Balsams have been constantly
supposed of a drying power, and recommended in gleets; and as they affect the
urinary passages, so they do what is contiguous to them, the uterine, and have
therefore also been recommended in fluor albus. Their effects in such cases are
confirmed by experience. It is difficult to explain how they act. They do not
act by their astringency; for they possess no such property. They are said to
have an agglutinant quality, and from this is their operation explained in
wounds, and ulcers. Even in such case they do not act from such pretended
quality; and although it should be granted they did, yet we can never suppose
they act in the same manner in the urinary passages; nay, the same virtue
resides in the oil, and other Stimulants have the same effect. I have seen
Cantharides ^ure both the fluor albus and gleet, and nothing but its very acrid
qualities, and the uncertainty of its action upon different people, hinders, in
such cases, its more frequent use. From this view, I think there is no sort of
doubt, but that our Balsams act in such cases, by bringing an inflammation on
the lax vessels, inducing in them contraction and firmness. Several accidents
tend to illustrate the same theory. I have seen persons cured of an obstinate
gleet by long journeys, and riding post, etc. Injections of Calomel I have seen
given in such quantity as to produce an inflammation, which it was necessary to
calm by repeated bleedings, but it was with the good consequence of suppressing
the gleet. Corrosive Sublimate I have seen produce bloody urine, but at the
same time cure the patient; and something also of the same kind I have seen
occur from Bals. Copaibae. All this ought to make us cautious in the use of
those medicines; as it is very difficult to measure the inflammation, and
proportion the dose to what degree of it we would produce.

As to the pectoral virtue of the Balsams we are speaking of, it must be
admitted on the same footing as that of other Stimulants. In some asthmas
without fever, where the excretion of mucus is stopped by spasmodic affections,
our Balsams may promote that excretion by their antispasmodic virtue. Their use
must not be promiscuous. These, and the Balsams of Sulphur, were formerly
employed in all diseases of the breast, and even in ulceration of the lungs,
but as producing that inflammation, which is in such a case so dangerous, they
are now in such intention properly laid aside.

With regard to the diaphoretic virtue, they have it in so far as they are
diuretic; but though they are diaphoretic by stimulating the excretions, yet
they also seem to be so by acting on the stomach. I have seen Guaiacum exert
this property before it entered the intestines; and Oil of Turpentine before
exerting its diuretic quality, which, however, afterward it did. The
diaphoretic virtue of these Balsams seems the foundation of their use in the
Sciatica, in which disease Pitcairn gave Oil of Turpentine, in doses of In
another copy the doses expressed are from one to two drachms, which ^ee^ to be
nearer the truth.
four drachms, or two drachms, with success. For my part, I never could come up
to this dose; from the heat and uneasiness produced in the stomach. Sometimes,
however, even in the small doses in which I could exhibit it, I have seen good
effects in Lumbagos and Sciaticas; but as often have I given it without any
relief, and have sometimes seen inflammation occasioned by it. On the same
footing is the use of Guaiacum in the Rheumatism, in which it is supposed
specific. In the Angina, where there is no inflammation, it may be useful by
promoting the diaphoresis; but in the case of inflammation, it always does
harm, and I have often in such cases seen the effects of it very difficult to
remove. In several chronic rheumatisms it is useful. In gouty cases, in so far
as it stimulates the stomach, it may be useful; as every medicine in that
disease will, which stimulates only to that degree, as to strengthen. Guaiac,
too, is said to prevent the Gout in the extremities. How far that ought to be
done by this, or any other medicine, shall afterward be mentioned.

These are the common virtues of our Balsams. They have virtues depending on
their essential oil, which, perhaps, in proportion to the quantity they contain
of that, they will exert more powerfully. Thus the Bals. Copaibae has much more
oil in its composition, and is more powerful than the Turpentine. The others in
this respect are not examined. Odor, too, may be supposed to vary the virtues
of these Balsams; but a very great odor may reside in a very small quantity of
matter. Whatever, then, may be said of the Bals. Gileadense in the eastern
countries, I do not know, as upon proper trial. I have not examined its
virtues; but a priori, I should expect little from it. I should much rather
prefer those which are cheaper, and less apt to be adulterated.

All these Balsams are apt to stay long upon the stomach, and I have known
Turpentine continue there for several days in some cases, with troublesome
symptoms. In whatever manner they are divided, whether by yolk of egg, or more
elegantly by mucilage, they are soon collected, and resist the power of the
stomach. Hence I^magi^ne, we should get a better medicine by applying
spirituous menstrua to Fir-tops, etc. than by giving the Balsams themselves. Of
Fir, the leaves and Tops may be employed, and Berries of the Juniper are in
common use. Whether we obtain a sufficient impregnation, I shall not determine;
but certain it is, that I have seen Juniper tea cure gleets, equally well as
the Bals. Copaibae. These grow in greatest perfection in the warm climates; and
in Holland, where they are much used, they get them from Italy. If such could
be got, they would certainly answer. Geoffroy relates that they produce bloody
urine, which gives a caution in their exhibition even in their mildest state.
Hoffman gives a great character to the residuum, remaining after the infusion
of Juniper Berries, for strengthening the tone of the viscera, and of the
stomach in particular. He speaks of it as astringent. I have, on trial, neither
found the astringency, nor the effects he mentions. The substance was rather of
a sweetish nature.

The Guaiac answers as well as any of these Balsams, and is of more convenient
exhibition. Perhaps the ^^iable Balsam of Tolu would have the same advantages,
but hitherto it has not been employed.

Next the Balsams mentioned, stand

MYRRH and LIQUID STORAX.
Of Liquid Storax I am uncertain what to say. Whether there be such a vegetable
exsudation as this is said to be, I am doubtful. Certainly what we have in the
shops under this title, is an artificial substance; and Hoffman relates his
knowing a man in Berlin, who manufactured it in considerable quantity. Its
sensible qualities give us no reason to make any preference of it to the others.

With regard to the Myrrh, it has been of long and frequent use, but by no
means are its peculiar virtues ascertained. It has been commonly, but
improperly joined with the foetid gums; for it differs from them in its
sensible qualities. In its taste it is resinous, and of an oily nature; it
comes nearer to our Balsams, and it is on this account that I have placed it
among them. It is acrid in the primae viae, stimulates the intestines, and, as
joined to Aloes, may increase its purgative virtue. I was present at some
experiments intended to ascertain the virtues of this medicine. In the dose of
half a dram it heated the stomach, produced sweat, and agreed with the
Balsams in affecting the urinary passages. As commonly joined with the foetid
gums, it has been supposed to promote the menstrual flux; but this virtue is
only in common to it with other Stimulants. It does not, as the Aloes, etc. act
by rarifying the blood.

Opposite to g stands the term

LIGNA, WOODS.
Although I have used this common term, it is not from any relation. It is
sometimes very difficult to say to what class medicines are to be determined. I
have set these here together, as commonly used in the same prescriptions.

GUAIACUM.
This wood certainly contains in its substance all the virtues of the Gum, but
then this cannot be extracted from it, but by a spirituous menstruum. Its share
in the Tinct. Sennae composita is recommended by Dr. Lewis as a considerable
improvement to that medicine. He says, that two drachms of Senna, infused in
eight ounces of Decoction of Guaiacum, will work as briskly as three drachms in
plain water. The fact is certainly true, but it is owing merely to the
largeness of the menstruum; and I have known two pounds of Decoction of
Guaiacum given without purgative quality. I say it is owing merely to the
largeness of the menstruum. For two drachms of Senna, infused in eight ounces
of water, will have equal effect with three drachms in four ounces. The
decoction of the Woods is a medicine of little efficacy, and, I imagine, wholly
insignificant. The virtues of the Woods reside in an essential oil, which
cannot be extracted with little boiling, or a small quantity of menstruum. If
the coction and the menstruum are increased, the essential oil is dissipated as
much as the quantity extracted is enlarged. In short, during a practice of
thirty years, I have never seen one cure performed by it, so that it does not
matter whether we allow the impregnation or not. It has been reckoned specific
in venereal cases, but it is only efficacious in these in so far as joined with
a sweating and emaciating course; by which means the fluids are changed,
especially that in which Boerhaave supposes the venereal poison to reside, the
oil of the body. Although I do not entirely agree with Dr. Boerhaave in this
notion, yet I am convinced that the emaciating course is what in this case has
the sole effect, and the Decoctum Bardanae will answer equally well with that
of Guaiacum.

SASSAFRAS.
This is commonly joined with the Guaiacum, and is, for that reason, places
here, though a substance of very different sensible qualities, and instead of a
thin essential oil, affords one of the greatest specific gravity we know. As
differing, then, in its sensible qualities, and likewise in class, we must
suppose it a different medicine. With regard to its use, we make this
observation, that wherever we lose sight of Stimulants promoting a certain
evacuation, we must be very doubtful as to their effects; nay, stimulating the
system in general may have very bad consequences. There is no doubt of
Sassafras being a Sudorific, and to this I confine its virtue.

SANTALUM, SAUNDERS.
This Wood now is hardly known in practice. It affords an oil like that of
Sassafras, which may be extracted by solution or distillation. I speak this of
the Yellow Saunders. It is, however, a substance of little use, and properly
neglected in present practice.

The three substances which stand next to the Woods, have no proper relation of
affinity with them; but because they have been employed likewise in venereal
cases, they are set down along with them.

RADIX CHINAE.
This formerly had some reputation in venereal cases; but as I have hardly ever
seen it in our shops possessed of any sensible qualities, I imagine that it is
with some reason that it is now banished from practice. But let me observe,
however, that it is of the same genus with the Sarsaparilla, which has little
sensible qualities; so that if virtues are found to reside in the one, it is
probable they also exist in the other.

SARSAPARILLA.
This has little sensible qualities, and any that it has, are not obtained but
by long coction; so that upon the ordinary method of reasoning, it ought to be
thrown out of practice. About twenty years ago it was reckoned insignificant,
but lately the Physician at Lisbon having done great service in venereal cases,
by what is called the Lisbon diet-drink, many conjectures were about its
composition, and, among other things, it was supposed to be no other than a
decoction of Sarsaparilla, and this came again into practice under the
reputation of curing venereal cases, in which Mercury failed. Fordyce, in the
London Medical Essays, gives us several cases, in which Sarsaparilla was of
considerable service. Whatever, then, we may object to the difficulty of
finding an explanation for those virtues, to its want of sensible qualities,
etc. yet the cases mentioned make me see foundation for the use of Sarsaparilla
in practice. Fordyce condescends upon particular times of the disease. None of
the cases, in which Sarsaparilla cured, were recently venereal: It seemed
necessary that Mercury should have preceded its exhibition, and that in
considerable quantity; so that its use seemed preferably confined to such cases
as Mercury had ^ailed in. We in this country know no peculiar Lues, and I have
seen no case in which Mercury failed; but certainly there may be such, arising
either from mismanagement, and perhaps the bad effects of the Mercury, or
perhaps the inveteracy of the disease itself. Whatever is in this, Sarsaparilla
is chiefly directed in pains of the bones, from such circumstances either
arising from cold, etc. yet surely venereal. This I would take as a test of the
efficacy of the Sarsaparilla, that in such pains where the patient had not
slept for a considerable time, the exhibition procured ease and rest. If in
such cases, after such testimony as has been given, it fails, I would allege,
it was from the badness of the Sarsaparilla, or the inaccuracy in preparing it.
I think that the first case is very common, for I have never seen it with any
sensible qualities; and in one case where it had, they were different from
those ascribed to it by Materia Medica writers. I forgot to mention, that
Sarsaparilla was recommended in cutaneous diseases from a venereal cause. A
very strong impregnation and decoction of this plant is necessary. It becomes
sooner acid than any impregnation any other dry root affords.

CONTRAYERVA
Comes from a plant of some, though not considerable acrimony, with little, but
peculiar odor. It may therefore be, as is supposed diaphoretic, or, as Materia
Medica writers call it, alexipharmic. It is used in malignant, low, nervous
Fevers, to support the vis vitae, and promote sweat. With regard to the use of
acrid medicines in Fevers, I find it very difficult to know when they should be
employed, nor can we do so till we have got a farther light into the theory of
fevers. With regard to those who consider Fever merely as an increased motion
of the fluids, I cannot think when we should use them, except we also take in
something, that during the whole is continually weakening the nervous power. I
used to solve this difficulty, by alleging, that the medicines we employed
were not really Stimulants, but Antispasmodics. Most of them are so, but there
may be cases where simple Stimulants are useful; but of this afterward in a
more proper place. At any rate I imagine, that from the manner and quantity, (
viz. three grains,) in which we exhibit Contrayerva, that it is only a part of
our rotin, and possesses no virtue at all. Of late Dr. Pringle has introduced a
new consideration in Fevers, the exhibition of Antiseptics. I will not deny
that these may do good, but in the quantity we exhibit them, ( Contrayerva, e.
g.) their effect is extremely doubtful.

The medicines we have been now talking of were classed according to the
botanical analogy, and, properly speaking, were introduced by the Coniferae. We
now come to medicines classed from the analogy of the sensible qualities.
Opposite to h is placed the title,

AROMATICA FRAGRANTIORA.
Such medicines are termed aromatic, as join with a pungent acrid taste a
fragrant odor of the agreeable kind. They all abound in an essential oil,
which in the proper aromatics is specifically heavier than water, and are
generally natives of the Torrid Zone. The whole of our list do not exactly
agree in these characters, but are some of them set down for the sameness of
their essential oil, etc. They are distributed into fasciculi. The first six
are best entitled to the appellation in every view. All of them have qualities
very much in common; they stimulate the stomach, assist digestion, and increase
appetite; in a stronger degree take off spasms in the primae viae, by
maintaining the stronger action of the stomach; take off spasms arising from
vegetable aliment, and, in general, except in inflammatory cases, are useful in
all spasmodic affections of the alimentary canal. However, they seem rather
appropriated for relieving those spasms when they occur, than to obviate them.
Nothing is more common than to give aromatics with purgatives, which are liable
to produce spasms; but in obtaining the pretended effect of their obviating
such, I have been frequently disappointed. On other occasions, Aromatics are
used in all cold diseases of the head and brain, in all languors of the system,
and, in short, for all the purposes of stimulants. All of them are of an
inflammatory nature, having their virtue depending on an essential oil, and apt
to inflame the part to which they are applied. Those Aromatics are most so
which have this oil in greatest quantity, and of the most acrid kind.

They have been employed in the case of Intermittent Fevers, in order to
obviate the return of the fit, but by this practice we are always liable to
change an Intermittent into a Continued Fever. Many Intermittents are of an
inflammatory nature, especially those of the spring season; and in these
especially would aromatics be improper. These are the virtues of Aromatics in
general, and are applicable to each.

Though distributed into fasciculi, I do not well know how to distinguish them.
The first six are the most proper Aromatics, most agreeable, and most used in
food. The Canella alba, Cortex Winteranus, and Ginger, are of inferior degree
of fragrancy, but still are entitled to be ranked with the others. The Pepper
and Capsicum have little odor, but most poignancy of taste, and are the most
powerful; which is an evidence of the small efficacy of odor in giving virtue;
and from the want of odor they are more recommended in food in certain
circumstances. The essential oil extracted from these, is milder than their
substance; which shows, we should not always suppose we have extracted all the
virtues, where we have extracted the essential oil, for often a part of that is
so heavy as not to rise. Alcohol, in such cases, affords the best impregnation.
Pepper, like Mustard, can be taken in six times the quantity when whole as in
powder, without producing the same heat. In Intermittents, where Pepper is
commended, this is the proper method of exhibition; for by this means the
stomach cannot extract such a considerable quantity at a time as to produce
inflammation.

The next three have not an odor of the fragrant kind, and therefore are not
used in food. They have no other virtues but those of the foregoing, and might
be safely rejected, were it not to afford that variety which is sometimes
required to adapt Stimulants to particular tastes.

The next three substances ought to be separated from this class; for though
possessed of an acrid taste, they have a disagreeable odor, and may be of
different virtues.

Galangals were introduced when we were in the humor of introducing every
other exotic medicine. It is neither agreeable in odor nor taste, and is the
weakest of the class, and therefore now properly rejected.

Zedoary has a penetrating odor, like that of Camphire, and is said to afford
a concrete of much the same nature, and therefore probably has antispasmodic
virtues, which, however, are not yet ascertained.

Serpentaria Virginiana. This contains an acrid essential oil, and therefore is
possessed of the virtues of the Aromatics. Its odor approaches nearly to that
of Valerian. Perhaps it is too frequently prescribed in the Edinburgh
Dispensatory. Surely as an Aromatic it is less agreeable than many of the
others. It is supposed of peculiar virtues. It is almost the only Aromatic we
use in continual Fevers, and I have seen it of good effect in low nervous
Fevers, raising the pulse, diminishing its frequency, and bringing the Fever to
a happy issue. It is certainly preferable to the Contrayerva. We call those
Fevers low and nervous, in which there is always a languor of the vis vitae,
and of the nervous power. When this proceeds to a higher degree, and is
accompanied with putrefaction, we call the Fever malignant. In the last case,
in the malignant Fevers, the Serpentaria is often evidently useful, and in the
beginning of nervous Fevers, where there is no manifest putrefaction, it is
often of pernicious consequence. Dr. Pringle has been very attentive to
malignant Fevers, and deserves great praise for his observations on them, for
from these we understand them better, and are less apt to suppose their
existence oftener than it really is. From his notion of antiseptics he was laid
to exhibit the Serpentaria. But he himself gives us a caution, though prejudiced
in its favor, viz. that he was now obliged to diminish his dose, from the
heating effects of this medicine. These heating effects are not sometimes to be
measured by the temperature of the skin, but the frequency of the pulse. Though I
have often seen good effects from this medicine, yet, as they are always very
doubtful, as malignancy seldom occurs here, and as I can obtain its good
effects from medicines of a less inflammatory nature, and which I can exhibit
with greater safety, I have now laid it entirely aside.

Of the five next following, the Malabathrum and the two Nardi are now entirely
neglected. The others manifestly contain somewhat of aromatic virtue, but so
weakly, that they have neither deserved nor obtained reputation. Those of them
whose flowers we use, always lose their virtue before they come here. Nay, even
those which are reared in this country, the Balsamita, e. g. and Costus, have
no peculiar virtue.

Lilium Convallium. This is an instance of odor introducing a substance into
medicine improperly. Though agreeable and fragrant, yet it is an acrid, even
poisonous substance, and, as having no virtues depending on its odor,
carefully to be avoided.

Ginseng. This, like other substances which have come into common use, has had
great virtues ascribed to it, especially in the countries where it is in common
use. It is a mild Aromatic, and (...) those who require such amusement, as safe
masticatory. It may be of use, but the weakness of its sensible qualities give
it no foundation for a place in medicine. The engaging virtue of a powerful
incentive and aphrodisiac has been attributed to it, but on the most slender,
and, indeed, absolutely false foundation.

Cascarilla. In this country, and indeed England, this is little known as a
medicine, but much used in Germany, and other countries. Its history is related
by Geoffroy, and transcribed by Dr. Lewis, neither fully, nor accurately. In
Germany its reputation is fallen of late, and its virtues are disputed. This
with me as with many others, has prevented any trials with regard to it. It
belongs to a set of plants, which contain an acrid and somewhat of a poisonous
nature. Its oil is very inflammatory, and as so irritating and heating the
system, and promoting sweat. In some cases it may be useful; ^^^^ose, e. g. in
which the Germans recommend it. It has somewhat of a narcotic power, and as a
bark manifestly astringent. L. Apinus employed it in malignant Fevers. Juncker
says that it does not answer in present practice; but that may often happen,
from our not knowing the cases to which it is appropriated. Juncker and Stahl
recommend it in Intermittents, but there it is by no means equal to Peruvian
Bark, which Stahl, from his system, avoided. From its astringent and narcotic
qualities, it might have been useful in those cases, in which the French
Physicians employed it, and its other sensible qualities will explain its use
in other cases. Stahl recommends it in Peripneumony, and Diseases of the
Breast. He excepts the Angina, which makes me very doubtful about its use in
the other cases.

Aspalathus and Rhodium. Had I intended to swell out my Lectures, might have
spoken of the various appellations of Aspalathus, etc. but on such
disquisitions I have nothing new to say. I avoid useless and uninteresting
subjects. They have a fragrant, agreeable odor, on which no virtues seem to
depend, and the only one attributed to these woods is that of cordial. They
seem, then, to be very properly neglected, and more to be regarded by the
Perfumer than the Physician.

The three following gums could not have been ranked with any we know, except
with the Balsamica before mentioned, to which they seem to be akin.

Benzoin and Storax are remarkable for giving out a saline substance, of the
acid kind, in a dry form, under the name of flowers. These volatile saline
acids are certainly ^ound in the balsams, and no where else that I know. The
Balsam of Peru is said to give out such in considerable quantity, and I my self
have seen it concreted in oil of turpentine. This saline substance in our Gums,
is joined with a resinous matter of remarkable acrimony. To both the Flowers
and Gum have been attributed the same virtues, which makes me, indeed, very
uncertain about them, as it is what I cannot possibly imagine. They are said to
be pectoral. I have seen them exhibited without showing any antispasmodic
power, or promoting expectoration. In general, we ought to be very cautious in
exhibiting stimulant Pectorals. Being not employed in present practice, though
not a proof of possessing, may yet be one of our knowing no virtues in the
Storax or Benzoin. Although they had virtues, they could scarcely appear in the
dose employed. The maximum of Materia Medica writers is ten grains. I have seen
them given in twice the quantity without any effect at all.

I cannot say that Labdanum is placed very properly between the two foregoing.
It is employed in plasters, and, with the other warm Gums, may have its share
in stimulating.

We now come to a set of Medicines, whose titles stand opposite to i, which are
very commonly employed, but whose effects on the system are very difficult to
explain.

9. AMARA.
This term is to be considered as very general, and running through a great
part of the Materia Medica. The Amara, however, are seldom simple, but combined
with other qualities, as stypticity, acrimony, aroma, etc. When I speak of
Bitter, I mean pure and simple Bitter, as that occuring in Gentian, Bile, etc.
In my list, I have not exactly confined myself to this; but considered as
bitter those medicines in which that quality is chiefly prevalent. With regard
to all these plants, a certain degree of stimulus is to be perceived in them,
depending on an essential oil, in greater of smaller quantity, giving
distinction to the Bitter. But this essential oil, as some have imagined, is
not that part in which the Bitterness resides; for on drawing that off, the
Bitterness remains in its full force, only more pure. It must be confessed,
however, that in some particulars the Bitterness does seem to reside in the
essential oil. More or less of Stypticity is commonly joined with Bitterness,
and cannot be separated from it, though discoverable only by striking black
with a solution of Green Vitriol. It is commonly said, that Bitters give more
fixed alkali than other plants, and from a variety of trials I believe the fact
to be true. What is to be inferred from this is very uncertain. The chemists
imagine they contain this, in the mixed, in the same state; but in this they are
mistaken; and though Bitters check fermentation, it is very far from being in
the same manner as an alkali, which acts by destroying an acid.

The common VIRTUES of BITTERS are these:
All are more or less stimulating and strengthening, hence are supposed to
promote appetite, and assist digestion. In the Stomach they check fermentations
of all kinds, on the one hand preventing a noxious acid, and on the other
resisting putrefaction. It is very probable, that their assisting digestion
depends as much on this resisting putrefaction, as on their stimulant quality;
for many substances which contain more stimulus, are without that effect. Many
Bitters excite vomiting, but without any emetic power, as has been supposed.
Universally they are nauseous; and, when taken in warm water, expede, rather
than promote vomiting. The proof is this, that if a slight impregnation be
equally nauseous, it will be as effectual as a strong one; and that given in
powder, so as to pass the fauces without being tasted, they have no such
property.

In the Intestines their stimulant virtue is better founded. Their taste
resembles the bile of animals, and seemingly in the same manner as that does,
they seem to promote the peristaltic motion. In trying Chamaemile for the
curing Intermittents, I have given it in the dose of one ounce, without any
proper purgative quality; though I must own, in such quantity it commonly moves
the belly. In the intestines we must mention their anthelmintic quality. All
animals seem to show an aversion to the Bitters, and there are instances of
insects avoiding their odor, which possibly may be the case with worms; and
undoubtedly if these creatures swallow them they may be destroyed, as Bitters
are possessed of a poisonous quality. But we now know, that anthelmintic
bitters are of very little efficacy, and Physicians suppose they act by
strengthening the tone of the intestines, and shaking off the mucus, in which
the eggs of the insects are contained. This, however, cannot be proved.

In the mass of blood. I have seen Bitters pass off by urine, in some cases
giving color and smell to it, and at least changing its condition. Bitters
have been recommended in the Jaundice. The virtues, as we have formerly said of
all medicines recommended in this disease, are much to be suspected. I must now
own, that after the use of Bitters, when the urine flowed yellow, its
consistence and condition was changed. As promoting urine, they have been used
in Dropsies. By themselves, their effects here are not very remarkable, but are
promoted by union with alkaline salts. These two medicines seem mutually to
increase each other's powers. Bitters are said to be diaphoretic and sudorific;
and actually, in large doses, and under proper regimen, they will excite sweat
as soon as any medicine I know. Whether this virtue is to be imputed to their
action on the skin, or on the stomach, is (...). From the suddenness of their
effect, the latter is the more probable case. In consequence of their
diaphoretic virtue, they are recommended as alexipharmics in Fevers, in which
cases they may be given with more safety than the Stimulants formerly
mentioned, or the Serpentaria. In consequence of their alexipharmic virtue,
they have been supposed Deobstruents in the whole of the system, and used in
rheumatic affections. They have been supposed, too, as Stimulants, to promote
the haemorrhoidal flux, and that of the menses. Aloes has been alleged as an
instance of Bitters promoting those fluxes, but in that the Bitter is joined
with a subtle purgative quality. In haemorrhoidal cases, in great quantity,
they may be of some service; in the ordinary quantity we employ them for the
menses, they are of none. As strengthening the system, they have been used in
the cure of intermittents. They certainly will cure; but, after repeated
trials, I have found them not near so powerful as the Bark.

They have also been employed in continued Fevers, but the particular cases in
which they are proper, are difficult to determine. They have been supposed to
remove obstructions in the abdominal viscera, and have been called hepatics and
Splenetics. Their specific property I cannot conceive. They may be useful in
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, as in those of the other abdominal
viscera, and therefore may be employed in cachectical cases. In scrophulous
cases, if the Peruvian Bark be found of advantage, we may infer the analogy to
other Bitters. Bitters have been supposed to cure the Gout, and in one shape
they really do so.

Not long ago, in England, the Duke of Portland's powder came into great
reputation. It is composed of the Aristolochia, and four other Bitters; for I
consider the Aristolochia as a Bitter; though from its foetid odor it be
transferred to another class. This powder, in the Duke of Portland himself, and
in many others who used it, prevented the painful return of the Gout in
Inflammation of the extremities, and thus seemed to cure the disease; but
almost always with a considerable change in the system, and pernicious
consequences. I may venture to say, that ninety of an hundred, who have taken
this remedy, in a year or two after have been carried off by apoplexy, etc. or
some other mortal disease. In Scotland only twelve or fourteen persons have
taken this powder, and all have done it with the consequences I mention. The
course of the medicine must be continued for two years to produce the cure
proposed. Many have not had patience to go through this course, and therefore
with them the medicine has neither had the effect of curing the Gout, nor of
bringing on any other disease. All this I mention from my own knowledge. For
the history, etc. of this medicine, you may look into a paper of Dr. Clephane,
in the London Essays, where he shows us it has been mentioned by every
practical Physician, since the time of Galen. Some alterations, at different
times, have been made in the prescription; but such as allow it always to be
considered as a bitter medicine. At the same time that Authors recommend it,
they have always subjoined a caution as to its use. Upon its reputation in
England, trial was made of it; and Gabius gives testimony of its having the
same effects we have said. Such is the state of the facts with regard to this
use of Bitters. How they act in either case, we shall not take upon us
absolutely to determine. This may throw some light upon any method, which may
be taken to explain it. We have said that Stimulants destroy the tone of the
stomach. Boerhaave, in a work, which, as spurious, I should not quote, were I
not certain of the fact alleged, in his Praelections on the Materia Medica,
tells us, that Aristolochia destroys the tone of the stomach, smooths the inner
side of the stomach, and takes off its villous coat. From all this we see how
sparing ought to be the use of bitters in stomach complaints. But as the Gout
seems to be sent to the extremities, by the tone of the stomach, we in some
measure conceive how Bitters act in preventing the appearance in the
extremities. Whether it is from the arthritic effort, if I may so speak, that
the disease is thrown upon the brain, I shall not determine.

Having mentioned the arthritic, we shall here speak of the antinephritic
virtues imputed to Bitters, where they are supposed to act as diuretics. As
this effect of being diuretic is not considerable, and as they are not supposed
to change the figure, etc. of the stones in the kidneys, from analogy we may
infer, that their action is much in the same way with some medicines mentioned
for the stone. There is a similarity between arthritic and nephritic cases. It
is commonly supposed that the nephritic fit is owing to the size, weight,
roughness, etc. of the stone in the kidneys. When a person is seized with the
Gout, he is relieved from the symptoms ensuing from such supposed causes;
though how an inflammation can take off the size, etc. of a stone in the
kidneys, is to me impossible to imagine. We must then suppose, that the
affection of the kidneys is the cause of concretion of the stone, and not the
latter of the former; in the same manner as Gout causes concretions of chalk,
so the Gout, from taking off this affection of the kidneys, relieves the
symptoms consequent upon it. This will be understood from what we have said on
the Uva Ursi. I cannot help mentioning a remarkable instance, where the stone
in the kidneys remained, and yet the patient was relieved from nephritic
complaints by the attack of a gouty paroxysm. A Gentleman, from nephritic
complaints was seized with excessive strangury, foetid purulent urine, and
ulcers in the whole track of the urinary passages, hectic paroxysms, etc.
insomuch that it was thought his case was desperate, when being unexpectedly
seized with the Gout, he was relieved from these complaints; his urine became
less foetid, freer, etc. and, for a fortnight, during which the Gout las^ed,
enjoyed an interval of ease from his nephritic pains. Nothing more clearly than
this shows the connection between the Arthritis and Nephritis.

I knew another person, who being troubled with the Gout, was seized with a
Nephritis, upon whose increase the Gout was proportionably diminished. Upon
dissection, no stone was found in the kidneys. This case seems peculiarly to
have been adapted to the Uva Ursi.

We have commonly been in use to neglect the antinephritic powers of Bitters;
yet certainly, although we know their bad effects in the Gout, yet in nephritic
cases they may have still enough to be worth enquiring into. Upon the whole, we
see the intimate connection between the two diseases, which possibly also may
extend to their remedies; and certainly it would be equally ridiculous to
reject their power upon the kidney, as to admit of their action on the stone.

Bitters are alleged to have somewhat of a narcotic quality, especially
applicable to those which abound in essential oil. So far as it is discovered
in Wormwood, it depends on the peculiarity of its essential oil, and not on its
Bitterness. Opium is a Bitter, but it would be foolish to say its narcotic
qualities depended upon this. I choose to mention this, as some deduce the bad
consequences of Bitters from it.

Bitters are said to weaken the system in general, and particularly the genital
powers. Of the truth of this I cannot say. It is scarcely to be known but from
a very disagreeable experiment, an experiment on one's-self. More certain am I
of another bad effect imputed to them, viz. hurting the eyes. This, down from
the times of the ancients, it has been observed, that Wormwood (and the same
property may reside in all) affects, like Sage, the eyes, with an uneasy
dryness, weakness, contraction, and inflammation, attended with headache. These
effects seem to depend on the narcotic quality, as the few which have them
abound in essential oil.

PARTICULAR BITTERS.
I have only a few remarks to make upon these; I have distributed them into
setts; that containing the first ( i) belongs to a natural order, the

SYNGENESIA.
It is in the leaves of these that the Bitterness resides; the root commonly
contains an aromatic resin, or, if it contains Bitter, it is of a weaker kind
than that of the leaves. What I say upon the leaves does not apply to the
Semiflosculosae or Plano petalae which follow. Those we are now treating of are
called the Amara calida, the following the Amara frigida. Abrotanum foemina, I
have nothing to observe of it. It is weak in the virtues of its class, and
neglected.

The three following are taken notice of as species of the same genus, and
therefore as of kindred virtues. Physicians, however, have been choosing, and
disputing about that choice. To me, the greatest power of this genus seems to
reside in the Absynthium vulgar, and there in the leaves. It contains a
considerable quantity of essential oil, and is therefore chiefly noted for
those narcotic qualities we mentioned, and effects on the eyes. Its smell is
rank and disagreeable, but is lost by keeping; that is, evaporation of the
volatile part. Dr. Lewis says, that after distilling Wormwood for the simple
water, that which remains in the still, after the essential oil is gone, is a
pure bitter substance, and gives a considerable impregnation to alcohol. I am
doubtful whether this practice be right, either in this, or other cases in
which Lewis recommends it: At least it remains to be enquired into, whether
either the Bitter, or essential oil, when separated, contain the virtues of the
entire plant. The Absynthium vulgar gives foundation for what I said of the
root of this class differing from the plant. Though I said Absynthium was the
strongest of this class, there may be others more strongly aromatic; e. g.
Haller mentions one which he found in Switzerland, which was used as an
universal febrifuge by the inhabitants of the Alps. Of the Artemisia we shall
speak afterward.

Carduus benedictus contains a more pure Bitter, and less essential oil, and
that not very volatile. It may be extracted like Wormwood, but we find that
heat applied dissipates it, insomuch that the only agreeable Bitter to be
obtained from Carduus benedictus, is by infusion in cold water.

The Carlina stands in our Dispensatories, but I am not acquainted with it.
Authors tell us the r^^t is bitter with acrimony, and considerably active.

Chamaemelum is the most frequently employed, and undoubtedly has almost all
the virtues we have been talking of. It abounds in pungent aromatic oil, is
considered as the most active of the Bitters, and, before invention of Peruvian
Bark, was employed as a substitute for it. I have frequently tried it, and
sometimes with effect; but it falls much short of the powers of the Cortex,
and, when given in considerable quantity, is much more apt to run off by stool,
and disappoint our purpose. Simon Pauli relates, that a strongly impregnated
decoction of it in wine, comes at last to acquire a remarkably saline taste,
like that of common salt. Neuman confirms the same thing, and finds, that, like
common salt, it makes Precipitates, but that they are different from those
obtained by it. Believing this might arise from the wine, Neuman boiled that in
the same manner by itself, but without obtaining what he got from its
impregnation with the Wormwood. Vide philosophical Transactions, No. 173.
Lewenhoeck, in his Experiments, finds the same sort of crystals, resembling
those of common salt in Carduus benedictus, but unluckily did not try
Chamaemile. This preparation ought to be enquired into. It may, perhaps, prove
singularly diuretic, as is alleged.

Cotula foetida, or Wild Chamaemile. Brown Langrish gives an account of a
decoction of this, recommended by a gipsey, throwing a person affected with a
Rheumatism, into a profuse sweat, and curing him of the disease. Such instances
ought to be marked.

Santonicum. This should have been ranked with the Aby^nthium, of which it is a
genus. It is doubtful with regar^ to the nature of this substance, whether it
be a seed at all; but although we see stalks, etc. evidently among it, yet, I
think, as evidently we see seeds. As belonging to the Wormwood, I make no doubt
of its having virtues, but surely it (...) none so peculiar as to make us
import it. It has been thought anthelmintic, and hence its common name,
Wormseed. After many trials, I do not find its effects remarkable. Bitters
undoubtedly may destroy worms, but, after many attempts, I have found no
success from their use. I blamed the smallness of the dose, but in men, where
it was much increased, no better consequences followed.

Tanacetum. From Pringle's Experiments, all our Bitters are Antiseptics. The
Tansy has a higher reputation of this kind, and, placed round animal bodies, is
said to preserve them long from putrefaction. Tansy has a larger proportion of
Aroma, with its Bitter, than any of its class. Its Bitterness is more
remarkable in the seed.

The three following substances are well known as medicines. Their virtues
reside in an essential oil. In the former, the Oil and Bitter were separable,
here the Oil contains both. On this account I consider them as the most acrid
and heating, and the bad effects we mentioned as resulting from Bitters, most
frequently appear in these.

Essence of Lemons is the most acrid of the three. They have all the common
virtues of Bitters. Septal^us gives a remarkable preparation of Orange-peel. He
takes the Peel of unripe oranges, and, by long decoction, treats it as for an
extract. This he gave with success in a flow of the menses.

Aurantia Curaslavensia. From their peculiar taste, I take these to belong to
the Citrus, which comprehends the Lemon and Orange. From their bitterness and
size, I take them to be an unripe fruit, and therefore particularly fitted for
Septalius's extract, whose effects I design to try; otherwise they seem
properly introduced into our Dispensatory, as containing less of an essential
oil, and so given with greater safety. Next to the three mentioned, stand

Centaurium minus and Gentiana. These, in opposition to the others, contain a
pure Bitter, with very little essential oil. They are species of the same
genus. Gentian has been long known as a pure Bitter, and, as without odor, is
more universally agreeable than any I know. Though not of much value, it has,
from the great request in which it is in some countries, been adulterated with
a poisonous plant. We seldom find it so here; so that I cannot give you the
method of detecting it. As difficult, however, to get properly, Lewis, in the
extract of Wormwood, etc. proposes a substitute for it. We wonder he did not
rather think of the Lesser Centaury, as plant of the same genus, resembling it
in virtues and appearance. If we make choice of this, the leaves should be
employed which contain most Bitter, and more as they are nearer the roots. We
certainly very improperly use the stalks and flowering tops. In a barren soil
this plant is very small. It is inconceivable to think, how much the luxuriancy
of the plant is improved by transplantation to a fertile soil. Its Bitter also
is improved by this change.

At the head of our next list stands China Chinae, the famous.

PERUVIAN BARK.
Chincona, Linnaeus's name, is the only proper one, for this substance was
brought to Europe by the Count of Chincon, after having remarkably cured his
Lady; and hence all the other names, China Chinae, etc. are only corruptions.
When first introduced, it was ^ound an effectual remedy in Intermittents; but
whether it was that a medicine of more seeming efficacy was brought at the same
time into Europe, or whether timid practice lessened the dose, it went out of
credit, and was not, till about thirty years after, restored by Talbot.

This is so much employed, that it would require a particular treatise. We
shall not enter so fully upon it, but endeavor to give what is most important
of it. Peruvian Bark belongs to the class of Bitters, and along with its
bitterness has an aromatic acrimony depending on an essential oil present. With
this it has a stypticity or astringency, which some have thought proper to deny
it; but which is evident sufficiently, when by distillation or solution part of
the other qualities are extracted.

All the common qualities of Bitters are ascribed to the Bark. It has the same
effects in the stomach and intestines. In a large quantity I have seen it
purge; and I have known more than one instance of an habitual Costiveness cured
by Peruvian Bark. It was not here given by accident. An habitual Costiveness
often proceeds from a (...) in the alimentary canal, and in such case, the
Bark, given in the dose of one dram for several days together, cured the
disease, and seemed to work a considerable change in the system.

Carried into the blood, little notice is taken of the diuretic or diaphoretic
powers of the Bark. It is supposed to strengthen the whole of the system.
Whether its action here depends on the proper exhibition, or on a specific
power, is disputed. The last is commonly supposed, and the manner of operating
as difficult, seems altogether neglected at present. I have formerly mentioned
my aversion to specifies. Many perhaps we may be still obliged to leave among
that number, but surely we ought to endeavor to leave as few as possible.

In order to cure an Intermittent, the Bark must be given in the interval of
paroxysms, and it is universally agreed, that in the fever they are hurtful.
Here it acts in preventing the return of the cold fit, and it is pretty
generally agreed, that the cold fit is the cause of the disease. Thus
Boerhaave, after telling us the order of the fits, tells us, videtur is, qui
primum tempus, and primam causam, superare possit, etiam totum illum,
paroxysmum posse tollere.

The prevention of Intermittents depending, then, on the prevention of the cold
fit, and the Bark acting on this, its method of action must be explained from
the theory we form of the paroxysm of Intermittents. If the cold fit be said to
depend on the accumulation of the fluids in the extreme vessels, the Bark
alters that accumulation; if on an affection of the moving fibers, the Bark
obviates the return of the spasmodic affection. One of these we must take up
with. I agree with the last. At this time I will not enter into the discussion
of that opinion, or the reasons for assenting to it. On this subject you may
consult Van Swieten, Hoffman, etc. I shall give a hint or two upon it.

The paroxysm of Intermittents seems so much an affection of the nervous power,
that it is frequently induced and obviated by animi pathemata. All periodic
affections are either of the spasmodic or feverish kind. I own there may be
some difference between these, but, from being the only distinctions, they may
be supposed very much of the same nature. That neither lentor, nor a putrid
fomes, as some have alleged, takes place, may be concluded hence, that all
periodic affections may become habitual. It is a rule of Celsus, that when a
person is cured of an Intermittent, he ought to avoid every thing which would
cause a return of the paroxysm, especially on those days in which the fit used
to return. Now in this case, that person who thus (and it is frequently the
case) is apt to have a recurrence of the paroxysm, is commonly in good health,
and cannot be supposed to be affected with a putrid fomes. It is my opinion,
then, that the Bark acts by obviating the spasmodic affection, to which the
system is so liable, and accordingly we find it a remarkable remedy in all
affections of this kind.

We should wish to go farther, and find this property connected with the
sensible qualities of the Bark. The Bark is a Bitter, and other Bitters have
the same effect. I have seen instances, but not frequently, of Bitters curing
intermittents. That Bitters are not so powerful as the Bark, may arise from
that being stronger, from their being joined with other qualities, from
improper exhibition, or exhibition in too small doses. Thus Chamaemile flowers
supposed by Pitcairn equally specific with the Bark, are much more liable to
run off by stool; possibly, if joined with an opiate, that effect might be
prevented. The Bark, then, being only a stronger Bitter, we must not confine
the property of curing Intermittens to it, but extend it to other Bitters. All
this, however, amounts to nothing more than a specific quality of Bitters.

Let us view this matter in another light. Bark is sensibly an Astringent, and
other Astringents have been used with success in the same cases; Alum, Steel,
and vegetable Astringents. Galls, in France, by Renaud and Homberg, were found
a remedy in Intermittents. The Academy ordered Lemery, Geoffroy, and other
Members, to make trial of it, and their report was, that Galls did cure
Intermittents, though not so constantly as the Bark. Bark, then, as an
Astringent, may only be of a stronger nature, since proof remains of pure
Astringents acting in the same way. Farther it does not appear, from
experiments mentioned, how much may be the effect of pure Astringents; for
Renaud only gave the medicine in a small dose; for in the exhibition of
Astringents we are ever in fear of exceeding in quantity; and it has been
objected to the Bark, supposing it an Astringent, that by its exhibition in the
quantity given, we should be in danger of suppressing healthy evacuations. It
is possible, then, that had the Galls been given in sufficient dose, they had
much oftener effected a cure. Others who are of a different opinion, allow the
Astringents may cure Intermittents, but that that is very seldom, and that it
is absolutely necessary Bitters should be joined with Astringency. Hence it is,
that in Germany they use Trifoil and Tormentil joined, and with success.

As Astringents, in many other cases, are antispasmodic, it is highly probable
that the action of the Bark is nearly of the same kind. Whether in any sense it
is antispasmodic, in the common acceptance of the word, I shall not determine.
Its operation may be explained in this manner.

I have formerly told you what I meant by tone of the fibers. Tonic medicines
are such as give this tone to the fibers, opposed on the one hand to rigidity,
and on the other to laxity. That such a tone takes place in the whole fibers of
the human body, especially in the blood vessels, where some have doubted it,
appears to me sufficiently evident. This tone depends on the firmness of
cohesion of the simple solids, and on the influx of the nervous power. The
first being commonly given, it is plain tone must depend chiefly on the last.
Now although it be doubted of the muscular fibers of the blood vessels, yet as
they are of the same nervous origin, they are therefore depending, for their
tone, on a certain influx of the nervous power. Nothing is more common than to
see mobility depending on atonia, as Hoffman terms it. By increasing the tone
of our fibers, does the Bark seem to act in obviating the return of spasmodic
affections. All this will be confirmed by attending to the history of
Intermittents, and the proper exhibition of the Bark in them.

In their paroxysm it is pretty evident, that amidst those spasmodic motions
which occur, there is always a constriction in the surface of the body. Our
tonic medicine increases that constriction, and therefore ought not to be
exhibited in the hot fit where that takes place.

That constriction, especially at the beginning of the disease, not only
remains through the whole fit, but also in the interval, and therefore it is
necessary to allow the disease to go on, through several paroxysms, till by
repeated sweats the constriction is removed. Hence the caution of
practitioners, not to give the Bark till after the disease has had a few
returns.

In proof of constriction taking place in the extreme vessels, the blood,
during the paroxysm, is collected in the viscera or abdomen. Till this
determination, therefore, be taken off, and the balance restored to the
surface, it is imprudent to exhibit the Bark. Hence we premise Emetics, to
determine to the surface and take off obstructions, in the abdominal viscera.
When the Bark is exhibited, it must be joined with purgatives, to obviate the
astriction in the primae viae, and the obstructions we have mentioned. When
these are removed, we must observe, that the purgative effect of the Bark
itself, or the exhibition of other purgatives along with it, will disappoint
our intention. The reason is this: It is found, that every debilitating power
applied to the body, such as evacuations, cooling medicines, etc. favor the
return of Intermittents. Hence, then* the evacuation produced, either by the
Bark itself, or other substances, does more than compensate by its weakening
effects, the power of the Bark, in strengthening the tone of the fibers.
Sometimes, however, effects may be mixed, and the Bark answer where a purging
ensues. Here, although the chief operation of the Bark be on the stomach, yet a
part of it may be carried into the blood, and obviate, compensate, or overpower
the effects of the purging.

Wherever an inflammatory diathesis obtains in the system, wherever the vis
tonica is increased, there the Bark is hurtful. In the blood vessels this
increase of the vis tonica appears from the tension of the pulse. Hence it is
the Bark is not near so effectual in vernal, as in summer or autumnal agues.

On the contrary, wherever a putrid diathesis prevails, there the vis tonica is
diminished below the standard, and there universally the Bark is useful. I am
very ready to allow, with Dr. Pringle, that a putrescency accompanies Autumnal
Intermittents, and that the Bark is noted for its antiseptic quality. But the
small quantity given, and still more, the very small quantity extracted, and
the little that must be absorbed of that quantity extracted, to me would seem
to have very little effect in preventing the putrescency of the fluids. Much
more do I imagine (and Dr. Pringle consents to it, and enumerates other
Astringents which have the same property) that the Bark, in such cases, acts by
restoring tone to the fibers, debilitated by putrefaction.

Hence not only in Autumnal Intermittents, but in a^ putrid Fevers and in
putrid diathesis of all kinds; in all remittent Fevers, where the remission is
evident, and in anomalous or malignant Fevers, where a putrefaction takes
place, the Bark is used with advantage. With regard to continued Fevers, there
also the Bark is employed; but with more dispute than in the former cases, and
without any persons, as far as I know, having ascertained the state of
continued Fevers in which it should be exhibited. Continued Fevers are not what
the ancients called Febres continentes, viz. such as after the cold fit had a
hot fit following it, and continued during the whole course, till the Fever was
terminated by a crisis. There is a distinction betwixt the Febres continentes
and continuae; for in the last they acknowledged a remission to occur. In my
practice I have never been able to see a continent Fever, and I find, from the
accounts of the ancients, that they confirm me in this. Hence I would allege,
that every Fever whatever consists of the return of a repeated number of
paroxysms. If this be the case, and as the return of the paroxysms depends on
that of the cold fit, it is plain that by obviating the return of spasmodic
accession, the Bark may be as useful in continued, as in intermittent Fevers.
But the difficulties attending the exhibition of the Bark in Intermittents, are
much greater here. There, as the Bark can neither be given in the cold nor hot
fits, nor sometimes even in the interval, when the constriction on the surface
is not removed, it is plain that here the exhibition will be more dubious,
where the effects of the hot fit will be more continued. Wherever an
inflammatory diathesis and increased vis tonica are present, we must certainly
avoid the Bark; and in the continued Fever, it is very difficult to ascertain
the times of accession or remission, another obstacle to its use. If a distinct
remission appear, we may exhibit the Bark with confidence and success. No body
better illustrates this than Cleghorn. When the Bark was not given at the
remission, his patients died. He watched the time of remission and, given then,
found the Bark succeed in cases termed desperate. If any body would study this
subject farther, he must consult Dr. Morton, a writer who abounds as much in
practical facts and observations as any, but, as falling into a system of
theory very different from the simple sagacity of Sydenham, too much neglected.
He constantly used the Bark in continued Fevers with the cautions mentioned.
One case, however, of continued Fever (whatever ambiguity (...) as to the rest)
there is, where the Bark may be employed without regard to intermission, viz.
wherever a putrid diathesis has gone to a great length in the system. I would
allege this often takes place where the disease is very inflammatory in the
beginning. Wherever maculae petechiae, etc. appear, there, I think, the Bark
may be universally employed. A dispute is carried on between De Haen and
Pringle about the nature of petechiae. From the experiments of the latter it
appear^, that in all such cases the Bark is the remedy chiefly to be trusted.
De Haen, in his Ratio medendi, gives many instances of putrid Fevers cured by
this remedy; and other (...), who have used the Bark in these Fevers, give
similar instances of its good effect. For the use of the Bark in Fevers, beside
the authors abovementioned, you should carefully consult Franciscus Torti, in
his Therapeutice specialis, and Werlhoff, De Febrib. edit. 1745.

In Dysentery the Bark is (...) so frequently employed as in some of the
foregoing cases, but still so often as to convince us of its utility. I
consider Dysentery as a febrile disease, and every body knows, that it is
founded in, or causes a putrid diathesis. This disease in the beginning is
often inflammatory, and then the Bark is improper. Such inflammatory
Dysenteries, by continuance, often grow putrid, and in all such, as well as the
originally putrid, the Bark is of great efficacy. In one of these cases, if
given in sufficient quantity, the action of the Bark may be considered as
antiseptic to the fluids in the primae viae; but in a more advanced Dysentery
it must act chiefly as astringent. We have had much delicacy in the use of
Astringents in the Dysentery, but, in gener^^ we should succeed much better,
did we exhibit them more frequently, and more early than we do. Dysentery, as
Sydenham terms it, may be considered as a Febris introversa, with constriction
of the skin. Now the Bark, as a tonic medicine, may not only be more safely
applied than simple Astringents, but will likewise act in restoring the
equilibrium to the surface. Several writers have taken notice of the use of the
Bark in Dysentery (...) you may consult a treatise by Wilson at Newcastle.

Bark is also employed in Gangrene and Mortification. Its efficacy is now
sufficiently established by universal consent. If any doubt remain of its
virtue here, where the ill success has not arisen from mismanagement, it may,
perhaps, be thus explained. There are properly two kinds of Gangrene; the one
kind arising from the violence of inflammation purely, the other from a
flaccidity of the vessels of the part, or, at the same time, an atonia of the
whole system. Every body knows the first; the last is what occurs in hydroptic,
paralytic, or old people. It is in the last, that the Bark seems peculiarly
appropriated, and very seldom, in these cases, if given in a proper dose, does
it fail to bring on a suppuratory inflammation, and separate the mortified
part. In purely inflammatory Gangrenes, if it has not been successful, it is
from improper exhibition, and the reason is obviously this, that the Bark,
acting by giving tone to the moving fibers, must certainly be hurtful where
that is so much increased by disease.

We have attempted to cure Fevers by a variety of Stimuli, in order to excite
such a degree of Fever, as might obviate the symptoms of accession. But the
Peruvian Bark does not operate by its aroma; for the pulse by it is not
increased above its healthy standard; and although it takes off flaccidity, yet
it does not irritate the heart and vessels. It is necessary to observe this, in
order to talk of the cause and cure of suppuration. Where suppuration is
wanting, it depends very often on the flaccidity of the part. In this case, it
is brought on by Stimulants applied to the part. It is in this manner that I
think all the balsamic substances act, and likewise Copper and Mercury, viz. in
restoring the tone of the flaccid fibers. In the same way, in stagnating,
sanious, and ichorous Ulcers, the Bark mends the suppuration, and brings on a
kindly healing of the sore.

Not long ago the Bark has been said to cure Cancers, but in all of these its
effects are not remarkable; and we are here liable to be deceived, as very
often where there is an Ulcer mali moris, it is apt to be confounded with a
Cancer. But even in Cancers I have seen its good effects, and the matter mended
by its use; and Ulcers pessimi moris I have seen cured by it. In short,
wherever a suppuration is to be carried on, not in its own nature inflammatory,
and wherever, in such cases, there is a tendency to the sinking of the vis
vitae, the Bark is useful. Hence, successfully it has been exhibited in the
Small Pox, which I consider merely as a suppuratory disease. Wherever the Small
Pox are attended with an inflammation round the pustules, and that inflammation
extends to the rest of the system, the Bark may be pernicious, and is certainly
hurtful; whereas at those times where a putrid diathesis is more evident, and
the topical inflammation does not appear, it has been as remarkably useful in
bringing on a proper suppuration. If any doubt remain of its efficacy in the
Small Pox, it is from its promiscuous use. You see it ought properly to be
confined to the suppuratory state, and, in general, ought not to be given till
the fifth or sixth day. I know it has been used in the eruptive Fever, but I
imagine with bad consequences; for where there is an inflammatory state over
the whole body, it must certainly do mischief. This last rule is without
exception, except in Small Pox of a singular kind, where, from the very
beginning, they appear with petechiae. As to the secondary Fever of the Small
Pox, its use there is more doubtful. This I know, that very often, (and it is
commonly the case) that Fever is inflammatory, and much better cured by
blood-letting and purging, than any other means, and rendered worse by the use
of the Bark; for by the eruptive Fever the body is left in an inflammatory
state. In the Measles this is very remarkable, and also occurs in the Small
Pox, and I take it, that wherever an evacuation is to be carried on, the Bark
is inconsistent, superfluous, or hurtful, and then only useful where a putrid
diathesis is very evident in the first part of a secondary Fever, or apt to
occur in its continuance.

As efficacious in Ulcers and in the Small Pox, some have thought of extending
the use of the Bark to internal Ulcers, and have used it in the phthisis
pulmonalis. Physicians now see that its bad effects are evident* and almost
inevitable in this case. The reason is, that the phthisis pulmonalis is
accompanied with an inflammatory state. A practice, about thirty years ago, was
proposed by Dr. Dover, of curing Consumptions by frequent and small bleedings,
and I myself have seen a phthisical person bled to the fiftieth time, and I
never saw the blood drawn in such cases without that crust which is the sign of
inflammation. Very often the case is purely inflammatory, and almost always
partly so.

These are the principal uses of the Bark, in which I have endeavored to
explain its operation. Some special cases yet remain. The Bark has been
employed in scrophulous cases. The Scrophula is attended with Ulcers mali
moris, depending on a flaccidity of the vessels of the part, and of the system
in general very often; so that here the Bark is plainly indicated, and I make
no doubt of the success had by Doctors Fothergill and Fordyce in such
circumstances. But it must be observed, that the Bark very often fails in this
disease. But even these Gentlemen have not always succeeded, because I imagine
this disease is often not to be cured certainly by any medicine; for it seems
often a disease of the lymph, seated in the symphatic vessels, and not
depending so much on a general flaccidity of the system in general, as in some
peculiar affection of the lymphatics, and matter generated there.

More successfully has the Bark been given, as a remedy of spasmodic
affections, in the hypochondriac and hysteric disease, and in certain kinds of
Asthma; but here not with such success as to be reckoned a specific. Wherever
disease depends on a mobility, and that on a debility, and wherever these are
causes or effects of disease, and not complicated with obstructions formed,
there the Bark may be safely and successfully employed. In the hypochondriac
disease, then, where the viscera yet remain entire, we may have recourse to the
Bark; but in the decline of life, when the disease is properly hypochondriac,
and where there are considerable obstructions in the viscera, there it must
manifestly do prejudice. On the contrary, in the pure hysteric disease, without
labes of the viscera, depending on causes acting on too moveable constitutions,
passions of the mind, etc. the Bark is very proper, and should always be used.
Epilepsy often depends on similar mobility, and here also it must be useful;
but where that disease depends on a wrong conformation of the brain, little
service can be expected from the Bark. Sir John Floyer found the spasmodic
Asthma, and the hysteric, without labes of the lungs, pretty certainly relieved
by the Bark, but wherever the lungs are over-loaded, and expectoration is
necessary, there it is found hurtful.

In the Chorea Sancti Viti, or those complicated, irregular, spasmodic motions,
which occur in persons of a lax moveable constitution, the Bark is a remedy to
be depended on. Sydenham proposes this disease to be treated by evacuations,
and in the beginning, where there is a fullness, they may certainly be
necessary; but by their continuance, I have never seen the disease cured; while
the Bark prevailed, after an unsuccessful trial of them.

The Bark has been proposed in the case of menstrual obstructions. These are of
various kinds. One species, which occurs at the first attack of the menses,
viz. the Chlorosis, seems, when we take a view of it, to be attended with all
the symptoms of flaccidity and want of tone, and for this reason is commonly
treated with Steel; and wherever that remedy succeeds, there have I seen the
Bark exhibited with equal advantage. Menstrual obstructions, however, may arise
from causes acting particularly on the uterus, and not on the system in
general, and there neither Bark nor Chalybeates should be given. It is not very
common to employ Bark in Chlorosis, or obstructed menses.

Much more commonly is the Bark exhibited in the fluxu nimio mensium. Here,
too, Astringents and Chalybeates are employed, and given in such quantity as to
bring on strong astriction. Whether the Bark answers equally well as an
astringent with the preparations of Iron, I shall not say. Wherever the
profusion depends on irritability and flaccidity, there I employ the Bark
joined with Sal martis,

It has been a question, whether the Bark may be employed in other
Haemorrhages? I think we may answer in the negative, generally. In cases of
Haemorrhage that depend on mobility and debility, the Bark may be used with
advantage; and in those by long subsistence become habitual and periodical. But
Haemorrhages strictly considered, and those by unusual outlets, are constantly
of the inflammatory kind. Thus Haemoptoe, in nine of ten cases, depends on an
inflammatory diathesis. There may, however, be cases of Haemoptoe, which have
long subsisted, and are kept up by laxity, where both the Bark and Astringents
may do service. These it is very difficult to discern, and where the
inflammatory are mistaken for them, bad consequences will follow.

In Dr. Haller's collection of Dissertations, there is one on the use of the
Bark in Jaundice. I will not absolutely deny the use of the Bark in this case.
We might say, that other Astringents have been used for the same purpose. But
now we know that Jaundice very often depends on stones in the biliary ducts,
which pass slowly through; so that the medicine given at the time of their
falling out, etc. has imputed to it the virtue of curing the disease. It is not
easy to see how medicines of this kind should promote the passage of such
stones, and at any rate, from the Author of the Dissertation, we cannot be
certain of the effects of the Bark. He seems unacquainted with the possibility
of the accidents abovementioned, and joins with the Bark Besides, he gives the
Bark in too small quantity to produce any effect.
(...) farrago of other medicines, some of which, perhaps, are more adapted to
the cure of the disease.

There is another disease, in which the Bark is employed, viz. Chin-cough. I
have had frequent experience of the use of the Bark here. The efficacy of the
Bark here shows the disease of the spasmodic kind, or, the spasmodic nature of
the disease being given, shows the reasonableness of using the Bark in it.
Wherever a child can be made to take the Bark in sufficient quantity, by the
mouth, it is almost a certain cure for the chin-cough; and even by injection,
though not so constantly, it succeeds. As to the time of exhibition, when the
disease is recent, and there are symptoms of an infarction in the lungs, while
yet no solution of the spasm appears, nor expectoration takes place, I imagine
the exhibition of the Bark is dangerous, and bleeding and emetics must be
premised. Often in the Chin-cough a bleeding at the nose and vomiting ensue,
both which are favorable symptoms, and therefore before a bleeding at the nose
or vomiting ensue, if there be not a certainty of no infarction in the Lungs, I
never gave the Bark; but after these I always exhibit it with success. I have
had in the exhibition of this remedy in the Chin-cough little regard to the
Fever, except in the beginning, always giving it where the disease has been
drawn out to a great length. The only caution to be regarded is this, viz. to
avoid giving it in the evening hours, where an exacerbation of the Fever
ensues, and rather to exhibit it in the morning and forenoon, stopping before
the midday accession.

I have only to add one more practical direction, which I had not an
opportunity of mentioning. I mentioned how apt intermittents were to return,
from habit. This leads us to give the Bark in considerable quantity. The Bark
has been said not to cure Quartans. In these the tendency to continue is very
great, and a large proportion of Bark is necessary; nor, indeed, ought it to be
limited to any quantity, but given in as great as the stomach can bear. There
are instances of persons taking one ounce at one dose, without bad
consequences; and I myself have seen half an ounce exhibited with great safety.
In general, the bad effects of the Bark depend on exhibiting it in improper
cases, seldom on the quantity given. We are often straitened with regard to the
interval for the use of the Bark, as even in the Quotidian Ague, we ought never
to exhibit it, but between the paroxysms. Some are so nice, that although the
paroxysm does not appear, yet they stop the exhibition of the Bark, till the
time in which the interval should again appear. But I find, that if the
paroxysm does not come on, and no sense of cold, paleness of the nails, or
languor, etc. take place, we may continue with safety; and by this method have
I cured Agues which would not yield in the other way.

It has been objected to the use of the Bark, that Intermittents are apt to
return, that there is no end of pouring in the Bark, and that the system will
be destroyed by it. But I am persuaded, that this is owing to not continuing
the Bark in sufficient quantity; for though the paroxysm disappears for a short
time, yet the tendency still remaining, it soon gains strength and recurs. We
ought to proceed in this manner. After the disease is removed, we should return
to the use of the Bark in three or four days; after that in the interval of a
week, then a fortnight, and so on, if I may so call it, during the epidemic
season.

As to the pharmaceutical treatment of the Bark, it ought always to be
exhibited in large quantities, and in substance; for the powers of the stomach
seem much greater upon it than those of any menstruum out of the body. With
some reason it has been imagined, that the action of the Bark is upon the
stomach. Hence it has been said, that all fluid preparations of it pass off by
the pylorus, and for that reason do not answer so well as the simple Bark,
which remains much longer. This reasoning is ingenious, but we may be satisfied
with what was alleged of the smallness of the quantity extracted. With regard
to the extraction, long boiling destroys its virtues. Ten grains of the Extract
has been said to be equal to half a dram of the Bark in powder; but in
practice I find that equal quantities are necessary, and considering the long
coction destroys the texture, as much as it enlarges the quantity extracted, it
is no wonder that it is so. As spirits disagree with many, wherever extraction
is necessary, we must employ water; and infusion with water is preferable to
decoction, being equally strong and preserving the aroma. By gentle heat we may
evaporate the infusion to any quantity.

ACORUSVERUS, or CALAM. AROMATICUS.
The place of this is uncertain; whether it ought to be placed among the
Aromata, or here among the Bitters, whose qualities it also possesses. As not
remarkable for any of these virtues, it has been, of late, neglected. I have
placed it next the Bark, as it has been frequently employed for the same
purposes. Upon good authority, I found it had cured Intermittent Fevers. I
myself had it tried, and found it alone to do so. How far it is to be depended
upon in ordinary cases, farther experience must determine. It is much of the
same nature with the Bark, aromatic, bitter, and astringent, pretty evidently,
but contains more essential oil. Like the Bark, it must be given in large
doses, and in substance^ Haller gives it in two drachms. The stomach bears
better a large dose of it, than of the Bark.

The three next plants belong to the Verticillatae, and might have been
mentioned with the Scordium, etc.

Chamaepitys. This, with the Chamedrys, Gentian, and Centaury, enters into the
Portland Powder, formerly mentioned. Its acrimony is of the terebinthinate
kind, and hence called in England Ground Pine. To show the analogy of these
plants, Shaw tells us, that in Barbary the Chamaepitys is used with success in
Intermittents. As to the

Marrubium, it is the strongest Bitter of the class, and frequently employed
for the uses of other Bitters. Its use is not properly defined. I cannot agree
with Materia Medica writers, who constantly make it pectoral. It is not
supported by analogy. Few of the Verticillatae are pectoral, and many more of
them are bitter, without any antispasmodic quality. There is nothing in which
we are more apt frequently to be misled, than in supposing acrid medicines to
act as pectoral.

Dictamnus albus. This is a strong, simple, and pure Bitter. I have had no
account of it. The root of it is used. Many plants have a strong odor exhaling
from them, which I imagine is their essential oil. Dictamnus albus is the only
one which will show the inflammability of this vapor, which in it will take
fire, on the application of a candle. Next to these three stands the

LUPULUS, HOPS.
This is a pretty strong Bitter, with a slight aroma. In Spain, from good
authority, I know it is used as a Sudorific, to banish the remains of the
Venereal Disease. Like other Bitters, it prevents fermentation and acidity in
vinous liquors; hence it is used as a condiment to ales. Whether there is any
thing peculiar in Hops, is very uncertain. Before the introduction of these,
other Bitters were used for the same purpose, and poverty obliges some to use
these still and from experiments I have found them equally effectual. With
regard to gratefulness, experiments must be repeated with different quantities.
Much has been said of the effects of Ale or Beer, in calculous cases; but I
imagine they can have little effect, either in generating or removing calculi.
We have reason to think, that these depend on peculiarities of constitution and
habit, not easily removed by diet of any kind.

TRIFOLIUM PALUSTRE.
Both the leaves and roots of this afford a strong Bitter, without any aromatic
acrimony, approaching in sensible qualities to the Gentian and Centaury, but
more harsh and disagreeable. It is applied to all the purposes of Bitters, and
has been celebrated as an Antiscorbutic. There is no doubt but all Bitters, as
antiseptic with regard to the fluids, and tonic and constringent with respect
to the solids, may be employed with success in Scurvy, though not by
themselves, but accompanied with acescent aliment. With regard to Trefoil, I do
not say its virtues are great in this respect. I imagine it very doubtful
whether it is properly or not given by the Germans.

This finishes the Amara calida. We shall now make a few observations on their

PHARMACEUTICAL TREATMENT.
Pretty universally they are more agreeable in their dry state than in their
recent. Most of them contain an oil, of which a portion is more volatile than
the rest, and gives a rank, disagreeable odor to the subject, and, which I
imagine is not without foundation, thought of a narcotic, inebriating quality.
This odor is lost by drying, and even the mildest Bitters, e. g. Centaury,
have some of it. When any considerable efficacy is to be expected from their
use, they should be exhibited in substance, both on account of the difficulty,
except they are in a very tender herbaceous state, of extracting them
perfectly, and perhaps also from its being necessary they should be detained
sometime in the stomach. Another obstacle is, that in their recent or dissolved
state, they are much more apt to run off by stool than when dry. Their
bitterness does not reside in an essential oil to be raised by distillation,
but in a more fixed, partly gummy, and partly resinous substance, and therefore
to be extracted both by water and alcohol; by water a greater quantity, by
spirit a stronger, purer, and more elegant Bitter being extracted, which leads
us to think that it chiefly resides in a resin. The more heat is applied in the
extraction, the Bitter will be more disagreeable, and by boiling, the whole of
the essential oil will be dissipated. It is true the more pure Bitter still
remains; but I think it very doubtful whether also some virtue does not depend
on the Aroma, united with the Bitter. In extracting these Bitters we want to
shun their disagreeableness. Spirit, without destroying the quality, renders
the Bitter more agreeable; water renders it more harsh, and wine, though rather a
watery than a spirituous menstruum, yet here corrects the Bitterness; but
whether without changing the virtue is not certain. All the fossile acids, in a
very small quantity, destroy Bitters. Perhaps it is from the acid in wine,
acting in this manner, that it mitigates the nauseous taste of the Bitter. For
my part, I think it very doubtful, whether acids are well employed in
extracting acrid substances. The very strong Squill may still retain its
properties, but this will scarcely apply to others. Alkali, too, is sometimes
added, but contributes nothing to the extraction; for the same color, etc. is
procured by adding alkali to the common solution after it is made, as before.
It does not, however, impair the qualities, and therefore is very properly
added as a diuretic to our Bitters.

AMARA FRIGIDA.
These, on a wrong foundation, have been supposed of a cooling virtue. The
mistake has probably arisen from the method of our using them at table, young
and blanched, and then containing only a mild vegetable juice.

The four first belong to the subdivision of the Syngenesia, the
Semiflosculosae. This order are all lactescent and acrid, and commonly
containing an oily matter, which when dried is inflammable. They are all
supposed of a poisonous nature. These here are the only exceptions, with some
of the campanaceous tribe of plants, containing a milky juice, and not being
poisonous. Even here their quality is suspected, and some of them, as the
Lactuca, is reported to have a strong narcotic virtue; and therefore, although
these four were set down as a specimen of the whole, the analogy must be (...)
^^ferred, with very great caution, to the rest of the tribe, Even the esculent
Lettuce, by Galen, is maintained to be of a poisonous nature. This was probably
owing to the heat of the climate, but it shows the tendency of such plants.
Besides the milky juice, these plants contain an essential salt, in which the
cooling quality is supposed to reside; but it cannot be extracted in such
quantity as to show that effect. As to their medicinal qualities, they have the
common virtues of Bitters. Materia Medica writers constantly talk of their
aperient qualities, and imagine them almost specific in visceral obstructions.
In confirmation of this they prove purgative, and in that manner may be useful
to the hypochondriacs. Boerhaave has a particular affection to the Amara
frigida, and supposes they have a power of dissolving the atrabitis he thinks
present, and of washing off impurities from the blood. I have employed the
juice of the Dens leonis in the quantity of four ounces, but neither observed
its laxative nor diuretic power. Boerhaave talks of their saponaceous quality
very much, but without any precision; for whenever we lose sight of a
combination of alkali and oil, and talk of a sapo composed of any saline or
inflammable substance, we can convey nothing distinct to the reader, nor
accurate as to what virtue we mean the substance exerts. I deny such soapy
qualities, and with regard to the Amara frigida, their use in medicine is not
yet ascertained. After these is inserted.

FUMARIA.
Not from its being akin in natural order, but because it resembles those we
have mentioned in sensible qualities, in which Sir John Floyer talks of a
smoaky sooty taste. It matters not whether the term is precise, since the
Fumaria and the former certainly agree in taste, and in the same ascribed
virtues. To me it is more purgative, and therefore more fitted to the Hectics
and Hypochondriacs. Opposite to l stands the term

ACRIA.
By this I mean such plants as are simply acrid, without any Aroma or
Bitterness joined. If I were again to make up the list of Stimulants, I should
transfer many of them to the class of Evacuants, as Diuretics, etc. but this is
an error of no great consequence.

ARUM.
This is very acrid in its recent state, but inert when dried; insomuch as
sometimes to be employed in food. It stimulates the stomach, and promotes
appetite and digestion; stimulates the intestines, which by its effects, if
given in quantity sufficient, it will discover; is remarkable for stimulating
the kidneys, and like most other substances, which do so in the mucous glands
of the Bronchiae. Hence we see it is akin to the Squills, but more pungent and
volatile. It is much out of practice at present, and for a very good reason,
because it is very difficult to procure in a proper state; for when recent, it
will not powder, and when we attempt to dry it, we are apt to go too far.

EUPHORBIUM.
It is an acrid Stimulant, used only externally. As exerting an attrahent
virtue, it shall be considered in another place. It might have been transferred
to the Purgatives.

IMPERATORIA,
Belongs to the Umbellatae. The part employed is the root. It is more acrid
than the former Umbellatae enumerated. Since I spoke of these, I have examined
the root of Angelica, and find it equally acrid with the Imperatoria, and
therefore suspicious.

IRIS NOSTRAS.
This term implies ambiguity. So far as we can perceive, the whole genus of the
Iris is remarkably acrid, both the flowers and roots. It is a great mistake to
give the Iris palustris lutea the qualities of astringent, and recommending it
as such. It is equally acrid with the Iris in our Dispensatory. The Iris
Florentina is acrid, too, in its recent state. I take the virtues of all of
them to be the same as those of the Iris lutea in their recent state, viz. that
of a very strong Errhine when snuffed, as I have seen it not only causing
sneezing, but Inflammation of the nose and head. Internally it is a strong
cathartic, and answers as a Hydragogue. In the medical Essays you may see it
employed in one case: I have seen it in seveveral others. The dose is set too
high, viz. two ounces. Two drachms is farther than I would choose to go. Even
fifty drops of the juice will prove purgative. In exhibiting it we should begin
with small quantities at first.

PERSICARIA URENS.
Is an example of the difference in substances, connected by botanical analogy.
It is remarkable for acrimony, although the rest of its genus are mild. Its
acrimony operates chiefly on the kidneys, and it proves diuretic. I have had no
experience of it. What is remarkable, it gives out its diuretic virtues, in
distillation, to water, which ought to be tried on other substances besides the
Persicaria.

PYRETHRUM.
Is an acrid, which resides in the leaves and in many of the roots of its
order. It is employed as a masticatory in the Toothache. It belongs to the
Composita.

SEDUM MINUS ACRE.
Another instance of different virtues in plants of the same genus. Its
qualities approach to those of the Siliquosae. It has been employed as emetic,
and its effects may go farther in the system. The seeds are of a strong
acrimony, and confined entirely to external use, in destroying some vermin
which infest the body.

WINE.
We have here no perfectly pure Wines. As most of those we employ are the
produce of foreign countries, either before or after importation, they fall
into the hands of the trader, where such additions are made to them, were they
pure of themselves, as would contaminate that purity. But as all Wine is
prepared from a saccharine juice, which undergoes fermentation, and as the
whole is not converted at once, but changed only successively, one part will
remain unassimilated, while another has gone a further step, and become
vinegar. And thus in all Wine we have these three parts, viz. 1st, A quantity
of unassimilated Must; 2dly, A vinous liquor; and, 3dly, a quantity of vinegar.
We shall first mention the properties of the several parts of Wines by
themselves, and then talk of the properties of these separate parts combined.

Every Wine consists, more or less, of these three parts: Must, pure Wine, and
Vinegar; for it is almost impossible, either to have fruit so maturated, or so
to conduct the fermentation, but a portion of each of these must appear.

1. MUST.
Sugar alone ferments in the stomach, gives out a gas sylvestre, acts on the
bile, has a laxative property, etc. Whether the Sugar diffused in Must, owing
to its mixture with the native juice of vegetables, may have these effects
varied, I shall not say. Certain it is, that Must acts in a less quantity than
Suar. Must may be considered as causing in the stomach fermentation or acidity.
Its effects, then, are of two kinds; 1. of the gas sylvestre generated on the
nerves. In so far as that is generated from the fermentation of Must in the
stomach, it will destroy the tone of the stomach, dispose it to spasmodic
contractions, and consequently disturb and interrupt the course of digestion.
2. If acidity is produced, it will join with the gas sylvestre in weakening the
stomach; the acid thus formed will unite with the b^^e, produce a strong
stimulus, thus occasion a flow of more bile to the intestines, and cause a
Cholera morbus, with violent spasms, and copious evacuations upwards and
downwards. Although these consequences of the Must may go thus far, yet they
are commonly more mild.

2. WINE.
The dististinguishing property of that part of the Must which is converted
into Wine, is, that it now contains an Alcohol, at least it is that on which
the chief effects of the pure vinous part, which I said was in Wine, depends.
On this head, therefore, we must consider the effects of Alcohol. 1. Alcohol
applied to the fluids, coagulates them; 2. to the solids, constricts and
hardens them; and hence, in stopping Haemorrhages, may act in either way.
Applied either to the fluids suddenly, or injected into the vessels of living
animals, in small quantity, it will produce death. 3. In the stomach, its
chemical effects on the fluids and solids may almost be neglected; nor can we
suppose, with Boerhaave, that, carried thence into the vessels of animals, it
can be subject to those vicissitudes of heat and cold, producing condensation
and rarefaction, and thus unequal compressions, and thence diseases. Alcohol
diluted, loses that strong power to generate heat; it must also lose its
coagulating powers, diluted in the blood vessels. Alcohol, internally, acts on
the nervous system purely, chiefly by means of the stomach. In small doses it
simply stimulates, increases the action of the heart and vessels, increases the
nervous flow over the whole of the system, whence more serenity and ease of
mind, more clearness and liveliness of imagination, and the vigorous exertion
of every faculty. In large doses it has a contrary effect; it destroys the
mobility of the nervous power, in interrupting its flow from the Sensorium
commune; whence from its se^ative and stimulant effects mixed, it produces
confusion of ideas and delirium; if the doses are still repeated, the nervous
flow is arres^ed, the voluntary and involuntary motions are destroyed, sleep
produced, lethargy, apoplexy, death. These are (...) the Alcohol of Wines. In
Wines themselves, especially in the last stage, the effects are almost never so
violent, for the Wine is necessarily thrown in more dilute at first, and in
smaller doses, and has, in a manner, the consequence of one dose dissipated,
before another is repeated, and therefore is more stimulant, and raises the
spirits more. It does produce stupor, but seldom death; for besides it being
more dilute, from its stimulant qualities it is apt to be thrown up from the
stomach, and again has, by the other matters in it, the powers of the Alcohol
moderated. Whether the Must, Acid, and Alcohol are all in every Wine, I shall
not determine. Certain it is, that if any body were to drink of pure Alcohol as
much as they can drink of Wine, in proportion to the strength it would have
deleterious effects. Alcohol is more inflammatory too, and productive of an
inflammatory diathesis, than Wine, because of the acid, etc. accompanying the
latter. A proof of this is, that Punch, which is an artificial Wine, is less
noxious than the same quantity of diluted Alcohol. Something also depends on
the accuracy of mixture, for Punch, though less noxious than Alcohol, is more so
than Wine. Hence I imagine it is a very bad practice to mix Alcohol with
fermented Wines; for though it is better than Punch, and by very long digestion
may be possibly mixed accurately with the Wine, yet it is far less safe than
the same quantity of spirit, gained by the vinous liquors themselves, during
their fermentation.

3. ACID.
The Acid of Wines may be considered as of two kinds; 1. That Acid, which,
during the whole progress of fermentation, is manifestly evolved, and which
probably enters into the composition of Wine and Alcohol; 2. That which is
generated, from part of the vinous liquor going on to the acetous process more
copiously and more separate, then called Vinegar. This renders the Wine m^^e
grateful to the palate, stimulates the mucous glands, and quenches thirst; and
in the stomach, by obviating putrefaction, exerts somewhat of the same quality.
Vinegar may always be considered as a mixed body, at least on most occasions,
containing, besides the Acid, a part of unconverted, saccharine matter. As
containing such, it may be laxative in the intestines, have the effect of
unconverted Must, generate g^s sylvestre in the intestines, and, in short, have
all the properties of fresh juice. When thoroughly converted, it acts in
another manner. By the quantity of Acid, it determines other vegetables to
acescency, weakening the stomach, and, therefore, hurtful to such as have their
health very much depending on the tone of that organ in arthritic and
hypochondriac cases. This cooling quality in vinegar may go so far as to
imitate the effects of the gas sylvestre, prove spasmodic, and have all the
consequences of Acid, generated in the stomach itself.

In so far as Wine contains Vinegar, or Must, it is not perfect; but it is
unavoidable but that in every Wine we have, they should be more or less
present. In the combined state of these qualities in Wine, they are much more
innocent than we have described them as separate; the Alcohol and Vinegar
obviate the fermentation of the Must, the stimulant of the Alcohol obviates the
cooling quality of the Vinegar, and this again, with the Must, the inflammatory
consequences of the Alcohol. There is in Wine a fourth ingredient, viz. Water,
which, according to its proportion, moderates the other qualities.

In many countries weak Wine is used as common drink, without any bad
consequences. For my part, I imagine it has considerable advantages, tending to
obviate the acescency of vegetable aliment, as we see in strong Wines, taken
with acescent fruits, and more universally the putrescency of the animal diet.
Hence, I imagine, dilute Wine is not improperly employed in those countries
where the food is chiefly animal, as obviating its noxious tendency, and
promoting the excretion of the putrescent parts of our food. As used with
aliment, Physicians have, indeed, considered Wine as diluent, and moderately
stimulating; as antiseptic, and promoting the secretions; but entirely
neglecting its nutritious quality. This, however, as containing Must, it
certainly possesses.

As a medicine, we must consider the effects of Wine in its different kinds,
for according to the kind of Wine, must its effects be diversified.

Wines may be distinguished according to the progress of their fermentation, as
crude, mellow, etc. In their crude state, Wines will have all the bad effects
mentioned of the gas sylvestre. When they are ripe, no such should appear. But
in those Wines we call mellow, there is always some unconverted Must, some gone
over to acidity, and even sometimes are what is called pricked, or apple
tasted. The effects of these will be easily understood, but it is often very
difficult to be able to know these states of Wine, for the Merchant takes every
method of concealing them. We shall now say somewhat on the different qualities
of Wines.

1. Sweet and Sharp. Sweetness in Wines may depend on the natural richness of
the grape, its maturity, etc. but much more commonly is it the effect of
imperfect fermentation, from racking off the vinous liquor from the lees, as
soon as the fermentation is tolerably active, into new vessels successively,
till once it be checked, and a sweetness remain. Such are the Spanish and
Italian Wines. Sweetness also may arise from the Vintner mixing with sharp
Wines a quantity of unfermented Must. The qualities are easily understood.
Where the sweetness, or rather crudeness of the Wine, depends on the quantity
of Must present, it will have the same effects as Must, generate gas sylvestre,
prove laxative, purgative, etc. Where the sweetness depends on the native
richness of the grape, the bad effects will be obviated by the greater quantity
of Alcohol, as in Canary and Tokay. But even in these, I am persuaded the
richness of the juice, and the viscidity attending it, prevent the generation
of as much Alcohol as might be produced; and accordingly we find that these
Wines have always a good deal of the effect of crude Wine.

Sharp Wines may have that property from different causes; 1. From the nature
of the grape, to be judged of according to the climate. Thus the Wines of the
Northern countries possess this property more than those of the Southern. 2.
Sharpness, whatever be the state of the grape, arises from every active
fermentation. 3. Sharpness may proceed from Wines being kept long, and partly
converted into vinegar. In one case, then, you see, Sharpness is a symptom of
weak Wine, and, therefore, of a cooling, less heating, and less inflammatory
liquor. In healthy stomachs these may be more freely indulged, and prove good
condiments for animal food, and likely to prove diuretic and antiseptic. When
the Sharpness proceeds from an unfinished active fermentation, these Wines may
be hurtful, as too cooling, and as debilitating the stomach, and thus produce
arthritic and nephritic paroxysms, and haemorrhoidal pains, which also depends
very much on the stomach's tone.

2. Brisk and Flat; i. e. more or less poignant. 1. Flatness of Wines may
depend on the want of a due degree of fermentation. 2. Flatness may proceed
from too great ripeness, or mellowness, and the Wine increasing in age. Thus
Wine kept long in well corked bottles, not having the air necessary for the
acetous process, turns simply vapid. 3. When artificial means is used to
prevent fermentation, it will induce flatness, as brandy mixed with Wines.
Hence the flatness of the Spanish and Portuguese Wines, in comparison of the
French.

Briskness also alone proceeds from an active fermentation present, and always
implies more or less of a crude state; whence, though more agreeable, it is
more dangerous. A distinction of Wines is made into those which are apt to
affect the nerves and the head, and those which produce fever. Champaign, from
using it flowering in the cup, is very apt to intoxicate. Experienced dinkers
have a rule for this; rejecting such Champaign as retains its flower long in
the cup.

3. Strong and Weak. These are compatible with the various other qualities, but
entirely depend on the quantity of alcohol. All wines are, in some degree,
heating and inflammatory, but their property in these respects is not entirely
to be measured from the quantity of alcohol. The same quantity of Wine diluted,
intoxicates sooner than the same quantity drank in the same time without that
dilution; at least this is a common observation of drinkers. The reason seems
to be this, that the Wine, by this means, is applied to a larger surface in the
stomach, and its dilution causes a quicker diffusion over the system. Some have
endeavored to explain this from the bulk of liquor in the stomach, but I
cannot conceive it in that way. Though Wines thus diluted are, caeteris
paribus, sooner intoxicating, yet their effects are also sooner over. With
regard to the quick diffusion, it is observed, too, that the Wine which
provokes urine soonest, is also the sooner intoxicating; which proceeds plainly
from its being applied to a larger portion of the system. For whatever other
purposes Wines are wanted, either as diluent, diuretic, or antiseptic, the
weakest are always to be preferred. Wine, you will now see, like Opium, has a
double effect. In strong Wines both the stimulant and narcotic qualities are in
a high degree, and, therefore, in these, there can be no safety; but in weak
wine we are safe, because with these we can more easily stop, before the
narcotic effects are exerted.

4. Smooth and Rough. Smoothness depends on the sweetness or mellowness, except
where it is mistaken for flatness.

Roughness depends, 1. On the natural acidity and want of sugar in the juice;
2. On the unripe state of the juice. At first the fruit is of a hard cellular
texture, which is filled first in the middle with a fluid, which gradually
extends over the fruit; so that within the center is always ripest. Hence the
difference between the juice flowing spontaneously, or from the grap^s laid
above each other, from that which is expressed; for every expression gives
acerbity. 3. Roughness may depend on artificial means, as the addition of
sloes, by the vintner. 4. On the addition of husks to Must in fermentation.

Acerb Wines are grateful to the stomach, check acescency, and are astringent
over the whole of the primae viae; except when joined with much sweetness, in
which case they determine rather to the vinous than acetous process.

5. Color of Wines. Color depends very little on the juice of the grape, the
red grape, I am well assured, affording a Wine equally transparent with the
naturally white. When a red Wine is wanted, the red husks are thrown in, so
that, caeteris paribus the red Wines are more astringent. Here we are apt to be
deceived. White Wines are rejected when brown and rough, which they grow by
age; hence the merchant dies them red, in which kind of Wines such qualities
are expected. Sometimes also, the same practice is performed, from a greater
demand at market. Hence little judgment is to be drawn from the color of
Wines, without, at the same time, taking in the other sensible qualities, and
the history of the fermentation.

We should now proceed to give in detail the properties of separate Wines, but
our limited knowledge of the history of their fermentation, etc. forces us to
speak but very imperfectly upon this subject. We shall in general speak of
them, according to the country in which they are produced.

REMARKS on the WINES of different Countries.
The Wines of the Northern climates are generally of a weak body, more acid,
and of a more sharp taste, and affording a larger proportion of tartar. The
reason of their greater acidity is easily understood. With regard to the tartar
of Wines, we have not yet spoken of it. Tartar accompanies sharpness and
austerity, and thence its effects are to be understood. Though tartar be a
purgative, yet in any quantity we drink Wines, they cannot, from the tartar, be
more active, or exert their purgative quality. Their laxative virtue is owing
to the acescent Wine mixing with the bile. It has been alleged, that tartarous
Wines are apt to produce the Stone in the kidneys; but neither theory nor
experience proves this. There is not the least resemblance between the stones,
and the tartar in their nature, and Hoffman tells us, that those who drink
Rhenish Wine were rather freer of it than the others. Hence, then, the
qualities of these Wines depends chiefly on their weakness and acidity, and
from these qualities their virtues may be understood. Of this kind are the
Moselle, Rhenish, etc.

The Southern Wines are strong, sweet, and unctuous. The Hungarian Wines, e. g.
Tokay, are supposed the best at present. The Canaries, though more Southern, do
not afford Wines so rich as the former. The reason seems to be, that being
insular, the grape is exposed to the cooling breezes of the sea. Madeira is the
growth of a warm climate; but from an accidental taste, which prevails at
present, a particular management of it has been introduced. In Madeira there
are mountains upon which they can grow Wines as weak as those of the Northern
climates. These, as more acescent, are more grateful, but, at the same time,
more dangerous. In order to transportation, they have a quantity of alcohol
mixed with them, and after that, to gain a proper degree of activity, require
to be kept, for some time, in the warmer climates.

The Italian Wines, as Southern, should be strong but from their being checked
in the fermentation, are sweet and weak. They come over to us in flasks,
covered with oil, and cannot be kept above a year.

The Spanish and Portuguese Wines cannot be transported to us without brandy,
and are the most inflammatory, and least exhilarating Wines we employ.

The French Wines are certainly, with justice, preferred to the rest. They may
be considered as Northern Wines, and the best of them are produced in Northern
Provinces, the Burgundy and Champaign. The French Wines have heat enough to
give them strength, but are not exposed to such an active fermentation as the
former, and so not so apt to be combined with Brandy or Alcohol. Champaign is
in active fermentation, and not so safe as the mellow Burgundy, but this
formerly, from being imported in flasks, was never properly mellowed, and was
very heady. This practice is now prohibited, and we have a Wine less delicate,
but more safe, particularly to the nerves. Claret, as weak and acerb, and
transported without spirit, is safe in every respect.

MALT LIQUORS.
Both from want of care, and the difficulty of conducting the process of their
fermentation, these are never so perfect as Wines. They contain much
farinaceous matter, and are more nutritious than Wines; but as more acescent,
are more laxative; and, as more viscid, less diuretic.

The essential Oils are placed next in our Catalogue, but I shall defer
speaking of them till we come to the empyreumatic, under the head of
Antispasmodics, when we shall meet them again, and treat of both at once. We go
on, therefore, to

ANIMAL STIMULANTS.
As animal bodies are made up of mild and bland substances, and are themselves
of a mild nature, it cannot be expected we should have many Stimulants from the
animal kingdom. In some, perhaps in all animals, some of the secreted fluids
may be acrid, and among the evacuants such shall be mentioned. Here we are
confined to the Insect tribe, so very different from the rest.

CANTHARIDES.
The acrimony and stimulus of these, from their common external use, is
sufficiently known. So considerable is it, that internally they cannot be
given, but in small doses. In large doses their effects might appear general on
the system; but as we manage them, even in pretty large doses, they affect the
urinary passages only, very little the rest of the system. To me it seems very
curious, that thus, without affecting the primae viae, they should only exert
their action on a more distant part of the system. The reason seems to be this.
In the primae viae they are constantly and equally diffused through the whole
mass of matter contained there, which is in some measure sufficient to obviate
the effect of Cantharides, which must be given in a great measure concentrated.
In their farther progress in the blood, they are still more diffused, and
thence still unactive, but from their connection to a particular portion of the
blood; they are again collected in their concentrated form, in the kidneys, and
consequently there exert their effects. In proof that it is thus from its
dilution, it does not act on the other parts of the body, even in the kidneys,
if it is exhibited very weak. I have known half a grain of Cantharides bring on
a strangury, and yet if this same half grain was diluted in much water, e. g.
it would have no effect at all. Hence it is very difficult to dose them
properly. When carried to the kidneys, they stimulate them, prove diuretic, and
hence are recommended in dropsies. Even here their dilution may in some measure
account for their not succeeding, and if that be not the case, they then are
found sooner to affect the neck of the bladder, than to prove diuretic. Upon
the same footing, they have been used in nephritic cases. It is very doubtful
whether Diuretics there are proper at all. Surely those which are inflammatory
will be prejudicial. Any effect they exert internally, is, I imagine, from
their common enough action on the neck of the bladder and urethra. By inducing
an inflammation there, they cure Gleets. This I have formerly shown, under the
Balsamics, to be a fact, in whatever method it be explained. Whatever method
has been recommended in the Gonorrhoea benigna, has been also recommended in
the Fluor albus. ^^re, from the contiguity of the parts, it may act in the same
manner we have mentioned; but to extend that effect, the inflammation in the
urinary passages must be so great, as to make their exhibition very
inconvenient. As diruetic they may be supposed diaphoretic, and hence probably
have been recommended in cutaneous diseases, as in the Lepra by Dr. Mead. I
have seen them exhibited in this disease without any good consequence. This,
however, does not contradict their diaphoretic virtue. I imagine the Lepra is a
topical disease, yielding little to internal remedies, but chiefly to those
applied to the part, as bathing, etc. As diuretic and diaphoretic, Cantharides
have been supposed pectoral. The only case of this kind, in which I know they
have been tried, is the Chin-cough, in which Dr. Burton proposed them. As in
the same composition was joined the Bark and Camphire to correct the
Cantharides, I easily saw the Bark was the substance on whose virtue the
medicine depended, and therefore used it alone. Other practitioners of my
acquaintance took the prescription as it stood, and found themselves exposed to
all the inconveniences of Cantharides, without obtaining any other good effect
than what was got by the Bark alone. These, then, are the virtues of
Cantharides, which you see are very precarious. As to their effects on the
skin, we must take notice of them when we come to other substances which
possess the same property.

As to the manner of exhibiting Cantharides several doubts have arisen, which
seem still to remain. As to the ancient opinion, of the several parts of the
fly being mutual antidotes, that I disregard, and cannot at present decide. A
more important disquisition is, to determine whether they ought to be given in
substance or solution. In substance they may possibly be given in larger
quantity, be gradually extracted, and gradually (and perhaps more successfully)
diffused over the system. On the other hand, they are so easily extracted, that
we cannot trust much to this; and possibly the common method of giving them in
solution answers better. For the watery or spirituous menstruum answers equally
well. In what substance, whether resinous or gummy, their virtues consist, is
not decided; neither, indeed, is it accurately of any other animal or vegetable
substance; neither is it known whether solution does not decompound them. With
regard to all the dose is undetermined. This must depend on the state of the
body, on the greater quantity of mucus in the kidney, the quantity of urine
naturally secreted, or at the particular time in which Cantharides are given.
We should begin with small doses, as five drops, etc. and increase them, till
once they affect the urinary passages. The simple London Tincture is preferable
to the Edinburgh, in which, indeed, the substances added agree with the
intention, but in the present form cannot be given in such quantity as to have
any effect.

MILLEPEDES.
These insects seem to contain a stimulus of the same undetermined nature as
Cantharides, to which they are vastly inferior in power. For their ascribed
virtues I refer you to writers. I have seen them, for sufficiently long time,
exhibited in the Chlorosis and Scrophula, but was never able to perceive their
salutary consequence. Sensible effects they had none at all.

COCCINELLA.
These insects are likely to continue of importance in dying. In medicine they
have no remarkable qualities. They have been called diaphoretic and sudorific,
but very large doses are required to produce these effects. They are only
employed for coloring our formulae.

We have now finished our list of particular Stimulants, and come to the
general titles added at the end.

1. NUTRIENTIA, as STIMULANTS.
Whatever increases motion may be considered as stimulant. These, as adding
strength to the solids, increase their oscillations, and more as increasing the
circulating fluids, and consequently the tension. But their chief effects, as
stimulant, is in their action on the stomach. In the hypochondriac, hysteric,
arthritic, nephritic diseases, etc. such Stimuli are often necessary; in the
haemorrhagic, feverish, etc. such are hurtful.

2. ASRINGENTS as STIMULANTS.
I have formerly explained the notion of these, as Tonics, not so much inducing
contraction, but increasing the firmness and tension of the part. This will
give a brisker action to the vessels in propelling of the fluids, in overcoming
resistance in their way, and resolving obstructions. We find all this effected
from the most simple Astringents; but a question arises, whether the Astringent
and Aromatic joined would not be more useful? I imagine, where the system is
not affected with Fever, it would. But there are cases where the Aromatic and
Astringent would be hurtful, e. g. in Vernal Intermittents there is often
joined an inflammatory diathesis. Here it may be doubted whether the Peruvian
Bark, which joins together the Aromatic Bitter and Astringent, should be
exhibited. It should be examined whither the simple Astringents would not be
preferable. Such subtilties do no harm, provided we are not too much addicted
to them in practice.

3. SEDATIVES as STIMULANTS.
These are pretty universally, in their first operation, stimulant, and very
often their stimulant qualities affect the action of the heart and vessels.

4. ANTISPASMODICS as STIMULANTS.
The same may be said with regard to these, being in their first operation
stimulant; and a question will afterward occur, whether as Antispasmodics,
they do not act as Stimulants? As such, many of them have been set down in the
list of Stimulants.

5. ACIDS as STIMULANTS.
Though the effects of these be sedative, yet they, like other Sedatives, are
probably stimulant in their first operation. With more confidence have I marked

6. ALKALINES as STIMULANTS.
Which, in every respect, are stimulant, but not to be considered in that view
alone.

7. NEUTRALS as STIMULANTS.
These are more obviously stimulant than Acids, but are attended with the same
sedative power.

SEDATIVA.
Sedatives are such substances as diminish motions in the system, and the force
of the moving power. There is a distinction between these two, which is not
easy to be made, seeing we suppose the last always to take place. Sedatives may
either diminish motion in a part, or in the whole of the system. In this view,
blood-letting is a Sedative, as taking off tension; but at present I am only to
consider such Sedatives as act particularly upon our nervous power, which can,
by medicines, have its mobility entirely destroyed. Their operation on the
nervous system is not easy to determine, and as to their ultimate effect, I
shall not endeavor to explain it. We know very little of the nervous power,
having nothing analogous to it in nature, at least nothing exhibiting analogous
effects; for though the powers of the sensitive plant seem somewhat of the same
nature, yet they give us no analogy with regard to the operation of medicines.
However, by enquiring into this subject, we may discover some laws of the
nervous system, and discuss some questions which have arisen on this subject.

The first question we shall take notice of is, Whether the action of Sedatives
be mediate or immediate? From my definition you will see I have assumed the
last, but others are of a different opinion. It is commonly supposed, that the
motion of the several parts of the body depend on an influx derived from the
Sensorium. This once being given, we can easily suppose, that when the blood is
rarefied, and distending the vessels of the brain, it may compress the origin
of the nerves, and impede the influx of the nervous power. Hence some have
imagined, that Sedatives act by rarifying the blood. Others again have adopted
a contrary opinion, viz. that Sedatives act by inducing a coagulation or
viscosity in the blood, whence the secretion in the brain is destroyed. We may
discuss both these opinions together; 1. We conclude Sedatives do not act
mediately, from the smallness of the dose required to produce their effect, no
medicine in such small quantity acting on our fluids, except in the way of a
ferment. 2. Sedatives act after the circulation is taken away, and Dr. Whytt
has shown, that after the heart is taken out, Opium has the same effect as
before, in stopping the motion of the system, which banishes altogether the
notion of Sedatives acting on the blood. 3. Farther, the quick operation of
some poisons shows, that medicines, confined to the stomach, can act on the
nervous powers, and be extended over the system, without any absorption into
the blood. I need not here mention experiments where these effects have ensued,
and the medicine been found to constrict both its orifices. Whether the
effects, on the nervous system does not produce changes in the fluids, I shall
not deny. It is that probably which has given rise to the mistake.

The immediate action of Sedatives on the nervous power being proved, we
proceed to a second question, viz. Whether Sedatives act on the nerves to which
they are applied, or whether more directly on the Sensorium commune? Although
we acknowledge a Sensorium commune, or prime mover, yet I think it is
sufficiently proved, that the nervous power is present in every part of the
animal body during life; and that, independent of any new afflux, a motion may
be excited; and therefore Sedatives act primarily on the part to which they are
applied. There are enough of experiments to show, that the heart, separated
from the body, retains its mobility for some time after the separation, will
even palpitate of itself, can have its motion renewed by Stimuli, and its
mobility destroyed by Sedatives* it is probable, then, the Sedatives act on the
part to which they are applied, and thence propagate their effects to other
parts of the nervous system, most easily to the Sensorium commune. It has been
asked, whether Sedatives act on the stomach? there is no doubt of it; but these
effects appear in those parts which consent most with the stomach, and most
easily in the common origin.

Sedatives, acting on the Sensorium commune, exert their power in two ways; 1.
In destroying the mobility of the nervous fluid there, and so destroying its
afflux to the rest of the system; 2. By destroying the mobility in the extreme
parts, and so making a resistance to the impulse from the Sensorium commune,
and consequently making it incapable to receive impression. I can see instances
where it is proper to make this distinction. Thus I think cold undoubtedly acts
on the extreme nerves, destroys the mobility in these, and at last shuts up the
Sensorium commune itself.

In order to the universal action of Sedatives in the system, their effects
must be exerted in the Sensorium commune. But here such effects are found to be
very unequal, the reason of which we must now endeavor to explain. This
difference of effect seems to be varied, 1. according to the proximity of the
part; 2. According to the Stimulus to which it is exposed; 3. According to the
habit induced.

1. According to the distance from the Sensorium commune. The effect of
Sedatives, in large doses, very often appears in pa^^y of the lower
extremities. These, in the experiments on Opium, were found the first to come
on, and the last to disappear The connection of this sentence with the
foregoing seems not very evident, and, indeed, the reasoning of the whole
paragraph obscure. Upon a comparison with different copies, this seems to be
the meaning: The nervous power is, cae^eris paribus, weakest in those parts
which are most distant from the Sensorium commune. Hence, whenever any cause
operates on the Sensorium in such a manner as to diminish its influence on the
rest of the body, the effects will appear most evident in the extremities, as
being the parts which, on account of their distance, have the slight^^
connection with it. Thus Sedatives show their action by inducing a Palsy of the
lower extremities. But the reverse is true in the case of medicines that excite
and increase the action of the Sensorium upon the body. Here the parts situated
nearest to the Sensorium commune soonest partake of its affections. From this
consideration, we are furnished with a method of terminating a dispute among
authors concerning the nature of Convulsions. It has been a subject of
controversy, whether they arise from affections of the Sensorium only; or from
irritations of particular portions of the nervous system, made in the different
parts of the body? Both cases, in my opinion, occur, and are to be
distinguished; in the one, by the Convulsion beginning in the extremities, and
gradually spreading over the different parts, till they reach the Sensorium; in
the other, by the Convulsions beginning in the muscles of the face, and
extending from thence to the rest of the body. The rest of the paragraph is
easy and clear.
. We know whether the action be on the Sensorium commune, or extremities, by
the convulsive motions appearing first in the head and extending to the
extremities and e contra. To this head of distance, I imagine, is to be imputed
the effects of Sedatives on the secretories, in suppressing secretions; because
these are situated in the extreme vessels every where, and therefore have their
moving power effected sooner than the heart. The secretory system to me appears
to be a distinct portion from that of the heart and vessels, though contiguous
to them, for they are very often differently affected. Nerves enter into the
secretory organs, which are not continued from those of the vessels; each
particular secretory has Stimuli, that act in a particular manner upon it,
without affecting the system of vessels: Motion is sometimes destroyed in the
secretories, without affecting the heart and vessels: The principal stimulus to
the secretories is that on their excretories, by which not only the excretion,
but the secretion is increased, without affecting the rest of the system; as in
sucking, or even handling a nurse's nipples, by which not only will the
excretion for the time be increased, but the secretion afterward. Again, in
the increased action of the heart and vessels there is no secretion but that of
sweat increased. All these distinct effects are to be observed, and perhaps are
depending on the head we are now treating of.

This paragraph is intended to prove, that the action of Sedatives on any part
is always varied in proportion to the degree of Stimulus to which that part is
exposed. This it does pretty clearly; but there are several things in it, of
which I cannot discern the connection with the rest of the subject. I have,
therefore, copied this paragraph from another manuscript, which, though
likewise obscure, may, perhaps, serve to make it somewhat more plain.

The inequality of the action of Sedatives likewise depends upon the degree of
Stimulus to which the parts are exposed. Thus the heart and lungs are
constantly exposed to Stimulus; in consequence of which their actions are but
little affected by Sedatives operating on the Sensorium commune, while those of
the rest of the system are destroyed. Authors, indeed, have endeavored to
explain this effect from the different source of the nerves here affected. They
tell us, that the nerves, by which the vital functions are carried on, arise
from the Cerebellum; while those which govern the other functions are derived
immediately from the Brain. Whether this explanation might not be urged with
some degree of plausibility in the case of Apoplexy, is a different question;
but surely in the case of sleep, and in the action of Sedatives, no reason can
be assigned, why an affection of the one can subsist without that of the other.
Add to this, that Dr. Haller has demonstrated that the nerves of the vital
functions are not, as was generally supposed, distinct from those of the rest
of the system; and you will hardly require any thing further to persuade you,
that the explanation we have delivered is by much the more probable, viz. that
a Stimulus being constantly applied to the vital organs, and only occasionally
to the voluntary ones, the latter are much more readily and considerably
affected than the former. From hence it follows, that whenever we would wish to
have the full effect of any sedative medicine, care should be taken that every
thing which acts on the organs of sense, every thought which affects the
involuntary motion, should be removed. It may be doubted, indeed, how far this
last is practicable. It has been alleged that the soul always thinks. Not to
enter into the subtilty of this dispute, we may content ourselves with
alleging, that we are not conscious of it, at least, in healthful sleep.
Dreams occur only in consequence of Stimuli, and hence do not so frequently
happen in the first part of sleep, as toward the latter end, when, from a
retention of the several secretions, an accumulation takes place, which gives
the Stimulus. Of dreams there subsists all the possible degrees that can take
place between the system's being perfectly awake, and buried in the most
profound sleep. Of the slightest kind, or those which recede least from a state
of perfect wakefulness, are the Somnambulantes. It is remarkable with what
steadiness they perform their actions. The reason of which is, that their
attention is not distracted by a number of objects, as in the time of
wakefulness; besides, being ignorant of the dangerous situation in which they
frequently are, they are wholly divested of fear, and, therefore, pay a calm
and undisturbed attention to the thing about which they happen to be employed.

But for the most part dreams are extravagantly wild and incoherent. That they
generally bear some conformity to our waking thoughts is acknowledged, and this
happens so frequently, that when we cannot discern it, we ought nevertheless to
suppose it. For our thoughts in dreams not depending on the action of bodies on
our external senses, but on internal Stimuli, those ideas will generally be
excited, of which there are at that time the strongest impressions in the mind.
These are such as have been the subject of our contemplation the preceding day,
which, being more recent, may be supposed to have their impression much clearer
and stronger than any other. But then they are irregularly and extravagantly
combined; because that power, by which the mind thinks and judges clearly,
requires for its exertion a free and undisturbed Sensorium, which in dreams,
being partly free and partly obstructed, occasions this irregularity. This
partial obstruction is likewise the cause of the incoherence of our ideas in
delirium, which differs from dreams in this, that here the organs of sense are
awake. We have commonly thought the application of a Stimulus to the brain
sufficient to excite a delirium; but we shall afterward see, that this will
not do without an obstruction of the Sensorium. And accordingly we more
frequently cure a delirium by means that remove the obstruction, than those
that take off the Stimulus. The conformity between the copies is now so great,
that I have omitted to copy the rest of this paragraph.


2. The effects of Sedatives, or other medicines acting on the Sensorium,
depend on the exposure of the parts to stimulus. Thus the heart and lungs have
their motions entire, while those of the rest of the system are destroyed. It
has been said, that the nerves of these differ, and that in such cases those of
the former are not affected. In Apoplexy this last may be sometimes the case;
but surely in the case of sleep, and of sedative medicines, no such difference
is to be observed; and besides, Dr. Haller has demonstrated, that the nerves of
the animal and vital functions are the same, and not distinct as was imagined.
Much more properly is the continuation of motion in these to be ascribed to the
Stimulus to which they are exposed. Accordingly we see, that this effect is not
confined to the heart and lungs, but extended to other parts, in proportion to
the Stimulus to which they are exposed. Thus any part of the alimentary canal
can be brought into action from the Stimulus of the food, and, in short, by
such means, any one part can be kept in motion independent of any other part,
notwithstanding the action of Sedatives, or of sleep, and all this from the
stimulus applied to it. Thus, in order to the action of sleep, or Sedatives,
every thing which acts on the organs of sense, every thought which affects the
organs of voluntary motion, must be removed. Whether the soul always thinks, we
cannot determine, at least we are not conscious of it in healthful sleep.
Dreams always occur in consequence of stimuli applied to particular parts, and
hence, in the first part of sleep, they are not so apt to occur as in the
morning, when accumulation gives stimulus. It is no wonder that the mind,
occupied during the day, retains the impression of the stimuli it received at
night, and therefore as we see dreams always depending upon stimulus, where
such cannot be observed, we must suppose them. Again, the body can be in any
degree of waking; and it is thus we must account for the Somnambulantes. The
steadiness of motion in such cases depends on the mind not being sensible to
other impressions, or stimuli, because there is a total absence of fear, and
therefore a more exact and undisturbed attention to the action we perform. I
should have taken notice of the incoherence of our thoughts in dreams. That
association of Ideas on which judgment is formed, depends on the whole
Sensorium being ^ree. When this, therefore, is at rest in one part, and awake
in another, wildness of thought must necessarily follow. Hence we can
understand the nature of delirium, in which, in oppsition to sleep, the
greatest part of the organs of sense, and the voluntary motions, can be
performed, but in which there is an obstruction in the Sensorium commune. The
incoherence of ideas in delirium depends upon the same cause as in sleep. We
have commonly imagined delirium owing to a stimulus applied to the brain, but
we shall afterward see that this will not do without resistance, and
accordingly we see delirium oftener removed by taking off the resistance, than
by taking off the stimulus; by Antispasmodics than by blood-letting. It is on
the stimulus taken off that depends the cessation of secretion and excretion,
for these are always excited by the action of stimuli on the motion of the
neighboring parts, etc. Hence we easily see how a Salivation is slopt by sleep
and a Diarrhoea from the same, taking off the action of the parts, and
diminishing the flow of the gastric and intestinal liquors, etc. The secretion
is stopped at the same time, in so far as it depends on the excretion, as it
often does.

The excretion of urine depends on the quantity pressing on the neck of the
bladder, and perhaps on the stimulus given by it. This bears a curious
application. A small stone falling into the neck of the bladder, by its
irritation not allowing a sufficient quantity of urine to be collected for
dilating the neck of the bladder, hinders its own expulsion; Opium given here
cures the complaint, by taking off, for a time, the mind from the irritation,
causing an accumulation of urine, which, when the effects of the Opium are
gone, by dilating the neck of the bladder, etc. expels the stone.

3. According to habit are the effects of Sedatives varied. Every motion may
become habitual, and then acquire a greater force. From this, as well as the
stimulus applied, are the lungs, etc. less affected than the rest of the
system. All periodical motions are difficult to remove, and hence it is that
Opium has a much greater effect at bedtime, than at any other hour, and this
should give us a caution both in the exhibiting Sedatives and Stimulants, which
should always be given at the time when the motion or cessation usually
occurred, if we want to induce these. It has been thought dangerous to exhibit
Opiates during the menstrual flux, even although spasmodic motions should occur
at that time; but I have found that Opiates may very safely be given in such
cases, and even as taking off the spasmodic affections I have ^ound them to
increase the excretion. However, I must own that in such cases caution is
required. Sedatives are often useful in preventing the power of morbid habits,
and, given before the fit of an Intermittent, I have seen them entirely prevent
it.

All this explains the inequality of the effects of Sedatives on different
parts.

I would also consider what we have said as applyig to sleep.

PARTICULAR SEDATIVES.
Particular Sedatives are of various kinds, and we are not acquainted with all
of them, and therefore, whether the operation of all is the same, or indeed
analogous, we shall not determine, but observe as far as we may.

Opposite to Numb. 1. is inserted Sedativa strictious dicta.

At a the title Rhaeades. Most of the genera comprehended under this natural
order are seemingly of the same virtues. The only one we employ in medicine for
its sedative powers, is the Papaver, which I set down as a general title. From
the spontaneous exudations of this is got

OPIUM.
With regard to the different kinds, and extraction of this, I refer you to Dr.
Alston's paper in the Medical Essays. Opium is one of the most important
articles of Materia Medica; a medicine of such considerable power, that it may
prove deleterious, and destroy the system altogether; and therefore always
requiring great caution of exhibition. Not only have the ancients disputed
whether it was cold or hot, but we are at this moment disputing whether it acts
chiefly as a Stimulant, or whether in any case it acts directly as a Sedative.(
Vid. Tralles on Opium.) These doubts probably arise from the effects of Opium
being mixed, and proving different, according to the dose, the ^ime of
exhibition, and the state of the patient. To throw some light upon this
subject, I shall lay before you the phenomenon which appear on the exhibition
of Opium. This I take to be the most difficult part of my task, as these
effects are much diversified. I shall only mention the general appearances,
which occur on the exhibition of Opium in a proper dose, avoiding the
specialities which may occur from use, etc. The effects are these. Opium given
to a healthy person, not accustomed to it, seems to produce no such effects,
but is in its primary operation, whether in large or small doses, directly
sedative. Whether it may have different effects in diseased persons, or whether
it may not be very much diversified by different diseases, are questions that
remain to be decided by experience.
First, a frequency of pulse, after which the body is sensibly warmed,
generally with a redness and flushing of the countenance. While these effects
proceed, a serenity of mind ensues, and a lively imagination, which, when it
occurs, is almost constantly of the cheerful and pleasurable kind. To these in
particular persons often succeed chagrin, irritability, and irrascibility. By
the time that these become remarkable, the senses appear imperfect, the
imagination false, and directly a delirium takes place, and intoxication. The
imperfection of the senses proceeds to a total want of sensibility, which end
in stupor and appearance of sleep. Under this sleep the pulse is pretty
constantly full and frequent, though varying in different persons. During the
sleep a sweat takes place, while the other secretions are sensibly diminished.
After this the person is awaked, and, if no other stimulus takes place, he is
attended with a sense of coldness and weakness. Such is the series of the
phenomenon, which plainly points out a mixture of S^^mulant and Sedative.
These, as I said, will vary in different persons, according to the dose. From
this mixture of the stimulant and sedative properties the whole may be
explained. 1. The stimulant power is exerted on the heart and larger vessels,
whence the frequency of pulse, heat, and flushing. Next the stimulant power is
exerted on the Sensorium commune. I must be content here to say, and it may be
demonstrated, that a free flow through the Sensorium commune is always attended
with serenity of mind, in opposition to chagrin, and that on the same free and
equitable flow depends the lively, the cheerful, and pleasurable imagination.
These are the effects of the stimulant power, except such as proceed from it in
a secondary way. As the sedative power takes place, demonstrable changes
follow, partly arising from the increased resistance to the Sensorium commune,
partly from the increased circulation producing tone and irritation, partly
from the imperfect sense, and false imagination. It is difficult to give an
account of the reason of gaiety or sullenness in different persons, and
therefore we shall neglect it. The sedative still mixing with the stimulant
power, as in other cases, so here produces delirium, which here, beside the
resistance given to the nervous power by the sedative, the stimulant still
subsisting, is owing also partly to the false imagination. More directly owing
to the sedative power are the Stupor and Sleep. During the Sleep, the fullness
of the pulse is owing to the accumulation in the larger vessels, and the laxity
induced in them, the frequency of the pulse to the stimulus of the Opium still
subsisting unsubdued by the sedative power. The same sedative power weakens the
powers of sense and voluntary motion, by weakening the energy of the sensorium.
The secretions are diminished from the distance, except sweat, which depends on
increased circulation.

From the sedative power prevailing, langour, coldness, weakness, and headache.
If the stimulant power prevail, recurrence of fever, inflammation and pain,
especially if any other stimuli are urgent in the system.

From what we have said, the effects (good and bad) of Opium may be understood.
It is easy to see, that from the stimulant power of Opium, it may be an
excellent cordial, though at the same time, when the stimulant power is great,
or other stimuli subsist in the system, it will produce Fever and Inflammation.
On the contrary, by its sedative power, it may be even used to correct motion,
except in the heart and vessels; that is, in fever. As its sedative power may
destroy motion entirely, so also, in particular cases, we may comprehend how it
will induce debility. These are the principles upon which may be understood in
what manner Opium is hurtful or salutary in different diseases. However, I
shall proceed a little farther in detail.

I choose first to begin with the anodyne qualities of Opium as tending to
explain the rest. Pain may be considered as of three kinds, arising from three
different causes, viz. Distension, Spasm, and Irritation; from Distension, more
especially of the inflammatory kind, as the Pleurisy; from Spasm, more
frequently in the alimentary canal, as in Cholic; from Irritation, or acrid
Stimulants applied, as in Cancers.

1. In pain from inflammatory Distension. As Opium, in its first operation,
increases the circulation and impetus of the blood, and even in its last
accumulates the blood in the larger vessels, and thus brings a stimulus to the
heart, it must increase inflammatory distension. When given in such a large
dose as to lull the senses, as that its sedative effects do take place, yet as
not removing the inflammatory distension, or its cause, and as producing an
accumulation in the larger vessels, and as thus causing a severer return of the
pains, it must be hurtful in this way also. In inflammatory diseases, which
depend for their solution on a particular excretion, as in the Pleurisy, Opium,
by checking this, prevents the only safe and salutary crisis of the disease.
From all this it is easily understood, why Opium is hurtful in inflammatory
pains. But there are some inflammatory diseases, which, though founded on an
inflammatory diathesis, are apt to turn chronic, as the Rheumatism. The acute
Rheumatism is always an inflammatory disease; the chronic much oftener than is
imagined, and to be cured by the antiphlogistic method; so that the use of
Opium, in this disease, must at best be doubtful. This will perhaps clear it
up. In the absence of fever, in pain of long standing, and confined to a
particular part, Opium may be employed for a temporary relief; but in no one
instance does it contribute to the cure; nay, even in pains of the longest
standing, and confined to the most single part, it will often be hurtful, by
increasing the irritation; which gives us great caution as to the free use of
it in such cases. It may be applied to a particular part with more safety. This
I imagine to be some foundation for the external use of the Cicuta being found
of benefit in chronic Rheumatisms. There is one instance of the external
application of Opium having good effect, viz. in the Toothache, which is a pain
of the rheumatic kind, sometimes arising from inflammatory Distension,
sometimes from Irritation. In the last, it is often useful, applied to the
nerves of the part. Whether in the pure rheumatic Toothache it should be
employed, I am not certain. I have seen it of service by destroying the nerves
of the part. To this head of inflammatory Distension must be referred the use
of Opium in the Gout. The pains occuring in the extremities, in this disease,
are certainly of the inflammatory kind, and therefore Opium may be supposed to
increase these, which indeed I have seen it do, though in so far it is safe, as
the health of the body depends on this inflammation. Whether we ought to
proceed further, and take off the pain, has been much disputed. The founder
practitioners, as Sydenham, are justly of opinion, that the more violent the
pain the shorter is its duration, and less hurtful to the system. If the pain
be so violent as to overcome all patience, they admit Opium may be given;
burden it is very justly added, that it is always with danger of the disease
attacking other parts more violently; and I myself have seen instances of it.
The rule then is this, that Opium ought not to be employed at the attack of the
Gout, no^ even at the height of the disease, except some violent symptom ensue
from mere irritation of pain. When the pains are gone, it may be given, but
then, as weakening the tone of the stomach, it debilitates that power upon
which depends the healthy termination of the Gout. However, I must confess,
that at the end of the disease, I have often seen good effects follow from it,
restoring the patient soon to health, and preventing many an uneasy night. I
have known also some who obtained the same effects from taking to a course of
spirituous liquors immediately after the removal of the pains. I imagine, then,
that if the stimulant effect of the Opium take place here without much of the
sedative, and at the same time as sweat is promoted, that the Opium will act
chiefly as a strengthener.

To this head of inflammatory Distension must be referred a species of it, viz.
that which occurs in Suppuration, an immediate consequence of Inflammation, but
different from the first stage of it, of which we have spoken. The use of Opium
here may be thought a contradiction to what we have said, but there is
certainly a difference between this and Inflammation, although we do not know
on what that difference depends. Practice shows, that the pains arising from
Suppuration are not only properly and safely allayed, but the Suppuration
itself promoted by Opium. Certainly upon this is the use founded of Opium in
the Small Pox. Did not experience and our own practice make it very evident, we
might know, from that of Sydenham, the use of Opium in this disease; though,
indeed, long ago it was employed by the Arabians, in the same intention. Some
doubts have lately arisen with regard to Sydenham's practice in this disease.
It has been observed, that Opium produced Costiveness and Fever, diminishing
the secretions, and increasing the distension and determination to the head.
With many, these doubts have checked the use of Opium in the Smallpox
altogether. Sydenham takes no precaution to obviate the effects mentioned, and
certainly there are some cases where the Costiveness produced by Opium in the
Smallpox has, as I have seen, been of advantage. But the better, more safe,
and now more common practice is, to obviate the Costiveness by emollient
clysters during the whole suppuratory state, and in this way is suppuration
promoted by the use of Opium, and all bad effects avoided in this disease. Some
are so fond, on the other hand, of Opium in the Smallpox, that they give it in
the purely inflammatory state, in the eruptive Fever; but I h^^^ always found
it hurtful here, and, in general, I think it ought never to be given before the
fifth or sixth evening after the attack. As to the secondary Fever of the
Smallpox, it is often inflammatory, and we want to obtain a diarrhoea in it,
so that here the use of Opium is very absurd. Even where there were the
strongest symptoms of determination to the brain and delirium, or what he
improperly calls Phrenitis, Sydenham gave doses of Opium till he overcame that
symptom. There are other analogous cases, where the symptoms, which are apt to
alarm from the use of Opium, are only to be taken off by a larger exhibition of
it. We now come,

2. To the use of Opium in pains arising from Spasms. These are most
effectually in all cases cured by Opium. At all times there have been disputes
about the virtues of extraordinary medicines. While Hecquet, at Paris, carries
the use of Opium to an extravagant length; on the other hand, the Stahlians
will not admit it at all; saying it operates merely as a palliative, without
removing the cause. Most manifestly here it has a different effect, not only
removing the sense of pain, but also its cause. Spasms only subsist in
consequence of an unequal distribution of the nervous power, and therefore are
to be cured from Stimulants, or Sedatives exhibited. Of what use Opium is in
curing Spasms, appears from its being the only successful remedy in those
violent spasmodic affections, the Tetanos and Opisthotonos, which occur in the
warmer climates, as you can see from the accounts of Chambers and Hillary. I
therefore take it to be a rule, that in all spasmodic affections, and in all
pains produced by them, which are not attended with an inflammatory effect,
Opium is not only innocent, but necessary, both as a Sedative and Simulant. We
shall here proceed a little in detail. There is no part so liable to spasmodic
affections as the alimentary canal, where Opium will not only be useful, as
acting on the system in general, but as here being applied to the morbid part,
and therefore is Opium so efficacious in all cases of Cholics. Spasms in the
alimentary canal may arise from a great variety of causes, which sometimes
point out a different method of exhibition; though none of them exclude the use
of our medicine entirely. To be a little more particular. Spasms of the
intestines are sometimes of the hysteric kind, sometimes of the hypochondriac,
and frequently pass for one or other of these, when they are properly
arthritic. In other cases they are connected with the haemorrhoidal flux,
either attending the Molimen haemorrhoidaeum, or arising in consequence of
haemorrhoidal suppression. In like manner they attend the menstrual flux,
happening at the time of its invasion, subsisting, or suppression. Frequently
they are owing to repelled eruptions from the surface of the body, frequently
to irritations on particular parts, as in the Nephritis, where the fit
generally extends over the whole of the intestines. In stones in the biliary
duct, Spasms are often supposed to proceed from the intestines themselves, but
very often they are owing to consent with the duct Spasms producing pain and
anxiety in the intestines have been known to proceed from violent venereal
inclinations.
. Often Spasms arise from various irritations, as in the Hernia; often from
poisons of the Saturnine and Arsenical kind, whence the Saturnine Cholic;
although we might equally distinguish the Arsenical, or those from irritations
in the guts themselves, in consequence of worms. Spasms also arise from various
acrimonies in the primae viae. The bile is commonly accused, though very often
Spasms arise from acidities, or crudities, occasioning its greater flow, and
from other irritations, as hardened excrements, etc. All these are idiopathic.
They have been distinguished into different kinds, the Bilious Cholic, Iliac
Passion, Colica Pictonum, or Dry Belly-ach, etc. To all these we may add,
Inflammation. In the whole of these, except the last, the cure is generally
sounded on Opium. In the different species of Cholic, varieties arise, which
give somewhat different indications, and point out the joining of other
substances with the Opium; for in some (...) it is an absolute cure, in others
only a palliative. In all the cases mentioned Opium is useful, and may be an
entire cure, except where Costiveness is to be overcome, acrid matter or
hardened faeces to be evacuated. But this exception is by no means so strong as
has been imagined, and even where acrid matter and hardened faeces are to be
subdued, Opium may be employed. Thus in Diarrhoeas and Choleras, where the
evacuation of the acrid matter is very proper, we must not proceed too long
with this evacuation, but generally, in such cases where they are violent, must
quiet the spasms for some time, and defer the evacuation. The case is much
stronger in hardened faeces. Opium certainly produces a slow action of the
peristaltic motion, and costiveness; but this costiveness in the Ileus, e. g.
and Colica Pictonum, depends upon spasms, without allaying of which the faeces
cannot be expelled, and, in effect, we see purgatives often do no good without
Opium. Nay, there are many instances, and I myself have seen of them, where
Opium has procured an evacuation without the purgatives. But the Opium and the
purgative may be given at the same time, and experience proves, that though it
does check the operation of the purgative, it does more than compensate for
that, by taking off the spasms. Now I see that practitioners are agreed, that
in the Ileus and Dry Bellyach, we ought not to wait till the evacuation is
procured, but should give the Opium at first, and the purgatives directly
afterward, or very often simul et semel. Nothing has misled us more, than
supposing the Ileus always attended with inflammation. If, indeed, we can see
undoubted signs of it, the hard frequent pulse, fixed pains, etc. we should
stop the exhibition of the Opium. But even with these we are often deceived,
and the sudden operation in such cases, and cure produced by the Opium, have
evinced, that no Inflammation took place. Often in the Ileus, and intus
susception arises from Spasms, and inflammation is only in consequence of that.
If you look into writers, as De Haen and Hillary, you will find the use of
Opiates well established in the Colica Pictonum. I cannot enter into a detail
upon this head, but this general rule may suffice, that except in so far as
inflammation may check its use altogether, or in so far as hardened faeces
require its exhibition to be deferred, or to be joined with purgatives, there
is no case in which the Opium is not of service. We shall here, however,
mention particularly the spasmodic pains of the stomach, distinct from those of
the intestines, and often arising from acidity, arthritic, hysteric, and
hypochondriac affections. Opium certainly may be employed in these, as well as
the other cases, but in the three last, as the Diathesis still remains in the
system, as Opium is apt to induce a habit, as the fit is often apt to secur, as
Opium, by weakening the stomach, tends to make that recurrence more frequent,
it is very doubtful whether, in all cases, such spasmodic affections of the
stomach should be checked by this remedy. It would be much better, except where
the utmost violence of pain forces the use of Opium, to use riding on
horseback. If Opiates are necessary, they should be mixed with Antispasmodics,
or the stimulant Aromatics formerly mentioned, though even with these there is
the same danger of habit and weakening as with the Opium. Here many would
proceed by Evacuants, as the fit often arises from crudities, and it is on this
footing that vomiting has been prescribed. But there is the same objection to
Emetics as to Opium, that they do not take off the cause; and besides I have
seen the tone of the stomach entirely destroyed by their use. Upon the whole,
then, in cardialgic pains, there is no one remedy to be depended upon, or
always to be continued, but sometimes we must use Evacuants, sometimes warm
Aromatics and Antispasmodics, and in more violent cases Opiates.

We shall now say somewhat of Spasms in the other abdominal viscera. 1. As to
Spasms in the Uterus; these may be of three kinds, 1. at the menstrual period;
for beside those mentioned to occur in the alimentary canal at that time, they
also take place in the Uterus; 2. more manifestly they occur at the flow of the
Lochiae, in what we call grinding pains; 3. there are cases where spasmodic
pains of the Uterus accompany childbirth. In all these Opium is the only
effectual remedy. We have already mentioned, under Sedatives in general, that
in those pains which precede or accompany the menstrual flux, Opium not only
takes off these pains, but, so far from checking the salutary excretion,
promotes the free flow. In the grinding pains Opium is also an effectual cure,
except where, from any hurt given in delivery, a pain from inflammatory
distension is produced, and then we must use it with greater caution. With
regard to the pains which accompany birth itself, these are often of the
spasmodic kind, and commonly called false pains. It is now an established rule,
that Opium takes off these, without hindering the salutary to ensue, and
therefore in all Spasms of the Uterus, is Opium useful, except where they are
accompanied with inflammation. I forg^t to mention, in talking of the grinding
pains, that by long continuance they are apt to induce an inflammatory
diathesis, and in such state of them, Opium must be exhibited with very great
caution. 2. As to the use of Opium in Spasms of the urinary passages, the
kidneys, ureters, and bladder; pains arising from affections of the urinary
passages are commonly supposed to proceed from stones sticking in the tubuli
urini^eri, ureters, or neck of the bladder, and consequently from inflammatory
distension; but often also they proceed from Spasms, and there is no other
method of accounting for the great pain produced by small stones in the
ureters, such stones as would easily pass through them, but from their
irritation producing a Spasm which hinders their passage; and hence we must
account for the effect Opium is found to have in expeding the evacuation of
sand and gravel in nephritic cases. But constantly here we must have in our eye
this exception, that whenever the pulse is hard, whenever the person is young
and plethoric, we must use bleeding to take off the inflammation, and
fomentations to the part. With respect to small stones at the head of the
urethra, we have already spoken under Sedatives in general. 3. As to icteric
Spasms from stones in the Ductus choledochus, I think we frequently see cases
where the Spasms in this duct are the cause of obstruction and regurgitation of
the bile. The only perfect cure, in such cases, is, from the stones causing the
Spasm being dropped out into the intestines. Probably here, as in the case of the
ureter, the passage is more slow from the spasmodic affections of the duct, and
therefore, in these icteric pains, Opium may be of service, by obviating the
irritation, dulling the sense of the duct, and allowing its dilatation.

We next come to talk of the use of Opium in spasmodic affections of the
thorax. Perhaps there may be some variety in these. The heart itself is subject
to Spasm, at least to palpitation and spasmodico-convulsive motions, but these
are not to be cured by opiates. The Lungs are, of the thoracic viscera, most
frequently subject to Spasms, but these are often without pain, and perhaps I
should have made a head of spasmodic affections without pain; but as they are
so few, I shall comprehend them under this head. Opium, as increasing the
action of the heart, and accelerating the circulation through the lungs, must
make the breathing more difficult, and more frequent, and therefore the
practice with it in asthmatic cases, had been supposed very nice. I think this
may be in such cases a general rule, that in all cases of pure Spasm, Opium is
useful; in all cases of infarction hurtful. The spasmodic periodic Asthma is
often of a mixed kind, attended with infarction, and terminating by
expectoration; so that here the Opium would seem to do more harm, by hindering
the excretion, than good, by relieving the Spasm. For the method of proceeding
here, I would refer you to Sir John Floyer. He, in such cases, emptied the guts
by a glyster, and the stomach by a puke, and then exhibited the Opium. I have
followed the same practice with success, and have sound, that though the Opium
did, in some measure, hinder the expectoration, yet that after the Spasm was
taken off by it, the expectoration became more free. Next, as to the use of
Opium in spasmodic pains of the head. Headache is a very frequent ailment,
arising from a very great variety of causes, producing, as I have now found,
after endeavoring to distinguish Head-achs from their causes, feelings exactly
of the same kind. Of these Head-achs, several are not of a spasmodic nature, in
which the Opium is hurtful, as those proceeding from inflammatory pains, and,
what is more frequent, from rheumatic affections. There is a third kind, the
apoplectic, by which I mean a certain state of the system, where the blood is
apt to be collected in great quantity in the veins of the head, and proves the
cause of Vertigo, Lethargy, and other soporose affections, where the Opium is
also hurtful. In the pure spasmodic Head-achs, which we discern by their
happening in persons subject to other Spasms, by their transient continuance,
and the remedies used, Opium is useful. These may be considered as of two
kinds; idiopathic, where the disease is in the head itself; sympathetic, where
it proceeds from connection^ with other parts, particularly the stomach. In the
idiopathic spasmodic Headache, where we can discover it, Opium is useful. In
the sympathic, although Emetics there be indicated, yet Opium is also useful.
It is doubted whether the Clavis hystericus be idiopathic or sympathic. Certain
I am of having often seen it affecting the head, where no other spasmodic
affection was present in the system, or occurred for a long time afterward. As
purely spasmodic, this affection is to be cured by Opium. To this may be
referred the laceration. etc. of tendons, producing the Locked Jaw, which is
now found to be most effectually relieved by Opium. This, perhaps, may rather
belong to the head of Irritation, or to Spasms in the extremities. As to the
spasms in the extremities, the Opisthotonos, in which we have already mentioned
the good effects of Opium, and referred you to Authors, comprehends them all.

3 We come to the use of Opium in pains arising from Irritation. These are of
various kinds, not easily to be enumerated. The most remarkable are those which
attend Cancers and other Ulcers: In all of these Opium is a safe palliative.
Those, who are prejudiced against Opium, condemn it as only a palliative, and
often bringing back the pain which it palliated with exacerbation; but this is
by no means so often the case as has been imagined. Thus, for instance, if an
acrid matter be lodged in the primae viae, if we can check its effects and take
off the spasms, in consequence of the powers of digestion, and the afflux of
the animal fluids, the acrimony may be corrected, in some cases even evacuated,
and so the Opium prove more than a palliative. Dr. Young imagines it a hurtful
palliative, but even his own facts being given, his reasoning upon them is not
good. But the facts he alleges do not agree with my experience, and I have
often seen the pain cased without any bad consequences. The virtues of the
narcotic Ci^^ta leads us to suppose Opium may at (...) be a safe palliative;
^^t I think more may be added; for I find that Opium will even mend the
digestion in Cancers. In other ulcers, attended with pain, Opium also may be
exhibited with good effect. These are perhaps the only Irritations we can here
speak of. In pains arising from fractures, wounds, etc. the temporary relief
given by Opiates, as these are of inflammatory nature, will be hurtful. I think
it even dangerous, as Young advises, to exhibit them before operations. But in
the case of wounds, whether given by art, or design, or got by accident, if
tending to suppuration, and accompanied with pain, I think I have not only seen
the good effect of Opium in relieving that, but also in promoting the
suppuration itself.

The other general head, to which may be referred the cases in which Opium is
employed, is in praeternaturally increased Evacuation. But before we enter upon
that, we shall speak of the use of Opium in Fever. In Intermittent Fevers the
use of Opium was common and constant among the ancients, and we have in this
endeavored to imitate them in modern times. A celebrated writer, in the French
Memoirs, has given us an account of his practice with Opium in Intermittents.
He was led accidentally to use them from the occurrence of an uncommon degree
of spasm; and laying down as a rule, I imagine very properly, that the
accession was owing to spasm, he ventured to try the effects of Opium against
it. He gave it about an hour before the accession, which it commonly prevented,
and procured a mild sweat. If given in the time of the accession, he found it
was employed with danger, if long before it, that its effects were lost: H^
^ound, that one hour before was what answered best, and allows only a deviation
of a quarter more or less. He thinks Intermittents may be distinguished
according to their degree of accession; in some very strong spasmodic motions,
rigor, tremor, etc. ensuing, in others, these being in a much milder degree. It
was in the former case he found Opium chiefly of service. It has been a
frequent practice to exhibit Opium in different cases. Boerhaave's
Antipyreticum raro fallens contains two grains of Opium; and, indeed, I imagine
it is only from our extraordinary attention to the Bark, that we do not
perceive the effects of Opium. We chiefly join it with the Bark to prevent
^^^^ging, but I think it has also a considerable effect as antispasmodic. In
continued Fevers Opium has been more frequently employed. Tralles has bestowed
much pains on this part of his subject; but he appears to me to argue like a
man who had already settled his point, and to have been prejudiced against it;
nay, indeed, to overlook, or rather to be totally ignorant of the
considerations which should determine the question. In inflammatory Fevers
Opium is certainly hurtful, but all Fevers are not of this kind, either in
their beginning or continuance; and every body allows now the Nervous Fever, or
that wherein the vis vitae is apt to sink; and also that every continued Fever
consists of repeated paroxysins. In the case of the Nervous Fever Opium may be
used as a Stimulant, and where the remissions are distinct, and the accessions
in consequence, as a Sedative. In the last case it may be used in the same
manner as the Bark, and whenever a distinct accession comes on, and it is
useful to throw in the Bark, Opium may be also employed. Of these things
Tralles takes no notice. Wine, I think, is an analogous remedy to Opium, being
both sedative and stimulant. In the last intention it is preferable to Opium,
as it can be given in a smaller dose, and also from the acid which accompanies
it, is less inflammatory, and therefore, on this account, in doubtful cases may
be more effectually used, as well as from the subdivided and gradual manner in
which we can exhibit it. But I have seen Fevers attended with very strong
spasmodic affections, where Camphire, Musk, etc. were used, where the Opium was
of much more consequence, and even, as I have seen, it removed delirium itself;
and indeed I believe it may be said universally, there is no case in which we
use Wine, where we may not also employ Opium.

We now go on to consider the use of Opium in increased evacuations.

The first of these which I shall mention is the Catarrh, an affection in
common to (...) head and breast. In general this disease may be considered as
an increased evacuation of mucus, more commonly in the thin acrid state in
which it is then immediately secreted. More commonly, however, as we have
considered Catar^h as a disease in the membrane of the bronchiae, and as
accompanied with infarction, Opium has been thought of disadvantage. I think
the matter may be compromised by these general rules; 1st, Catarrh may be a
recent affection from Cold, and then is more or less of an inflammatory and
feverish nature, and consequently here Opium may be hurtful and dangerous. But
there are many cases of recent Cold, attended with Cough and Catarrh, where I
have seen Opium employed with safety, very often operating by diaphoresis or
sweat, which obviated its bad effects. A dispute has arisen, whether we should
attempt to cure a recent cold by sweating. I have seen such a practice increase
it. In general, if there is any degree of Fever, it is not advisable to
attempt the cure by opiates. 2dly, Where the Catarrh is of long standing, is
habitual, not inflammatory, where the stillicidium is thin and acrid, Opium is
the only effectual remedy, as taking off the sensibility of the part, stopping
the evacuation, and allowing the matter to remain in the follicles till it has
obtained its proper consistence and blandness. This I consider as an increased
excretion. 3dly, In Catarrhs where there is an increased secretion, and a great
deal of gross mucus, seemingly arising from a greater quantity of the fluids,
which furnish this mucous matter, being carried to the lungs, I consider the
disease as an infarction.

Next the increased Evacuation, in which we shall consider the effects of
Opium, is Vomiting. This might have been referred to the head of Spasm, but as
there is an appearance of Evacuation, it is indifferent whether we consider it
here or there. With regard to the use of Opium in Vomitings, the practice is
difficult, as they may arise from such a prodigious variety of causes. When
Vomitings arise from acrid matters taken into the stomach, they must be cured
by their expulsion. Thus it would be ^very absurd to check the effects of
poisons swallowed by the exhibition of Opium: But when the Vomiting proceeds
from acrid matter generated in the stomach itself, acting as a leaven, and
changing into its nature the other juices poured into that organ; when the
Vomiting has been drawn out to a great length and proceeds to debilitating, it
may be quieted by Opium. Nay, perhaps by this means the matter may be thrown
into the intestines, there corrected by a greater afflux of fluids, and by
means of a glyster evacuated. Thus in Cholera, where the stomach has been
cleared, and the vomiting proceeds from a greater flow of bile caused by an
inverted motion of the guts, Opium may be useful, by taking off the inverted
motion. Where the vomiting proceeds from inflammation or scirrhosity, Opium is
useless, in many such cases hurtful. Where vomiting is a sympathetic affection,
from spasms of the alimentary canal communicated to the stomach, Opium is
universally useful. There is one case in which it is very doubtful, viz. in
that Vomiting which occurs in the cold fit of Intermittent Fevers. Some check
this by Opium, and some mix it with their saline draughts. If the saline
draught could be retained in the stomach, then perhaps Opium might be useful in
determining to the surface. But in most cases this Vomiting is a salutary
effort of Nature to throw off the offending cause, and to determine to the
surface, and therefore ought not to be checked by Opium.

We are now to talk of increased Evacuations in the lower belly. In Diarrhoea
and Dysentery the use of Opium is very common, but the particular circumstances
in which it ought to be exhibited are not so well ascertained. Where Dysentery
is recent, accompanied with Fever, and perhaps inflammatory diathesis, and, in
short, wherever one would think of bleeding in this disease, Opium should not
be employed. Some are for considering Dysentery always as an inflammatory
disease; but I imagine this is but seldom the case, and where it is not, Opium
may be employed. Disputes have arisen on this subject, and it has been said, as
giving occasion to the retention of the acrid matter, and hardened faeces,
Opium should not be used. To be sure the whole of the cure must not be trusted
to it. Dr. Young's arguments, who thinks he has treated this part of his
subject very fully, amounts to no more than what we have said of the retention
of the acrid matter. But Opium may certainly be compatible with the Evacuation
of these hardened faeces, and acrid matter. Often, as in the Ileus and Colica
Pictonum, they owe their rise to spasms, and can only be removed by Opiates. As
the giving Opium with purgatives has been allowed by Dr. Young himself, I think
the whole of the dispute ought to have been superseded, and a general rule been
established, that Opium universally may be used, where it does not interfere
with the Evacuation. Opium is not to be considered as astringent; it only
diminishes the moving powers in the vessels for a time, leaving the system as
lax as before.

We shall next consider the effects of Opium in Evacuations of Blood, natural
or morbid. The only natural Evacuation of Blood is the menstrual. The increase
of this may be considered as of three different kinds. The first, which rarely
happens, is attended with an inflammatory diathesis; the second depending upon
Spasms; the third on debility, which is seldom free from the second. In the two
last, Opium is a safe and useful remedy, but not to be depended upon for a
cure; for the astringency of Opium is only temporary, and it is given only as a
Palliative, till other Astringents can be used, to give tone to the parts. Nay,
I would advise against the too frequent use of it, as it is apt to bring on an
inflammatory diathesis. In too great flow of the Lochiae Opium is very proper,
for this increasing flux is often attended with spasmodic affections, and
debility; but here we must constantly have in our view the inflammatory
diathesis, apt to be induced in childbirth. There is a third-case analogous to
these, viz. where pregnant women are threatened with abortion, and already a
flow of blood has taken place. There is no case in which the use of Opium is
more difficult than this. I have seen it frequently prevented, frequently
brought on by bleeding. I dare not confine the bleeding to the plethoric, for
even in these has it produced abortion, and therefore I am not ready to mark
out the cases where one or the other is proper. Where the disease arises from
any cause of inflammatory nature, I would admit that Bleeding is the remedy,
and Opium is hurtful. Again, where the flux depends on hysteric affections, and
there is no inflammation, Bleeding is hurtful, and Opium is the cure. Where the
abortion is owing to habit, as every body knows it may, Opium is always useful,
and I have seen instances, where by the use of it women retained children, of
which they would otherwise have miscarried. The use of Opium in pregnant women
is doubtful. Where pregnancy is attended with spasmodic affections of the
stomach, etc. Opium would be a palliative, but still it is doubtful if it ought
to be used. In every pregnant woman, there is an inflammatory diathesis, and
the blood covered with a crust. Though on other occasions, I have used this as
an argument against that crust being always a morbid appearance, as in the most
healthy women it occurred, yet here I must own, that it gives a suspicion of
the inflammatory state, and therefore should make us cautious in the use of
Opium. These are the natural evacuations of Blood. What comes nearest to a
natural evacuation is the haemorrhoidal. I would not allow, with the Stahlians,
that the haemorrhoidal flux is always a natural evacuation, but frequently,
from various accidents, it becomes a habit, and a law to the system, and
necessary for health. From the nature of the disease, being a distension and
collection of blood in the cellular membrane of the rectum, often depending on
a laxity of the vessels, Opium may be useful; but as costiveness is commonly
the cause, which Opium would increase, it will as frequently be hurtful in this
disease. It is only in great urgency, and when the disease is attended with
Spasms in the alimentary canal, that the exhibition of Opium should be
attempted. In morbid haemorrhages, there is no doubt but that the sedative
power of Opium will relieve their excess; but the haemorrhagic diathesis is
very near akin to the inflammatory, and whatever accumulates the fluids in the
larger vessels must be hurtful in haemorrhages, and accordingly we see that
when they are repressed by Opium, it is not uncommon to see them return with
greater violence. The ancients employed Opium and Hyoscyamus in spitting of
blood, and some lately have renewed the practice, though seemingly with a good,
yet, in my opinion, always with a doubtful effect. Most of the spittings of
blood are attended or followed with an inflammatory diathesis, and end in
phthisis pulmonalis, which is likewise of the same nature, and there the Opium
is hurtful. But there are cases of spitting of blood, subsisting for forty
years, where there is no tendency to phthisis, or tubercles, and where the
disease has arisen merely from an accidental rupture of the vessel, and
afterward kept up by laxity and habit. It is in such cases only in which Opium
can be exhibited with any safety.

These are the cases in which Opium is hurtful, or of advantage. Possibly
several may be omitted. At present I recollect one, viz. the use of Opium in
the Measles. The Measles, from being an eruptory disease, and being frequently
joined with the Small Pox in Treatises of Physic, has probably had the use of
Opium transferred to it, from its being employed in the other. But in the
Measles it ought not to be exhibited on the same footing as in the Small Pox,
for the Measles is not a suppuratory disease, and it was as a Suppuratory that
I said Opium acted in the Small Pox. The Measles are seldom dangerous in their
first attack, but afterward are so, from their inducing more or less of an
inflammatory peripneumonic state, and therefore Opium must be used in this
disease with caution. A symptom frequently indicates it, viz. the Cough which
occurs, with thin acrid distillation without much mucus, and I imagine in the
beginning it may be employed, but shall not determine whither it would obviate
the disease in the lungs. When the eruption is over, and the peripneumonic
symptoms are coming on, it is dangerous to give Opium. There is another
symptom, the diarrhoea, to wit, which indicates Opium. Nothing better shows the
inflammatory state in the Measles than the observation of Sydenham, that the
diarrhoea occuring here is best removed by bleeding.

As to the pharmaceutical treatment of Opium, little need be said about it. Its
virtues may be extracted equally by every menstruum. All the preparations of it
are only made with the intention of weakening it, which may be much more
effectually done by lessening the dose. The great labor bestowed on this head
seems entirely useless.

Opposite to b stands the title Umbellatae. I have mentioned only two genera of
the same order, the rest of which may have similar virtues.

CICUTA.
Linnaeus applies the term Cicuta to the Cicuta aquatica, calling this, of
which we are speaking, Conium. From what we now know of the Cicuta, I am apt to
suspect we shall find some uncommon virtues in Parsley and Fennel. Fennel has,
in effect, been seen to discuss hard Tumors.

Of late the Cicuta is so famous, that I need give no account of it, but only
refer you to Stork's pamphlet. At the end he has drawn up some corollaries upon
the whole of what he has said. At all times externally applied, the Cicuta has
been known for resolving scirrhous tumors. We now learn it may be applied
internally for the same purpose. We imagined that medicines internally given,
could not reach the vessels of the affected parts, and I believe we were right
in that supposition; for the Cicuta probably acts on the nervous power, and
communicates its action to the most distant moving fiber of the body. I leave
you then to judge whether it be from increasing the action of the vessels, or
by dissolving the concreted fluids, that the Cicuta's action is exerted.

We cannot admit some of the corollaries at the end of Dr. Stork's pamphlet. It
is asserted the Cicuta has no sensible effects. This contradicts our practic^.
I have known twelve cases where vertigo was produced, one particularly where
the vertigo, and some kinds of convulsion was produced, and although the
patient took, at length, forty grains for a dose, yet did the Cicuta not cure
his disease; and, what was extraordinary, even externally applied had the same
consequences mentioned. Hence it cannot be so safe to every age and sex as he
mentions. Besides, as to the sensible evacuations, I myself have seen the
Cicuta move the intestines; have good authority for its acting by urine and
sweat, but do not indeed know if its effects were different when it had or had
not (which was more commonly the case) any sensible evacuation produced by it.
Stork recommends the Cicuta in the Struma, which is a very vague term, and has
been applied to every swelling of the conglobate glands. This does not apply to
our Scrophula, which is not a topical disease, but diffused over the whole of
the lymphatic system, and occurring more frequently in the young than old. The
first, second, ninth, tenth, and thirteenth cases are all different from our
Scrophula, except the tenth, which comes nearest to it; and in the other the
disease is in old persons, and much farther extended than our Scrophula, in
which we have commonly employed the Cicuta, and commonly indeed failed, from
the reasons given.

From having had lately recommended in Cancers a remedy which failed, I imagine
we are too apt to distrust the Cicuta. I have seen two desperate cases, one of
a Cancer in the lip, and another in the breast, which are nearly cured by it;
and have had accounts of others from persons of verocity. For my part, I have
no manner of doubt in believing in the success of the Vienna practice. Many
circumstances may mislead us in judging of the virtues of the Cicuta. We may
have applied it to diseases to which it is not suited, as in the Scrophula or
Cancers, and Scirrhi, which arise from causes not to be removed by it; we may
have failed from using an improper medicine, i. e. taken at a wrong time of the
year, or a wrong prepared extract; from using it for too short a time, (for in
many of Stork's cases a very long time was required;) from too gradual an
application perhaps of the dose, by which, when we have attained a large one,
we lose its effects; and several other causes to which we do not attend. In
many of the cases, both here and at London, the medicine has procured a good
suppuration, but gone no further, which I imagine to be owing to the small dose
having lost its effects by habit. We should therefore interrupt the exhibition
or increase the dose.

CICUTA AQUATICA.
Since such virtues are found in the common Cicuta, we may infer the same to
the Cicuta aquatica, which has been supposed to be the poisoning Cicuta of the
ancients. Poison and medicine only differ in degree, and I imagine we are very
rash in rejecting substances, from suspicion of the danger. I had set this down
in order, with that of several others, to give you the history of it as a
poison, but that I find our time obliges us to neglect. As poisonous, this
plant belongs to the next set, which is a natural order, called by Linnaeus
LURIDAE, which he imagines to be poisonous, from their malignant aspect; but
the botanical analogy likewise takes place, for all of the same class have the
same virtues. Of the six mentioned, the virtues are much the same. Possibly
there may be some variety, and indeed experiments seem to show it. We shall
only remark upon three of them.

BELLADONNA, or SOLANUM LETHALE, etc.
This is marked out as a poison, which does not exclude it as a medicine.
Gesner tells us, that the expressed juice of the berries, made into a syrup, is
a safe and useful anodyne; and by a peasant in Utland, infused in wine, it was
found to be employed as a cure for the Dysentery. Another author, tells us of
its success in cancerous cases, and these are the best testimonies of its
virtues, which indeed, from analogy, we should readily expect. Lambergen
abroad, and Gataker at home, have given us instances of its success; and if
well attested instances are brought of its success, although it has failed both
here and at London, we may judge of it in the same manner as of the Cicuta.
From my own experience I can say somewhat of it. A woman, born of a mother who
died of a Cancer, and her son, had, the one a Cancer in the Lip, the other on
the Cheek near the angle of the eye. The son, who had the Cancer in the Lip,
got the Belladonna, began with half a grain, and by degrees had the dose
increased to twelve grains of the dry herb, which produced a good pus in the
wound, prevented its spreading, and healed it up, all to a small speck covered
with a scab. The medicine had produced a heat, and afterward a constriction of
the fauces, from which it was given up, but the Cancer afterward breaking out,
recourse was again had to the Belladonna, and with the same good effect as
before, but with the same constriction of the fauces. After this the lad was
seized with a vomiting of blood and died. This vomiting of blood I impute to
the Belladonna. In the mother the Cancer was of fifteen years standing, and
began a small erosion, which gradually extended to her eye: She used the
Belladonna very cautiously, and soon found relief from the pain, found the
farther extent of the sore prevented, good pus formed, and at last a
contraction of the sore. In this state has she continued for these four years.
Whenever the sore again renews, she has recourse again to the medicine, which
effectually prevents its extending; nay, sometimes she goes so far as to make
it contract a little, but never so much as to heal it up entirely.

There is a case mentioned in Juncker's Conspectus Therapeiae, of what he calls
the wonderful effects of the Belladonna in curing Cancers, but he also gives us
another instance in which it failed. These, and the cases I have mentioned,
only show that the Belladonna is not fit for all cases of Scirrhus and Cancers,
which is also true of the Cicuta; but this does not hinder either the one or
the other from being a valuable remedy.

HYOSCYAMUS, HENBANE.
This was employed by the ancients as narcotic, in the same manner as Opium,
and by some has been said to be more powerful. It is said always to produce a
quarelsome humor. Whether this proceeds from the management of the dose, I
shall not determine. It has the other common qualities of the Luridae. Several
of the Anodynes of the ancients have gone out of use. We are obliged to the
courage of Paracelsus for restoring the use of Opium. The Hyoscyamus has been
employed, by some of the moderns, in Catarrhs and Haemorrhages, and I believe
with the same virtues in such cases as the Opium. The same observations apply
to the Mandragora, Solanum, and Stramonium.

NICOTIANA, TOBACCO.
The anodyne and narcotic virtues are here joined with a large proportion of
the Stimulant. Every body knows its errhine power, its power of stimulating the
stomach and intestines, and internal parts of the system. Its errhine and
salivatory powers are too frequently employed. I take the use of it to be very
uncertain. As errhine, its effects are lost by habit, though it is supposed to
continue to produce the excretion of mucus, which, as it is an excrement, is
not of much harm. As salivatory, it does not increase the secretion, and takes
off and expends a fluid necessary to the system, palls the appetite, hurts
digestion, etc. The same is to be said of the use of it in fumes. Its quality
as emetic is valued by some, but I know no advantage it has above other acrids.
In the Dysentery, Opium is conjoined with purgatives. The Nicotiana possesses
in itself both the stimulant and sedative qualities, and by Diemerbrock has
been employed, with advantage, in the disease of which we are speaking. Given
by the mouth, it is so liable to prove emetic, that it is very inconveniently
employed as a purgative. Given in a glyster it answers much better. Its dose
may be from half a dram to one dram in infusion. It is as certain a remedy
in all cases where glysters are wanted, as any I know, only if the dose be
large, it is apt to produce weakness at stomach, vomiting, and tremors and
spasms over the whole body; however, properly exhibited, it is of advantage in
many cases. Du Haen has found the fumes of it very the strangulated Hernia,
Colica Pictonum, and Ileus; and nothing hinders my employing it, but the want
of a proper apparatus, which has been endeavored to be supplied.

From the effect of the fumes, we see the active parts may, in great measure,
be volatilized. Hence we can obtain a milder preparation by boiling. It has
been long used in syrup. When the acrimony is taken off by boiling, it may be
exhibited with more confidence internally, though its purgative effects are, by
this means, taken off; but here it may be introduced into the system, and prove
diuretic and pectoral. If in this state it retain its narcotic and stimulant
effects, it may answer better than Opium, or simple Stimulants. Externally,
like the Cicuta, it has been employed for resolving Scirrhusses; and, made into
ointment, has been employed as a detergent, and digestive in Ulcers. I do not
know whether it has been employed in Cancers; applied to fresh wounds, it has
proved dangerous, and this gives a caution against employing it in open sores.

MISCELLANEOUS LIST.
LACTUCA.
One species of this is remarkable for its narcotic virtue. I set down this to
give you a suspicion of the lactescent plants containing somewhat of the same
quality. Its effects in medicine are not ascertained.

LAURUS.
I intended here to have given the history of the Lauro-cerasus as a poison,
but must refer you to the Philosophical Transactions, and the experiments of
Brown Langrish upon brutes. His experiments would seem to show, that in a
moderate dose it might be employed, but they are not yet sufficiently numerous
to be trusted. He finds it produces considerable changes in the blood, but such
trials require much caution. But although such change were found, it is not
owing to its action on the blood itself, but on the system of vessels.

Laurus. This has been long employed in medicine, in leaves, and berries. The
kernels resemble those of the bitter Almond and Lauro-cerasus, and on that
account have been brought under suspicion. But it is doubtful whether we do not
carry this matter too far. Surely the kernels of the black cherry are not of
the same qualities with the leaves of the Lauro-cerasus. They may contain them
in different degrees, and therefore I think it is wrong to reject them.
Different parts of the Laurus have been employed, as we have said, in medicine,
and may still be retained; and I am doubtful whether the Bay Berries, in the
Elixir sacrum, are properly rejected. While the old composition remained with
the Carduus and Bay Berries, I have seen this Elixir cure Intermittents. Their
proper use, as carminative, I do not know. Externally, the leaves may be
useful. In White Swellings I have used them with success, they in some proving
a cure, and in others stopping the progress of the disease.

COFFEE and TEA.
How far these are properly inserted here, I shall not determine. I set them
down, in order to give a suspicion of their deleterious qualities. Much dispute
has arisen about their virtues* One would imagine frequent experience would
long ago have decided such dispute. Perhaps it is that frequent and universal
use, which gives occasion to it. Whenever a medicine comes to be in universal
use, many of the operations of nature are ascribed to it; as no person is in
perfect health, its effects will be varied in proportion as those who use it
recede from the standard. He who errs on the side of rigidity, will find relief
from warm water; he who errs on the side of laxity, has his laxity increased by
it. If such a medicine, as those we talk of are, act on the nervous system, its
effects will be destroyed by habit; as rendered palatable, no good account can
be had of its effects; if good, they are magnified; if bad, they are concealed;
nay, we are apt not only to deceive others, but ourselves, and to fancy those
qualities we wish to exist. All these circumstances take place with regard to
Coffee and Tea. Their effects are, in my opinion, very much mixed, depending on
the warm water. All this has so much weight with me, that I cannot speak
positively on this head. The assisting digestion, relieving the stomach from a
load of aliment, from crudities, and from head-achs arising from them,
promoting the secretion of the urine, and perhaps of perspiration, may all
fairly be attributed to the warm water. The same, also, will have the effect of
keeping from sleep. These are the chief of the virtues ascribed to Tea and
Coffee. The weakening the tone of the stomach by frequent use, weakening the
system in consequence, inducing tremors and spasmodic affections, are the
effects of the Tea itself, though in some measure also of the warm water. This
applies to Tea chiefly. I have a stomach very sensible, which I have found to
be hurt by Tea, which I attributed to the warm water, but having used some
indigenous plants with the same heat of water, I found no harm ensue, and this
I have repeated above fifty times. I continue now to use Tea, but without the
same effect as before from habit, and also from my advance in life. Many others
I know, who have had the same experience. The same effects are not so
remarkable in Coffee; but still experience shows them to be of the same nature.
From the use of it I have always an arthritic affection of my stomach but no
tremor. Farther, I can support what I have said on Tea, from botanical analogy,
for it belongs to an order of plants of the narcotic kind, viz. the Coadunatae.
These narcotic effects are so remarkable, that the people of Asia do not use it
till it is a year old. As we have it, it is always of that age, and has its
acrimony in some measure dissipated; but as it has an emetic quality, it shows
that it is not all gone.

After all, I think we may conclude, that Coffee and Tea, however their effects
be varied by habit, or particular constitutions, are here properly placed as
Sedatives, as weakening the tone of the system, and diminishing the force of
the nervous power.

CROCUS, SAFFRON.
This is properly a substance sui generis, being the only instance of the
stigmata of flowers employed in medicine. Possibly some curious virtues might
be found in employing this part, as it is of a peculiar acrimony. Saffron has
been long famous among Physicians, but its effects are not ascertained. In
small doses it has no effect; nay even in the largest given by Materia Medica
writers. I have been attentive in making several experiments with it, and never
found it act, except in very large doses, (2 drachms) as a general Stimulant.
It has been recommended as emmenagogue, and I have succeeded with it in that
intention, But here there is a fallacy, as the natural evacuation may be
brought on in time of the remedy being exhibited; and indeed I have much oftener
failed than succeeded with it. As to any exhilarating effects, I never
perceived them, and as little its anodyne or anti-hysteric. I am sorry
Boerhaave should have thrown away so much authority upon this medicine. Indeed
he seems to have copied what he says of it, from writers of no authority at all.

NYMPHAEA,
Is set down, because it stands in our Dispensatory. The London College have
very properly left it out, as its properties are not known. It has been said to
be anodyne, etc. and indeed analogy seems to support it, as it is of the same
natural order with the Poppies.

WINE and ALCOHOL.
I have set down these here, as I conceive that they have the same property as
Opium at bottom, and that all that has been said of that will apply to them;
with this variation, that Wine is less, Alcohol more inflammatory than Opium.

The next thing is the general titles. These may be distributed into three or
four classes, Acids, Astringents, Neutrals, Emollients, and Antispasmodics.

Acids and Astringents, as Sedatives. Acids have undoubtedly the power of
destroying the mobility of the part to which they are applied. They seem too to
act as astringent, and therefore are conjoined with these. Many Astringents
extend their effects over the system, and while they produce contraction, at
the same time destroy the mobility; and it is a frequent remark, that the use
of Astringents or Spasmodics is followed by an Atonia.

Neutrals as Sedatives. Neutrals are refrigerant, but it is uncertain to what
to refer their operation. Both Acids and Neutrals are antiseptic, and by taking
off the intestine motion of the fluids, take off the stimulus from the solids.

Emollients may be considered as Sedatives; for by relaxing, they take off the
activity from the Solidum vivum.

Antispasmodics as Sedatives. These are often Sedatives directly, insomuch that
the general term Sedative might often comprehend both; and indeed, in our list
of Sedatives, many of the Antispasmodics have been mentioned. The distinction
will be mentioned under the head of Antispasmodics.

ANTISPASMODICS.
[We are now enabled, by the sight of other manuscripts, to put the whole of
this paragraph in a better condition; and give it accordingly as follows:

With regard to every affection of the nervous power, we have been much in the
dark, and particularly, with regard to the nature of spasmodic affections, and
antispasmodic remedies. The learned Gaubius thus defines Spasm: Spasmus dicitur
violenta, invita, inordinata fibrarum motricium actio. The original word in the
Greek language means no more than contraction; but it is necessary to
distinguish those contractions which are performed in health, from those which
are morbid, and it is only to the last that the term Spasm is now applied. Dr.
Gaubius, by the terms of his definition, intends to express the circumstances
of the morbid state. The actions of muscles are voluntary or involuntary, the
first are morbid when invitae, and both are so when violentae et inordinatae.
But, to render the definition still clearer, the t^rm inordinata must be
understood to comprehend a great deal with respect to both the cause and the
manner of contraction: Thus, the contraction of the heart is ordinarily excited
by the influx of venous blood, and, in health, is in proportion to the state of
that; but, if excited by other causes, it may be said to be an inordinata
contractio. The term seems to be more properly applied to some irregularity in
the manner of contraction; and we shall mention a chief instance of this kind.
We think it is a law of the animal economy, that the contraction of moving
fibers is naturally succeeded by a relaxation of them; and, commonly, the
muscles contracted by the power of the will, or other natural causes, are
easily stretched out again by their antagonists, or other powers applied. If,
therefore, it happens, that the contraction of a muscle is not spontaneously
succeeded by a relaxation, and does not easily yield to antagonist or other
stretching powers applied, such a contraction may be said to be inordinata; and
it is to this state of constraction, that many of the moderns confine the term
Spasm, while the other states of inordinate contraction, they call Convulsions.
Thus, Dr. Gaubius, 'Qui spasmum a convulsione distinguunt, illum vocant
continuam, hanc alternantem, musculorum contractionem; This excellent author,
however, is doubtful if such distinction is necessary; Perinde fuerit, says he,
number eodem an diversis nominibus utere; uterque enim effectus ad idem genus
pertinet, parts easdem occupat; similesque et causas et differentias agnoscit;
quin et haud raro alius in alium transit. It is certainly just, as the learned
author observes, that these affections are nearly related to each other, and
truly belong to one genus; but, at the same time, they are evidently different
species, and may therefore properly be distinguished by different appellations.
However, we must own, that this is hardly the place for it, as we cannot say
that the several medicines to be here mentioned under the title of
Antispasmodic, are more suited to the o^e than to the other species of
affection. We find ourselves obliged to comprehend both cases under the title
of (...). Affections; and, by antispasmodic, we mean such medicines as are
suited to take off either, or both affections.

As to the manner of operating, it is difficult to explain. Spasmodic
affections may depend upon an extraordinary influx of nervous power, and that,
either in consequence of a stimulus applied to the part or to the sensorium, or
in consequence of an unequal distribution, depending upon the weakness and
mobility of the nervous power. From hence it may be perceived, why sometimes
Sedatives and sometimes Stimulants prove antispasmodic, and some have thought,
that all antispasmodics are either the one or the other; but besides those more
obviously sedative or stimulant, there seem to be antispasmodics distinct from
both. Stimulants are very generally such to the sanguiferous system, and very
often sedatives show the same effects; but there are antispasmodics which do
not at all. Again, there are antispasmodics which discover none of the narcotic
qualities of sedatives; and therefore, from both considerations, we presume
there are antispasmodics distinct from both the stimulants and sedatives. We
shall, indeed, have occasion frequently to say, that the antispasmodics are
intimately connected with these other classes, but still, we do not allow this
to be universal, and would rather assert, that most of the medicines in our
list of antispasmodics, are more such than in proportion to their stimulant or
sedative properties.

FOSSILE ANTISPASMODICS.
AMBRAGRISEA.
The real origin of Ambergrise has been disputed. Two particulars we know, that
it is neither of animal nor vegetable origin, being always found in the sea, or
thrown out upon its shores; and that its chemical analysis affords the same
principle as Succinum, viz. Petroleum. As grateful to the nerves it may be
called cephalic and cordial, but this gives no distinct idea. Possibly it may
have the same qualities as Musk, but the analogy is not here perfect, and
experiment must determine it. Odorous bodies, and almost those only, are
Antispasmodics; but odor may sometimes reside in so small a part of the
subject as to have no effect on the body.

SUCCINUM, AMBER.
This has been employed in medicine; but I believe is not soluble in our
fluids, nor in any menstruum out of the body, so that it can be given in
sufficient quantity to exert powerful effects. Hence it must have no virtues,
and, after many experiments, I have found this to be the case. The preparations
of Amber have been more employed than Amber in substance. An acid salt is got
from it, which afterward is enumerated under the Acids. In its own nature it
is not antispasmodic, and any virtue it may have of that kind is owing to its
oil. This oil is very much of the same nature with Petroleum, and an oil of the
same kind is to be procured from pit-coal, and other bituminous substances, and
therefore we may talk of the virtues of fossile oils at once, except the fire
may alter them, by giving more or less of empyreuma and acrimony; but all of
them, by proper rectification, may be brought to the same degree of purity. We
shall then talk of them under the general title of

PETROLEUM.
All fossile oils have been reputed antispasmodic, but are likewise very
powerful Stimulants, and by this means often unfit for use. They have been
received as pectoral, and the same cautions take place with regard to them, as
with regard to other acrids used in that intention; for many chronic diseases
of the breast are of inflammatory nature. Besides their antispasmodic virtue,
the fossile oils have had ascribed to them that of emmenagogue. Their use in
this intention must be where there are spasmodic affections of the uterus; But
I have often been deceived with them when these affections were present. They
are of so much reputation with the women, that they take them unprescribed, and
I have known cases where they have been given to procure abortion, but even in
very large doses without the effect, they only disturbing the system in
general. I must here, however, take notice, that our Petroleum is commonly
adulterated with two thirds of oil of turpentine, so that, properly speaking,
the cases mentioned were only trials of the oil of turpentine. Fossile oils
have been said to be useful in Quartans, and, indeed, I conceive this probably
to belong to every Antispasmodic. Externally applied, their effects are more
considerable and more ardent. Anointed on the extremities they are said to
defend them from cold, and this virtue has been ascribed to the Oil of
Turpentine and Amber; but on trial they never could be applied without
irritation, and disappointing the effect. They have been recommended in
oedematous swellings, upon the supposition that that disease depended on a
laxity of the part; but oedematous swellings are often attended with an
erisypelatous inflammation and tendency to gangrene, which last I have seen
brought on by the application of Petroleum. But here we need not be anxious
about topical applications, for none of them are of any service except bandages
in convalescents, as the swelling commonly depends on a fault in the system. In
paralytic cases they are more effectually employed. Here they sometimes
penetrate deep in the system, but I have no faith of their being capable to
stimulate the Medulla spinalis when rubbed along the spine; nor have I any
notion of their stopping Intermittents when rubbed upon the breast. It has also
been used in rheumatic pains, but whether it acts here from its stimulant or
antispasmodic virtues is uncertain.

VEGETABLE ANTISPASMODICS.
With regard to the antispasmodic plants, most of them might have been inserted
among the Stimulants. Of the first set, a^ a, Artemisia and Matricaria might
have been mentioned among the Syngenesia; Cardiaca and Pulegium among the
Verticillatae; Cuminum, Levisticum, and Meum among the Umbelliferae; and Sabina
with the Coniferae. All these have the virtues of their order. They are
repeated here, on account of a rank and foetid odor they possess, which, with
some other qualities joined to them, is the foundation of their antispasmodic
virtue. All Antispasmodics are odorous: In some, the odor is of the fragrant
kind, but more commonly as it grows are directly foetid.

At a is inserted the title

HERBAE. FOETIDAE.
All these may be useful in spasmodic affections. Some of them are recommended
in epileptic cases, but this is not so universally. Much oftener have they been
used in spasms of the alimentary canal, or what is called the Hysteric disease.
Nay, their action has been supposed to extend farther, and to take off those
spasms in the uterus, which are the cause of the obstruction of the menses, and
other symptoms attending thereon. These are the general qualities of these
plants. We shall only make remarks on a few of them.

ARISTOLOCHIA.
This might have been marked with the acrid Bitters, formerly mentioned. Its
acrimony appears, from its vomiting in a large dose. It enters into the
composition of the Gout Powders, and has at all times been famous in this
disease. A medicine has lately come over from Germany, taken by some here for
the same complaint, which is found to be a tincture of the Aristolochia and
Serpentaria joined. The tincture of Aristolochia is openly used by others in
the same intention.

The same observations are to be made with regard to the Aristolochia in the
Gout, as in the Gout Powder in general. It is this which Boerhaave tells us,
and which Haller repeats, that takes off the villous coat of the stomach; and
this perhaps, in some measure, may point out its use in the Gout. Artemisia is
more foetid than the rest of the class, and hence has been supposed stronger;
but I imagine it has no title to any virtues but what are contained in Wormwood.

ATRIPLEX OLIDA.
This gives out a saline matter, both volatile and fixed, in greater proportion
than any other plant I know. Indeed it seems sui generis, and may perhaps have
some peculiar virtues. Its odor is not very volatile, and the plant can be
very well preserved, both in extract and by drying. I have not seen many trials
made with it. Several times, however, in form of tea, I have seen it of
advantage in hysteric cases.

RUTA.
This is a plant of several peculiarities. Although this plant does not contain
much essential oil, on which I said the virtues of the set we are talking of
depended, yet it has rather a stronger antispasmodic virtue than any of them.
As its parts are pretty fixed, the virtues of this plant may be got pretty
entire, either in inspissated juice, or as extracted from the plant. Rue
particularly has been recommended in Epilepsies and hysteric complaints, and
wherever in such cases the complaints can be bettered by stimulants, Rue may be
employed. All the plants we have mentioned may be called anthelmintic, and none
more properly than the Rue. By the mouth it will not go so far in any quantity
in which we exhibit it; but in a glyster, a strong decoction of it is often
employed to destroy the ascarides which infest the rectum.

SABINA
abounds in essential oil more than the rest, and is a powerful stimulant,
insomuch that, externally applied, it has been said to destroy worms. I have
not seen this effect. Internally it has the same qualities with the former.

Opposite to b is inserted the title of

GUMMATA FOETIDA.
The Tacamahaca, which stands at the end, might be inserted with the Storax and
Labdanum. The other five are very much of common virtues. They are all taken
from umbelliferous plants, wherefore, as plants of this class are frequent in
Europe, and as the Gums of these exotics come so often to us adulterated, we
should carefully endeavor to find something of the same kind in our own
plants. Though I have formerly pointed out the Umbelliferae as poisonous, and
the Gums might be supposed of the same virtues, yet as such qualities are often
lost by drying, I would hence insinuate, that some of the most acrid juices of
our own plants may prove the most excellent medicines. Of Assafoetida,
Galbanum, and Sagapenum, the virtues seem manifestly lodged in an essential
oil, which rises either with water or spirit. The oil of Opopanax is more
sparing, and the Gum Ammoniac gives no essential oil at all in distillation.
Hence I would allege, that of those which have the greatest proportion of
essential oil the antispasmodic virtues are greatest, and so in proportion.
They all stimulate the stomach, and in the countries where they are produced
are employed to excite appetite and promote digestion. With us they are used as
stimulant and antispasmodic, proving carminative in the stomach and intestines*
and used to take off the remarkable spasmodic affections happening in the
alimentary canal in the hysteric disease. Like Aloes they are laxative to a
certain degree, and like this, too, by frequent use, are apt to irritate the
rectum, though neither in their irritant or purgative qualities are they so
powerful as Aloes. These, like the Foetidae formerly mentioned, have been used
as anthelmintic; and there are frequent instances of strong odor affecting the
insect tribe. Assa Foetida has been long employed for this purpose, and lately
has again been brought into practice. In the blood they are frequently
diuretic, but are more remarkable still for their diaphoretic virtues.
Sanctorius testifies, that the Assa Foetida is the strongest in this last
virtue. From these qualities they may be justly reckoned pectoral, not only
promoting the secretion of mucus in the lungs, but perhaps also as carrying
thither their antispasmodic virtues. The Ammoniac being recommended as the most
powerful pectoral, would make me doubt of this last supposition; but for my
part, I am apt to (...) the preference to the Assa foetida, which, however, is
one of the warm pectorals most frequently abused. Like Castor, these gums have
been employed in Fevers, and where we can judge the proper time of exhibiting
stimulant Antispasmodics, they might be useful; but as I find their stimulant
exceed their antispasmodic virtue, I employ them very little. Their emmenagogue
property I consider as an effect on the whole system, and shall afterward
mention it. I imagine it is not without some foundation, that they have been
said to occasion a rarefaction and turgescence of the whole mass of blood. With
regard to Aloes, this is in a manner proved, it not only inducing the
haemorrhoidal flux, but also promoting other haemorrhages, and possibly, by
this means, the menstrual evacuation. In general, as antispasmodic, the more
subtle the odor the better, and therefore I imagine it is not without reason,
that Assafaetida, in our present practice, seems to have supplanted the rest.

As to all, for the purpose of medicine, they are of easy preparation, and may
be extracted either by water or spirit, more effectually by the last. The dose
is difficult to assign, not only on the account of their different effects on
different persons, but also from their strength varying according to the time
kept. I exhibit them from five grains to one dram. I have known two drachms
of Assafaetida taken in twenty-four hours with little effect, but this must not
be taken as a general rule, and probably depended on the impurity of the
medicine.

CAMPHIRE.
This is a substance, which, for the good or harm it can do in medicine,
deserves particular attention. It is a substance of a very peculiar kind in
nature, like to which we can produce nothing by art. It approaches in its
nature to the essential oils, is got from vegetables by distillation with
water, is of an acrid odor, and soluble in Alcohol; but, like these, it does
not suffer a decomposition with distillation, nor separate as they do into oil,
acid, and earth, but rises always in the same manner as before. It differs also
in its relation to acids, uniting with them without effervescence, and
separable from them by affusion of water, without any change. We may allow,
lastly, its mode of concretion to be peculiar. It is alleged, indeed, that
something of the same kind is to be seen in essential oils. I have always
perceived this concretion in essential oils to be different, and more
approaching to regular chrystallization. What is to be made of these
peculiarities, I cannot determine. As to its botanical analogy, it is got from
a species of the Laurus. Our common Laurus, in its sensible qualities, is
nearly related to the Lauro-cera^us, which I mentioned as a strong Sedative;
and, indeed, all the substances which have the laurel bitter, are justly
suspected of the same nature. Camphire, though more poignant, appears to me to
have the same taste and odor, and therefore, in the first place, I would
insinuate a suspicion of the same qualities, and consequently a caution in the
exhibition. Menghini, of Bologna, has been employed in making experiments with
Camphire upon different animals, and has found it poisonous to every one of
them. Birds were killed with a few grains, and large doses either drove into a
rage, or destroyed, quadrupeds. I have only these accounts from a Literary
Journal. From it, however, it appears, that in some animals it produced sleep,
followed by death, without any other symptom; that in other, before death, they
were awakened into convulsions and rage. It seems, too, to act chiefly on the
stomach, for an entire piece swallowed, produced the effects mentioned, with
very little diminution of weight, as appeared from its being afterward thrown
up. I mention all this, to show the power of Camphire on the system, and at the
same time to point out its danger.

The virtues of Camphire have been much disputed. You will easily see how that
happens, from the different effects of different doses on different
constitutions. Its considerable acrimony, strong odor, and that of the
disagreeable kind, would lead us to think Camphire a stimulant. These sensible
qualities have given occasion to a dispute not yet properly determined, whether
this medicine be heating or cooling. In the fauces it produces heat, and in
some, when taken into the stomach, this is affected with an uneasy sensation of
heat, while in others it may be taken in large doses, without any sensible
effect at all. Disputes also have arisen about the reason of this diversity of
the effects of Camphire. Some account for it from the Camphire being taken in
entire pieces, and allege, that in our powders there are always some entire
molecules, which, from their less specific gravity, are bouyed up, and
stimulate the sensible upper orifice of the stomach, and produce the heat
mentioned. This certainly ought to give us a caution, in order to the minute
division of Camphire, when exhibited. But to proceed with respect to its
heating and cooling effects. I think it is now pretty generally agreed, that it
is rather cooling, not stimulating the heart and vessels, nor producing
exacerbation or Fever. In short, the antispasmodic virtues of Camphire are the
only ones agreed upon, and it is for this, and such like disputed substances,
that we must make a distinct head of Antispasmodics.

As antispasmodic, it has frequently been employed in the hysteric disease, and
complaints of the hypochondriac kind, and wherever these are purely spasmodic,
in a proper dose, it may be of service. Camphire has also been employed in
Mania. Dr. Kinnear, in the Philosophical Transactions, gives us several
instances of Manias cured by it, when given in the dose of half a dram. I am
ready to believe the Doctor's success; but there are several different kinds of
Mania, and, after several experiments, I cannot say the Camphire succeeded.
Sometimes indeed it produced a quieter night and day, but never effected a
cure; but in a disease so obstinate, and so adapted to violent remedies, the
Camphire ought not too hastily to be rejected. Like other Antispasmodics,
Camphire has not been much recommended in Epilepsy, perhaps from the
uncertainty of its effects, and the great variety of causes from which that
disease may proceed; and indeed I have seen it fail in Epilepsy. But in other
cases I have seen its good effects, and where the fits were frequent, it often
produced large intervals; and where the disease was in some measure accidental,
arising from passions of the mind, as fear, etc. I have seen it work a perfect
cure.

The chief use of Camphire has been in Fever. Whether there it acts as an
Antispasmodic, I shall leave you to decide, Some extend it universally to all
Fevers, while others confine its use to those of the malignant kind, recommend
it even in the Plague itself, in putrid Fevers and all those attended with
Exanthemata, as the miliary, and petechial Fevers. In this country we have no
proper malignant Fever, so that I cannot speak as to its use in these. We use
it in the nervous Fever, where the vis vitae is sunk, and there find it of
great service, and I begin to think we should find it of still greater, were we
to employ it in larger doses. Heucher, in his Dissertation, entitled, Ignis
igne extinguendus, who appears to have much experience upon this subject,
recommends Camphire in Fevers of all kinds, especially the last we have
mentioned. Pouteau, who attends an hospital of lying-in women, in a book lately
published, entitled, Melange de Chirurgie, tells us, that an epidemic seized
upon the women, attacking them with Cholic and a Fever, whose symptoms showed
it of an inflammatory nature, and where, on dissection, the bowels were found
inflamed, which inflammation extended to the uterus, whose inner membrane
appeared livid and gangrenous. Here Mr. Pouteau exhibited Camphire, dissolved
in oil, and made into a syrup, in the quantity of five grains, of which three
doses were repeated in half an hour, and one ^^^e hours after, and so on till
about thirty grains a day, by which means he operated a perfect cure. As to the
manner of action: In one woman, after delivery, who was seized with a violent
pain and cholic, and in whom the disease was urgent, the Camphire was given to
the quantity of sixty grains in half an hour, by which she was entirely
relieved; but upon being put to bed, was seized with a paleness and chillness,
which seemed to threaten instant expiration, which symptoms were relieved by
warm wine, and the application of warm cloths. The coldness was without any
frisson, or shivering, and ended with a sweat, and the woman was quite well
afterward. An instance analogous to this has occurred to myself, of a maniac,
who got forty grains of Camphire at once, and ^ell down cold and pale, with a
weak and small pulse, but soon after recovered. Another instance of the effect
of Camphire you may see in Dr. Hoffman, in the first volume of his
Consultations, in a case entitled, De Camphorae in Dosi tres s^rupuli effectu.
I have mentioned all these instances, to show the effects of Camphire as a
Sedative, in weakening the motions of the system, in weakening the action of
the heart and vessels. But to go o^ with the use of Camphire in Fevers. Pouteau
alleges, that Camphire is of no use in a Phlegmon, but in the Erysipelas is a
perfect cure. He tells us it is of use in vernal Pleurisies and Perip^eumonies,
which, he says, are of the erysipelatous kind, and that it was from seeing in
the case of the women, the erysipelatous nature of the inflammation upon
dissection, that led him then to the use of Camphire. This sort of reasoning is
very doubtful. The Erysipelas and Phlegmon are very difficult to distinguish,
and in our practice here we use Camphire promiscuously in all external
inflammations, and seemingly with equal success, sometimes answering and
sometimes failing. There is one case, viz. in rheumatic affections, which
approaches nearer to the phlegmonic nature, where we find the Camphire of
particular use. If externally the distinction between Erysipelas and Phlegmon
is so difficult, it must be more so internally. There are very few authors who
take notice of internal Erysipelas. You may see an instance of it in Lommius;
but such are very rare. It was therefore incumbent on Mr. Pouteau to distingush
them; for Vernal Pleurisies and Peripneumonies are here, and, as far as I have
been able to learn, even the torrid zone, of a general inflammatory nature.
Nay, we may go farther, and say, that even Pouteau's dissections seem to show
the inflammation of a phlegmonic nature. If we can make any proper distinction
between phlegmon and Erysipelas, it is this, that the Phlegmon is in the proper
cellular membrane below the skin, while Erysipelas is situated in the rete
mucosum. Hence, then, we are rather to take Mr. Pouteau's facts as instances of
the powers of Camphire in inflammatory cases in general. Although we cannot
admit of the distinction here, yet there is another curious enough instance
given by the same Gentleman. He tells us, that a Gangrene is surrounded with an
erysipelatous circle, which seems to be the cause of its spreading, and that,
on the exhibition of Camphire, the progress of the mortification is stopped,
and the Erysipelas changed into a Phlegmon. So much for the use of Camphire, in
Fever. Hoffman, in his treatise, De tuto Camphorae usu interno, gives us a
great many instances of Nervous Fevers cured by Camphire, and also some of the
purely inflammatory kind. Here we do not employ it in the last mentioned cases.
When the effects of Camphire are not evident, I imagine it is from not throwing
it in sufficient large doses.

As akin to its effects in inflammatory cases, we shall next mention the use
of Camphire in Haemorrhages. Hoffman, and the German Physicians recommend it
strongly in Haemorrhages of all kinds, and when given in the dose of half a
dram, it does not increase the frequency of the pulse, and so possibly may be
of advantage; but I have had no experience of it. This quality does not agree
with another ascribed to Camphire, viz. promoting the menstrual flux, which
from its antispasm die power it may. Neither is this easily reconciled with
another effect attributed to Camphire, viz. giving fluidity to the blood. I
could wish the experiments upon which such conclusions have been formed had
been more accurately examined.

Hoffman mentions the use of Camphire in the Lues Venerea, in all its stages,
and even in a recent Gonorrhoea recommends it as a most effectual remedy.
Hoffman, in this case, appears not to have spoken from his own practice, and,
indeed, he talks very loosely upon the subject, and not condescending on the
manner of exhibition. Possibly in the recent Gonorrhoea it might be rubbed
externally on the penis, in the manner of unction, in order to allay the
inflammation, which is the first thing indicated in that disease and in the
more advanced state of the disease might be joined with other diaphoretics.
Possibly some might think here of its acting in another way. Camphire has been
said to weaken the genital powers. It is not easy from experience, to determine
this. Some experiments mentioned in authors seem directly to contradict it; and
from these Camphire seems rather to promote venery. However, if it has the
power of allaying Inflammation, stopping Haemorrhage, and acting as a powerful
Sedative to the system in general, I must say I would expect that it should
also weaken the genital parts.

This leads to another disease, viz. where an inordinate venereal stimulus
produces nocturnal pollutions or emissions without erection. The cure here is
extremely difficult, for the disease appears attended with a weakness of the
whole nervous system, and those affected in the manner mentioned, are some of
the most remarkable Hypochondriacs I have seen. In first treating this disease,
I thought of interrupting the habit, and gave Opium in this intention.
Sometimes for once it would stop the recurrence, but on frequent exhibition I
found it rather to increase the disease from its stimulating and accumulating
properties, I therefore had recourse to Camphire, which I found have the
desired effect. It was exhibited at bedtime, as anodyne, and the patient at
other times took Chalybeates. These are the particular diseases in which
Camphire has been employed. We shall now talk of some general qualities
attributed to it.

Camphire has been spoken of for its soporific virtue. In any quantity in which
we give Camphire in the human body, I have never seen this effect. It is never
evident, except when there is an irritation, which Camphire, by taking off,
allows the natural tendency to take place. Another general quality attributed
to Camphire is that of diaphoretic. Here, in so far as diaphoresis may be
promoted by relaxing the surface of the body, and taking off stricture,
Camphire may be of use; but in so far as a stimulus is wanting, Camphire is of
none at all; and I have seen two scruples of it given without any effect, and
probably when diaphoretic in Fever, it acts by taking off the inflammation, the
stimulus still subsisting.

Camphire has been said to be antiseptic, and to this quality Pringle
attributes its effect in malignant Fevers. From what we have said formerly, and
Menghini's experiments, it is probable that Camphire acts on the stomach;
though if any substance in small quantity can be antiseptic to our fluids,
Camphire has a very good chance to be so, as so easily diffusible and
penetrating over the whole system.

EMPYREUMATIC OILS.
The Empyreumatic Oils of Vegetables have probably the same virtues as those of
Animals, though at present out of use. The changes wrought both on these Oils,
and those of Animals, by repeated distillations, will be seen in the Chemistry,
which see. Lewis commends the Edinburgh Dispensatory for rejecting the Ol.
Lateritium; but this is only to be understood of its present form; for by the
changes wrought on it by repeated distillation, we have all the reason in the
world to suppose its general action on the nervous system and antispasmodic
qualities to approach to those of the Empyreumatic Oils of Animals. Dippelius.
The Chemist, who has brought these into reputation, repeated the distillation
forty times; and in the German Dispensatories, the process is directed to be
performed fifteen or twenty times. It were greatly to be wished, that some
means were found to shorten a process, which, for its expense and tediousness,
our Chemists and Apothecaries would be so unwilling to undergo The addition of
water, and distilling from thence, is the method proposed for expeding this
process by most authors. Beaume proposes the applications of Ether. He
alleges, that by the mixture of this, a thick gummy matter is precipitated
from the Empyreumatic Oil, and that the liquor above remains more pure. He says
also, that by this management more may be done by two distillations, than by
ten without it.

These Empyreumatic Oils, whether procured from animals or vegetables, are of
the same nature, and when brought to the utmost degree of purity, are very
valuable medicines. In that state they become clear and limpid, suffer a great
diminution of their specific gravity, are remarkably more volatile, and have
their odor and taste much improved. They likewise become soluble in vinous
spirits. By long or frequent exposure to the atmosphere they lose these
qualities and return to their empyreumatic state. Hence they should be kept in
small phials, close stopped, and never suffered to remain open any length of
time.


. From its ^oetor in the first distillation, we might suppose the Empyreumatic
Oil of Animals antispasmodic, but then this foetor is joined with so strong an
acrimony, that the stimulant overpowers the antispasmodic virtue. Thus Hoffman
tells us, that a few drops of the Oleum C. C. will throw a strong man into a
profuse sweat, but by repeated distillations this foetor is taken off, and the
Oils are improved greatly in volatility, their antispasmodic virtues, at every
repeated distillation, are increased, and they approach to the nature of
Camphire. Were it not for their dearness, they might certainly externally be
employed as antispasmodic. In this way they have been employed for curing
Cataracts. In one case they checked the progress of the disease, and alleviated
the symptoms; in another, which was not of long standing, the Cataract was
entirely discussed. Internally, the Empyreumatic Oils of Animals has been used
in hysteric and hypochondriac affections; but what they have been chiefly
famous in, is the Epilepsy, and I think unluckily; for this disease often may
depend on causes out of the reach of Antispasmodics, and, when it is, there are
few which can make such a change in the system as to take off the irritability;
and I imagine that Antispasmodics often fail, both in hysteric and
hypochondriac cases, because we employ them at all times, whereby they become
habitual and familiar to the system, and lose their effect when given in the
time of the paroxysm, where alone we ought to employ them. To take off the
irritability we must rely on Sedatives and Astringents. The Empyreumatic Oils
have likewise been famous in Intermittent Fevers, when given like Opium before
the paroxysm. They have also been used in Continued Fever, and with some, with
all the reputation of Camphire; though this use of them has been founded on few
experiments. They have been still more famous than Camphire for their anodyne
properties, but, like it, I imagine they act rather by taking off spasm and
irritation, than by any properties directly anodyne.

ETHER.
Ether is very analogous to the substances of which we have been just
treating. It is an oily matter, colorless when pure, and soluble in alcohol,
resembling, as I would allege, in taste and flavor, the substances of which
we have been talking, and though of different production, yet of similar
virtues. Its effects as antispasmodic are now sufficiently known. It has been
found useful in Head-achs of the spasmodic kind; nay, even in inflammatory and
rheumatic Head-achs. There is one case, viz. The Toothache, in which, if
properly applied, it not only gives a momentary, but durable relief. In order
to its action, it must be converted into vapor, which is done by the heat of
the body, and therefore, in applying it, we cover the part with the palm of the
hand, in order to drive back the vapor, and prevent its dissipation in the
air. It would be worth while to imitate the same practice with Camphire. The
Ether is more volatile, has some advantages over the Camphire, and becomes
more quickly applied to the particular nerves affected. Hence Ether is
properly preferred to it in all spasmodic affections of the stomach and primae
viae. The method of exhibiting it, is by diffusion in water, by which means, if
not dissipated, it will probably act more powerfully. How far its use might be
extended to other spasmodic cases, I do not know. Perhaps it might be employed
in Epilepsy. In Fevers it is not employed; but if you consult Dr. Hoffman, you
will find it often employed here; and in so far as his testimony is to be taken
for a medicine of his own invention, (for the Liquor anodyn^s mineralis is
nothing else but Ether diffused in Spirit of Wine,) and by which he was to
obtain profit, it is found of considerable virtues.

ESSENTIAL OILS.
These are separated and deposited in particular cells, existing more copiously
sometimes in one, and sometimes in another part of the vegetable. These we can
sometimes obtain exactly as Nature prepares them, by opening the cellular
texture of plants, and treating them by expression. But this is seldom
practicable, and we are obliged to have recourse to the aid of distillation.
But from the heat applied we should always be on our guard against any changes
they undergo in distillation, either from excess of heat giving them an
empyreumatic taint, or raising along with them a portion of grosser matter.
Procured with all the art possible, Essential Oils are liable to suffer
considerable changes on being kept, and to lose their spiritus rector and
medical portion, unless accurately secured from the air. The spiritus rector
has, indeed, gone off, but in inconsiderable quantity, but the remainder is so
entangled in the now thickened oil, as not to exert its medical virtues. All
this shows us, that if we depend on any virtues in the Essential Oils, we must
use them as recent as possible.

The virtues of Essential Oils are generally those of the Plants, from which
they are derived. Formerly it was supposed they contained all the virtues of
their respective subjects, and hence were called Essences; but this we now find
is the case with very few. The virtues of plants are not always confined to
these odorous parts. We are not to expect the Astringency of Cinnamon in its
Essential Oil, or the Bitterness of Wormwood. Hence it might be supposed, we
could talk in general of the virtues of Essential Oils as distinct; but there
are not yet a sufficient number of experiments to enable us to attempt this, or
to determine their differences.

Essential Oils are chiefly taken from the class of Stimulants. The
Verticillatae all give out an Essential Oil, the virtues of which are more in
common than that of the Plants themselves; for these often have their
distinguishing property depending on a more fixed part. With regard to the
Umbellatae, the same seems to take place; but sufficient experiments have not
been made to determine, whether the Essential Oils of this class partake of its
poisonous qualities. The Siliquosae are not commonly supposed to contain an
Essential Oil, but accurate experiments now show that they do, and that an
Essential Oil, of a valuable kind probably, as very volatile, pungent, and
diffusible, and the more volatile and penetrating the parts, the more
antispasmodic virtues we find. The spiritus rector is very copious in Mustard
and Horseradish, and so also is, probably, in their Essential Oil. The same
observations possibly apply to the oils of the Alliaciae. A particular kind of
Essential Oils is got from the Coniferae, affording us the several balsamic
substances. The Oils of the aromatic class approach to the nature of Camphire.
The Oils of other substances have different virtues, which will be understood
from what we have said of the virtues of their respective plants residing in a
volatile or fixed part.

All the Essential Oils have been introduced as antispasmodic, but fall short
of Camphire, Empyreumatic Oils, or Ether. Their action is more confined to the
part to which they are applied, and hence they are more remarkable as
Carminatives, than in their effects on the system. They, too, have more of a
stimulus than any of the substances we have been mentioning, and therefore they
should be given to the torpid and flaccid, and not to the inflammatory.

From their not containing all the virtues of the subjects from whence they are
drawn, and from their frequent adulteration, a great many of the Essential Oils
have been rejected from practice, and even those which are still in our
dispensatories, rarely occur in prescription. We are, however, apt to run into
excess, both in our favors and prejudices, and possibly there may be
exceptions to our general rules. What we have said of Essential Oils applies
still more to distilled waters; for the impregnation in them is inconsiderable,
insomuch, that little virtues are now expected from them. Even here, however,
there are exceptions, and we see Pepper-mint water is a very valuable medicine,
both as carminative and antispasmodic in the primae viae, and this virtue
probably is more active in the water than in the Essential Oils. This is
somewhat contradictory to what we were just now saying; but certain it is, that
several plants have their Essential Oils and distilled Waters more active than
in the plant in substance. A glaring instance we have of this in the
Lauro-cerasus, which Langrish found of such pernicious properties in distilled
Waters, and of a much milder nature when exhibited in substance.

MUSK.
As approaching to the former substances in virtues, I choose to treat of Musk
here. Musk is among the few medicines afforded us by the animal kingdom. It is
an animal substance of a peculiar kind, containing a considerable portion of
Essential Oil, and on that account belonging to the antispasmodic class. It is
extremely volatile, quickly diffused, the most odoriferous substance in nature,
and at the same time the most retentive of its odor. Musk has long stood in
the list of officinal medicines, but its virtues, I imagine, have not been
known till of late; for which we are entirely obliged to the Chinese. As by
them taught to exhibit it in a large dose, we have found it a valuable
antispasmodic, and indeed have used it in all kinds of spasmodic affections. We
have employed it in hysteric and hypohondriac affections, which we are very apt
to think always to take place, when there are spasmodic affections of the
alimentary canal; whereas they often proceed from Gout; but even here Musk has
been found of advantage, and it has been known to cure a Gout in the stomach,
as may be seen in the London Essays. In short, it is limited to no spasmodic
affection. It has been found of advantage in the Hiccup, and from Hillary we
learn, in those violent spasmodic affections called the Colica pictonum. The
analogy has not been extended to the Ileus, though I think it may. Musk is
often useful in Epilepsy, but with the same restriction as we have given
already upon the use of Empyruematic Oils there. In the Tetanos, we learn from
Hillary, that Musk, conjoined with Opium, is an effectual remedy. The Musk, as
we now employ it, was chiefly intoduced for its effects in the Rabies canina,
by the Chinese, and its efficacy here is now sufficiently known; and, indeed,
we have reason to imagine it would be successfully employed there, as it is
pretty generally thought, that this disease is only to be considered as a
spasmodic affection; and wherever we are doubtful of the nature of the disease,
we may reasonably deduce it from the nature of the remedy employed.

In Fever, too, Musk has been exhibited. Whether this is always to be
considered as a spasmodic affection, I shall not determine; but wherever these
occur, accompanied with tremors, subsultus tendinum, etc. Musk not only is
effectual in relieving these, but in taking off the Fever itself. From Dr.
Wall's practice we find it has been of use, where an inflammatory diathesis is
present; but whether properly it ought to be employed in such case, I shall not
determine. In all the nervous and malignant Fevers, Musk is of signal
advantage; and Mr. Reid has found it of great efficacy in the jail distemper. I
wonder Dr. Pringle says nothing of its use in these diseases. From this,
however, I would conclude, he has no material objection to it. He gives,
indeed, an instance, where its effects, he says, were not so sudden as in Mr.
Reid's cases, but this was far from making a fair trial.

There is one other disease in which Musk has been employed, viz. in Mania.
This disease often depends upon causes not to be removed by any medicine, and
is often hereditary. In such circumstances, Musk, like other remedies, fails:
But I have seen Musk have more effect than any other remedy. I have seen a cure
obtained by it; and in other cases it would probably have the same effect, had
the dose been largely continued.

ZIBETHUM, CIVET.
Civet is an odorous, oily, animal substance, which we may therefore suppose of
similar virtues to Musk; but I know nothing in practice that either confirms or
confutes this analogy.

CASTOR.
This is more frequently employed. It has its virtues depending on an Essential
Oil. Besides this and the two former, I know few animal substances of the same
kind. In the Castor the odor is not so volatile, and is of the foetid kind,
which has been supposed the foundation of its antispasmodic virtue; but from
the analogy of Musk we see, that agreeable odours may be antispasmodic as well
as fetid. Castor has been employed as an antihysteric, and in feverish cases.
Like the Essential Oils it has a stimulant joined with an antispasmodic
quality, and is often more hurtful by the former than advantageous by the
latter. Its antispasmodic qualities otherwise are by no means remarkable,
whence it is, that Castor of late has been much neglected in practice.

In our Dispensatory stand both a simple and compound tincture of Castor, the
former intended for those with whom Assa foetida disagrees. There have been
disputes about the menstruum, but it is now agreed that pure Alcohol is best,
and that any other menstruum extracts more of the disagreeable, and less of the
useful parts. Our College, in the compound tincture, have attempted a
refinement, and ordered the extraction to be made by the Spiritus volatilis
oleosus, but this limits the dose of the Castor, and weakens the spirit, which
gives us a weaker impregnation.

The next thing we consider is the proportion; and in ordering a greater
quantity of Castor, the Edinburgh college is the more judicious. Nay, Alcohol
will dissolve more Castor than is commonly imagined. The first extraction is of
the most subtle kind, the others less useful, and more disagreeable. Hence I
think we might employ cohobation; emloy, e. g. one pound of Alcohol, to extract
one ounce of Castor, and then apply the same Alcohol to fresh parcels of the
drug.

CASSUMUNIAR, PAEONIA, VALERIANA SYLVESTRIS.
We have, in the account of the substance in the Catalogue, been obliged to
transpose a little, in order to bring our most powerful Antispasmodics together.

Cassumuniar should not have stood in this part of our list, but along with the
Zedoary and Serpentaria. With the Zedoary it agrees both in botanical analogy
and sensible qualities, and hence its virtues may be deduced. It is now,
however, disregarded, though formerly in high reputation, on account of that
favor we so lavishly bestow upon exotic medicines.

Paeony has long stood in our lists, but I can find no writer or practitioner
who can give testimony of its virtues from particular experience. Besides,
there is a suspicion of its poisonous qualities, and botanical analogy inserts
it into an acrid class.

Valeriana Sylvestris is the only one of the three which is at present in
repute as an Antispasmodic. It was introduced on the authority of Fabius
Columna, one of the restorers of botanical knowledge, and a man of industry and
discernment. He tells us, he cured himself of an Epilepsy by it. It was
afterward disregarded, but is now used in every species of spasmodic
affection. Its ordour seems to point out this quality; but for my part, after
having seen it employed in a number of cases, it has failed altogether, or
produced very inconsiderable effects. Physicians acknowledge this, but say it
is owing to the smallness of the dose. Linnaeus, who seems to have had a good
opinion of Valerian, marks, as the medium dose, two drachms of the root in
powder. I have given to the quantity of half an ounce, without any effect.
However, I am apt to think this might be owing to the badness of the medicine.
Valerian is only perfect when it is taken up in the spring, before its leaves
are shot out; whereas we commonly get it as taken up at the end of summer, when
it is flowering. When in proper condition, it is alleged to be gently
purgative and diuretic. It contains a considerable portion of saline matter,
which supports its diuretic virtue.

The dose in which Valerian must be exhibited in substance, shows that little
advantage can be got in extracting it by any menstruum, as we can hardly get
one in which it could be taken in sufficient quantity. Hence the impropriety of
Alcohol, Brandy, or even Wine. Water is the only menstruum by which we can
extract it, and at the same time could exhibit it, thus extracted, in
sufficient quantity. The London College infuse it in Spt. volatilis aromaticus,
but it is plain that this must give but a weak impregnation, that the
impregnation got can only be exhibited in very small doses, and that the whole
of its virtues must depend upon the menstruum. It is the chief ingredient in
our Tinctura Cephalica.

VOLATILE ALKALI.
I have said that the antispasmodic virtue resided in Essential Oil. There
seems an exception with regard to the volatile alkaline salts, but if we
consider their origin, and inflammability with nitre, this exception will not
appear so striking as would be at first imagined. As Musk is the most
odoriferous of natural substances, so Volatile Alkali is the most odoriferous
of the artificial. Upon this footing it has been frequently experienced a
powerful Antispasmodic. It is considerably acrid when applied to the tongue,
and that in inconsiderable quantity; but if by any means we could defend from
its action the mouth and fauces, it might be thrown into the stomach in a large
dose, even without inconvenience. From its volatility and subtilty it proves
the quickest Antispasmodic in the stomach in nervous affections. I have said
these spasmodic affections often depend upon Gout.

Hence it is employed in all cases of Fever, where Simulants and Antispasmodics
are necessary. In consequence of those virtues, it is a powerful Diaphoritic.
On this account it has been said to be alexiphermic, or expelling poison and
contagion of all kinds. Now we know that in the case of poison, as well as many
others, we ought not so much to regard the cause as the effects, viz. the
spasmodic affections, etc. commonly produced. It is on this account Jussieu, in
France, has found the Volatile Alkali, after repeated trials, so useful in
obviating the effects of the bite of the viper. Thus from the nature of the
remedy, we may fairly make a judgment of the nature of the disease. But with
regard to its effects in determining to the surface. The danger of Fevers
depends mostly on the cold fit, and it is in the cold fit of Intermittents that
most people die. To relieve this, we have not many medicines, but the Volatile
Alkali is employed with advantage. This cold fit appears in various forms, and
I have seen it often appear in a straitening of the chest, and cough. The
Volatile Alkali given here, brings on an agreeable heat, and determines
powerfully to the surface. It is also recommended as pectoral on the same
footing. We cannot omit saying somewhat here as to the antiseptic quality
attributed to it by Pringle. It is as possessing this virtue, that he employs
it in malignant and putrid Fever; but it is evident, from the small quantity in
which it acts, and the suddeness of the operation, that, as antiseptic to our
fluids, it is of no efficacy, and that it acts almost entirely in the stomach.

Formerly it was supposed that the Volatile Alkali differed according to the
substances from which it was procured; but now we know, that, if equally pure,
it is always one and the same. Got from Sal Ammoniac, it is pure; as procured
from animal substances, it is contaminated with empyreumatic oil, and perhaps
that oil contributes to its virtues; but surely the difference cannot be great;
and if we want to join such an Antispasmodic along with it, we should choose one
whose dose and effects we can better ascertain, e. g. the Oleum animale. But
there is another more considerable difference, viz. as it is employed in its
caustic, or mild state. Certainly, as an application to the nostrils, the
former is preferable, and the French practice with Eau de Luce, confirmed,
indeed, by our own experience, shows the usefulness of it in that condition. It
acts without inconvenience, and more suddenly, which is a great matter; and
indeed I make no doubt, but that in almost all cases it would be preferable,
could we defend from its acrimony the mouth and fauces.

FULIGO, SOOT.
I have set down this among the Vegetables, although I believe there is little
difference between the vegetable and fossile Soots. An arsenical matter,
however, may accompany frequently the fossile Soot, volatilized from the
pyrites contained in fossile inflammables, and therefore a proper caution is
necessary when we use it as a medicine. Soot is a very heterogeneous substance,
containing, besides Sal Ammoniac, a quantity of naked Volatile Alkali,
enveloped more or less in an empyreumatic oil. The Volatile Alkali is very apt
to fly off, and hence we should use the Soot as fresh as possible. Even as the
Volatile Alkali and Oil stand in Soot, they are certainly antispasmodic; and I
have known obstinate head-achs cured by the use of Soot, in the dose of half a
dram, continued for some days; but then in other cases it failed in the same
disease.

As Fuligo even fails in substance, much more will it do so in the weak
impregnation obtained by tincture. The Assa foetida joined to it may be of some
advantage, but that can be very little. The London College gives us a tincture
of Assa foetida with Soot, which may be useful, as the menstruum employed
extracts the Essential Oil, on which its virtues depend; but even there the
dose is limited by the menstruum.

We have now finished particular antispasmodics, and have, according to our
custom, subjoined some general titles: Astringents, Emolients, Demulcents,
Stimulants, Sedatives.

Astringents are antispasmodic, by taking off the laxity on which mobility
depends. All our Antispasmodics are only effectual in the time of the fit. It
is Astringents which we must use to obviate the return of spasm, and when spasm
occurs, Antispasmodics. To obviate Spasm we use Iron, Lead, Copper, and
Peruvian Bark. Spasm may sometimes, be owing to an over distention, as well as
laxity, and hence Emollients, by relaxing the simple solids, may take off the
continuance of the Spasm. A very frequent cause of Spasm is Acrimony.
Demulcents, by obtunding this, will take off the Spasm, by lessening or
removing the cause. It is a doubt whether all our Antispasmodics are not
stimulant or sedative. Very frequently at east we can refer them to one of
these heads.

We have now finished the consideration of Medicines which act on the Solids.
These, as most important, we have considered first; for the medicines which act
upon the Fluids, do so commonly in consequence of acting on the Solids. I do
not say this is the constant, but certainly it is the general case, and every
day we see Writers, as well as Practitioners, inclining to the pathology of the
solids.

The medicines, which act on the fluids, are divided into those, 1. Which act
on the circulating fluids; 2. Into the evacuants, or those which act on the
excretions. The Alterantia, or those medicines which act on the fluids still
remaining in the system, may be divided into two kinds; 1st, into such as
affect their consistence or cohesion; 2dly, into such as affect the mixture of
our fluids. To the first head belong the Attenuantia and Inspissantia; to the
second head the Demulcentia, Antacida, Antalkalina, and Antiseptica. Before we
enter into the consideration of these, we shall endeavor to say something on
the nature of Animal Fluids in general, whether with regard to their chemical
consideration, or with regard to Materia Medica

On the NATURE of ANIMAL FLUIDS.
This I consider as the most difficult part of the task in which I have been
engaged. Most of what has been said or wrote upon this subject is very
imperfect. There was no book in which I expected more than the second volume of
Haller's Physiology; but as a compilation, I find it only collected from those,
whose views are not opened on the subject, and still leaving us as uncertain as
before. Perhaps more is contained in that book than any where else; but there
is scarcely a page in which I cannot see faults, in which I cannot point out
errors We would wish to say here, that this censure of Dr. Haller's works must
be understood to be strictly confined to those parts of it only which relate to
the chemical doctrine of the fluids; for we know that in other respects our
Author has a high esteem of the judgment and erudition of Dr. Haller.
. There are two other authors from whom materials may be drawn; Gaubius, in his
Pathology, and Senac, in his treatise Du Coeur. Even in these, however, the
materials are involved in obscurity, or error. Formerly I intended to have
taken Gaubius for a text, but I found I should be so often engaged in
criticism, that it would have been very disagreeable to those who are engaged
in the beginning of study. I do not pretend to correct the errors of these
writers, but only to point out what I think is fully established on the
subject. All the fluids in animal bodies must be, if not formally, yet
materially present in the common mass of blood. In considering this, then, we
consider the foundation of all the rest.

In the common mass of blood three different portions may be discerned. First,
the coagulable lymph; secondly, the red globules; thirdly, the serosity. These
three portions are constantly observable in the blood of animals. There are,
indeed, a set of animals called the Exsanguia, but I find that there are very
few of these, even those of the in^ect tribe, but what contain more or less of
the abovementioned portions. Although these be the proper constituant parts of
animal blood, yet it must be allowed there are several others occasionally
present, as, e. g. a quantity of unassimilated chyle, and, though not so
constantly, a quantity of reabsorbed secreted liquors, either of those intended
to be thrown out of the body, or of those secreted into particular cavities,
for particular purposes. Besides these, there may be, on various occasions, a
number of extraneous matters, not capable of being converted into animal
fluids, taken in with our aliment, or given in the way of medicine, etc. which
are conveyed out of the system, as soon as the laws of the economy admit.
These we shall talk of afterward. At present we proceed to consider those
principal portions we have mentioned; and first,

COAGULABLE LYMPH.
This was first taken notice of by Malphigi, under the title of the Pars
fibrosa sanguinis, and is what Davies and others call the Gluten. I keep to the
term imposed by Senac, before whose writings it had not been taken notice of as
a constant constituent part of the blood. That it is always present, is shown
by easy experiments, by washing the crassamentum, by agitating the blood drawn
from veins or arteries in a close vessel, and pouring off the other parts from
it, and by coagulating the serum. In is also found both in the diseased and
healthy, appearing in the form of what is called inflammatory crust.

From examining it, in consequence of the experiments abovementioned, it
appears to be that portion of the blood most disposed to concrete upon
stagnation, or cooling of the whole; and, therefore, the foundation of the
concretion in extravasated blood. From concreting along with the coloring
parts, it has commonly escaped the notice of Physicians. When freed of this
coloring part, it appears more or less white, perfectly mild and bland,
resembling, in sensible qualities, and chemical principles, the albumen ovi of
oviparous animals; whence I conclude them to be entirely the same substances,
only that the coagulable lymph can never be got so accurately separated, as the
albumen ovi. As that serves for the nourishment of the chick, so the coagulable
lymph is the nutritious part of animal fluid, that into which our aliment is
converted, and that in consequence of whose changes the solid parts of the body
are formed. This is confirmed when we compare it with animal solids, which,
upon chemical trials, and other appearances, are evidently one and the same
kind of matter. The coagulable lymph is chiefly acted upon, or undergoes
changes, in consequence of heat, cold, or putrefaction. It is not to be changed
by any substances which can be taken into the vessels of animals consistent
with life. It is, indeed, affected by concentrated acids, caustic alkali, and
neutrals, but never with these when taken in by the mouth, and when injected
into the vessels they produce death.

2. RED GLOBULES.
By former Physiologists these were considered as a very great proportion of
our fluids; but are now found, in comparison with the whole, to come in but for
a very small share. In other respects they are not near so much the object of
our attention as formerly; for the Lewenhoeckian doctrine now is entirely
exploded, which no observation, even with the microscope, has confirmed, and
which every later observation contradicts. Every experiment proves them to be a
distinct part of the blood.

The chief property of red globules is, that they refuse mixture, and are only
diffused in the other parts. With the serosity they readily admit of diffusion;
and though joined to the coagulable lymph, yet there is no intimate union, and
the two portions can be easily separated without resolution of their mixture.
It is on account of this want of miscibility, that they appear in a globular
form, in the same manner as oil in water, or, if the oil be in greater
proportion, water in oil. We never can see the ultimate particles of bodies;
and whenever we see a globular appearance in mixed bodies, we must conclude it
is only in consequence of diffusion. Gaubius supposes the red globules of an
oily nature; but their more ready diffusibility with water, preferable to the
serum or coagulable lymph, contradicts this opinion. Neither, indeed, will they
unite with oils, which holds true with no other oily body I know. It has been
said they are inflammable, and give out much oil in distillation; but against
this it may reasonably be alleged, that those who made the experiment were not
sufficiently accurate in separating them from the other parts. Thus we have
said what the red globules are not, I wish we could say what they are. We have
called them globular, but Haller and Senac dispute about this, the one calling
them globular, the other lenticular. Another question has arisen, viz. Whether
every single globule is of a red color; or whether they only attain that when
placed in a quantity above each other, in the same manner as happens in tinged
glass, which, if divided into thin films, becomes transparent and colorless;
but if these transparent colorless films be laid above each other, the same
color as formerly again appears. Haller says, that the globules have singly
their red color; Senac the contrary. We may allow to Senac, that if the single
globules are red, they are but faintly so, and that it depends chiefly on their
being laid on one another; and that the deepness or brightness of the red
depends on the diffusion or concentration of the red globules,. I am inclined
to think of their separate red color; for in very small proportion they give
color to a large quantity of water. The nature of this part of our blood
depends so much on microscopical observations, and these are so liable to
error, that we cannot depend upon one particular which has been said concerning
it. It is said that the red globules remain not only of the same size, in the
same animal, at different times, but in all different animals at all times. If
this were true, it would be very difficult to account for; but I imagine the
fact is not accurately established. Whether the color of the red globules is
heightened or lessened by particular circumstances, and what is the reason of
these changes, is a great desideatum; but not determined. That they are changed
by putrefaction, may be allowed; but that ever their ultimate particles are
changed, require confirmation, or that any medicines exist which have the power
of altering their color or form. In short, how the red globules are produced,
to what purpose they serve, in what proportion they exist, and by what powers
they are altered, seems altogether unknown.

3. SEROSITY.
Allowed to cool, the blood spontaneously separates into Crassamentum and
Serum. These are commonly thought homogeneous, but it is found the Crassamentum
is compounded of the two last parts which we have mentioned, and the Serum of
the Lympha coagulabilis, and the portion which by Senac has been properly
called Serosity, or that watery part which runs out of the pores of the cut
Serum when coagulated. It is observed, that, when warm, the Serum shows both a
taste and odor, which experiment finds to be owing to the serosity, which
consists of pure water with saline matters dissolved, and probably a portion of
an oily matter adhering, in which is found to possess the taste and odor
mentioned, more or less strongly, in proportion as it has been accurately
separated from the coagulable lymph. The Serosity, then, is to be considered as
a separate part of the blood, and from many circumstances it appears akin to
the urine in the kidneys, and to be properly the excrementitious part of the
blood. As putrefaction renders volatile, saline and oily matters, it is no
wonder how they come to exist in the serosity. It is these which probably fly
off in the halitus sanguinis, which is not, as some have imagined, a distinct
part, but found by experiment to be of the same nature with the Serosity.
Whether a peculiar matter flies off along with the Serosity, is not so easy to
decide. Experiments show, that air is contained in the blood, but whether this
be common or fixed air, is not determined. Shut up accurately in close vessels,
the blood remains remarkably fluid for a long time. Air is, in some measure,
the foundation of fluidity in water, and on both these accounts may perhaps be
supposed the foundation of fluidity in our blood. The only author from whom you
will, perhaps, gain any knowledge on the Serosity of the Blood, is Mr. Senac.

With regard to the union of the Serosity with the other parts of the blood. It
pretty manifestly does not unite with the red globules. I said that the red
globules were washed out with the Serum, but then they very soon precipitate to
the bottom. How far the Serosity unites with the coagulable lymph, is not so
certain. It is plain that a portion of the coagulable lymph spontaneously
separates from the Serosity, to form the crassamentum, but then another part
goes along with the Serosity; but I imagine there is never between them a
perfect union. The serosity is always acrid, and whatever substance, therefore,
it is mixed with, it must communicate that acrimony to; but the coagulable
lymph, separated from the Serosity, retains no such property. Again, when we
coagulate the Serum, we find the Serosity run out from the pores of the
coagulable lymph, which shows that it was only entangled in the same manner as
the fluid volatile alkali coagulates with spirit of wine. From this view we
would be led to imagine, that the three parts of the blood are never joined by
proper mixture, but only kept in union by motion and agitation. If this be
confirmed by useful purposes deduced, as thence accruing to the animal
economy, it will appear more certain. The Serosity seems designed to take off
the putrid parts of the blood, and to furnish the excrementitious secretions.
If a proper mixture should take place, it would take off the nutritious
coagulable lymph along with it, which we could not conceive to be separated by
the secretory organs. Again, the Serosity seems to hold any occasional matters
which may exist in the blood, and which, by this means, are soon carried off by
the secretions, but otherwise would later the nature of the animal fluids. This
shows that matters, introduced into the mass of blood, can have little effect
in altering i^, but may be, as they actually are, soon discovered in the
secretion.

Besides these there is a portion of matter pretty constantly present in the
body, viz. the oil which must have been secreted from the common mass into the
cellular texture and may again be reabsorbed. How this exists in the blood is
not determined; whether united with all the other parts of the blood
beforementioned, and separated by the secretory organ; whether formally as
well as materially present; or whether joined with the serosity. It is this
last opinion I am apt to favor, for we find often the oil formally present in
the urine; we find, that in a due quantity the oil will act as a demulcent, and
will take off, e. g. the acrimony of the mucus in the branchiae, whence we
would be laid to conclude, that it is designed by nature to obviate the
acrimony of the serosity. Wherever there is a tendency to putrefaction, there
the acrimony of the serosity is increased, and there consequently would be more
occasion for the oil as a demulcent. Accordingly we find, that in ninety-nine
Fevers of an hundred, there is an emaciation and an absorption of the oil from
the cellular membrane.

May we then conclude, that those we have mentioned are the only constituent
parts of the blood, or are there still others? It has been supposed by Haller,
Gaubius, and Senac, that there is a (...) matter similar to the vegetable
mucus; and the latter also supposes what he calls a gelatinous matter. It will
be proper to take notice of their arguments. We are daily taking in a quantity
of vegetable aliment, which furnishes a vegetable mucus, which may pass through
the primae viae unchanged, and exist in the mass of blood. Indeed this seems to
be the case; but then this mucus fl^ats in the serosity without furnishing any
nutritious fluid, and so is thown out of the body. By these Gentlemen it has
been said to furnish the mucous secretions. If you look into Dr. Fordyce's
Thesis de Catarrho, you will find the secreted mucus has a great resemblance to
the coagulable lymph, from some experiments, which indeed were made with a view
to this very question; a portion only of the serosity being mixed along with
it; and indeed every view of this subject seems to confirm what is shown by
these experiments. As a foundation, indeed, for his opinion, Senac alleged,
that the mucus is present in the mass with the same qualities as secreted. He
took a stomach, and emulged from it a considerable quantity of mucus, more, he
says, than could be contained in the follicles, and which, therefore, he
concludes must have been drawn directly from the blood. But who determined for
Senac the capacity of the follicles of the stomach, or showed him, that, though
that was not great, it might not be compensated by their number? Again, in any
irritation applied to the excretories, the mucus runs out in a fluid state, and
it is only in consequence of stagnation, that it attains its viscid
consistence. Hence, then, we are led to think, that any mucus Senac obtained
from a dead animal, was only in consequence of its having stagnated in the
follicles of the stomach. Besides, Senac always supposes the mucous matter to
exist formally in the mass of blood, whereas it is much more probable that it
is formed in the secretory organs.

As to the gelatinous matter, it may be more shortly discussed. Senac only
infers the presence of this matter, from the nature of animal solids, which are
made up of the fluids, and are resolved into a jelly different from the
coagulable lymph, which jelly he concludes thence must exist in the blood. But
we never can fairly resolve animal solids; nay, as in the case of vegetables,
there is always a successive solution and resolution, as will appear
sufficiently evident from the experiments of the Bologna Society, and of
Geoffroy; so that still we may admit that animal solids are composed of the
coagulable lymph, although by reason of the resolution which ensues, we cannot
extract it in its original form.

Having thus ascertained the constituent parts of our blood, it would be of
advantage to determine the proportion. This, however, cannot well be done.
Although only diffused or entangled, it is very difficult to disjoin the parts
of the blood, the serosity entangling and being entangled in the coagulable
lymph, and that again concreting with the red globules; and although these
parts may be separated, yet never can the separation be made with that accuracy
sufficient to determine the proportion. Haller, when he examines the quantity
of cruor, has no notion of its entangling the serosity; and, in short, all the
experiments which have been made before it was known of what parts the
proportion was to be assigned, must go for nothing. En gros, the red globules
seem to be in smallest proportion, and the serosity in greater than the
coagulable lymph.

Here, then, we must consider the changes the blood is apt to undergo, by
spontaneous or artificial separation. Nothing is more common than to judge of
diseases by the appearance and separation of the blood; but when we consider
the variety of circumstances which influence this separation, the size of the
orifice, the manner in which the blood flows, the shape and capacity of the
vessel which receives it, the temperature of the air at the time, the air in
which the blood is allowed to stagnate, etc. we must easily see that our
judgment must be very fallacious, when which of these different causes affects
the separation at the time, is so difficult to ascertain. Brown Langrish has
made many experiments to determine the judgment to be formed of diseases from
the appearance of the blood; but as he could not, and certainly was not aware
of the causes, which varied the blood's appearance, I maintain his experiments
must go for nothing. May we not also suppose, that the blood in the vessels is
affected with very small changes, while the real nature and condition of the
fluids is not altered? Senac gives us an instance of blood's concreting, and
forming a rope as it flowed from the vein, without its appearing that the
patient labored under any disease. Again, a ligature kept on a limb for some
time, will produce that inflammatory crust, which has always been considered as
a morbid state of the blood. I had a patient affected with an Epilepsy, who had
been accustomed to have blood drawn before the fit, at which time it appeared
of the natural condition, but in an hour after, in the time of the fit, the
blood drawn concreted, without any spontaneous separation. Upon the whole, it
will appear, that our judgment, with regard to the state of the fluids, is at
present upon a very uncertain footing.

I have said, the Serosity is a watery fluid, and therefore not apt to
concrete, especially on account of the saline matters dissolved in it. The red
globules show no concreting disposition, and it is therefore only the
coagulable lymph, which, in its own nature, is ready to concrete. It will be
therefore next curious to enquire, what are the means in the living body which
prevent this concretion, and allow its passage through the minutest vessels. 1.
From the view of the proportion, we may perceive that the diffusion of the more
fluid parts will prevent the concretion of the rest. 2. Whatever preserves the
mixture, preserves the fluidity. This preservation will then depend on
agitation, and the action of the vessels. How much these take place, appears
from experiments out of the body. If blood is kept in constant agitation, even
below the animal heat, the fluidity will be preserved. 3. We must take in, as a
prevent^^ of concretion, the degree of heat in animal bodies, which, with a
certain degree of motion, and close vessels, always take place in the animal
economy. Here we would be apt to rest in explaining the fluidity in the mass
of blood, but I am sorry to say it, still upon imperfect foundation. If we
agitate vehemently blood in close vessels, the coagulable lymph is separated,
and the other parts may be poured out from it. This coagulation even takes
place in animal bodies, even when life and the natural heat subsists. We
constantly find it in aneurismal sacs, and often taking place in the heart,
under the name of polypus. However, I am apt to think these polypi do not so
often take place in living healthy bodies as is imagined, but are formed in the
agonies of death, or immediately after it. Still, however, there are instances
of their continuing for a length of time; i. e. instances where all the
circumstances we mentioned as preserving the fluidity take place, and yet a
concretion obtains. This is very difficult to explain. Perhaps this may
illustrate it. It is a curious fact in chemistry, that when two bodies are
joined by solution, or diffusion, more particularly by the first, as in a
saturated solution of salt, the chrystallization will not take place, except
where there is a contact with some third body, viz. the air, a solid body
immersed, the bottom, or sides of the vessel. Thus we see that if a dry body is
put into the blood, a considerable concretion will be formed upon it, as in the
whisking of the blood with rods. Hence we are furnished, besides ligatures,
with another means of stopping haemorrhage, and it is by furnishing an
opportunity to this concretion, that charpie acts, and probably agaric, whose
fine fibrous texture gives an occasion to the separation; for which reason, I
imagine the scrapings of a hat would answer the same purpose. This same fact
bears a curious application, and seems probably to be the reason of the
separation of saline matters and air from water, upon filtration through sand.

But to proceed; this concretion does not take place in our vessels because
there is never a dry body in contact with them, a thin fluid, oozing out from
their side, continually moistening them, of the same nature perhaps as the
serosity, and repelling the particles of the blood. But why does not the
coagulable lymph concrete to the sides of vessels applied to receive the blood?
Because, probably, the heat preserves the fluidity for a little, and the
serosity gets itself interposed; but wherever there is a dry contact the
concretion takes place. This dryness happens in the vessels, as in the case of
Inflammation, and probably also aneurismal sacs; and hence it is that I
imagine, where polypi are found they are owing to a previous Inflammation. All
this, however, is not sufficient. Other concretions take place, and I suspect,
that a violent agitation, produced in a particular portion of the blood, may
produce them. Hence, then, concretion is not a consequence of the ordinary
circulation, because there the powers are so directed as to preserve the proper
mixture and proper fluidity; whereas, in the agitation of a particular part of
the blood, I conceive the serum taking hold of the red globules, and allowing
the lymph to concrete. But even in the progressive motion, it is possible the
agitation may go so far as to give occasion to the concretion of the said
lymphatic part. In a healthy person, this does not take place, and the
coagulable lymph does not separate from the red globules, but when violently
agitated by inflammation the lymph gets up to the surface and concretes by
itself. This inflammatory crust is no new matter generated by the inflammation,
as some have imagined, nor is it then present in greater quantity. No
experiments have been adduced to confirm these opinions. I have said, that it
was very difficult to assign the proportions of our blood, and therefore this
question ought properly to remain in doubt, as belonging to that head. In spite
of this, I believe we may take upon us to determine; for when this inflammatory
crust is seen, the crassamentum is in less quantity and not so firm. Neither,
indeed, can we conceive in what manner such new matter can be generated. If a
ligature produce the same appearance, we cannot imagine it arises from any
change of aliment. As the serosity is furnished by the coagulable lymph, and as
we know so little of the red globules, we cannot suppose, or at least explain
any change in the latter part, which should convert it into coagulable lymph,
or in order to the same purpose, any retrograde change in the serosity. It may
here be asked, whether or not this crust is increased in density? This I would
deny; for in its spontaneous separation it never appears of greater density,
than when procured in the ordinary way. Nay, the force of cohesion in the
particles of the coagulable lymph seems rather diminished; which gave occasion
to the separation. In putrid Fevers, and scorbutic cases, this crust is very
frequent, and there, as in other cases, depends on some change of the lymph,
which causes an easy separation. The appearance of this crust is commonly, and
may be taken as a sign of inflammation; but it is by no means an universal one;
for in healthy persons it will remain for a length of time, as, e. g. in the
case of childbearing women. In Fevers, where there is no topical inflammation,
the crust has commonly been supposed an indication of inflammatory diathesis,
and of blood letting. I would allow this, in so far as we allowed the
inflammatory crust as a sign of inflammation. Formerly I used to employ this
appearance as a mark, whether a fever was nervous or inflammatory; and, indeed,
it often answers; but now I find that it is not a constant mark, and that the
Fevers, in which it appears, would often be the worse for having the evacuation
pushed, and were of the nervous or putrid kind.

Having now spoken of the consistence of our fluids in health, we proceed to
consider their morbid variations, with regard to the two heads marked out in
the Catalogue, of Attenuants and Inspissants.

When we consider the subtle vessels, through which the circulation is to be
made, we would think, that only a fluid of extreme exility was fit for it; but
we find that our fluids, which seem not to be of a perfect fluidity, are
capable even of filtrating along the sides of the simple fibers, through pores
inconceivably small. There is, then, adapted to each animal a certain degree of
fluidity, which must be placed as a standard, from which deviations on either
side may be produced. Where the consistence is thicker than the natural, we
call it lentor, where thinner, no technical term has been applied.

Proper consistence seems to depend, first, on the due proportion of the parts;
secondly, on these parts being kept accurately diffused together; thirdly, on
the due force of cohesion in the constituent parts of each.

1. Due proportion of the several parts. In order to produce lentor, we should
conceive this chiefly to arise from an over-proportion of coagulable lymph, and
1. from a large proportion of aliments, or convertible parts, thrown into
bodies of strong and rigid solids, we might suppose this increased quantity of
coagulable lymph to take place; and, in fact, different proportions seem to be
in different animals, and if we examine them in gross, we shall find, that the
density of the blood is in proportion to the strength and vigor of the solids,
and therefore in proportion to the different age and sex, and these being
given, to the different temparament with regard to rigidity, etc. but, as
arising from these causes, lentor will seldom be a disease. Rigid and robust
solids require a strong and dense blood as a balance, nor indeed do I think it
ever probable, that the natural powers can produce a disease. We may indeed
see, that the coagulable lymph is in greater proportion where there are dense
solids, but then the greater action of these solids will prevent its
concretion. Again, wherever the coagulable lymph is increased, it has the power
of inviscating the other parts, of preventing the secretions, and thus
obviating the effects of lentor, and if at any time the secretions be
diminished, the saline parts must be increased, must become more and more
putrid, and thereby occasion a greater fluidity of the whole. Although,
however, we should allow, that an increase of animal nourishment in weak
persons may produce an increase of coagulable lymph, yet even here the
consistence will not be much varied, for it will be counterbalanced by
increased putrefaction lessening the cohesion. Upon the whole, there is little
reason to suppose the animal powers can produce lentor from increasing
coagulable lymph, nor indeed do we know any matter which particularly furnishes
coagulable lymph, or that it can be procured by any means, but from our aliment.

What next will vary the consistence, is the proportion of serum. This may be
diminished either by too great evacuation, or by the ordinary evacuation not
being supplied by drink. With regard to the last, as the diminution of drink
diminishes all the fluid secretions, its want is compensated. It may act also
in another way. The fluid accompanying our aliment promotes its solution: The
less of this, therefore, we take in, less nourishment is extracted, and
consequently less coagulable lymph is carried into the blood, so that in either
way, no increase of the blood's density is produced. I think this is confirmed
by experience. I know many persons, especially those of the female sex, who
take exceedingly little drink, and yet there blood is not more dense than that
of other people; and the same thing I have found to take place with myself,
and, therefore, I think persons, in this respect, may be allowed their own
choice, without suspicion of any bad consequences. Another counterpoise to the
keeping back of fluid parts is, that the fluid secretions are diminished, as
the urine and perspiration; from which retention of the saline parts, a
putrescency takes place, which compensates entirely the effect of the
diminution of drink on the consistence. Next, with regard to the abstraction of
the fluid parts. In the living body there is no exhalation or dissipation of
fluid parts but what is made by secretion. Nothing is more talked of by
Physicians, than that by the dissipation of the more fluid parts, an
inspissation of the rest is produced; and yet I am of opinion, it very seldom
takes place. The most considerable fluid secretion is that of urine, not,
indeed, greater than perspiration, but more considerable, as made from a
smaller portion of blood. Let us suppose one dram of blood goes through them
The Kidneys.
at every pulsation of the heart, which let us suppose sixty-four times in a
minute, then will eight ounces of blood pass through the kidneys in a minute,
which is a very moderate calculation, considering the proximity of the
emulgents to the heart, and thirty pounds in an hour. From this quantity let us
suppose four ounces of urine in an hour to be separated, which is a great
proportion, making six pounds a day, then will the whole quantity secreted be
only an hundred and twentieth part of the blood which secreted it, which can
very little alter the consistence. When such is the case in the secretion of
urine, where so much is taken from so little blood, much more will it take
place in other more diffused secretions. But when are the secretions increased?
When there is a considerable quantity of fluid taken in. Again, when the
secretions are increased, the increase of one is always followed by the
diminution of another, and the body becomes in an absorbent state, and attracts
moisture from the air. Again, increased secretion is always followed by thirst,
and then a supply of fluid is thrown in, or, if we are prevented from drink for
any length of time, it never misses to diminish the secretions. Hence, then,
dissipation of the fluid parts can have little effect in producing lentor.

The second cause of Lentor may be assigned Defect of Motion. To this purpose
it may be observed, in the first place, that if blood be received and kept in
close vessels, it retains as much fluidity as is consistent with the cold to
which it is exposed, so that without exhalation, the fluidity is not much
altered, and accordingly in the smaller vessels of a dead body the whole was
fluid almost as in the living. Sometimes, indeed, in the larger vessels we do
find coagula, but these are owing to particular causes, e. g. agitations in a
particular part, or the agonies of death. In fact, we have not much to suspect
from small stagnation, unless some other circumstances concur to favor some
secretion; or if concretion should take place, fluidity is soon restored by the
action of the containing vessels, as in persons recovered from a long syncope.
This is most remarkable in the sleeping animals, whose fluids actually concrete
during the winter, and are restored to fluidity by the vernal warmth exciting
the action of the vessels. Van Swieten clearly shows, that in a bat's wing,
which he examined, the first change was produced in the solids, and that the
grume accompanied their motion till it was totally dissolved. Formerly we
imagined, that when fluids were concreted beyond the vessels, as in Cancers and
Scirrhosities, that the disease was incurable; but late experience has happily
shown this to be a mistake, and awakes our remembrance to other facts of the
same kind, long ago alleged. Such are the provisions we see afforded by the
animal economy, in order to avoid disease, insomuch that hope need not fail us
while life remains. Even when the blood stagnates in such a manner as to favor
concretion, as in Ecchymoses, false Aneurisms, etc. we see there are
undoubtedly some powers in the animal economy, which restore fluidity, and
cause absorption.

The third cause of Lentor may be an increased Force of Cohesion in the
coagulable lymph, or in any other part of our blood. This may arise, first,
from the nature of the fluids themselves; or, secondly, coagulable substances
applied; or, thirdly, coagulating powers, as cold. The first may take place in
consequence of difference of aliment, and vigor of the assimilatory powers;
but in so far as increased cohesion arises from these, it is never a disease,
for it is always in proportion to the strength of the solids. But aliment may
be considered in another light, according to its perspirability; e. g. Oysters
are more unperspirable than mutton, which is explained from their greater
viscidity in the blood. How far this may go on in producing a viscidity of the
whole mass is uncertain. If the same aliment be not continued, the effect is
s^on over; if the aliment is continued for a length of time, a disease indeed
is produced, but then the retained perspiration obviates the viscidity, which
would be apt to occur, by causing putrefaction; and therefore it is a Scurvy,
and not a lentor, which we must apprehend from too viscid aliment.

The second means of increasing cohesion was, by coagulating substances
introduced into the blood. These Boerhaave enumerates in his Coagulum acidum
spirituosum et austerum, under the last comprehending Metallic Salts, etc. All
these, when diluted, lose their coagulating property, and without dilution they
cannot enter into our blood. They can only be given in small quantity at a
time, that must be diluted before it pass our fauces, is diluted in every step
of its progress through the alimentary canal, carried into the lacteals is
diluted with the lymph refluent from every part of the system, entering the
subclavian is diluted by the blood, and is thrown out from the left ventricle,
diffused through all the fluids of the body. It is plain, then, in such
dilution and diffusion, the sensible effects of coagulating substances
introduced by the mouth cannot be perceived. Injected, indeed, into the veins,
they will exert their effects, but then this is not to be considered as a
disease, and, in fact, is entirely incompatible with life. Dr. Boerhaave adds
an instance of the effects of Gypsum, which needs no animadversion here.
Coagulum, then, in our fluid, from coagulating substances, can never take place
in the living body.

The third means of increasing cohesion mentioned, was by coagulating powers
applied, i. e. Cold or Heat. Why such opposite degrees of the same power should
have such similar effects, it is not our business here to enquire. The
coagulating effects of neither of these on our fluids can take place in the
living body. Cold cannot coagulate the fluids till it has destroyed the action
of the moving fibers, and the mobility of the nervous power, to which all its
effects are to be imputed. On the other hand, coagulating heat can never take
place till it has destroyed the whole system, or the peculiar part to which it
is applied. From these considerations it will appear, that though we cannot
absolutely deny such effect upon the fluids, yet that it occurs much more
rarely than was imagined, and that, when it does, it is not much to be regarded.

Although not strictly connected with this subject of Lentor, I cannot help
taking notice, that Obstruction has been considered as an universal cause of
disease. Obstruction may depend either on the thickened consistence of the
fluids, or the straitening of the vessels. This last is what I imagine to be
most frequent, and from what we have said, I think, it will appear that from
the first cause it very rarely occurs. For this subject I refer you to Haller,
who alleges, in consequence of direct observation, that Obstruction at all
very seldom takes place, and who denies absolutely the principal species of it
alleged, the error loci. In short, it is proved, that Obstruction without
Irritation, is of little consequence in the system. All this applies to the
whole pathology of the fluids.

Before I leave this subject, of the Consistence of our Fluids, I cannot help
speaking of the phlegma calidum et frigidum of the ancients, which, indeed,
some of the moderns have endeavored to support. By the first is meant
constantly Inflammatory Lentor, so that it is plain here, a natural portion of
our blood has been mistaken for a morbid one. If the coagulable lymph thus be
the subject of the phlegma calidum, I deny absolutely that any such thing as
pituita frigida takes place, beyond the primae viae at least Boerhaave has
given us many instances of glutin^sum spontaneum, but you will find they all
occur in consequence of secretion, and stagnation out of the course of
circulation, and do not infer the existence of any such matter in the mass of
blood.

Lentor, then, if seems to be proved, occurs very seldom; but at present let us
suppose it possible, and consider these medicines which may obviate its
production, or remove it when produced, viz. the

ATTENUANTIA.
These by some have been distinguished from Resolvents, and such do not extend
the meaning of Attenuantia, as we do to medicines which diminish viscidity in
general, but confine it to such medicines as dilute thickened fluids; whereas
they say, that Resolvents restore fluidity to a portion of our fluids by any
means concreted. These last I would deny the existence of, as none such can
have effect in the living body. There are, indeed, resolving powers, but such
are not resolvent in consequence of application to the concretion, but in
consequence of action on the moving fibers.

However, as I am not certain whether I can deny these altogether, I have set
down in our list such as are supposed to have these properties. Attenuants may
be of two kinds; 1. Acting by increasing the proportion of fluid parts; 2. By
diminishing the cohesion of the parts of the blood. Of the first kind are only
Water and watery liquors.

WATER.
Of this I am only to talk of the internal use. Externally, cold Water proves a
stimulus to the moving fibers, and in the same manner acts internally on the
stomach, overcomes the plethora quoad vires, removes that load which an
oppressed stomach gives to the system, promotes digestion, promotes evacuation
of the faeces. It is in this way only we can explain a common application of
it. Chocolate is a very viscid aliment, and apt to stay long upon the stomach;
but if the use of it be followed with a draught of cold Water, it is easily
digested. The efficacy of cold Water on the stomach is diffused over the
system, and causes a determination to the surface of the body; and indeed there
is no means more effectual in procuring a sweat, than a large draught of cold
Water. This I cannot explain, but may illustrate it by the effects of the
saline draught, which has the same effect. Cold Water, too, will answer in
relieving Vomiting, wherever the saline draught is effectual, when vomiting
depends on want of determination to the surface of the body. The ancients
employed cold Water to relieve the vomiting in Intermittent Fevers; and the
southern nations still use it for the same purpose. Cold water has likewise
been employed in continued Fevers. The use of it here you must study in
Lommius, and the ancients, and in the writings of the Physicians of Italy and
Spain, who not only use cold Water, but Ice Water, and have bestowed whole
volumes on the subject. As among the ancients disputes arose, whether hot or
cold water should be employed at different times, so these disputes still
subsist. What are the limits I cannot determine, from want of experience, and
perhaps also, from not having consulted with sufficient accuracy the authors I
have mentioned. Here is, however, one decision which I can offer, viz. that in
inflammatory Fevers, more especially those attended with topical inflammation,
as Angina, Pleurisy, etc. cold water has often bad effects; but again, is
useful in Fevers of the malignant, nervous, and putrid kind. In the northern
countries our Fevers are more of the inflammatory kind, and therefore cold
Water is not so commonly used; but perhaps not merely from the difference of
the disease, but also from the Cartesian theory, by which the use of warm Water
was introduced along with the notion of lentor. However, there are certainly
exceptions to this. We every day see the country people employ it with
impunity, with advantage This holds true, particularly in Autumnal Fevers, of
which the poor are often by this means cured, while the rich go on in their
disease.
, often exciting a sweat, which produces a solution of the Fever. These are the
effects of cold Water in the stomach, and in consequence on the system. One,
however, still remains, when cold Water is thrown into oily matters, or where
oil is diffused, as an emulsion, it immediately separates the oil, and does not
allow the proper diffusion. Something of the same kind seems to occur in the
stomach. I myself was once troubled with weakness of the stomach, insomuch that
oil would not stay upon it, but flowed near the upper orifice, and was thrown
up in pure oily inflammable eructations. Now though this disease is gone, I
still find upon a draught of cold water, the oil will separate as before, which
can be explained on no other foundation, but that oil does not unite even with
mucilaginous matter without triture, but is thus separated by the cold Water.

As a diluent and solvent, the advantage is entirely on the side of warm Water,
which proves a stimulus to the stomach, and by expeding solution, mixture, and
evacution of the stomach, favors digestion very much, and hence we must deduce
the effects of Tea and Coffee for the same purpose after a full meal. But with
these effects it produces a relaxation of the stomach, whose tone is in common
to the whole of the system, and weakened, produces a tremor, extending the
relaxation and heat over the whole surface of the body, and producing
diaphoresis and sweat. In inflammatory Fevers, then, and inflammatory
Diathesis, warm Water is very proper in these intentions; but in weak, lax, and
flaccid habits is pernicious. Hence in the same persons, besides the
ingredients themselves, we may see the bad effects of Tea and Coffee may also
arise from the warm Water.

In the milder aromatics, with moderate restriction, we should see the same
effects of Tea in promoting digestion, without their relaxing debilitating
qualities. These are the effects of cold and warm Water in the stomach, except
what regards their emetic property, which properly comes under that head.

Carried from the stomach into the intestines, their effects are entirely the
same, because when they have arrived there, the hot or cold Water has gained
equally the temperature of the body. The effects of cold water in the stomach
may be propagated by consent into the intestines, but as taken down and
materially present there, it differs nothing from warm water. In the
intestines, Water promotes solution, dilutes the chyle, and the viscid stuff
contained in them, and washes off the mucus adhering to their internal surface;
by giving greater fluidity of their contents will favor absorption, and by
increasing their bulk the progress downwards, insomuch as sometimes even to
prevent its own absorption. Given in considerable quantity, as in that of a
Scots pint, by its bulk it will so much increase the peristaltic motion, as to
become purgative. This only can explain the purgative effect of some Mineral
Waters, which often are so, merely on account of the dilution in which their
saline matters are held, and whose effects can be increased by increasing the
dilution. Thus, one pound or two pounds of Mineral Water in which two drachms
of Glauber's Salt is dissolved, will prove more powerfully purgative, than half
a pound, in which one ounce is dissolved. I am persuaded, it is a mistake to
limit the dose of our Mineral Waters of this kind, for we see the common
people, who pour them down in large quantities, obtain their effects more
remarkably, both with respect to their purgative as well as other properties.
Certainly this of Water is one of the safest purgatives, acting merely by its
bulk, without stimulating, inflammatory, or sedative weakening powers. Absorbed
into the lacteals, Water must dilute the chyle and favor its mixture with the
lymph; but its effects are much more considerable in washing out the mesenteric
glands, that important part of the lacteal system. The Scrophula is now found
to be a disease of the lymph, and often to effect the mesenteric glands, which
Water will not only wash out, but increase the action of their vessels. Mineral
Water and Salt Water are most noted for their effects in this disease, and,
considering the weakness of their impregnation, and the great variety occuring
in that where the effects have been found the same, we have great reason to
suspect that a considerable part of their virtue is to be imputed to Water. To
this purpose I shall give you a fact. I am ready to believe, with Russel, that
Sea Water cures more effectually than Mineral Water; but then from its
impregnation it proves so purgative, that thence its dose is much limited. My
practice is, both with children and adults, to join an equal quantity of Common
to the Sea Water, and I find remarkable good effects from the addition. All
this seems to prove the action of the Water here to be that of washing out the
lymphatic system.

Carried into the blood vessels, Water expedes the freedom of the circulation,
and promotes a more free secretion; but here there is no danger from its
quantity, for it is soon thrown out by the secretions it promotes. It increases
the motion of the vessels, while at the same time it opens those of the
extremities to give way to the increased impetus. It is one of the safest
Stimuli, and, by diluting the saline and putrescent matters in our fluids,
checks their intestine motion. By one and the other effect, it expedes every
secretion, as has been mentioned, but more especially the excrementitious
secretions of sweat and urine. By expeding these, it washes acrimony from the
coagulable lymph, and discharges that acrimony out of the system. By diluting
the coagulable lymph, it seems to facilitate its application to subtiler parts,
or its filtration along our simple fibers. It is a certain fact, that calves,
e. g. are much more nourished by an equal quantity of milk and water, than by
milk alone, which can only be explained from the water producing more easy
application. We thus consider the effects of Water on every part of the system,
and upon the whole, the use of it in diseases. We shall, in some measure, be
ready to allow, with Hoffman, that the title of Panacea more properly belongs
to it, than to most other medicines.

If any of the following substances be attenuant at all, it is from diminishing
the cohesion of the parts of our blood.

ALKALINA.
The title is set down as comprehending the substances marked at b, in column
of Antacida. We must here invert the order in which they are set down.

Volatile Alkali. This, from its stimulus, can be given only in such small
quantity at a time, that its attenuant powers cannot be observed. Its operation
is probably confined to the stomach, as a Stimulant and Antispasmodic.

Vegetable and fossile Alkali. Between these there is no difference in medical
properties. In their mild state they have no effects, as attenuant in the mass
of blood. Out of the body, in that condition, they do not affect the coagulable
lymph; a fortiori, not in the system. In their caustic state, out of the body,
they do act upon the blood, and that very quickly, but all the difficulties we
mentioned about the effect of substances on the blood, take place here; and to
these an additional one is, that in passing the stomach, they will always meet
with an acid; and surely with these disadvantages, and diffused in a large
quantity of serosity, they can make little change in the mass of blood, in any
quantity in which we can introduce them. Concentrated, however, in the
secretions, their attenuant effects must be more considerable. Here we should
also take notice of their resolvent property, but first shall mention.

QUICKLIME.
This must necessarily be given thus caustic, in order to have any effect on
our fluids It dissolves the coagulable lymph, and may be thrown in in greater
proportion than alkali, but never can be given in such large quantity as to
have any considerable action as attenuant. Besides, it is used as a medicine,
to obviate acidity, a proof that it is neutralized in the stomach; from all
which, with the alkali, it may be considered as exerting only its power in the
kidneys. Both this and Alkali have been said to dissolve stones. A priori, we
should certainly deny this; a posteriori, we are very certain that in many
cases they do not. Du Haen gives us an instance of fifteen hundred weight of
quicklime being taken, besides many pounds of soap, and all without any
sensible action on the stone. Limewater, however, on the other hand, has been
said as undoubtedly to dissolve stones, and calculous concretions of the
kidneys, but then these are of exceeding great variety, and in some the
solution may be obtained. I think I have seen such, where the urine was turbid,
with greater quantity of sandy matter, and matter of a flaky appearance. Here,
however, there might be a deception, and a slight change of urine might have
had the effect; and indeed we must allow, that many more experiments are
wanted, and better directed observations. In many instances the pain and
strangury are relieved where there is no solution; and indeed if we allow that
the Uva Ur^i can operate without that effect, we may admit that Limewater and
Alkali may operate in the same manner. Again we are liable to another fallacy.
We argue for the power of Limewater dissolving the stone, because the urine of
those who use it will dissolve the stone out of the body, but still we are not
sure that this is owing to the impregnation received from the Limewater, for
the urine at this time contains a volatile Alkali, so that we must not
determine till we have tried the urine of the same person with or without the
remedies. Besides these, we are exposed to many other fallacies; so that, on
the whole, we must not determine till experiments be repeated with a view to
say any thing certain on this subject.

SALES NEUTRI.
These have no sensible effect on the coagulable lymph out of the body, and how
they should have it in the body I cannot imagine, both on this account, and the
small quantity in which we can exhibit them. In one view, however, they seem to
be effectual in preserving, if not in obtaining the fluidity of our blood. Our
blood is, in great measure, kept fluid by the serosity, and this property it
seems to posses, as water impregnated with saline matters, for common water
will not have the effect. This would make us believe, that some neutrals added,
and also Alkalies, would increase the effect; but still I can allow little to
it, merely from considering the small quantity in which they can be thrown in.
If thrown in in a large quantity they will vomit, so that we are forced to take
them at several times, insomuch that one part will be acting on the kidneys,
while the other is throwing in. The most which we can suppose of Nitre, e. g.
taken into the blood, is half an ounce, and yet this diffused in twelve pounds
of serosity, scarce gives any sensible taste, scarcely any sensible action. Of
their effects we shall talk afterward.

SAPONES.
Here I mean to talk of the combination of Expressed Oil and Alkali. This
manifestly relaxes the texture of the coagulable lymph, and may be taken in
quantity, and then only preserve the fluidity of the whole. I have known lately
a gentleman who took it in about the quantity of three ounces a day, with whom
it came off by urine. Its effects in the gravel are not certain. We should
examine the state of the soap when discharged by urine, and endeavor to find
whether its oil be separated, so that the alkali has now become more powerful.

Our list of Attenuants, you see, is very small. The others mentioned under
this head by Materia Medica writers have been introduced from inference,
because found useful in what is called viscidity of the blood and pituita
frigida, but we have already occasion to show that the action of these was on
the solids. Dr. Alston, in making up this list of Attenuants, gives properly
those which we have mentioned, and afterward adds a great many from his list
of Stimulants. With regard to these no body has spoke precisely. If they be
said to be attenuant from acting on the fluids, I deny that any experiment
shows it. If they are said to be attenuant from acting on the solids, it
possibly may be so; but I know no man who has determined that degree of their
action necessary to give fluidity.

We now come to speak of the general titles.

Dulcia. These, at the place referred to, have been constantly mentioned as of
a saponaceous nature; but from what has been said, their effects must be very
ambiguous. As the foundation, however, of the Nutrientia, they may be of some
avail.

Nutrientia. In so far as vegetable aliment gives less nourishment, it gives
less coagulable lymph, and consequently on this account, and as accompanied
with a good deal of fluid matter, gives fluidity to our blood. But I do not
know how far this can be carried, for the density of the blood depends very
much on the state of the economy with regard to the solids. Thus a robust
laborious man, who lives on vegetables, will have denser blood than a fine
gentleman who lives on animal food. Again, vegetables, as less putrescent, may
remain longer in a viscid state before they are converted; and it is for this
reason that they are given in the Scurvy, where density and consistence is
wanting.

Emollientia. Vegetables of this class, as marked in the Catalogue, were
supposed to abound in the saline matter, but this is not in any such quantity
as to give them any title to a place here.

INSPISSANTIA.
Under the head of Attenuantia we have considered how far Lentor may take
place. We are now to consider the deviation of the fluids toward the side of
too great fluidity. This change must depend on an over-proportion of fluid
aliment, or a diminution in the force of cohesion of our fluids. A defect of
motion was speciously enough alleged to be the cause of Lentor, so that an
increased motion might be reckoned the cause of fluidity; but while the
proportion of the parts remain, great motion will not alter it. Fluidity, then,
depends chiefly on the proportion, which may be varied in two ways, either by
the introduction of a great proportion of fluid aliment, or by the retention of
the secretions.

1. As to the over-proportion of fluid aliment; if this be perfectly mild, we
have mentioned the salutary effects that may arise from it, as that of
increasing the secretions, by which means the over-proportion would run off. It
has been alleged, that, instead of being carried out of the body, water may
run off into the cellular membrane, or into the cavities, and produce Anasarca
or Ascites. From observation I never saw a Dropsy arising from this cause.
Universally it depends on a considerable resistance made to the return of the
venous blood, or a defect of absorption. Hence I would doubt whether ever an
over-proportion of fluid aliment could produce disease. An over-proportion of
warm liquors may certainly be hurtful, but then we must ascribe this to the
relaxation they induce in the stomach, and consequently over the whole system.

As to the retention of the secretions. If we could suppose this to take place
over the whole system, the effect would certainly follow, but this we cannot
expect; and if the retention is only partial, it will always be compensated by
the increase of other secretions.

The fluidity of the blood may also be varied by the proportion and state of
the more dense and concreting parts of it, and the fluidity may be increased
either by a defect of these parts, or by a diminution of their force of
cohesion. A faulty proportion may occur from a defect of the more consistent
parts of the blood, by abstracting nourishment altogether, or to a defect of
assimilation. As to the first, it is doubtful how far fluidity may arise from
this cause, considering how fruitful the animal economy is in making provision
against any such changes. A blood once provided with a due proportion of
coagulable lymph is only liable to lose it by putrefaction, and it is of this
that those die who die for want of food. More to be attended to is what we
mentioned last, viz. when the digestive and assimilatory powers are too weak to
convert aliment into proper juice. I am ready to believe this may happen; but
in the formation of our blood, the effects of motion, etc. are so little known,
e. g. whether it would produce viscidity or fluidity, or whether there be not
provisions to obviate these, that we cannot yet speak positively on the
subject. In one other way our fluid may be varied on the side of fluidity, by
the more dense parts being evacuated. Such effect might be supposed to take
place in haemorrhage, but here it is uncertain whether the haemorrhage operates
by abstracting the dense parts, or by retaining the secretions, and so
occasioning fluidity.

2. With regard to the production of fluidity by the diminished force of
cohesion in our fluids. This may happen from the fluids proceeding too far
toward putrefaction, or from other causes, of an over proportion of saline
matter in the blood.

From whatever sources this of fluidity may proceed, it will appear they are
very doubtful, and therefore that the existence of it is not so frequent. When
it occurs, however, we must next consider how it is to be remedied. This may be
affected in two ways; 1. by restoring the due proportion of viscid fluids; 2.
by increasing their force of cohesion. The substances proper for the first
indication are marked under the general title, to be mentioned afterward. As
to the second, the only medicines marked for this head are Acids and Alcohol.
These can never be used internally to produce their effect, and therefore are
only employed externally in the case of Haemorrhages. As to the first
indication, if we can restore the viscid fluids, it must be by the Nutrientia.
The Astringents also in some measure belong to the article of Acids.

To the Nutrientia we must add a number of Demulcents, which, as they contain a
mucilaginous matter, may have the effect of increasing the viscidity of the
mass; but then they float only in the serosity, and are soon carried off with
it.

DEMULCENTIA.
These are medicines which correct the acrimony of our fluids. Changes may be
made in the mixture of our fluids when no Acrimony takes place, but this is a
subtilty not yet established. Medicines correcting acrimony may be of two
kinds, as correcting Acrimony in general, or particular Acrimonies. It is the
first of these which is properly meant by Demulcents, which act not by changing
the nature of the acrimony, but merely by sheathing or covering it, in
imitation of Nature, who has covered our solids with a mucus for the same
intention; for it is the same thing whether our solids are wrapped up in this
mucus, or whether the fluids are mixed with it. Hence all our Demulcents are
mucilaginous, or oily matters, or a mixture of both. It is the serosity which
is the vehicle of acrimony, in order that it may be carried off by the
secretions. In these acrimony exerts its chief effects, and it is there, too,
that our Demulcents are collected, in order to defend the secretory organ. But
before this I should have observed, that Demulcents which sheath acrimony,
which in the heart-burn affects the upper orifice of the stomach, have the same
effect in the intestines, supplying the natural mucus, as in the case of
Dysentery, and also defending the rectum in case of very hard acrid faeces, etc.

In the blood vessels, I do not imagine acrimony takes place, on account of the
diffusion, and likewise because the vessels are lubricated and defended from it
by a mucus constantly exsuding from their sides. It is in the secretions, as we
have said, where the acrimony passes in greatest plenty, and exerts most of its
effects. Hence in acrid urine, the efficacy of our Demulcents, which, carried
along in the same serosity with the acrimony, defends the kidneys from its
effects; and hence in this, as well as other diseases of the urinary passages,
calculous and nephritic cases, etc. are so very useful. An increased secretion
of mucus is always acrid, being poured out from the follicles, before by
stagnation it has time to become mild. Thus poured out in the bronchiae, it
produces an irritation, creates a violent cough, and affects the lungs. Hence,
in almost all diseases of the breast our Demulcents are very effectual in
covering the acrimony of the mucus. Fluor albus is nothing more than an
increased evacuation of mucus in an acrid state, and hence Demulcents become
good palliatives. Nay, sometimes the disease seems to be continued merely from
the effects of the acrimony, and in such circumstances I have seen Demulcents
operate a perfect cure. Demulcents are also useful in the flux of the lochiae
in women. In every haemorrhage an acrid serum is poured out, which in this case
I have seen so much, so as to excoriate the parts which is passed over; so that
universally all haemorrhages may be continued from the irritation, and so
universally our Demulcents useful.

It was formerly a practice, yet continued by some, to give Spermaceti to
childbearing women, for which I was at a loss to know the reason; but now see,
that in large quantity it might have the demulcent property we mention. After
menstruation, I have often known the parts sore, and by this means an uneasy
irritation produced, only to be removed by Demulcents, externally or internally
applied. It has been imagined that Demulcents, in stopping haemorrhage, acted
by inspissating the blood, and hindering it to flow out; but you will easily
see, that it is much more probable that their action is by inviscating the
acrimony which irritates to haemorrhage. So much for the effects of Demulcents
in general. On particulars we have very few observations to make.

The three first marked in the catalogue belong to the

ASPERI FOLIAE
I do not know whether we can extend the demulcent virtue to the whole tribe.
The Consolida major contains so much of it in every part of the plant, that it
can be prepared into a kind of salep.

Pulmonaria has the ordinary virtues of demulcent. Cynoglossum is not solely
mucilaginous, but has an acrimony joined with it, which makes it avoided as
demulcent. It was formerly called narcotic, but this property is still doubted.
Sir John Floyer gave it to a dog, in great quantity, without any poisonous
effect. Dr. Hulse, in Ray's Hissoria plantarum, tells us it is of use in the
Scrophula. On the other hand, Morison and Blair give us instances of its
poisonous property. Blair's, indeed, does not properly apply, as the
Cynoglossum maritimum is a different plant.

FARINACEA
All these (and indeed all the Nutrientia of the vegetable kind) have more or
less of demulcent virtue, in proportion as they give out in infusion or
decoction a greater quantity of mucilage, and by this we may judge of the
propriety of their exhibition, and the largeness of the dose.

DULCIA.
It would seem doubtful whether these belonged to this head, but experience
shows they are useful, and we give syrup with good effects in Catarrh. The use
of the Dulcia may be collected from what we said of them formerly in the
Nutrientia, and what will be said of them as Laxatives. As to the various
kinds, how far they distinguish them in practice is doubtful. Fine Sugar is
less fermentable than Honey, but that boiled, and deprived of its acid, is
neither more detergent, demulcent, or balsamic, than sugar. The fruits are
demulcent in proportion to their sweetness.

Liquorice. We cannot employ many of our sweets, because they produce thirst.
If it were true that Liquorice had not that inconvenience, it would be of great
use, but upon trial, given in the same quantity with the rest, I have found it
always to produce the same effects, without any remarkable pectoral virtues.

MUCILAGINOSA.
The first four of these are very useful. I can throw in more mucilage of
Althaea than any other plant, and so of Gum Arabic, which is commonly employed
in too small a dose. I give to the quantity of four ounces in emulsion, and
then only find its proper demulcent effects in the urinary passages, where
there is most occasion for it. Starch is a vegetable substance, in the state
most fit to be employed as a mucilage, and I have known it thrown in internally
in the dysentery. Salep should have been set down here. Many of our own plants
might afford a similar substance, e. g. Symphytum and Althaea. Ichthyocolla is
set down as an instance of animal mucilage being employed as well as the
vegetable. This is one of the strongest species of animal glues. Wherever there
is reason to dread putrefaction, these should not be employed; possibly,
however, there may be cases adapted to it. In the primae viae, where there was
acrimony without fever, I have seen it given instead of Starch in glysters, and
with good effects, its difficult diffusibility is the occasion of its rarer use.

The general titles will be easily understood. Sedatives take off the effects
of acrimony, by diminishing the sensibility of the part. I have put them down
here, because they are often said to be demulcent in the st^^ctest sense. Thus
the seeds of Hyoscyamus have been supposed to have its virtues depending on its
demulcent property; but it is plain they never can be given in such quantity as
to produce that effect; and thus Hyoscyamus, as demulcent, acts merely by its
sedative quality.

ANTACIDA.
Animal bodies are formed, both fluids and solids of them, from the aliment we
take in. No portion of these fluids is of any duration in the system, but is
constantly washing out, and supplied from the aliment. Vegetable food is the
only food of animals whose changes we need properly enquire after, as all
animals either live directly upon it, or on animals who do. The acescent matter
of vegetables, for it is by that they are chiefly distinguished from animal
nature, is converted into animal matter in consequence of powers subsisting in
the animal body. Hence, then, vegetable aliment in animal bodies goes through
all the steps to putrefaction, which, however, in its highest degree, never
takes place in animal bodies. Hence we are led to consider animal fluids in
three states; 1. a portion still remaining acescent; 2. a portion in an
intermediate state betwixt acescency and putrefaction, or the proper animal
fluid; 3. a portion degenerated toward putrefaction. This view leads us to
observe the morbid deviations, while, on the one hand, our food retains too
much acescency, or, on the other, is gone too far toward putrefaction. These
two acrimonies, the acid and alkaline, are the chief, and perhaps the only ones
we can distinctly mark. We may, indeed, perceive extraneous acrimonies
introduced by different means into the body, but into these we cannot, nor is
it our business at present to enquire. How far even in the common mass there
may not be a variety of Acrimonies different from those we speak of, I shall
not say; but I maintain that no body has explained or shown of what kind they
are, in what cases they appear, and with what symptoms they occur, or what
symptoms they produce; and de non entibus, ac de non operantibus, fere eadem
est ratio. There is yet a more fruitful source of acrimony in the body, viz.
from degenerated fluids being absorbed, and acting upon the system. But to know
what acrimonies they would produce, we must be acquainted with the state of all
the secreted fluids, a knowledge we are very far from having attained. Every
one of them which has been lately examined, has turned out different from what
it was formerly imagined, and till once we are well acquainted with their
nature, it is in vain to speak of the changes to which they are liable; so
that, though we allow an infinite variety of acrimony, certainly we ought not
to talk of them so confidently as we do. As an apology for this discussion I
may observe, that perfection is not to be expected in a system of the theory of
Physic, and that it is necessary to point out its errors. I can venture at
least to say, that acrimony is often accused without foundation. No sooner do
we see a motion excited in the system, than we refer it to stimulus, and that
to acrimony; but every motion of the system can be excited independent of
these, as in the hysteric disease, etc. by the passions of the mind. This,
indeed, may be thought a stimulus, but surely it is neither of the mechanical
nor chemical kind. Acrimony, indeed, does exist, but its species can never be
precisely determined; nay, when it does exist, we may neglect it. Thus,
undoubtedly, in the Small Pox, and other contagious diseases, (...) acrimony is
certainly present; but in the cure it gives us no indication, and we do not
regard the acrimony, but the effects it produces. In the same manner, in the
case of poisons, we obviate their effects, for we very seldom know the nature
of the particular poison. Even when we do know them, it is very seldom we can
give medicines to correct them. However, there are a few cases where the
indication is to expel the morbific matter; but then this is only in a very
general way, and by such medicines as bring a total change on the fluids. Upon
the whole, then, you will see, with what impropriety we amuse ourselves with
acrimony, seeing we accuse it so often without foundation, talk of it with so
little precision, and may neglect it with so much safety. From all this we
shall treat only the acid and alkaline, as with these we are best acquainted.

Acid Acrimony takes place when the vegetable aliment retains its acid nature
to a morbid degree. In what part of the system does this take place? In the
first stage in the primae viae, and almost only in the stomach itself. Some
have supposed it goes into the blood, and there occasions diseases. For my
part, I am of a contrary opinion. Even in the intestines an acid has never been
found, for it is there covered with fluids. As soon as it comes out of the
stomach it is mixed with the bile, and forms with it a composition which is the
cause of its effects in the intestines. Much less then can we suppose it in the
blood vessels. I doubt if even the chyle ever appears there, as some allege,
considering the diffusion it must undergo immediately after passing from the
thoracic duct into the subclavian vein. All the chyle seen in these days in the
blood is only a portion of the coagulable lymph, separated by itself. Even
although we allowed it did take place, in twelve hours it would disappear; for
after that time having elapsed from the taking of food, no milk is secreted, so
that we cannot conceive it having any effect on the consistence or mixture of
our fluids. How far a certain modification in the state of our fluids may take
place, I will not say. Vegetable aliment may, indeed, give a less dense blood,
but even that was doubted; but supposing it did, it would by no means be acid.
Dr. Boerhaave is the chief leader of this doctrine, and, in his Aphorisms,
talks of an acid milk, etc. produced by it, etc. The very same Boerhaave, in
his Chemistry, contradicts this opinion, and maintains the contrary against
Lemery and Homberg. Nay, he goes to an excess on this subject, and denies an
Acid could be extracted from human blood, an experiment successfully repeated
since Homberg, etc. by every succeeding Chemist. When Van Swieten was
published, I expected to have seen the matter confirmed; but if you look into
his Commentary, you will find him talking sceptically upon the subject, and
giving no instances to confirm the allegations of Boerhaave. I shall then
abstract entirely from the consideration of Acid in the blood vessels, and talk
of it only as existing in the stomach. There it many take place on two
footings; 1. When the acescent fermentation is of the vinous kind, producing
gas sylvestre, spasmodic pains, etc. 2. where, though the fermentation is calm,
such a quantity of acid may be generated as to produce bad effect, uniting with
the bile, and causing Cholera, etc. These may depend on a variety of causes; 1.
From an over proportion of acescent aliment, which may leave so much Acid as to
prove a ferment for some time afterward. This cause is much considered, but of
a nature easily to be overcome. 2. The sault more commonly lies in a defect of
the digestive liquors, as an abstraction of the saliva, etc. 3. More frequently
still do these effects proceed from a weak stomach; for by its natural action
the aliment is compressed, the air generated in the formation inviscated and
reabsorbed. Slow evacuation is another consequence of a weak stomach; and
indeed this might have been made a distinct head, as Acidity is always greater
in the proportion as the aliment is longer detained; and I have seen no
instances of a very strong Acid produced, except where there were scirrhosities
of the pylorus, and then it had the effects of mineral acids, eroded linen,
etc. Not only is ^low evacuation thus hurtful by causing acescency, but also by
preventing its passage into the intestines, and being corrected by mixture with
the intestinal fluids. From all this it appears, that vegetable aliment must be
more acescent, as less soluble. The weaker action of the stomach, deserves
particular attention, as arising from so many secondary causes, and these
depending on the constitution of the system, in general, these diseases being
seldom a topical affection, and being produced even by passions of the mind,
etc. and every increased evacuation of the system. In order, therefore, to a
cure, we must eradicate these various causes; but our time forbids us now to
enter upon such a consideration, and we are only to talk of such medicines as
destroy Acidity for the time present.

The medicines set down under the article Antacida, are those which destroy
Acidity by neutralizing it. These are divided into three classes. The first
contains Earths, the second Alkalines, the third Neutrals, under which is
comprehended one compound of another kind.

1. EARTHS
All the set marked at a, are Absorbents. They are divided into two fasciculi,
the Fossile and Animal.

Of the Fossile I have set down those employed in our Dispensatory. Lapis
calcarius may remain, though of no peculiar use. Ostiocolla should be rejected,
as strangers may suppose we have some confidence in the virtues its name
implies. Chalk, when washed from its flint, is a pure Absorbent, perhaps the
best of them, and preferable to the animal Absorbents. Magnesia alba should
have been added to this set. It has had a considerable reputation as an
Absorbent; and, when neutralized, as a Purgative; but I find it is not more
absorbent than any of the rest, nor more purgative in less quantity; as Chalk
or Crabs eyes, given in the same dose, viz. two drachms will have the same
effect. Therefore it may be neglected.

The Animal Absorbents are all of a common nature except the C. C. us^um, which
absorbs less than any of the others, and for that reason has been proposed to
be rejected; but its salt is manifestly of an astringent kind, and therefore it
may very properly be retained, to be employed in such cases where we want an
astringent joined with an absorbent power. I do not here speak from experiment.

All the others are of common nature and virtues. They differ in some measure
in the quantity of acid they absorb, but this so inconsiderably, that cheapness
may regulate our choice.

When the presence of acid in the stomach demands the use of absorbents, they
may be used with freedom, at least we need not limit the dose for fear of what
some have imagined, that they shall be entangled in the viscid matter and form
hard crusts; for so much does the stomach tend toward acidity, that they would
soon be washed out in a saline state. We may not, however, go too far in
abstracting acid, which seems to take place for good purpose in the animal
economy, viz. to obviate the alkalescency so remarkable in the rest of the
system. If this be too much corrected, the putrid tendency will, in proportion,
take place. Dr. Pringle has mentioned them, from their septic quality, as
mischievous in dysentery and putrid Fever. His reasoning is tolerably well
founded, but I do not apprehend the consequence, for it is not a small
quantity, nay, not even a large one, of absorbents, which will hurry on to
putrefaction, so much acid is continually generated, and we see every day
persons of acid stomachs take large and repeated doses of them without
producing that effect. Again, when they are joined to the acid in the stomach,
and neutralized, I conceive them acting like other neutrals as antiseptic, and
correcting any bad effects they produce by abstraction of acid. In the
intestines they are purgative, and partly with some degree of astriction. At
all times Absorbents have been noted as diuretic and diaphoretic, which
properties, I believe, they exert in the same manner as neutral salts. Carried
into the blood, and passing by the excretories, they are in some measure
diuretic, and there are more especially astringent. Liquid shell, a combination
of the muriatic acid with a calcarious earth, I have employed in nephritic
cases with a manifest alleviation of the symptoms. I suspected a solvent power,
but sound none such out of the body, and therefore thought my success
imagination. But now that I find other medicines have the same property without
affecting the stone, I make no doubt of its action, especially as absorbent
earths have had the same property ascribed to them, and those could never reach
the kidneys without being joined to an acid in the stomach.

2. ALKALINES.
In talking of these mentioned in our Catalogue, we shall, in some measure,
invert the order of insertion.

VOL. ALKALI, from its stimulus cannot be given in sufficient quantity to prove
absorbent, and its other properties have been already mentioned.

CALXVIVA is placed among our Alkalines, as agreeing with them in several
properties. Its anti-nephritic, and lithontriptic virtues have been already
mentioned. Its other properties may be shortly discussed.

Externally it discovers somewhat of an astrictive quality, and so is useful in
lax and flaccid ulcers. Whether there it has any effect as an Antiseptic, I
cannot say. In the stomach its chief effects are as and Absorbent and Solvent,
correcting the too great viscidity of the mucus. I have said, that Arthritics
and Nephritics are liable to disorders of the stomach. Limewater relieves such
disorders. Some would allege this to be in consequence of a farther operation
in the system, but to me its operation seems to be in the stomach, depending on
its solvent, absorbent, and astrictive power. In the intestines it acts as
astrictive, and so has been found to stop obstinate Dysentery.

Whether in the blood it is solvent I cannot say. Passing by the several
excretories it may exert its effects; for the rest I refer you to Dr. Alston.

As accompanied with so much common water, which is so likely to wash out the
lymphatic system, and also exerting an astrictive property, Limewater may be
useful in scrophulous cases; accordingly it has been asserted powerful in such
circumstances; but I have never had this property confirmed by experience.

As to any other virtues of quicklime I must remain uncertain.

FIXED ALKALIS.
The fossile and vegetable fixed Alkali have, as far as we know, the same
effects in medicine; the fossile is the milder.

Deprived of their air, or in their caustic state, they have the power of
destroying animal substances altogether; and hence are employed as the common
escharotic of the Surgeons. The strongest Caustic is always the best, soonest
performing what is intended, and I believe with least pain. Prepared by itself,
it is always fluid in the air, and it has been found useful to obtain it in a
firm consistent form. For this purpose, the preparation of the London College
is preferable, and the Quicklime there added, not only gives a dry form, but
preserves the Alkali in its caustic state.

When not so caustic, but more dilute, it is a fine solvent and detergent in
various foulnesses of the skin, freckles, morphew, where matter sticks in the
sebaceous excretories.

It is extremely effectual in washing off every thing that adheres to the body,
and so at first gives a nitor and polish to the skin; but upon frequent use, by
washing out the sebaceous matter, it leaves it dry, shrivelled, and parched.

Dr. Boerhaave employs it as a detergent in ulcers; but in general, except such
as are very foul, and covered with crusts, ulcers do not bear saline medicines
at all, as they all produce inflammation. Hence the fixed Alkali has been
thrown out of our tincture of myrrh, and aloes, mixed with ointments it has
been recommended for dressing issues by some. In the stomach, fixed Alkali may
be absorbent, but unless it meets with sufficient quantity of acid, it will act
as a stimulant, so that in this intention it is a very uncertain medicine, very
apt to be over dosed, not exceeding in this property the absorbent earths, and
not, like them, remaining innocent till an acid be produced to wash them away.
Even as a stimulant I do not know but we have properly omitted the fixed
Alkali, as in that intention more diffusible stimuli are preferably employed.
It has, however, been mentioned as an useful stimulus to the intestines.
Boerhaave talks of it as a convenient purgative; but in this view, I imagine,
with little advantage; for in so far as not neutralized, it proves acrid and
inflammatory, and when it is, excels not the neutral salts, which are
therefore, with justice, more generally used. Carried into the blood, and
collected in the excretories, fixed Alkali proves diuretic; and perhaps there
is none more powerful in that operation. It has been employed in various
cachectic and especially hydropic cases. Whether it acts by remaining alkaline,
is doubtful. It is certainly proper to combine it with a little acid. In its
caustic state the fixed Alkali is always most powerful, but then it is too
acrid. We should, however, take as near to Causticity as we conveniently can;
and I imagine Practitioners are right in using the ashes of plants; because the
Alkali of these is in a caustic state. It is commonly joined to an acid wine,
by which it is half neutralized, and thus may be exhibited in greater quantity.
The wine we commonly use is Rhenish. Fixed Alkali may be a powerful solvent of
mucus, but Limewater is safer, and more effectual.

Huxam accuses fixed Alkali as producing Scurvy, probably only from theory. It
may act, however, by absorbing acid, and so hurrying putrescency.

3. NEUTRALS.
These I have set down, not so much for their being absorbent, as to point out
the decomposition they may undergo.

BORAX has been said to be absorbent. It has been said to be diuretic, but I
have never found it to have that property. In the stomach it may be decomposed
by the acid, there be absorbent, and act as other neutrals. It may be employed,
where that is safe, to take away Aphthae, which it does very well.

TARTARUS SOLUBILIS is the most agreeable of the neutral salts. The French have
used it, and recommended it. It is found that with the fossile Alkali it will
be got crystallized, and it is this which is called Sell de Seignette, from its
inventor, and has been dispersed over France as a valuable remedy. But either
in one or the other form it is a purgative, little to be depended upon, because
all the tartarous neutrals are liable to be decomposed by the acid in the
stomach; and because in soluble Tartar there is only a small portion of Alkali,
and the rest Cream of Tartar; and when the alkali of the soluble tartar is
taken away, the cream of tartar does not remain in a sufficient dose. As a
purgative it is to be considered in the same light as Magnesia, viz. at the
same time as checking acidity. Possibly a fitter soluble Tartar might be
procured by neutralizing the Tartar with Magnesia.

SOAP, as an attenuant, has been already mentioned. I have set it down here as
decomposed in the stomach, and I imagine its reputation twenty years ago, as of
so much use in arthritic cases, depends greatly upon that. Limewater, too, may
have somewhat of the same action.

4. GENERAL TITLES.
Acidity can only be ^a^ically cured by the Stimulantia, which restore the
afflux to the stomach. The Antispasmodics take off the (...) Acidity. Some of
the Stimulants, as the Pitters, obviate fermentation, at the same time that
they stimulate and strengthen the stomach, the weakness of which is the most
general cause of the disease.

ANTALKALINA.
There is a doubt whether we can speak of Acrimony as properly alkaline, and
perhaps when this exists, it is always with destruction to the system. Du Haen,
however, has shown us, that an Alkali may be developed in the secretories, as
in the urine of calcalous patients, whose urine effervesced with acids, and
turned syrup of violets green. But in general, our fluids are only in an
alkalescent state, and it is to this our medicines must be directed. This may
occur in any part of the system, wherever there are animal fluids. It may even
happen in the stomach, though, on account of its acescent tendency, but seldom.
More copiously it may exist in the intestines, most of all in the common mass
of blood, and the several excretories. In all these cases it may be considered
as of two kinds, the chronic and acute; the former in Scurvies, the latter in
putrid and malignant Fevers. With regard to the first, the nature and causes
are sufficiently evident, it arising, e. g. in consequence of alkalescent
aliment taken in, or obstruction of those excretions by which alkalescent parts
are thrown off. With regard to putrid Fevers, there is much darkness and
obscurity. In the case of Scurvy, we can suppose the disease to take place
without a ferment; whereas in the latter case that must be taken in; and,
indeed, a ferment of a powerful nature, and rapid progress. As to its manner of
operation, it is doubtful whether it acts wholly on the fluids, or chiefly on
the solids. That it does act on the solids often, is evident from the nervous
affections accompanying it, and from the cure, we doing much more by
Antispasmodics than Antiseptics. I have no doubt of the action of contagion
being on the nervous system, though at the same time I will not deny their
action on the fluids. I have seen instances of it. A servant, in a family where
I was employed, who lived very much upon vegetables, and was without any
obstructed secretions, on a sudden was seized with a flaccidity of the gums,
violent incoercible haemorrhage and pet^^hiae, and a putrid Fever, soon ending
with death. Here, certainly, the operation was on the fluids; and many
instances of the same kind occur in the annals of Physic; but wherever this
action on the fluids occurs, a cure is very little in our power. A chronic
alkalescency in the blood vessels is only to be cured by throwing in a large
quantity of vegetable acescents, and by opening the excretions, promoting
perspiration and urine. It is not to be cured by any substances not converted
into our fluids, however powerful Antiseptics, or effectual neutralizers of
Alkali, because it is necessary the vitiated fluids should be entirely supplied
with new ones. Practice confirms this; and I mention it to prove what I so
frequently inculcate, that medicines have little power of altering our fluids.
As alkalescency may occur in the primae viae, it is to be corrected by Acids.
These are of two kinds, native and artificial. In treating their virtues, we
shall first speak of Acids in general, and then of particular Acids.

ACIDS IN GENERAL.
Applied to the lips, they show an astringent quality, as appears by vinegar
expelling from them the red blood. This astringency is only proper to be taken
notice of when they are considerably diluted. Hence the vegetable Acid is
commonly used, and where this part of their operation is required; and hence
they are used to bathe over-stretched ligaments. In a more concentrated state,
to this astringent they join a stimulant and rubifacient power, and therefore
we have thought of applying them in paralytic cases; for which purpose we blend
them with oily matters, as hogs lard, in the Unguentum paralyticum, to obviate
an excess of their inflammatory property. A more fluid Oil than the former may
be employed, with the advantage, perhaps, of more accurate mixture. This
ointment is certainly serviceable, though not with great advantages. If the
Acid be blended with too great proportion of oil, the stimulus is not
considerable; if not, it is inflammatory, and does not extend over the system.
It ought only to be employed where benefit is expected from a few applications
of it; for on repeated use, instead of increasing, you will ea^ily see it must
impair and destroy the sensation of the nerves This remedy is equivocal,
because as much is lost by the sedative as gained by the stimulant power, and
to be avoided; applied externally ^o the nose, acids have been used in hysteric
(...) and ^aintings; as the nitrous and muriatic acids are deleterious, the
vegetable only can be used in this intention; the vitriolic has no odor; the
vegetable acid from regenerated tartar is most penetrating.
. Applied alone in a concentrated state, Acids prove corrosive, and destroy the
texture of animal substances. This corrosive quality is not taken off by an
union with metals, but increased by it. Thus, in the lunor caustic; somewhat of
its effects are to be attributed to the metal. The same is the case with the
Butter of Antimony, to which, as well as to the Acids, as caustics, may be
objected the inconveniences of fluidity. How much Acid can perform alone, may
be seen in the Medical Essays. It has there been proposed to make an alternate
application of acid and caustic Alkali, giving the one, when the other had
begun to pain; but in this method, each would hinder the other's operation, and
a crust of neutral salt would be formed, which would destroy the effect of the
Caustic. In short, the whole (...) seems to be a mere whimsy of refinement.

With regard to the internal use of Acids. In the mouth they exert astringent
effects. To obtain this property, they have been exhibited in various forms. It
was Sydenham's practice in the Angina to give the vitriolic Acid with Mel
rosarum. Where laxity prevails this may be useful, but it is difficult to
distinguish such cases; and in more violent inflammation they are certainly
hurtful and dangerous, by their stimulant, and, perhaps also, their astringent
power. Acids also exert their stimulus in the mouth, and increase the excretion
of saliva and mucus, and hence allay thirst, in which intention they are
sometimes given in Dropsies, where we want that effect without increasing the
quantity of fluids. It has been said, that they dissolve the mucus, but this is
not properly proved. On experiment, they do not coagulate it like blood, but
show a tendency to that way, and their operation is probably by stimulating the
excretories, and drawing ^orth a fluid, by which crusts and sloughs are pushed
of. In any sort of catarrhal where a load of mucus is accumulated in the mouth
of the glands or throat, they may be used. Alum and Acids have been employed to
cure Aphthae, but the practice is doubtful. They will, indeed, take away the
Aphthae, but then they are very apt to return worse than before, except in some
particular cases, which are difficult to distinguish. Borax answers much
better, especially in children.

Carried into the stomach, Acids prove a grateful stimulus to it, and promote
appetite, which shows they are not unfamiliar to the system. The acid reliquiae
in the stomach are supposed to be the cause of appetite, but this is more
connected with the state of the system in general. Acids, by checking
putrefaction, serve to preserve at least, if not to excite, appetite; but not
only do they obviate the putrefactive, but also check the vinous and acetous
fermentations; whence they are used to prevent flatulencies, etc. the
consequence of these. At first I thought this difficult to account for, but I
now see that it is not acid but acescency which is the disease; that vinegar,
which has already undergone the acetous fermentation, is not near so hurtful as
vegetable acescents, and mineral acids still less so. Thus lemon, having its
astringency improved by roasting, I have seen cure Spasms arising from
acescency; and thus the chlorotic girl eats the sour green fruit with safety,
while the ripe increase her disorder, unripe fruit are much less disposed to
ferment than the ripe; and hence the magistrate in wine countries does not
suffer the grapes to be gathered till they are fully ripe, le^t the wine should
not be well fermented. In the stomach, too, Acids quench thirst, by promoting a
flow of liquors to it, by preventing putrefaction, and perhaps, too, as
refrigerant. This property which Acids possess, of being cooling and sedative
to the whole system, seems contradictory to the stimulus we ascribed to them;
but as Acids in certain doses and dilution are astringent, and as Astringents
are sedative, the effect is more easily understood. Whether their action be not
analogous to that of cold water, I shall not determine. They may be diuretic
and diaphoretic, by being carried to the secretory organs; but it is certain
also, they exert this property before they arrive there.

In the intestines. When Acids arrive there unaltered, they may be detergent by
promoting the excretion of mucus. As checking putrefaction, as sedative,
checking the peristaltic motion, and also as astringent, Acids are useful in
Dysentery, but chiefly as altering the bile, to a change of which, Dysentery
seems owing. It is the Acids in this disease which we prefer to the Acescents,
perhaps from sedative powers analogous to neutrals. The fossile Acids have not
the same bad effect with the others, not proving much purgative. Their action
in the intestines ought to be enquired into, as they precipitate the bile.

Whether in their progress through the lacteals they can act as acid, or in the
mass of blood, is extremely doubtful, from the dilution they must necessarily
undergo before they reach these parts of the system. They might be supposed to
cure, at least to check the Scurvy, but neither the one nor the other is
observed, so that their effects on the mass of blood are very doubtful. They
have been recommended in Haemorrhagy. Here it is supposed they act on the open
vessels, and by coagulating the fluids; but we cannot imagine them to be
carried thither, and we must rather suppose they have their effect in the
primae viae, and not materially, but by consent on the vessels.

Though their effect on the blood be denied, yet it has been constantly allowed
they may be collected in the excretories. Like other saline matters they may go
along with the serosity, pass by the kidneys, and prove diuretic. On this
foundation also they might be diaphoretic and sudorific, but from their manner
of action these properties seem to be in consequence of their effects in the
primae viae.

Acids are said to irritate the Bronchiae, and promote a Cough, which gives us
a caution to their use in Haemoptoe, and other cases where they are employed.
Muriatic acid inflames issues.

PARTICULAR ACIDS
We divided into native and artificial. The native Acids in general have the
effects we mentioned of Acids, as exerted in the primae viae, but beyond that
they scarcely act as acid; but by the action of the system are liable to be
converted in succum et sanguinem, and hence are adapted to the cure of the
Scurvy, and it is there we frequently employ them. They differ as more or less
mild or acerb.

Of the artificial Acids the first mentioned is Wine, the Acid of which
approaches to the last, as more or less convertible into the animal fluids. The
others are more akin, and more invincible to the system, if we except the
vegetable, which is divided into the fermented and distilled, which last is
less convertible than the former. Such distilled Acid appears in Tar-water,
whose action seems only to be in so far as it is acid. It might, indeed, owe
much of its virtue to the oil; but practice does not confirm this. Tar-water
may be useful in promoting the whole fluid secretions, and in some cases
antiseptic; and if you look into what has been writ upon it, you will
understand its real virtues from what has been already said.

The fossile Acids are stronger. Muriatic Acid has at all times been famous as
promoting appetite, and assisting digestion. I have not given it pure, but
joined with some alkali. This Hoffman tells us is the Tinctura aperitiva
Moebii, only reddened by the addition of some roses.

Vitriolic Acid is employed for most of the purposes of Acids obviating
fermentation, etc. This is supposed superior in haemorrhagic cases, but I
cannot perceive this. It may perhaps retain somewhat of the virtues of
concentrated acid; though I will not maintain that.

The nitrous Acid is commonly excluded entirely, out of prejudice, for if
equally dilute, it is as safe as any of them. It is not, however, totally
disused. Boerhaave employed it in his Nitrum nitratum, which is a nitrous
ammoniac, only with a superabundant quantity of acid.

Sedative Salt by Homberg was recommended as of extraordinary power, but in no
instance has that been discovered fairly. In one or two instances, I thought it
had given relief in the Chincough, but I found afterward its effects must be
attributed to other medicines joined with it. Any virtue it has, is that of
being gently and weakly sedative, but even this is not well established. The
French now acknowledge all this.

Acid of Amber has been frequently used in medicine, though it be not so long
since we discovered it to be an Acid. It has failed me in every trial. If any
advantage be found from it, it is owing to the oil joined to our Sal Succini,
for no body has yet used it pure, and indeed it is very difficult to get it so.

GENERAL TITLES.
The Nutrientia are the only proper Antalkalines which can be used in the
Scurvy. Putrefaction is promoted by any thing weakening the solids, and
therefore Astringents are found useful in Scurvy, especially the Vagina^es
referred to, which are both acid and astringent. How far Demulcents can be
employed to cover alkaline acrimony, I will not say, but the Dulcia are of an
acid nature, and may act from that quality.

ACIDS employed in MEDICINE.
Ol. Vitrioli. Spt. Vitr. fortis. -- tenuis. Ros Vitrioli. El. Vitr. acidum.
Ol. and Spt. Sulph. per campanam. Spt. Vitriol. Volatilis. Aqua Sulphurata. Gas
Sulphuris. Clyssus Antimonii.
Spt. Nitri dulcis. Nitrum nitratum Boerh.
Spt. Salis communis. -- dulcis. Spt. Vitrioli philosophicus. Tinctura
aperitiva Moebii.
Succi acidi nativi. Gelatina Ribesiorum, etc. Miva Cydoniorum. Syrupus
Limonum. Rob Limonum. Acetum Vini. Acetum distillatum. Spt. AEruginis, vel
Veneris. Crystalli Tartari. Acidum Abietis, etc. Aqua Picea, ^ive Tar-water.
Spt. Mellis. -- Pa^^s. Sal Sedativum. Sal Succini. Spt. Formicarum.
ANTISEPTICA.
By these, I mean such medicines as obviate the several tendencies of the
system toward acrimony. I would have ^a^^er chosen the term Antifermentative,
as what are included here under the title of Antiseptics, obviate the vinous
and acetous, as well as putrefactive processes. The Antiseptics, strictly so
called, (...) our chief consideration in medicine. The history of putrefaction,
in every part of it, is absolutely necessary for understanding the animal
economy, and when I inserted this (...), I i^t^^^^ed to have studied it
myself, and to have delivered it to you; but the want of tune has prevented the
execution of that intention. I must be content with referring you to almost the
only writer on that subject. There is, indeed, something in boerhaave, and in a
paper by ^^x, in the Philosophical Transactions; but their defects are
supplied, and faults are corrected by Pringle. If this list had been made up
thirty years ago, it would have stood very different from what it is at
present, and many of the substances set down here would have been reckoned as
Septics. The list in our Catalogue is chiefly taken from Dr. Pringle, with some
additions from analogy, and my own experience.

Dr. Pringle certainly deserves much praise for what he has executed on this
subject; but still what he has said requires confirmation and addition, and no
experiments are absolutely to be rested upon, till they are repeated with
different views, and by different hands. Somewhat of a more correct Chemistry
is necessary. Thus we cannot trust his experiments with common Salt, because a
pure salt was not employed. This he also, according to the old opinion,
supposes to have an absorbent earth for its basis, and the same mistakes occur
in other substances. Besides, he does not operate on the best of subjects, and
animal blood is what we should wish our experiments to be chiefly performed
upon. Hence the whole of this doctrine, as applied to the purposes of medicine,
should be received with caution. I would not, however, doubt Dr. Pringle's
conclusion The diffidence expressed in this paragraph, however proper in
general, happened to be ill placed here. We are well persuaded, that Dr. Cullen
is now satisfied that the experiments of Sir John P^ingle are sufficiently
confirmed, and appear to have been planned, with sagacity, executed with
exactness, and communicated with the greatest fidelity. In short, every one is
now agreed, that this excellent Philosopher and Physician has made very useful
and important discoveries on this subject.
.

Two questions I would propose, viz. Whether putrefaction is so common a cause
of disease, as is imagined? And, Whether antiseptic substances can be
introduced in such manner into the human body, as to exert that antiseptic
quality in the common mass of blood?

EVACUANTS in GENERAL.
A doubt arises with regard to the propriety of placing these among the
medicines which act upon the fluids. They act, probably, on the solids, but
have the fluids for their object. With regard to their operation, there have
been several opinions. 1. It has been supposed they act on the mass of blood,
as, by rendering the blood of a fluid consistence, they promote the fluid
secretions; but this operation extends so much in common to all the secretions,
as not to explain how particular ones are promoted; for it will still be a
doubt how we can give the fluidity proper to particular secretions. 2. To
obviate this, it has been said, that all the secreted liquors exist formally in
the mass of blood, and that the secretory organ only separates them; and with
regard to the Evacuants, it has been supposed that they have an elective
attraction to particular portions of our fluids. But all this is a mere
supposition. There is no proof of the formal existence of these matters, and of
their not being altered in the secretory organ. Neither of these are
satisfactory, and hence we must have recourse to this third supposition, that
Evacuants, particularly Stimulants, stimulate their respective excretories, as
can be proved in the case of Errhines and Sialagogues. It is difficult to apply
this to Evacuants diffused in the mass of blood. We must suppose them somehow
determined to pass by particular excretories, in consequence of being joined to
particular parts of the blood more copiously passing there, and thus
stimulating those very sensible and irritable organs. Still a question remains,
whether evacuants may not have a specific power in stimulating one excretory
more than another? This is difficult to determine. I must observe, that
Evacuants are general Stimulants. Those which affect the nose, carried into the
stomach, will prove emetic; into the blood, diuretic, diaphoretic, and
pectoral. The Stimulus is not in any that I know of certainly specific, and a
common power is evident in most of them. This question will be more fully
mentioned under Particulars.

With regard to particular Evacuants, I have inserted them at random. I have
begun a capite ad calcem, and therefore the first on which our enquiries will
be bestowed, is the following head of Errhines.

ERRHINA.
Errhines are medicines applied to the inner membrane of the nose, producing a
discharge of mucus, accompanied with a stimulus, and commonly sternutatory.
With regard to their effects (...) cured by Evacuants, are more effectually
cured by these being applied near to the part affected. There are, indeed,
cases where the evacuation must be great, and such direct application cannot be
made, and in such cases where we intend to alter the distribution of the fluids
in the system; but these are the only exceptions. Upon this is the foundation
of the virtue of Errhines. They are adapted to diseases of the head, acting
partly by the sneezing, that general convulsive motion they produce, and partly
by evacuation. Since observations have been accurate, Errhines have not been
much used; and where they are useful, is difficult to determine. They are
certainly proper in rheumatic affections about the head, in which evacuations
of any kind are necessary. I have known instances of not only temporary relief
procured from them in such cases, but even the rheumatic diathesis being
removed. I have known persons, unaccustomed to Tobacco, on the first beginning
to snuff, relieved, and even cured of the toothache, and other rheumatic
affections, to which they were subject. In all rheumatic headachs, they are
useful; and, analogous to these rheumatic affections, in all neighboring
inflammations of the chronic kind, as inflammations of the eyes frequently are.
I see practitioners cautioning against Errhines, as producing congestions in
the vessels of the head. If the disease be recent, certainly we ought not to
use them; but when it has continued for some time, I have seen a cure from
Errhines. Many diseases are of this inflammatory nature, which we do not
imagine to be so, as the opacity of the Cornea, which is frequently founded in
inflammation, though there be no seeming redness, and also in a beginning
cataract. In these, Errhines of the strongest kind may be used. At different
times, Errhines have been employed in all diseases of the head, though with
what safety or limitation I cannot say.

These are the general virtues of Errhines. The virtues of particular ones
cannot well be fixed. I believe our li^^ might have been more general, as there
is no suspicion of a specific virtue. Many possibly are omitted, mentioned by
both Materia Medica writers and Physicians, as the Lilium convallium, Benzoin
and its flowers, to which Sal Succini, an analogous substance, might be added,
and the Vitriolum album. Those mentioned in our Catalogue are divided into two
classes, the Vegetable and Fossile, and I proposed also a division into the
Mitiora and Acriora. I have endeavored to range them in the order of their
power. The juices of the Bent being sweet, are sternutatory, in consequence of
the sugar they contain, which itself is an Errhine. Among the Acriora,
Euphorbium should have been placed lower. Among the Errhines none is more
famous than Turpeth mineral. In diseases of the eyes it has been much commended
in general; but it must be observed, that this and other Acrids are not only
apt to produce violent inflammation and dangerous Haemorrhage in the membrane
of the nose itself, but also in the neighboring parts. I have seen a few drops
of the Iris nostras, or Iris palustris lutea, occasion a violent sneezing and
discharge of mucus with blood, swelling of the whole head and neck, and,
perhaps from some neglect of the patient in keeping himself warm, indurations
of the cheeks, etc. only yielding to repeated bleedings, but curing, however,
the patient of the toothache, and disease for which it was applied. Even where
it was given in a slighter dose, often a great rheumatic affection was caught
during the use of it. I mention all this, to give a caution that cold got
during the use of these remedies is often worse than the disease they were
intended to cure.

The only two I have known employed with safety and advantage, are Tobacco and
Asarum. The first is only useful when we begin the practice. Asarum is
recommended as keeping up a longer flow of mucus than any other. Those who
favor it, say it is necessary it should produce a mucus with streaks of blood.
Given at the interval of two days between each dose it has cured a violent
chronic inflammation of the eyes.

SIALAGOGA.
Th^se are common Stimulants, and often the same as the Errhines. They are
divided into two kinds, the Vegetable and Fossil.

The Vegetable are only sialagogue as externally applied, and their effects may
be understood from what we have said of Errhines.

The Fossil act in consequence of being introduced into the mass of blood. Of
the Hydrargyrus we must take a particular notice.

The following account of Mercury is added from the Author's works on
Chemistry, and though not so complete as might be wished, may serve to explain
the subject more fully.

This is a subject that has been of all the most labored in Chemistry, and
most frequently employed in Medicine.

I shall here endeavor to show its variety of preparations, and establish
their relation in regard to each.

1. The first question that arises is, Whether Mercury is active in its crude
state, as is not (in that) acted on by the vegetable acid? This, however, is
somewhat doubted; but some speak much of its efficacy, and Dover gave it in a
variety of diseases; and when this is the case, a medicine will frequently reap
that honor which is only due to nature. It certainly may be converted into an
active state, by a small degree of trituration. Nay, even the agitation of the
steadiest buildings, when standing in a phial, will induce a black powder on
its surface, and, probably, the agitation in the stomach may answer the same
intention.

2. It is rendered active by being turned into vapor, and is then endued with
a sedative power, and can induce palsies of various kinds; hence Gilders are
particularly subject to (...) Vide De ^a^n. When used in venereal cases, it
brings on a salivation. Why should (...) effect (...) two cases be so
different? But this action, in a state of fume, is not peculiar to Mercury
(...) common to other metals in some degree; but its operation can never be
conducted with accuracy.

3. It is rendered active when calcined, whether by itself, or with gold. It is
by this means, probably, only more capable of being acted on by the vegetable
acid, and consequently by the acid in the stomach.

4. It is peculiar to Mercury to be rendered active by trituration. It can be
thus converted into a black powder, manifestly active to the human body. This
trituration goes on slowly in glass vessels when per se, but may be expeded by
the addition of rough bodies, or even of fluids; and when a small portion is
thus converted into a black powder, it gives the whole that appearance;
however, upon washing it, it will easily separate from the crude.

Keyser, a celebrated empiric in France, has found a way of converting it into
this state more effectually, by triturating it with water, which washes out the
powder as it forms, and hence arises its peculiar efficacy. In this state it is
soluble in the vegetable acid, for which reason he adds a quantity of that
acid, which assists in separating the pure powder.

Other substances have been used to assist the trituration. Honey is much
preferable to either the balsams, or gums, of which last I have seen pills made
of so stiff a consistence, as to pass through the body undissolved, and
unaltered.

This objection is applicable to gum ammoniac likewise, unless at the same time
an equal quantity of soap is added, which gives it consistence and solubility.

They have also given it with resin of guiacum, but this is still worse than
the foregoing, as being more difficultly triturated, and less soluble.

In making the trituration we are very apt to be deceived, by thinking it
sufficient when no globules appear to the microscope, for after an intermission
of the triture, globules will appear that did not before; we should return to
it at intervals, and continue it till it is almost soluble in water.

From this difference of triture, very different effects will arise in the same
medicine. I have thus seen seven grains produce the same effect with three
drachms of a worse prepared medicine. Oils of any kind likewise, as suet, etc.
may be joined, when we use it externally. Some of the Balsams would extinguish
it better, as Bals. Terebinth Liquid Storax, or Bals. of Sulphur, but their
erosion of the skin renders them useless.

Here the same cautions are necessary, with regard to triture, and the efficacy
of the ointment will be proportionable.

It is likewise triturated with testaceous and dry powders, and thus forms the
Merc. alcalizatus. It is thus rendered capable of being active, but as its
action depends on the acid of the stomach, and as the testaceous powders would
destroy that acidity, its power of acting would be thus destroyed.

Sugar answers better, especially if we add a drop or two of essential oil to
assist its division.

Triturated with sulphur it becomes an inert substance, as being capable of
resisting the vegetable acid.

This I could determine a priori, whether it was in the form of AEthiops
Mineral, or native, or factitious Cinnabar. Some say these are active, but I
never could find them to have any effect. I have seen the AEthiops Mineral
given in as large quantities as the stomach could bear, when the Sulphur only
exerted its laxative effects.

Mercury may be united with Sulphur in three ways; first, by trituration;
secondly, by fusion; thirdly, by sublimation; of which the last is the worst,
because the closer the connection the less active.

5. We are now come to its (...) state. There are some of its combinations with
saline substances that are not soluble in water. This, perhaps may be thought
an objection to the term, but we shall wave this, and call every combination
with acid saline. Here the alkalies are entirely out of the question, as it
entirely rejects any union with them, and as the least of their presence
entirely destroys the gilding process; the same, too, with regard to neutrals.

Its union with the Fossil Acids has always been known, and to these I have
added the Vegetable. I shall speak of it as combined with these in its crude,
calcined, or triturated state.

The calcination and trituration of Mercury is a curious problem, and what
other metals are not subject to.

In trituration, Are the particles that constituted its crude nature separated?
Or does it admit of any addition under it? I should be rather of the latter
opinion; but what this addition is, whether of some matter universally
diffused, I know not. We may next consider it, as it is diversified by the
acids.

Turpeth Mineral may be made in two ways; first, by adding the Mercury to the
Vitriolic Acid, when at the boiling heat, and thus obtaining a matter that has
the appearance of a white calx, which, on being washed in pure water, is
converted into a yellow powder.

This change of color is a curious problem. Secondly, it may be made by
dissolving the Mercury in the Nitrous Acid, and then adding the Vitriolic, and
then by washing it we get the Turpeth.

This is the most easy process, but it is the most acrid preparation, because
there is a quantity of the Acid adhering, but by repeated affusions, with the
assistance of heat, it may be made nearly the same.

Mercury is next combined with the Nitrous Acid. These preparations have been
but little employed in medicine, and have rather been used as the foundations
of others.

It is likewise combined with the Muriatic Acid, and this either by
precipitation or calcination, and accordingly forms either the Mercurius
sublimatus corrosivus, or the Mercurius precipitatus albus of Boerhaave.

The Marine Acid does not unite with it in a fluid form, and must therefore be
used either as combined with metals, or with neutral salts; for this purpose
common salt is added to Mercury dissolved in the Nitrous Acid.

A certain rule to judge of its acrimony, is from its solubility in water, for
the greater quantity the water will take up, the more salt adheres to it, and
consequently the more acrid is the preparation.

The method of precipitation from the menstruum, when it is in the form of a
Calx Mercurii, is much easier; but there is an objection, that the Acid is in
too (...) quantity, and the preparation is not easily brought into a
crystalline form. We have so ^^d a way, however, of managing this, by
suspending it in Nitrous Ammoniac, and then adding common salt. All the other
preparations of Mercury depend on their being rendered more mild, or more acrid.

They are rendered milder, first, by the abstraction of the Acid; or, secondly,
by the addition of Mercury.

1. By the abstraction of the Acid. Some have doubted if Mercury is rendered
more powerful, by being added to Acids; but I think none who are conversant in
practice can deny it. The degree of trituration certainly varies its efficacy,
but one-eighth of a grain of corrosive Mercury is a dose.

One method of abstracting the Acid is by calcination, as in the Red
Precipitate. The foreign Precipitates are thought to be better than those made
at home. The London College has, therefore, given particular directions, nay,
more than necessary, as I think; for the whole difference between the foreign
and domestic seems to depend on the degree of calcination, which is sometimes
carried too far, so as to sublime too much of the Acid.

Another method is by attraction of the Acid. This is of two kinds, first, when
the acid is attracted only; and, secondly, where the Mercury is precipitated.
An instance of the first is the Pulvis Principis. Vide Lewis. The water here
dissolves that part which has the largest proportion of acid, and leaves the
less soluble, and consequently less acrid behind. Water applied to any of the
saline Calces will thus abstract the more active part.

Ardent Spirit, in many instances, abstracts the Acid from metallic substances
pretty entirely. I think I have seen Corrosive Sublimate rendered inactive by
this means. It may likewise, when dilute, act like the water, in abstracting
the most acrid part. This is the foundation of the Mercurius Corallinus and
Panacea Mercurii.

Camphor unites with Acids in the largest quantity of any other substance. It
triturates easily with, and has been added to the Turpeth Mineral, ( Vide Edin.
Med. Essays;) and I have often used it with success before our late
improvements.

Mercury is rendered milder by attraction and precipitation. The Mercur.
precip. Fuscus Wortzii is Mercury dissolved in the Nitrous Acid, and
precipitated by a fixed alkaline Salt; this gave a mild preparation, but its
unseemly color was the chief objection. To obviate this the Muriatic Acid was
used, which gives us the Merc. precipitatus dulces of the former Edinburgh
Dispensatory; but it has been but little used in our shops, though it might be
an useful medicine, and answer pretty nigh the same intentions with Calomel.

The Muriatic Acid has been used in conjunction with Copper, so that the
Mercury was precipitated in a green powder. Different accounts have been given
of this, some approving, others disapproving of it; but it seems to act
uncertainly, and with violence. I should think that from this combination of
copper we might receive advantages in external applications.

The Mercur. precipit. albus of the London Dispensatory is made both with fixed
and volatile Alkali; the color depends on the proportion of the volatile
Alkali.

Another way by which mercurial preparations are rendered milder, is by a fresh
quantity of Mercury. This is effected in the process for Calomel, where a fresh
quantity of Mercury is added to a portion of Corrosive Sublimate. The union of
these is first made by trituration, and it then is more intimately effected by
repeated sublimations.

Sublimation to the second or third time may produce the intention, but to
carry it farther will only separate the Mercury.

The only true standard of a sufficient sublimation is to examine its specific
gravity in ardent spirits, and so determine their comparative mildness. Two
sublimations, after a sufficient previous triture, generally are sufficient.

The metal may have the acid adhering to it in any proportion, but the acid
seems to have a point of saturation with regard to the metal, and when this
proportion is (...) water nor alcohol will have any effect on it. But thus
endeavoring to render the (...) mild, we bring it to a Mercurius dulcis, and
this equally well, either by abstracting the Acid, or by adding Mercury.

MERCURIAL PREPARATIONS rendered acrid, or kept so.

These are rendered more acrid by redissolving the Precipitates. When Mercury
is precipitated from any of the fossil acids by alkalis, it is soluble in the
vegetable acid. I have precipitated Mercury from the nitrous acid, by means of
fixed alkalies, and again dissolved it in the muriatic, and from thence
obtained it in crystals. This is a pretty accurate preparation; one grain of
this I dissolved in an ounce of water, and gave twenty drops of it for a dose,
so that supposing this grain contained one third of Mercury, which seems to be
the case, this one third dissolved in an ounce of water, or four hundred and
eighty drops, these twenty drops could only contain 20-480 of 1-3 of a grain of
Mercury. This shows the great addition of power that Mercury acquires by being
joined to Acids. This is the Mercurius solutus, as I have called it.

By Suspension with SAL AMMONIAC.

I used formerly to say, that the combination with the muriatic Acid was more
corrosive than that with the nitrous or vitriolic, but I have found the nitrous
equal to either of the others; but when dissolved in water or alcohol, a
portion of the acid is abstracted, so that the Mercury falls to the bottom in
form of a powder; hence arose the difference of its efficacy, and the dangerous
in accuracy attending it; for whether dissolved in water or brandy, the
strength of the solution will be widely different at different times, and every
day fresh Mercury will be subsiding. For these reasons it was that I first
thought of the preparation just mentioned. Sal Ammoniac renders the Metallic
Salt more capable of being taken in greater proportions, as it increases the
suspensibility of water to twenty times its natural power. The Sal Ammoniac not
only enables us to give it in a smaller dose, but by continually suspending the
Mercury it renders that dose always accurate. All these preparations differ
only in being mild or acrid.

Of the Action of MERCURY.

I imagine that Mercury acts only as a stimulus on the sensible and irritable
parts of the solids. It has been long thought to have acted on the fluids by
dissolving them; but supposing it should do so, there are undoubted proofs,
too, of its acting on the solids. Thus it acts as an emetic and purgative, as a
stimulant to the whole vascular system, as a diaphoretic and diuretic. Had it
acted on the fluids only, every secretion would have been increased equal with
the salivary. It never produces any effects on the secretions, till it has
arrived in form and substance at the secretories. Thus we see it produces a
slight inflammation, and increased discharge at the salivary glands.

In the height of a salivation, where the inflammation runs so high as to
render bleeding necessary, an inflammatory crust was found upon the blood, a
circumstance very inconsistent with the supposed dissolution.

We shall, however, advance, on the other hand, the most favorable fact, in
support of its acting on the fluids. It is found greatly to aggravate the
scurvy, where the blood is found to be alkalescent, and disposed to fluidity;
and that the first symptoms of a scurvy are similar to those of an incipient
salivation, i. e. a putrid laxity of the gums, tendency to bleed on the
slightest injuries, and a fetid breath. So far I allow. But I imagine it has
only these effects when accumulated in large quantities in the salivary glands,
and that it does not produce the same effects in other parts of the body. By
this particular accumulation in the salivary glands, it stimulates them, and
causes a greater flow through their organs, but does not, by inducing a
dissolution, occasion the blood to discharge itself by this outlet. The acrid
preparation stimulate the stomach, and, in consequence of that, perhaps the
whole system by consent.

The mild preparations never answer but when they run off by the saliva. This
accounts for the supposition, that salivation was the only true application of
it. If Mercury had acted on the (...) poison as an antidote, it might have been
expected to have performed (...) without any sensible evacuations. Salivation
was thought to be the only way of (...) it, but we now know that it may be done
by other ways, and with less trouble. We have instances of its being cured by
the intestinal discharge; but this is tedious and doubtful. The cure by urine
or sweat must chiefly be promoted by the more acrid preparation. But in some
people all mercurial preparations have a particular tendency to the mouth; here
we must yield to the natural tendency, and suffer the salivation to go on; but
when it can be done otherwise, it is with less trouble to the patient, and less
care and attention to the practitioner.

N. B. There is one preparation of Mercury which I forgot to insert, viz. a
third way of uniting it with the muriatic acid. Sal Ammoniac is triturated with
Mercury till the globules disappear; this is put into a moist place, where it
suffers a deliquescence, some of the Mercury re-assumes its fluid form, the
deliquescent part is to be poured off, and the rest triturated with the
liquefied Mercury, till the whole is dissolved. This operation is founded on
the stronger attraction Mercury has to the muriatic Acid than the volatile
Alkali has.


MERCURY.
Upon this head we shall first consider the operation of Mercury in general;
and here the first question that occurs, is, whether it operates on the fluids
or solids; as dissolving the former, or as a stimulant to the latter, exciting
the respective secretions of those to which it is applied?

The first is the common supposition. That opinion, in the first place, has
been supported by arguments a priori. 1. It has been said, that it acts from
its specific gravity, its great momentum in the mass of blood breaking down its
texture. But to me this is not at all satisfying; for, first, it is proved by
Chemistry, that mechanical force never divides Mixts, but only Aggregates. Our
vessels, indeed, whose action may be supposed mechanical, seem to have some
such power; but then this is from breaking the cohesion, but not altering the
mixture. 2. Supposing such effect could take place from mere mechanical force,
that here is not sufficient; for any body reduced to so great tenuity as to
swim in a fluid, will have in proportion to its greater tenuity, the ratio of
its superficies to the quantity of matter so increased; as not to be able to
overcome the resistance. Thus the most ponderous gold can be so minutely
divided as not to be able to overcome the cohesion of water or spirit of wine,
but to be suspended in them; so that much less can Mercury be supposed to alter
the cohesion of our blood. 3. Supposing the force of Mercury capable to break
down our blood, the quantity, even the greatest we can suppose to be
introduced, will not have the effect, so that every thing said on the
mechanical action of Mercury on the Fluids is without foundation.

Secondly. Those who allege that Mercury acts on the Fluids, allege it acts
by a septic power. The proofs brought are, the remarkable faetor of the saliva,
the tumid flaccid gums, and the blood ready to flow out from them. These
arguments seem very specious. Again, say they, experience shows that Mercury is
hurtful in the Scurvy. With respect to its effects in the Scurvy, that may
depend on its irritation and stimulus, and all other stimulants have the same
effect in aggravating Scurvy. As to the faetor of the saliva, possibly it may
have the power of producing that, but not of extending putrefaction over the
system. But the foetor can be produced without Mercury, and there is no
instance of an increased secretion being kept up for any length of time,
without the same symptoms occurring. This accounts for the other effects in the
mouth, which arise evidently from the putrid saliva; for no one instance is
alleged of a scorbutic putrefactive taint taking place in any other part of
the system. There is no alteration in the blood during a salivation, and its
viscidity appears then as strong as at any other time. Salivation is attended
with an inflammation, and the blood shows an inflammatory crust, which, indeed,
may be said to be a symptom of the Scurvy; but then, if we examine it, we find
it denser than it appears in that disease. Again, after the operation of
Mercury is over, no taint appears in the blood, but, on the contrary, the
person is in better health than before, and gives marks of a firmer state of it.

From what has been said, I would conclude, though not certainly, that Mercury
acts neither by its mechanic nor septic powers. We have proved at least that it
is not septic in the mass of blood; but if it be so, only as collected in the
secretories. But though we should allow Mercury in a considerable quantity to
have somewhat of a septic power, yet in the ordinary dose in which we exhibit
it, it can never have that effect. In the case of unction, that indeed may be
denied; but we have many instances of a very small quantity of some
preparations of it taken internally having the same effect as some ounces by
unction.

All this will be farther confirmed by the arguments we can bring for the
action of Mercury being as a stimulant. All its effects may be explained from
this supposition. From its stimulus in the stomach it proves emetic; and
carried into the intestines, it is purgative from the same quality; into the
blood, diuretic and diaphoretic; and, in short, like other evacuants, a very
general stimulus. Other arguments for its action as a stimulant are, that it
never acts but in an acrid condition, discoverable by its metallic cupreous
state in the mouth; that a salivation can be excited by its external
application to the salivary glands; that its effects are always accompanied
with some degree of fever and inflammation; that its effects in ulcers are
plainly derived from its stimulant powers producing that degree of inflammation
necessary to the being of good pus, and that it produces these effects much
better by external application than internal exhibition. In proportion as these
proofs of the stimulant power of Mercury are convincing, they weaken all others
that may be alleged for any other method of action.

This reasoning is somewhat connected with another question, viz. Why Mercury
is more particularly and naturally determined to go by the salivary glands? The
fact is certainly true, and more so of this than of any other acrid acting by a
common stimulus. Those who talk of its mechanical power say, that the more
ponderous parts of the blood keeping the axis of the canal, and the course of
the blood, from the left ventricle to the head, being more in a strait line
than in the descending aorta, that therefore the more ponderous and solids
parts will be determined thither. I would allege that this hypothesis is not
supported by Anatomy; for the aorta suffers a curvature before it gives off the
carotids, so that the heavier moleculae must be reflected into this curvature,
and consequently the reasoning must be groundless which is built on the
contrary supposition. Another supposition is, that Mercury breaks down the
blood to the size which ^its it for passing off by the salivary glands; but
this is very difficult to suppose, and entirely hypothetical: Much rather may
we say, that Mercury goes chiefly to the glands, from a certain attraction to
the liquor of the salivary glands, in the same manner as neutrals, by an
alliance to the watery parts of the blood, are concentrated in the kidneys. The
nature of the saliva and of many other of the secreted fluids is not known. I
would allege Fordyce's experiments, that it comes nearer to the mucus than has
been imagined. This uncertainty with regard to the saliva, prevents my
endeavoring to go farther to give the reason why Mercury is particularly
related to that liquor. Upon the whole, Mercury appears a very universal
Stimulant, and general Evacuant, being emetic, cathartic, diaphoretic,
diuretic, and salivatory, and accordingly we find it one of the most universal
aperients and deobstruents with which we are yet acquainted.

Thus much we have thought proper to say with regard to the general operation
of Mercury. We shall now proceed to talk of the preparations of Mercury, as in
these the effects are diversified.

PREPARATIONS of MERCURY.
With regard to the use of the preparations in practice, Crude Mercury, and the
combination in Cinnabar and AEthiops mineralis, to which may be added the
AEthiops antimonialis, in so far as it contains Mercury, can only by accident,
or indirectly, prove medicines. All the others are not only active but
powerful; the only distinction, however, seeming to be, that of being more or
less acrid. How to determine their difference in that respect is not easy. It
is commonly supposed that Mercury, triturated with Turpentine and Honey, is one
of the mildest preparations, and that every addition, as well that by acid, as
the fire, gives additional acrimony. The prepartions by triture are very apt to
be imperfect, and I maintain they are more active, as longer triture is
bestowed. Hence I should imagine, that if Mercury in this way were properly
divided, the preparation might prove equally acrid with the precipitate per se.
As prepared in the shops, the strength of this medicine is very imperfect, and
uncertain. Generally no other test is sought of the preparation's accuracy, but
the blackness and disappearance of the particles. Although they disappear at
present, upon standing they very frequently are collected, and reassume their
form, and therefore, after having obtained the foregoing tests, we should let
the ointment stand for a day, and use the assistance of a glass, to see if any
collected globules can be discovered.

Mercury united with the Vegetable Acid, as in Keyser's Drageae, should be one
of the mildest preparations. The preparations of Mercury with the nitrous Acid
are milder than those with the vitriolic, and these again less acrid than the
muriatic preparations.

All these differ in their operation as that is extensive or partial. Taken
into the stomach, they show their effects by producing sickness and pain, and
sometimes go the length of vomiting. This leaves some doubt of the specific
stimulus of Mercury, which, in opposition to Antimony, will often sooner
inflame the stomach than prove emetic. Whenever Mercury is to be used in that
intention, it must be given in a large dose. I do not know whether it is by
accident, or design, that Turbith Mineral has been here commonly employed.
Given in the dose of half a grain, it acts on the system in general; but in a
large dose, viz. gr. viij. it is said to prove emetic. In less quantity it
excites insufferable pain, and must be given so as to operate directly. This
Turbith Mineral is found to have effects different from any other of the
preparations. These will be known from what we shall afterward say on Emetics
in general. It is found to resolve swelled testicles, when Mercury in other
forms has failed: It also salivates longer than many other of its preparations;
but this is not peculiar to it.

In the intestines, the stimulus of the mercurial preparations is exerted with
greater effect, but still it is confined to the part, and Mercury acting in
this manner is carried off without any farther effects on the system. Mercurial
purgatives are seldom employed alone, but in conjunction with other purgative
medicines, although I have known doses of Calomel alone employed with
advantage. When we purge, we commonly think we are operating on the common
sewer of the system; but little advantage is to be found from Mercury employed
in this way, as its virtues depend chiefly on its operation on the body in
general. As a purgative, the most insoluble preparation of Mercury is the best,
and therefore Calomel is used; but when used in this way we are disappointed if
we expect it should exert the other virtues of Mercury.

The great effects of Mercury seem to be exerted when it is again carried into
the mass of blood, and is united in the excretories. A diffusible preparation
of it is necessary for this purpose, and advantages arise from the different
determinations. Mercury seems to change the whole mass of blood: This it does
in three ways, by Purging, Sweating, and Salivation.

Purging is one of the flowest means. There may be another way than the common
of making Mercury exert this action, viz. by introducing it into the blood, and
then determining it to the intestines. Purging is never excited by any means
without spasms of the intestines, which, when the operation is continued, are
apt to end in durable spasm and inflammation. These are attended with very
dangerous consequences; and neither does the method of purging by unction
answer much better, (although perhaps more effectual,) because it is attended
with very great pain. The method of Douglas is, on this account, now neglected.
He followed, in this method, Dessaut. Sweating is the easiest operation of
Mercury that I know, but the difficulty here lies in preventing any of the
others from taking place.

As this of Sweating is so difficult an operation, Physicians have been led to
employ Salivation, which, however, is attended with many inconveniences, as
inflammation often to a dangerous degree; and it is the universal consent of
Practitioners, that they employ only Salivation because no other means can be
used. It then means be found of exciting copiously, and keeping up a Sweat, it
should be universally practiced. We have now learned that the most acrid
preparations of Mercury, as the corrosive sublimate, are most apt to have this
effect, because they will more readily produce that increase of circulation, on
which the increase of this excretion depends. Here the Acrid must be given in
smaller quantity than will make it run to the salivary glands. In a great dose,
indeed, these preparations are apt to inflame the stomach, and if they go to
the salivary glands are more troublesome than others; but where this can be
prevented their operation is much more easy.

In order to avoid the inconveniences arising from Salivation, raised by the
acrid preparations, the milder ones should be chosen, and slowly introduced,
and that by way of unction. One of the inconveniences of a Salivation is, that
when Mercury is going off by the salivary glands, there are certain causes
which drive it to the intestines. This must be guarded against; but in a
medicine introduced by the mouth there is more danger of this happening,
especially as we intend it should be mild, and consequently less soluble;
whereas by unction it can be given slowly without that effect; and for the
method of exhibition, Astruc's directions are the best. All these various
preparations vary according to regimen.

I should now proceed to the particular diseases in which Mercury is useful;
but as its action is never specific, and only as an evacuant in general, I
shall decline this at present. It is ce^t^inly one of the most universal
Deobstruents and Aperients yet known. Some others may be adapted to particular
cases, but none is of such extensive application.

EXPECTORANTIA.
Expectorants have been much talked of, but little understood. The discharge by
the lungs seems to have somewhat in common with urine and perspiration, but of
this I shall not speak positively. By Expectorantia here, we have only in view
such medicines as promote the secretion of mucus in the lungs. To talk of these
is difficult. I have set down a long list; but, after attending a thousand
times to their operation, I am not able to say whether the effect produced
depended upon the medicine, or nature. This shows the uncertainty, not only of
medicines acting on the fluids, but of such as are thence deposited on the
excretories, they being liable to so many changes in the primae viae, etc.
before they get thither. Expectorants have been supposed attenuant. The
difficulties regarding such a power have been formerly mentioned. This
supposition has been of bad consequence in practice, having led us to employ a
great number of acrid medicines in this intention. On this head Dr. Boerhaave
has been extremely useful. In his Chemistry he very properly cautions us
against the use of medicines of an acrid kind, in diseases of the breast. In so
far as our Expectorants are attenuant, they act only as stimulating the
excretories. Possibly another action of them may occur, viz. that of
antispasmodic. Some medicines are diaphoretic from this quality, and hence I
imagine Assa foetida acts as expectorant rather from its antispasmodic virtue,
by which it removes the obstruction of mucus.

The ^our first plants in the Catalogue were mentioned among the Verticillatae.
They all contain an essential oil, acrid and inflammatory. Their virtues, as
Expectorants, are not well established by experience, and I imagine that, from
their inflammatory nature, their use should be considered as dangerous. Of
three of them, viz. the Hedera terrestris, Hyssopus, and Pulegium, I never saw
the expectorant effect. The virtue of Marrubium is perhaps greater, but then it
is more acrid than any of the three mentioned, and I have never seen it tried.
Analogy, and its sensible qualities, are against it.

ENULA CAMPANA.
This is much spoken of. I can say nothing concerning it from my own
experience. It contains an acrid essential oil, and so is equally suspicious
with the last. It is, however, to be observed, that in distillation it gives
out an oil resembling Camphire, and a volatile salt, which should lead to
observe its medical properties. Elecampane is said also to be laxative, and to
act on the kidneys. I should have observed, that Diuretics often prove
pectoral. Perhaps we might invert the observation, and say, that, as pectoral,
medicines may be diuretic. On this foundation, probably, a diaphoretic power
has been attributed to the Elecampane. It has likewise been recommended as
emmenagogue, but this virtue is liable to the same doubts as that of other
medicines operating through the mass of blood. Upon the whole, from this
general method of talking, no application can be made to particular diseases.

The next three, Iris Florentina, Nicotiana, and Scilla, are all emetic and
purgative, only pectoral in consequence of a common and universal stimulus, and
in so far as by any means their other qualities are taken off.

IRIS FLORENTINA, in its recent state, is very acrid, but loses that acrimony
by drying, when, if it has any virtue at all, it is that of expectorant.

NICOTIANA, under any preparation, is more powerful than the former, and may
deserve the praises of Materia Medica writers; but its acrimony, and sensible
qualities, prevent its frequent exhibition.

SCILLA is an universal stimulant and remarkably acrid substance. It acts as an
Emetic, and in that intention is frequently employed, whether with any
particular advantage I cannot determine. It is also purgative, with a
hydragogue effect. Among Haller's Dissertations, there are two upon Squills,
where its considerable effect in hydropic cases is observed, and that large
doses of it have proved a cure; but in such case it is merely on the footing of
the common hydragogue purgatives. Carried into the blood, the Squill is
diuretic; but in that view it oftener disappoints than answers our intention.
Its pectoral effects, though much cried up, as well as its diuretic, are very
liable to deceive us; and it is very difficult to introduce the medicine so
far. The only chance we have of succeeding, is this, viz. the dissipation of
the more volatile parts, by which means we prevent the immediate action in the
stomach, and have a better chance of introducing our medicine, in greater
quantity, into the mass of blood. Hence almost always they should be used dry.
This drying, however, should have bounds, which cannot be well fixed by a
Physician. If Squills be dried in tunicles, it does not answer, and therefore
it is very proper to cut it transversely; for otherwise the drying is
prevented, by the membrane covering the tunicles. When we want to extract the
Squill by vinegar, in order to mitigate its taste, or whenever we are to infuse
it in wine, or water, it should always be in a dry state; and this is a general
rule with regard to all plants; for their common juices hinder the application
of any menstruum. Hence the London Acetum scilliticum is preferable to the
Edinburgh. Oxymel scilliticum, with all the other Mellita, should be rejected
from the Dispensatory. We have industriously chosen fresh Squills in the
Pilulae scilliticae. These Squills suffer a change by drying, so that their
dose is very uncertain, and they become insoluble; wherefore, in this
preparation also, the dry Squills should be employed.

TUSSILAGO.
The Petasites belongs to this genus, and probably possesses the same virtues
with the Tussilago. Petasites is more acrid; whether or not it is a better
medicine, I cannot say. Both have been famous for pectoral virtues. I should
have rejected the Tussilago, though supported by this reputation, had it not
been for its use in the Scrophula. Dr. Fuller recommends it in his Medicina
gymnastica, and mentions cure from it; and on frequent exhibition, I have found
it of advantage. How it acts I do not know, as I do not know exactly the nature
of the disease. From experience, I have great reason to believe Dr. Fuller in
the right, and that Tussilago will succeed where salt water has failed. I used
it in different shapes. I employed the recent juice in the quantity of three
ounces or eight ounces a day, and when the juice could not be procured, I used,
like Fuller, the dry herb in decoction, and I believe with greater advantage. I
find the disease oftenest in the spring, at which time the fresh herb is not in
so perfect a state as it may attain, and therefore I believe the decoction will
be found the most convenient, as well as effectual method of exhibition. Many
remedies are recommended in the Scrophula, and experiments ought to be made
with them, in order to discover the nature of the disease. Cynoglossum has been
recommended in the same disease. I can say nothing concerning it, but that it
is entitled to a trial.

BENZOIN, and STYRAX CALAMITA, are remarkable for a volatile acid salt, which
each of them gives out in distillation. How far this may be the foundation of
their pectoral virtue, I cannot decide; for with respect to the Flores
Benzoini, that virtue is as doubtful as in other pectorals. From any dose in
which it has been exhibited, no effects have been seen, and I have given it in
the dose of one scruple and half a dram.

I take occasion hence to allege, that Benzoin, in officinal preparations, is
of no other use, but as it gives an agreeable flavor.

PIX LIQUIDA is properly an empyreumatic oil of vegetables.

SOAP.
Twenty years ago the reputation of Soap was very great. Many instances have
been alleged of its effect in pectoral cases, and I think I have observed some
advantage from it. It has a better chance of success than many others, because
it may be given in considerable quantity, which is very suddenly passed off by
the kidneys, nay, even by the mucous glands; but this quality of it is probably
only to be obtained by those who can take it in considerable doses.

GENERAL TITLES.
1. STIMULANTIA.
Under this head I have referred to the Umbellatae, as Anise, etc. There is a
foundation for their pectoral virtue, in so far as they are generally diuretic.
On the same footing the Siliquosae are referred to, of whose virtue there is
undoubted evidence. We have formerly mentioned the use of these in hoarseness.
Their stimulus, though acrid, is not inflammatory, but from their great
volatility, and its transient effect, very difficult to be conveyed to the
breast, so that we are very often disappointed of their effect. The best method
of obtaining it is to introduce them entire, when, in consequence of ^lower
solution, they may be carried into the mass of blood. As to the Alliaciae,
referred to at d. the same method of exhibition is requisite, in order to
obtain their pectoral virtue, as in the Siliquosae; and we shall never see
Garlic diuretic, except when given entire. It is said to be so penetrating as
even to prove pectoral applied to the soles of the feet. But this penetration
through our porous substance is not to be depended on.

2. ANTISPASMODICA.
Of these, as pectoral, I think I have as often experienced the good effects of
Assa foetida as any. Ammoniac is supposed peculiarly adapted; but to me it is
not so antispasmodic as the former, and more heating and inflammatory.

3. DEMULCENTIA.
At c, to which I have referred, several Sweets are mentioned. I was doubtful
whether I should consider these as pectorals, as being demulcent, or in
consequence of their saline stimulating nature. I incline to the last
supposition, for Sugar stimulates the nose and excites sneezing. Perhaps in
hoarseness and catarrh their effects are really the same as they are alleged
to be.

EMETICA.
What Vomiting is, it is not necessary for me to define; and in what state of
the stomach it consists, I leave to Pathologists. With regard to this head, it
would seem unnecessary to mention the various effects of Vomiting; but as I
find the effects of particular Emetics are not to be understood without a
knowledge of the effects of Vomiting in general, and as I have little to say on
particular Emetics, I shall enter a little upon that enquiry. First, then, as
to the various effects of Vomiting, or a state of the stomach analogous to it.

1. Vomiting evacuates the contents of the stomach itself. It is not easy to
know when that is fully performed. It is easy to see, that various matters may
be detained in the plicae, or mucus, so that frequent ablution must be
required. Many have got now into a method of promoting few repetitions in
Vomiting, and giving small ablutions; but I think I can maintain, that by this
method we disappoint ourselves of the effects to be obtained from a full
evacuation. Small quantities of a medicine may excite vomiting, but that they
will produce a full evacuation is very doubtful.

2. Vomiting causes a flow of liquors to the stomach, purges it, (if I may so
say,) and emulges its mucous glands; which operation seems not occasioned by
the stimulus, but produced in the same manner as in Senac's experiments.

3. Vomiting not only emulges the mucous follicles of the stomach, and promotes
a flow of gastric liquor, but has the same effect in the neighboring glands,
especially the pancreas and liver.

4. While Vomiting continues, it not only inverts the peristaltic motion of the
stomach itself, but also of the intestines, which pour out their mucus to be
carried to the stomach, and evacuated with its contents. This serves to explain
the throwing up of bile, but is by no means the common cause of it, for it is
manifestly produced by squeezing of the liver and gall bladder, a proof of
which is, that it occurs at the end of the operation; which throwing up of bile
is, not without reason, thought a test of a Vomit's perfect operation, and was
the rule to stop, of a Physician who employed Vomiting as a panacea. As
squeezing the liver and gall bladder, Vomiting may push biliary stones into the
intestines, and cure the jaundice; of which, however, I have frequently seen it
a cause, because Vomiting, by the same method of operation, might force the
stone into the duct. As inverting the peristaltic motion, Vomits are useful in
diarrhoea and dysentery; but, independent of that, they are probably more
useful as purging the intestines, occasioning a greater flow of liquors into
the intestinal canal, which, if the Vomiting continues, are ejected by the
stomach; a proof of which is, that the faeces are often thrown up; which again,
by the bye, shows that the intestines may be inverted in the whole track. If
the Vomiting ceases, the increased secretion is carried off by stool, so that,
at any rate, the adherent foulness is washed away. This also explains another
point, viz. that, independent of being carried thither, Emetics may be
purgative, by squeezing the track of inte^^^^^*

5. Vomiting squeezes, and occasions a constriction of the whole abdominal
viscera, especially the mesenteric glands, and in consequence pumps the whole
lymphatic system. On this account Vomiting has the power of increasing
absorption, as also from its evacuating property. Purges are, indeed, more
frequently employed in that intention, but Emetics answer equally well. There
are several instances of the waters of hydropic persons evacuated by Vomiting,
and I have had occasion to observe such a case.

6. As Vomiting occasions a constriction, squeezes and emulges the whole
abdomen, so I imagine it has the power of affecting the kidneys. Emetics
indeed, commonly do so, but this may be said to be owing to the quantity of
water drank along with them; but I think a great deal depends on the consent
between the two organs; for as irritation of the kidney will produce Vomiting,
so, on the other hand, it is reasonable to think that Vomiting may also act
upon the kidney. Hence, Vomiting would seem useful in propelling stones in the
kidneys. This, indeed, is difficult to determine, and some have imagined they
are always dangerous in nephritic cases. As to myself, I confess I am afraid of
them, but others use them with success and safety; and thus much may be said
for the practice, that it seems to be an imitation of Nature, which often
excites a Vomiting in the cases mentioned, and probably for good purposes. So
much for the effect of Vomiting in the abdomen.

7. These effects are, perhaps, extended to the viscera of the thorax. I have
observed to you, that the promoting of expectoration was very doubtful: I have
seen it much oftener effected by Vomiting than by any other means. We may here
observe, that the action of Vomiting is attended with obstruction of
inspiration, as vomiting can only take place when the diaphragm is relaxed in
exspiration. The application of this will appear afterward.

8. Vomiting increases the constriction of the fauces, and forcibly emulges the
whole of the mucus and salivary glands. I have seen it have the effect of
masticatories, relieving rheumatic affections of the head, toothache, etc.

By preventing inspiration, Vomiting occasions the regurgitation of the blood
which usually happens at the end of expiration. The accumulating of blood
produced by Vomiting is only momentary, and may be soon counterpoised, as we
shall see by considering its advantageous effects on the system in general.

1. During the time of Vomiting the pulse is small, weak, and intermitting.

2. If when Vomiting is over, the stimulus continues, the circulation is
increased, with a fullness and softness of the pulse, a determination to the
surface of the body, and sweat; this last may be supposed to proceed from the
increased circulation; but it may also from the consent of the stomach and
surface; and I think it is probable, that here, as in other cases, an
antispasmodic virtue takes place with regard to the extreme vessels, which is
illustrated from this, that Emetics, combined with other Antispasmodics, as
Opium, increase the virtue; so that combined they become more powerful
Diaphoretics than each when alone.

These are the primary effects of Emetics. With regard to the secondary, it is
impossible to enumerate them all here. They will easily be deduced from their
emptying the stomach, and increasing secretion and circulation, which may be a
part of their antispasmodic virtue, especially in the extremity of the vessels,
as in the case of Fevers. On the consideration of these we must not enter at
present. I shall only say, that as the animal economy has numberless means of
preventing disease, the Vomiting excited in the beginning of Fevers seems to be
for good intention; and though it does not always cure, it may justly give
indication.

After thus mentioning the operation of Emetics, with regard to their salutary
effects, we shall next mention the cases where they are forbid.

1. They are forbid in all cases of firm and obstinate obstruction, not to be
overcome by the force of circulation. Hence in inveterate Scirrhosities, in
Calculi firmly impacted in the biliary ducts, Emetics should not seem proper to
be given; but as we have mentioned the uncertainty of the rule in these cases,
it may possibly be liable to the same in others. Possibly in Scirrhosity,
Vomiting not only extends its effects to the gland, but to the vessels in the
place of the obstruction. This doubt should point out an enquiry into the use
of Emetics in the case of scirrhous viscera. They have been known to be used
with safety. There is one case, however, where caution ought certainly to be
used with regard to them, viz. when the parts are lax and tender. In Scurvy,
where there is a laxity of the vessels, and in Cachexy, where there is the same
tenderness. Vomiting must then be hurtful, and accordingly Physicians observe,
that they are dangerous wherever there are stagnating putrefactive humors.

2. Wherever there is an increased impetus already, we should judge a priori
that Vomiting is hurtful; but as it cannot be proved that it increases the
inflammatory diathesis, Vomiting may happen to be employed with safety. Dr.
Robinson gives instances of inflammatory cases where it was useful. He seems,
indeed, prejudiced, and I have not tried its effects, but I have seen it
employed in Peripneumony and Pleurisy. Pleuritic pain was not increased by it,
which seemed to depend on Vomiting stopping inspiration, in which that increase
is felt; but still in other cases the Vomiting was hurtful, and much ambiguity
occurs with regard to it, as I have learned from the practice of the person
whom I mentioned as using Emetics in every instance. I should not think in
topical affections that Vomiting without bleeding could be safely prescribed.
It is not used, as is agreed upon, in topical affections of the stomach itself,
or in topical affections of the neighboring viscera.

3. In Haemorrhagy it is not certain whether it is salutary. Robinson, in his
Essay on Emetics, maintains there is no more useful remedy in Haemorrhage
universally, and he gives examples of its good effects; and I have seen
confirmation of what he advances. The same Dr. Robinson gave Emetics in
spitting of blood. In the Infirmary I have exhibited them without bad effect,
and perhaps it was for want of courage to continue them that they did not work
a cure. There are certainly cases where they may be useful; and uterine
Haemorrhage has been cured by the stibium ceratum when it vomited; and I have
employed Ipecacuan with the same effects as well as Dr. Robinson. In Dysentery
the good effects of Emetics are certainly confirmed, and they may be here in
the same manner.

All this contradicts our theory. It may be said, that in the time of Vomiting
a constriction takes place over the whole body; but Robinson observes, that the
circulation is soon increased, which is certainly inconsistent with the cure of
Haemorrhagy. Robinson is of opinion, that Vomiting acts in consequence of
restoring an equable circulation. I imagine something else must be taken in. In
Haemorrhagy, as Dr. Hoffman observes, a spasmodic affection often takes place,
and Vomiting may act by taking off that spasm. This reasoning deserves at least
consideration.

4. Emetics are very dangerous in congestions of the head, in apoplexy, palsy,
and in smaller collections in the veins of the brain. Vomiting may be supposed
to push such to the utmost violence, and to cause a rupture of the vessels on
which they depend. Many, however, allege they are useful. It may be said their
constrictory power obviates their other effects. Indeed, I do not remember, in
the annals of Physic, a fatal apoplexy produced by Vomiting. As this effect,
then, is not to be expected, their other good properties may then take place;
and I have seen instances of them; though in those instances they were
exhibited much at random, nor can I particularize those in which they are
proper.

From the whole of what we have said, it appears, that the bad effects of
Vomiting are precarious, the good undoubted, and that its real virtue favors,
in some measure, the supposition entertained by the practitioner we had
occasion to mention, of their being a panacea.

PARTICULAR EMETICS.
Particular Emetics differ in degree of acrimony, and in extent of their
effects. I have forgot to mark in my Catalogue the great variety of them, and
their gradation. I should have mentioned Warm Water, which operates, from its
bulk, in the same manner as cold water, and also from its nausea. Impregnated
with oil, it becomes more powerful, and the same with bitters, and other
nauseous additions. Next to these, Mustard and Horseradish exceed in acrimony;
and more acrid and more powerful than these are Squills, which indeed, if given
dried, and in sufficient dose, are as acrid as any other emetics. After fresh
Squills, and exceeding them in power, is to be placed Ipecacuan; and exceeding
that again Erigerum, Asarum, and Nicotiana. With regard to the gradation of the
three last, I am not certain; Erigerum is more mild than the Asarum. As to the
rank of the fossil Emetics, neither am I certain with regard to it. I forbear
to mention particular Emetics, because in doing so, I should only repeat what
we have said on Emetics and Vomiting in general. None of them have a specific
virtue. We shall take this opportunity to say something on Antimony, as its
distinguishing property is its emetic power, although it might also have been
referred to other heads.

ANTIMONY.
Antimony began very early to be the favorite of the chemical pursuits. It
certainly affords us some very efficacious remedies, and this very efficacy of
it was brought as an objection against its use, till of late these prejudices
have been triumphed over, and its credit re-established; not but that even now
it is attended with some doubts. I shall therefore bring to your view its
various preparations, show the foundation of each, and their relation to each
other.

Antimony consists of a Regulus and Sulphur; this Sulphur was, for a long time,
imagined to be of a particular kind, but this is now found to be erroneous;
hence its peculiar medical virtues must reside in its Regulus. To procure this,
various means have been thought of and practiced, which is a proof of the
confusion of their chemical knowledge. But they are all founded on the general
rules applicable to the smelting of metals. We shall speak of two kinds. First,
Simplex, with fixed alkalies; or, secondly, Martialis, when with Iron.

The Chemists, indeed, have employed different metals, imagining they imparted
different virtues to the Regulus, and even a combination of them; but the
differences are rather in the quantity than quality of the Regulus; the
prescription of the London College coincides with the first method, where the
Black Flux is used. The Crude Antimony and the Flux are ground together, and
then thrown, in small parcels, into a hot crucible; a deflagration ensues, and
the Regulus is precipitated; part of the Sulphur is dissipated with the nitrous
Acid, part forms a Hepar Sulphuris with the remaining fixed Alk, which
dissolves some of the Regulus; for the purposes of arts, therefore, the Regulus
is never prepared in this way, but by the other, viz. Martialis. Iron is here
added to absorb the Sulphur; but if too great a quantity is added, the
superfluity will unite with the Regulus. With regard to Iron, indeed, this
addition would be harmless, but not so if we made ^^e of other metals. When we
have thus get the Regulus pure, we have a substance capable of being acted on
by the acid in the Stomach, hence the Perpetual Pills, which are emetic and
cathartic. This is the only shape in which the pure Regulus is employed.

Crude Antimony should, from a general principle, be inert, as we have said of
Mercury combined with Sulphur, etc. but though experiment confirms that in
general, and I have given it triturated to two drachms without any effect; I
have no less seen it raise a vomiting, etc. like the other preparations. This
we must account for from the different strength of the Acid in different
persons, and in the same person at different times. Moreover, different
portions of Antimony have different quantities of Sulphur, and it is alleged,
that even the same c^ne differs in different parts of it, that there is more
Sulphur at the basis than at the apex. Hence in prescriptions we have
directions what part to take it from. From this uncertainty of the material
circumstances necessary to its action, its crude state is looked on as an
inaccurate medicine. To render it more certain we abstract part of its Sulphur,
and that is done,

First, by Alkalies. If Crude Antimony is fused with four-fifths of its weight
of common salt, and one-fifth of a fixed Alkali, the Regulus falls to the
bottom, and the Sulphur floats on its surface in form of Scoriae. This is the
Regulus medicinalis. This was taken from a prescription in great vogue in
Germany, called the Febrifugium Cranii. The common salt is added only to float
on its surface, and prevent the access of the air. This process has been
variously diversified; some have chose to add vitriolated Tartar. The ready
fusion of this is a curious circumstance; but the effect is similar to the
foregoing.

Another method is the preparation of the Kermes Mineral. This was a curious
secret in France, first invented by Glauber, afterward in the hands of the
Carthusians, at length the preparation was purchased by the French King, and
made known.

A quantity of Crude Antimony is boiled in a lixivium of Salt of Tartar; the
Sulphur forms a Hepar with the fixed Alk* and suspends part of the Regulus.
When this is decanted and set to cool, part of the Regulus with its Sulphur
falls to the bottom in a red powder. The quantity of Sulphur is not, however,
sufficient to prevent its being acted on by the Acid of the Stomach.

The Sulphur auratum Antimonii is of the same nature, but milder than the
foregoing. There are various ways of making it; one is of taking the scoriae of
the Regulus simplex, and putting them into boiling water; on cooling it falls
down in a powder. The Chemists thought this too simple a process, and hence
thought proper to add Acids, which precipitate the Sulphur in greater quantity,
but of less efficacy, and less impregnated with Antimony. But there is no
certainty in any of these; for they will vary according to the different times
of the precipitation; the different subsidations of the same process should be
intimately mixed; but we never can be sure that we have the same power in
different preparations.

Antimony is likewise deprived of part of its Sulphur by Nitre. I am not
certain of the accuracy of attributing this separation to the Nitre, but it is
rather owing to the action of its parts separately, in the decomposition of it,
when the Acid carries off part of the Sulphur with it, while the Alkaline
absorbs the rest, and forms an Hepar Sulphuris. This process is diversified
according to the quantities of Nitre used. If we use an eighth part we obtain
the Regulus Antimonii medicinalis; only as we increase the quantity we make the
preparation more and more acrid, till we arrive at equal parts of each, which
is the Crocus Metallorum. If we go on increasing the Nitre it grows milder; on
the opposite side, if we use one and a half of Nitre to one of Antimony, we
obtain the Crocus Metallorum mitis; if two parts of Nitre to one of Antimony,
we obtain the Pulvis Cornachini, or James's Powder, or the Emeticum mite of
Boerhaave.

I never could discover the power of diaphoretic Antimony; for three parts of
Nitre will render it an inert substance. I believe we should to four of
Antimony take only seven, perhaps six and an half of Nitre; nay, perhaps only
six; we may then get a powder that will act as an Emetic and Diaphoretic; but
it is not reduced to any proper standard.

Secondly, by Calcination. If we treat it with a heat less than is necessary
for its fusion, we do much the same as by adding Alkali, viz. destroy part of
the Sulphur; but as we continue to evaporate more Sulphur we calcine more of
the Metal, and during the calcination something is added to the Metal from the
fire, which renders it inert; but if we afterward increase the fire suddenly,
we bring it to a glass, and in that state it is capable of being acted on by
all the Acids.

Thirdly, by Sublimation. The Flores Antimonii are procured by joining aludels
to each other, and then subliming the Antimony. In the farthest aludel we shall
find most Sulphur, in the nearest most Antimony.

Of REGULUS of ANTIMONY combined with ACIDS.
With the Muriatic. Antimony may be combined with this in different ways, but
not conveniently, unless it is in a concentrated form. Different compounds are
therefore made use of for this purpose, but chiefly the Corrosive Sublimate. In
this case the Muriatic Acid joins the Antimonial Regulus, while the Mercury
unites with the Sulphur. In distilling this we procure the Butter of Antimony;
on repeating the distillation it comes over thinner, under the name of Oleum
Antimonii. If the operation is urged farther, the Cinnabar of Antimony comes
over, which has really no Antimony in it, and only the properties of common
Cinnabar, and equally inert. I know no alteration that is made by uniting it
with any other salts that contain Muriatic Acid. We may treat it with Sal
Ammoniac in the same manner we mentioned of Mercury. When thus united with the
Muriatic Acid, it is one of the most corroding substances we can apply to the
body, and only used in this fluid corrosive form externally. For internal use
we must abstract a part of its acid; this is effected by adding water; the most
soluble and acrid part is accordingly dissolved, and part of the Antimony
precipitates, which is absurdly called the Mercurius Vitae.

Stahl recommends ardent Spirits instead of Water; this throws it down in a
finer powder, but I know not that it has any other effect on it.

The Chemists have proceeded to the calcination of it, in order to dissipate
more of the acid; and I see from Senac, that it has been used in this way,
though I know of no particulars relating to it.

Of its UNION with the NITROUS ACID.
First, Antimony, if calcined with Nitre in this proportion, viz. three parts
of Nitre to one of Antimony, the Regulus is fully saturated with nitrous Acid,
and forms a diaphoretic Antimony inert, and not soluble in our fluids.

Secondly, By adding Nitrous Acid to Butter of Antimony, it attracts the
Regulus from the Muriatic Acid, but only corrodes it, and brings it down in the
form of Bezoar Mineral.

This is perfectly inert, from the superfluity of Nitrous Acid, and cast out of
our Dispensatory.

Its UNION with the VITRIOLIC ACID.
It precipitates the Regulus from the Nitrous Acid, and has much the same
effect. It is not used.

With the VEGETABLE ACID.
This Acid will act upon Antimony in its crude state, if its sulpher be in some
measure abstracted. The action of this Acid is observable, too, on the Regulus,
or when the crude Antimony is a little calcined, or in its vitrified state, or
when precipitated from other acids; the effect of all the^e is the same when
acted on by the vegetable Acid. We generally use the acid in a dilute form,
viz. that of wine, as in the Vinum Antimo^^ale and Benedictum of the shops.

The spirituous strong Portuguese wines are not so good for this purpose; the
lighter French wines, or the more acid, as the Rhenish, make a stronger
solution of it, and our own home-brewed wines exceed either. For these reasons
I am often disappointed with the Vinum emeticum of the shops, while that of our
Infirmary never deceives me. Vinegar might, perhaps, answer better, and,
brought into a proper form with syrup, might make an elegant prescription. The
acid attracts it in very small quantities, and always in a certain proportion,
so that the quantity and concentration of the Acid being given, the strength of
the medicine is known. One ounce of Crocus Metallorum, or Glass of Antimony,
may serve an Apothecary his life time, and an ounce of the wine is the general
dose.

To get it in a more concentrated state we employ Tartar. We dissolve in water
as much Tartar as we can, by the assistance of boiling, and then add Crocus, or
Glass of Antimony; on cooling it falls down in crystals, and forms the Emetic
Tartar. This method of crystallization is precarious, and cannot well be
practiced; we therefore evaporate to dryness, and afterward blend the whole by
trituration. It is not easily soluble in water, the more saline part will be
taken up, and the more antimonial left; to obviate this the French have used
the Soluble Tartar, and thus they may give it in drops.

Of the MEDICAL VIRTUES of ANTIMONY.
Antimony is purely stimulant, it no where shows any astringent, tonic, or
sedative power, or, if it ever does, it is in consequence of its stimulus. It
certainly stimulates very readily, as a very small quantity will act as an
Emetic. It has long been a great desideratum to get a preparation that would
act on the other parts of the system without this effect. When it passes the
stomach, and acts only on the intestines, it acts as a Purgative. I doubt much
if it acts as a Diuretic or Sudorific by being properly applied to the organs
of these evacuations, and rather imagine that it produces these effects by
acting on the stomach and intestines. It is difficult to conceive this, though
we evidently see its effects on the surface or kidneys, sometimes before it can
possibly have arrived there. Other Emetics certainly do the same.

It is certain, from matter of fact, that, from its action on the surface, it
can both stimulate and relax the vessels on the surface of the body, but this
is common to it with other Emetics, to produce constrictions on the surface,
and hence its service in haemorrhages; that, however, is in consequence of the
nausea it creates.

Of its FEBRIFUGE QUALITY.
It is no difficult matter to show testimonies of efficacy, adduced in favor
of the most inert medicines. But I allow that practitioners of candor and
discernment acknowledge the virtue of James's powder; and, indeed, the Pulvis
Cornachini and Antiquartzium of Riverius, medicines of a similar nature, have
been extolled with the same commendations. I imagine, that, by acting on the
stomach, it produces a diaphoresis, by relaxing the spasms that take place on
the surface. But what is the proper form in which it should be exhibited? Such
a proportion of Nitre seems to be necessary as will leave it to be acted on by
the acid of the stomach, and that stimulus should not be too great, but that it
should suffer it to pass into the intestines. For this purpose Cornachinus adds
Scammony, and James adds Mercury, viz. a preparation of it in the Nitrous Acid.
But the Tartar Emetic is as much in use as any of them, and is at present the
favorite Febrifuge in France and England, when joined to Glauber's Salt to
enforce its action. The action of the Tartar Emetic is much slower than that of
the Vin. Emeticum, hence preferable, as it is longer before it produces a
nausea. It may be conveniently given in form of a bolus.

CATHARTICA.
These are medicines which evacuate by stool. They are called Cathartics, or
Purgers, by way of emmence, from a gross view, they being supposed to carry off
all the impurities of the body; but the term must be considered only as
metaphorical. Here, as under the head of Emetics, we shall mention the effects
of the medicines at present.

1. They evacuate the ordinary contents of the Intestines. As this is a
necessary operation of the animal economy, and not occasional and accidental,
as in the case of vomits, they have been considered as medicines friendly to
nature.

2. Besides evacuation, by exciting a more active peristaltic motion,
Cathartics squeeze out the glands of the Intestines, and occasion a greater
afflux of intestinal liquors, etc.

3. As operating on the whole alimentary canal, they draw also from the
stomach. Whether it is peculiar to any to be stomach purgers, we may afterward
consider. From all these considerations, their evacuating property must be very
great.

4. They also evacuate the whole glands of the Intestines, and those which pour
their liquors into them, particularly the pancreas and liver, by expeding the
circulation, in which last they have effect on the spleen, and all the
abdominal viscera. If there is a certain connection between secretion and
absorption, by increasing the former they promote the latter. Hence they are
called Hydragogues, not only as evacuating, but occasioning the absorption of
water which has stagnated in any cavity.

From this view of their operation our medicines might be considered as
Cathartics in general, and if the evacuation be continued for a length of time,
they may most certainly purge the whole body. But this constant evacuation is
not to be supported except by repetition of acrid medicines, which is a
dangerous practice, and only to be applied to bodies of a lax flaccid kind, so
that still we must refuse them as general purgers. Upon this plan we may object
to their use in the Lues venerea, and I doubt whether we can ever continue them
so long without danger, as to change the whole mass of fluids. Hence the
discharge by salivation, urine, etc. is preferable. You see even the same
objection holds against Salivation, and this because both are attended with
inflammation of the parts where the medicine is collected and applied.

5. The evacuation by stool, and derivation to the intestines, necessarily
determines more blood into the descending aorta, whereby they make a revulsion
from the head, and I have no doubt of their increasing every evacuation made
from the extremities of the descending aorta, so that, therefore, Cathartics
may very probably be considered as promoting the menstrual flux, opening
obstruction in the uterus, and useful in washing off the virulency of
Gonorrhoea, useful in Ulcers, by evacuating the system in general; to Ulcers in
the inferior part of the body, as causing a greater flow to the part.

6. Cathartics have a stimulant power, which, as applied in the intestines,
excites, or at least aggravates inflammation in them; nay, some of them there
are which will propagate the same over the system. Again, there is hardly a
purgative, which, conveyed into the mass of blood, is not diuretic and
pectoral. These are in general the operations of Cathartics, but it may be
proper also to point out more particularly some of their bad effects.

As repeated Emetics weaken the stomach, so Cathartics often renewed, diminish
the tone of the intestines, and their sensibility, and so,

1. Partly by this, and partly in consequence of mere evacuation, their
frequent use renders the intestines very liable to irregular spasmodic
affections.

2. Of most Purgatives the acrimony is of an inflammatory nature, not only
exciting inflammation in the part to which they are applied, but acting in the
same manner as poisons. Narcotics, as the Nicotiana, are accounted purgative,
much oftener are purgatives narcotic.

3. The inflammatory stimulus is extended to the system, and produces or
aggravates Fever and inflammatory Diathesis.

4. Their inflammatory stimulus is directed to the rectum, through which the
whole acrid matter must pass. Hence all Purgatives increase haemorrhoidal
swellings.

5. They not only inflame the rectum, but also extend the irritation to the
urethra. These effects are varied in particular cases. This finishes what we
were to say on the good and bad qualities of Cathartics in general.

PARTICULAR CATHARTICS are of two kinds. Acids poured more copiously into the
bile, give it a purgative quality, and the same effect will ensue from a more
copious Acid produced in the stomach passing into the intestines. The two kinds
of Cathartics then, are, 1. Acids, or acescent aliment; 2. Medicinal
stimulants, whose acrimony is fitted to purge.

The Fructus acido dulces; Prunes, Tamarinds, and Cassia; Serum lactis, Lac
ebutyratum, and Olera blanda, have all their chief effect in consequence of
their acescency in the stomach. In so far as they contain sugar, they stimulate
the intestines, which we may conclude from the effect of sugar itself applied
in glysters.

Medicinal stimulants differ greatly in their degree of acrimony, and so in
their purgative effects. It were proper to arrange them in this order. First, I
would put common water, which, in considerable quantity, is purgative,
operating by its bulk, stimulating the peristaltic motion, thus pushing
forwards the contents faster, and evading the absorption by the Lacteals. Thus
many Mineral-waters act.

Next I would insert Bland expressed oils; these, when taken in such quantity
as to evade changes in the stomach, may prove laxative, but, like water, I
believe it is chiefly from their bulk. Simple oil is employed in the Colica
Pictonum. I have seen it given in the quantity of one pound, but its action
seemed always to be in the way we allege.

After these we may place Soap. With regard to the operation of this, I am
doubtful. Though mild to the taste, it has the power of stimulating the
intestines, and proving purgative. This it will sometimes do in the quantity of
one dram, and at other times the effect is not considerable from two ounces.
This has led me to imagine, that Soap has no effect but when decompounded in
the stomach. Soap, as contaminated with common salt, may owe some of its
purgative quality to it. Accordingly, upon using the Soap made by Lewes's
direction, free from common salt, I never found it purgative.

Following this I shall mention Sulphur, which, in its perfect state, is mild
and brand. The theory of the action of this is as difficult as that of ^oap,
for, in spite of its mildness, it is stimulating to the intestines. Whether our
fluids have the power of dissolving it, I cannot say. It is certainly a mild
and safe Cathartic, never producing my considerable evacuation, but keeping up
the natural excretion without any irritating or heating effects. I have
frequently had occasion to employ it, where irritation would have been harmful,
and costiveness increased the disease, viz. in uterine and haemorrhoidal
haemorrhagy, and there it was effectual without inconvenience. Sulphur has been
accused of griping, but I imagine this is owing to its having suffered that
deliquescence to which we know it is liable* for in that condition its
purgative property disappears, and the griping takes place, which gives us a
caution to use our Sulphur always in a mild (...), or previously to wash it.

I must here insert one or two medicines, of which I am not certain whether
they be entirely in their place. (...) is capable of stimulating the stomach
and intestines. Its effect, as a purgative, is only to be obtained when it is
entire, and then given in the quantity of half an ounce or one ounce; if not
purgative, it keeps up a regular excretion.

Next I would place Bile, which, as suited by nature to promote evacuation,
might be supposed to have that effect when introduced into the body in a larger
proportion. Accordingly it has been recommended. I have made experiments with
it; but whether it be that Bile has really no effect, or whether I may have
fallen short of the proper dose, it is certain I did not succeed with it. I
gave inspissated Bile in the quantity of half a dram, but on continued
practice never found from it any sensible effect.

Approaching next to these mentioned in mildness are the Saline Purgatives, and
of these, in the first place, Sugar; and, connected with it, Honey, Manna, and
the sweeter Fruits. Indeed their purgative quality seems somewhat contrary to
their Sugar; those containing most of it not being so purgative, as Tamarinds,
etc. Hence I would say, that none of these can be conveniently employed, except
where we may put up with the effects of acescent fermentation.

Next in order come fixed Alkalis, of which we have formerly spoken.

Tartar acts more considerably by its neutral qualities, and the Magnesia Alba
is only purgative as converted into a Neutral, so that this is the proper place
for considering Neutral Salts in general as Purgatives, and for marking out
their peculiar differences. The fixed Alkali is only purgative as converted
into regenerated Tartar.

Where acidity prevails Magnesia is preferable to other Neutrals, but it is
uncertain whether it is so to other absorbents.

Neutral Salts taken internally stimulate the stomach, excite appetite, and
promote digestion; hence the term digestivum applied to one of them. Since
Neutral Salts are directly stimulant, as we see by their effects on the
stomach, and by their sometimes producing vomiting, we give them in divided
doses. Some of the Neutral Salts, however, are remarkably antiemetic, sedative,
and refrigerant. Hence their use in fevers, inflammations, and haemorrhagy.
When used frequently, or in large quantities, they impair the tone of the
stomach, bring on flatulencies, and weaken the intestines, as is seen by the
frequent use of Nitre, Glauber's Salts, etc. They have in some degree a
sedative power, and sometimes a diaphoretic one, which they exert in the same
manner that a draught of cold water does. They are of use in the cold fit of an
ague, by promoting a critical diaphoresis. In like manner they stop vomiting,
by determining to the surface of the body. Custom has given a preference to the
Neutrals made with native vegetable acids, before the artificial, as Vinegar,
but I know not upon what foundation. It is observed, that the Neutral made with
the Volalatile Alkali, as an antiemetic and sudorific, is preferable to
regenerated Tartar. When admitted into the intestines they act as purgatives,
and pretty sharply; and hence, from the quantity and Hence those Neutrals that
are the most stimulant, as those of the muriatic kind, are thought best in
Fevers.
suddenness of the evacuation, useful in ^everish disorders. However, their
stimulus is inconsiderable, and is not extended, as in most other purgative
medicines over the whole system. Their Hence perhaps one of their uses in
inflammatory complaints. They have likewise a sedative power.
relaxing quality makes these Salts improper for those who have a lax tone of
their stomach, as hysteric and hypochondriac persons. In obstinate costiveness
they are given in small quantities, viz. one quarter of a dose in an hour,
until the quantity of two or three doses are taken, and this often with the
best effect. All Neutral Salts prove purgative; but as soluble Tartar has no
disagreeable taste, it should be, on that account, preferred, was not its
operation so very precarious, as the acid of Tartar is separated from its
Alkali by every other acid, and hence would be decomposed by the acid of the
stomach. Hence it is generally given as an absorbent. As the quantity of fixed
Alkali is but small, it will not be very purgative by the effect of the Acid it
finds in the stomach, as this combination is less stimulant to the intestines
than soluble Tartar. Regenerated Tartar has no peculiar efficacy, and when
exhibited requires a large and expensive dose. Vitriolate Tartar is given as a
purgative, in doses from two to four drachms, but neither this, nor the Sal
polychrestum is often used, on account of its difficult solution in water, and
the great increase of the bulk of the dose on that account.

Hence Glauber's Salt is preferred, which, though of easy solubility, have a
most nauseous taste, but this may be in some degree alleviated, by the addition
of Aromatics, among which I think nutmeg has the best effect, with some sweet
substance added to it, which would coincide with the purgative intention. I
find but little difference between the medical effects of the true, and the
Magnesia Glauber's Salt. Neutral Salts, though in the largest quantities we
could exhibit them, when diluted, can have very little effect upon the fluids
as introduced into the body. Some have alleged, that they cool and allay the
heat of the blood, because all the Neutral Salts, when powdered, and thrown
into water, generate cold. But it is only during their solution that they have
this effect; so that they would be most likely to exert these effects, if given
in form of a bolus, as, when the Salts are already dissolved, they have no
farther effect in producing cold. Perhaps by their cooling power they may show
some small sedative effects on the stomach, but these would be trifling. Their
antiseptic quality is very small. But although they cannot much affect the mass
of blood, they show very considerable effects on the secretory organs, and
hence very powerful diuretics and diaphoretics. On this may be founded the
virtues of many Mineral Waters impregnated with Neutral Salts.

All the medicines hitherto mentioned are Eccoprotics, or those laxatives of a
more gentle and cooling kind. All those afterward to be mentioned must be
considered as having an inflammatory stimulus, though still we are to speak of
a few which must be separated from the acrid Purgatives.

All those plants enumerated formerly under the title of Amara calida, are more
or less purgative. Chamaemile flowers are so much so, that this quality is the
chief hindrance of their being effectual in Intermittents.

More powerful than those may be considered the Foetid gums enumerated among
the Antispasmodics. In their purgative effect they all approach to the nature
of Aloes. Though the foetids just now taken notice of are Bitters, though the
Bitters mentioned before them are purgative, and though Aloes be bitter, yet a
Purgative is not a common quality in Bitters, and therefore in Aloes, etc. is
to be considered as a peculiar property.

ALOES.
If any medicine be entitled to the appellation of a stomach purge, it is
certainly Aloes. It is remarkable with regard to it, that it operates almost to
as good purpose in a small as in a large dose, that five grains will produce
one considerable dejection, and twenty grains will do no more, except it be,
that in this last dose the operation will be attended with gripes, etc. Its
chief use is to render the peristaltic motion regular, and is one of the best
cures of habitual costiveness. There is a difficulty we meet with in the
exhibition of Purgatives, viz. that they will not act but in their full dose,
and will not produce half their effect if given in half the dose. For this
purpose we are chiefly confined to Aloes. Neutral Salts in half their dose will
not have half their effect, although even from these, by large dilution, we may
obtain this property; but besides them, and our present medicine, I know no
other which has any title to it, except Sulphur. Aloes sometimes cannot be
employed. It has the effect of stimulating the rectum more than any other, and
with justice has been accused of exciting haemorrhoidal swellings, so that we
ought to abstain from it in such cases, except when we want to promote them.
Aloes has the effect of rarifying the blood, and disposing to haemorrhagy, and
hence it is not recommended in uterine fluxes. Foetid gums are of the same
nature in producing haemorrhagy, and perhaps this is the foundation of their
menagogue power.

BALSAMICS.
These have the power of stimulating the intestines, and are next in virtue to
Aloes, being very proper to overcome a costive habit, and peculiarly useful
where the costiveness is attended with great spasms, as in the dry belly-ach;
they are more heating to the whole of the system, and produce more copious
evacuations. Of these the whole variety, as Turpentine, etc. may be used.
Turpentine, on account of its difficult diffusibility, is not very proper. The
most convenient, and perhaps the most efficacious of all, is Gum Guaiac, which
is found an useful Purgative in all cases of obstinate Costiveness, where there
is no danger from its heating quality. We are apt to miss the effects of this
in a solid form, and therefore it should be well dissolved in mucilage, or yolk
of egg. With sugar it is not so effectual, depending more on the solvent powers
of different stomachs.

Before we come to the Purgatives which may be properly styled acrid and
stimulant, we shall just mention a few mild ones, set down before the former,
which was done with some view of inserting them according to the order of their
virtues.

Of Violets and pale Roses, the purgative virtue is little to be depended upon.

Polypody has inconsiderable effect as an aperient Purgative. It does not
operate in the dose of one ounce, so that exhibition in large quantities is
necessary to its operation.

All the Purgatives inserted in our Catalogue, after the title Antispasmodica,
are,

Acrid Purgatives, of which Materia Medica writers say very little but what
concerns their natural or chemical history. With regard to the first, we have,
in general, purposely avoided it. Little has been obtained from the chemical
history, nor is it yet determined in what substance the medicinal powers
reside. Not one of the analyzes are perfect, and those who have made them, e.
g. Bouldu^, Neuman and Cartheuser, are contradictory to each other. They differ
only as more or less acrid, from the different degrees of which acrimony and
stimulus, they have been distinguished in Cholagogues, Phlegmagogues, and
Hydragogues.

Rhubarh has, besides its purgative quality, an astringent one, and hence is
peculiarly adapted to the dysentery. It also has a bitterness joined to it.

Seneka affects the stomach, intestines and excretories. In order to make it
prove purgative or diuretic, it should be given at intervals, largely diluted.

Genista is frequently recommended in dropsies. It is an useful diuretic. Half
an ounce of broom tops, managed like Seneka, will produce the same effects.
Ascites is accompanied with flatulency. Purgatives that expel wind are the best
in that disease, and the Genista answers that purpose.

Senna. Whether there be any foundation for this being one of the most
frequently employed purgatives, I cannot say, nor have I been able to find it.
It is as acrid and inflammatory as any. It ought to be infused in a large
proportion of water, which is preferable to decoction, in so far as the
purgative quality resides in a volatile part, which flies off by the treatment.
This volatile part, obtained by the largely diluted infusion of Senna, is that
whose operation is most gentle and easy. Juice of Lemons and Cream of Tartar
correct the bitterness of our present subject.

Helleborus niger is commonly placed among the most acrid purgatives. It is to
me a medicine of uncertain qualities. As employing it in infusion or extract, I
have been disappointed of its effects as a purgative at all. It has also been
recommended as a powerful emmenagogue by Dr. Mead, but I have never met with
instances of its efficacy.

The five next are all species of the same genus, the Convolvulus, and are
exotics. Our common Convolvulus deserves a trial, to see if it possesses the
same virtues.

Mechoacan is remarkably mild, with little sensible taste.

Jalap is neither more violent in its effects, as a purgative, than Senna, nor
is it so griping. If any purgative be diuretic, this is remarkably such, when
treated like Seneka by decoction, which dissipates its virulent acrimony.

Scammony has been always placed among the acrid purgatives. Its taste is not
very disagreeable. It requires to be very well divided, is frequently
adulterated; I imagine it has something of the nature of aloes.

The purgatives that follow are more acrid than those we have mentioned, but
none of them have any specific powers.

Colocynthis, Cucumis Asininus, and Elaterium, to which might have been added
Bryonia alba, belong to the natural order of the Cucurbitaceae. Their virtues
reside more or less in a volatile part, and their effects are obviated by
boiling.

The metallic Purgatives follow next.

Gold. This is not active in its metallic state, or when taken up by oils, but
very much so in its saline st^^e. For this it must necessarily be dissolved in
Aqua regia. It is a strong caustic, whether used in the solution, or a
precipitated or dry state. It may be brought into a dry form two ways; first,
either by evaporating to dryness; or, secondly, by precipitation with Alkalies.
In the latter state it is called Aurum fulminans. This was in great vogue, but
its certain effects are not known. It has been sometimes employed with
advantage, and in other cases done harm. They used it after washing it from its
acids; but in this state, though not soluble in watery fluids, yet it may, like
other precipitated metals, be acted on by the weaker acids, as that of the
stomach. Hence its action would depend, in a great degree, on the quantity of
acid present there, and hence t^^ are derived the various accounts of its
effects. In general it acts as a purgative, sometimes as a diaphoretic, and,
like other metal^^c preparations, is also anthelm^ntic. It may be easily over
d^^sed, and at best dangerous, and therefore very properly left out of the
Materia Medica. Geoffroy's way of prepairing it was to evaporate a solution of
Gold to dryness, and then to triturate it with regenerate Tartar, by which it
became soluble in ardent spirits. The theory of this is very difficult.

Silver. This metal is inactive in its metallic form, nor can it be rendered
saline by the acid of the stomach, unless when precipitated from the nitrous
Acid. This for dissolving silver should be pure and without any admixture of
the Muriatic. Two parts of water added to Glauber's Spirit of Nitre is the best
proportion. A solution of Silver in the Nitrous Acid, evaporated, fused, and
cast into a mold, gives us the lunar caustic. This is often employed externally
as a caustic, but where a quick effect is desired, it does not succeed so well,
as it is deliquescent. It is useful as a styptic, and may answer as a
detergent. Internally it may be of service, when the crystals are rendered
milder, by extracting part of the acid. Lewis, in the New Dispensatory, has
given the best directions for this. It has been employed chiefly as a
Purgative. Boerhaave and Boil recommend it much in hydropic cases, as
evacuating the contents of the viscera by stool and urine with great ease, but
a long use ^f it hurts their tone. I have tried it, but have not found it
answer; it required considerable quantities, and was far from acting easily.

Ward used to give an hydropic purge, which acted much in the same way they
speak of this. That published in his book of Receipts, with many others, are
probably very different from those which he himself used.

Mercury and Antimony have been before treated of.

DIURETICA.
The effect of Diuretics is very uncertain. Many medicines are enumerated as
having a diuretic quality, but there is not one of them that exerts it always,
nor any to a considerable degree. There is not a more powerful stimulus to the
kidneys than the Cantharides, and yet even the effect of these in increasing
urine, was not steady, although at the same time I have seen them produce a
strangury. The failure of the Diuretics is probably owing to the diffusion
which all the medicines passing through the mass of blood are liable to. We may
be disappointed in many supposed Diuretics from the medicines mentioned by
Materia Medica writers relieving only diseases of the kidneys. There is
evidence of many Astringents, besides the Uva Ursi, being in the list of
Diuretics. A Physician wrote a Dissertation, published forty years ago,
entitled, De Calculo per Astringentia pellendo, and I do not doubt but
Astringents may sometimes promote this evacaution. I am told that Stock, in a
late book, his Annus Medi^us recommends several Astringents, in obstinate cases
of the Colica Pictonum, which sufficiently shows the uncertainly of the
operation of any medicine.

The operation of Diuretics does not depend on their changing the consistence
of our fluids, and I have no doubt in saying, that universally they act either
by a stimulus directly applied to the kidneys, or to the parts consenting with
them. That the kidneys may be affected by consent, appears from their being a
copious flow of limpid urine in hysteric paroxysms, in the same manner as
nephritic affections cause vomiting. It is from acting in the Intestines that
purgatives, I imagine, exert their diuretic power, at least it is very doubtful
if it be not so, since stones in the kidneys cause Cholics. Commonly, and
perhaps properly, the stimulus of Diuretics is supposed of a saline nature; but
I would by no means confine it to this. Any Acrid will do, and there is
Acrimony of an oily kind, and others with which we are not acquainted.

As to their general effects:

1. They evacuate water from the blood vessels, and by the evacaution causing
an absorption, they draw out water accumulated in any quantity and stagnating
in the cavities. Hence they are supposed to cure Dropsy, but their stimulus is
generally but gentle, and we succeed less often than we would wish or imagine.

2. They evacuate with the water, the saline, putrescent parts of our blood,
and hence all Diuretics are antiscorbutic; and the contrary.

3. With these Diuretics wash out all the extraneous bodies in the serosity.
Hence they may be useful in evacuating every sort of Acrimony.

If their operation were certain, this class of medicines would be of infinite
advantage; nay, they may often be so without any sensible effect, for every
Diuretic is a Diaphoretic. In order to expede their operation, it is always
proper to throw in much water, which may run off by the serous excretories. The
only exception to this is the case of Dropsy, but even here we are not certain.
We have had lately an instance, in this place, of a woman laboring under an
Anasarca, and seemingly an Ascites, which has resisted every medicine, who, by
drinking largely of a mineral water, brought on a great flow of water, and was
relieved. There are instances in physic of a cure performed by common water,
but still the practice is doubtful.

PARTICULAR DIURETICS.
Of the vegetable Diuretics I have marked two natural orders.

1. The Umbellatae, which have universally a diuretic power ascribed to them.
Their effects are never very evident, although, like the Cicuta, they may be
useful without these being sensible. I have set down such as are most employed,
but cannot say how far the choice is accurate.

2. Stellatae. The whole of this class are astringent, and it is to this
property that their diuretic virtue, if ever they exert it, is, I imagine, to
be imputed. Although these are the only natural orders particularized, yet
under the title Stimulantia, referred to, will be found the Siliquosae, etc.
with which I might have increased the list, as every one of them is famous in
this way.

What follow next are a Miscellaneous Set, put together from various sources,
upon very uncertain foundation, except with regard to a few.

Asarum, Genista, and Seneka, are mentioned, to show that all Emetics and
Cathartics, by proper management, may be rendered diuretic. Thus Ipecacuan, by
strong coction, will lose its emetic, but reserve a diuretic power.

Absynthium, Carduus, Ruta, etc. are all, on many occasions, evidently
diuretic, but without any pretensions to saline acrimony.

With regard to the rest, hardly any particular marks need be made.

Dulcamara is a species of Solanum, and of the nature of it and the other
Luridae. Its berries are narcotic, which the leaves and bark are, in a less
degree, with the addition of a purgative virtue. The woody parts are least
narcotic, somewhat purgative, and more diuretic. The use of this has lately
been restored by Linnaeus, who gave two ounces of the Stipites in decoction,
which he and his compatriots recommend as a cleanser of every acrimony in the
blood.

Saline Diuretics. The increase of urine is never very remarkable from these,
except when the salt is accompanied with a large quantity of water, to which
the increase may be greatly imputed. The most powerful of the Saline Diuretics
is the Caustic Alkali properly diluted, and perhaps more effectual when joined
to the Bitters, the virtues of the one mutually increasing, and being increased
by, the virtues of the other.

DIAPHORETICS.
These are properly of two kinds; 1. Those strictly so called, which promote
insensible perspiration only; 2. Those which cause sweat. Of the Diaphoretics,
strictly so called, as the effect is not evident to the senses, and seldom
tried by statical experiments, our knowledge is not accurate. We have only
account of one by Sanctorius, viz. Assa Foetida.

As to their general effects, they are analogous to those of Diuretics.
Sudorifics act thus sensibly, and so have been employed in Dropsy, but their
use is uncertain, as the means employed to obtain their operation excite a
fever, which is not always safe. They especially evacuate every putrescent part
of the blood, every acrimony generated there, and every extraneous matter. We
are more certain of this operation, by making external assistants concur with
our internal Diaphoretics. Here we should suppose, as the action is more
extended, that a more copious evacuation is made, and more convenient, as we
can in some measure secure it, when these means are not hurtful with regard to
the disease we could cure. In the Scurvy, Sweating would be hurtful, and a
Diaphoresis is only proper. In the Lues Venerea Sweating has peculiar
advantages. It can be kept up more steadily than the evacuation by stool, and
more conveniently than salivation, and if it could be excited with ease, is
certainly the best method of cure. Sweat is the only excretion, which,
independent of particular stimulus, merely follows the increase of circulation,
which connection seems to have been established by Nature, in order to obviate
the effects which would arise from heat, motion, etc. and hence Sweating might
cure Fever, without having recourse to the evacuation of any particular matter.
Fever is always founded in a constriction of the surface of the body, and if
this be granted, it is plain the relaxation of the constriction may take it
off. Hence there is no doubt but Sweating may cure Fever, but whether at all
times it is proper, I will not say. It is alleged, that if we can bring out a
Sweat in the beginning, we may obviate any Fever; but this needs confirmation,
and I do not agree to it. Certain, however, it is, that the case is often thus.
Some are of opinion, that Sweating may be used during the whole course of a
Fever, while others think it ought only to be employed in the beginning. This
discussion we cannot enter upon at present. To determine when and where they
should be exhibited is very difficult, but it must be admitted, that in many
cases Sudorifics are useful.

Sudorific power and sudorific medicines are of different kinds. All general
Stimulants of the system, as motion and heat, are powerful Sudorifics. The last
seems to concur with the others I am to mention. Particular Stimulants may be
of two kinds; 1. Those which are applied to the excretories themselves; 2.
Those applied to parts consenting with them, as the stomach and intestines.

In the next place, Sudorifics may be Antispasmodics. These are of two kinds;
1. The Sedative and Narcotic; 2. The Antispasmodics, strictly so called. The
first relax the smaller, and give a stimulus to the larger vessels. The second
are such as we are not certain by what power they act.

With regard to all of them, we had occasion to mention them before. We have
only one thing to observe. Stimulant Sudorifics are only to be employed as
Evacuants, when there is no feverish Spasm, except to obviate the Spasm at a
new accession, or when the antispasmodic virtue is in considerable proportion,
because febrile Spasm is not to be overcome, but aggravated, by increasing the
circulation. This especially takes place with regard to inflammatory Spasm. In
order, therefore, to proceed safely, we must use Antispasmodics. Whether or not
these are so with regard to inflammatory Spasm, as is alleged of Camphire, I
shall not determine, but undoubtedly this, Musk, etc. are useful in the
feverish Spasm, and where Nature points out a remission and accession, and then
may safely be employed.

MENAGOGA.
In concluding our last head, we were engaged in a difficult subject, and at
present we enter upon one of the same nature, in the consideration of
Emmenagogues, for there is not an indication which we have less in our power.
It differs in this from the other evacuations, that we never think of
increasing it above its natural quantity, or of applying medicines but to
overcome its obstruction. Hence, medicines on this head must differ as the
cause of obstruction differs. 1. Nothing has been more common than to suppose
the menstrual flux depending on an universal plethora, so that a defect of it
must depend on a defect of fluids, and whatever restores the plethora must
restore this. But in my opinion this cannot be the case, for the flux often
goes on steadily and regularly where this defect of fluids in the system takes
place. 2. A certain lentor and viscidity of the blood has been reckoned a cause
of the menstrual flux. Against this I would allege, that the presence of such
an actual lentor has never been proved, and although it had, it is very
unlikely that it should ever affect the lax dilatable system of uterine
vessels. 3. With more probability has a defect of motion been blamed, as it is
often apt to occur in the weak, as in the case of Chlorosis, and where there is
a weak system of the uterus. But still there is an uncertainty here, and it is
doubtful of the weakness and obstruction, whether it is cause or effect. To
remove the disease, however, it is necessary to remove the flaccidity. 4. But
the most obvious cause is the constriction of the extreme vessels, the
contractio vasi propria aucta, which is often produced by cold, passions of the
mind, etc. for suppose we should admit the weaker impetus, it could not have
the effect, unless as it gives an opportunity for a strong stricture in the
extremities. Hence Menagogues may be considered as of three kinds.

1. Astringents, in so far as they can be employed to restore the tone of the
system, i. e. such as produced a constriction, which does not go so far as a
spasmodic affection, but increases the impetus of the system. Almost all of
these have been, at different times, employed. I have only set down Iron as
most commonly in use. Probably, by introducing it in small quantities, and at
intervals, it might be made to act as a tonic. The astringent Bitters, as the
Bark, might be employed for the same purpose.

2. Menagogues may be Stimulants, of which there are of different kinds. 1.
Such as act on the system more generally, and only indirectly increase the
impetus of the blood in the uterus, as externally the Cold Bath, and internally
Mercury, which produces brisker oscillations in the extreme vessels of the
whole system. 2. Stimulants may be such as act on the uterus itself. These have
been supposed such as act specifically upon the uterus. Specific stimuli to the
secretions can be explained, by supposing an affinity between the medicine and
the fluid to be secreted, but such explication cannot be given here; and I
would allege, that no specific stimuli of the uterus are yet shown, and that
the direct stimulants of the uterus are only the external. There is no doubt
but application might be made to the uterus by way of fotus, but this is not so
convenient, and could only be in common to it with the whole lower belly.
Injection into the vagina has been proposed, but this can seldom be admitted;
cases, however, have been alleged of its success. The injection of the smoke
of tobacco has been proposed, and I make no doubt of the exertion of its
stimulus: Such medicines also as aloes and the foetid gums (of which, though
difficult (...) ^^^^ain, the virtue in some measure seems to be proved, of a
specific power of increasing haemorrhagy,) may be employed. 3. There is another
way still of using Stimulants, viz. by determining the blood in greater
quantity to the descending aorta and its branches, and so to the uterus. Such
is the application of warm water to the extremities, and opening the veins of
the foot, which last is an evacuation certainly of little consequence in
increasing the impetus indirectly, and is not sensible on a calculation.
Purging is a more effectual determination, as the stimulus subsists some time,
as the evacuation that way may be greater than any other, and as the stimulus
even may be communicated from the consent between the womb and alimentary
canal: Hence acrid purgatives are often effectual Menagogues. The same thing is
effected by such medicines as have a particular power of stimulating the
urinary passages, as Cantharides, which excite the venereal appetite, which
cannot be done without a considerable determination of the blood to the genital
parts, and to the uterus in particular. On this account I doubt not but that
such, if they could be safely employed, would prove menagogue.

3. Antispasmodics may be menagogue, as the disease is founded in spasmodic
constriction. Those of the foetid kind are supposed to be peculiarly
appropriated, but the others would answer equally well, if we had the proper
method of applying them, which, as there is a continued spasm, we should
suppose might be done at all times; but, on repeated experience, I have found
they are only useful in the time of the menstrual period.

None of the medicines proper for the removal of the menstrual obstruction can
be employed at all times, and when the period is not near at hand, except the
Astringents and Mercury; but it is only at the return of the menstrual period,
where there is an aggravation of the symptoms, and an effort of nature, that
the Stimulants, and more especially the Antispasmodics, can be effectual. I
have no doubt that musk may be a powerful remedy, when given at the time of the
paroxysm, or aggravation. Castor is set down as a general title for the foetid
Antispasmodics. Crocus is very seldom to be depended upon.

CATALOGUS MATERIAE MEDICAE.
MEDICAMENTA agunt in
Solida Simplicia NUTRIENTIA I. ADSTRINGENTIA II. EMOLLIENTIA III.
Viva STIMULANTIA IV. SEDATIVA V. ANTISPASMODICA VI.

Fluida Alterantia ATTENUANTIA VII. INSPISSANTIA VIII. DEMULCENTIA IX. ANTACIDA
X. ANTALKALINA XI. ANTISEPTICA XII.
Evacuantia ERRHINA XIII. SIALAGOGA XIV. EXPECTORANTIA XV. EMETICA XVI.
CATHARTICA XVII. DIURETICA XVIII. DIAPHORETICA XIX. MENAGOGA XX.

I. NUTRIENTIA.
1. Ex VEGETABILIBUS.
a. Fructus acido dulces. Drupaceae. Cera^a Mala Armeniaca. Mala Persica.
Pruna. Pomaceae. Mala Hortensia. Pyra. Hesperideas. Aurantia. Senticosae.
Fraga. Rubi Idaei fructus. Uvae Vitis. Ribesia. Uvae crispae. Fructus siccatae.
Uvae passae. Dactyli. Ficus.
b. Cucurbitaceae. Cucumeres. Melones. Pepones.
c. Herbae -- Oleraceae. Atriplex. Beta. Spinacia. Lactuca Agnina. Siliquosae.
Brassica. Nasturtium. Semiflosculosae. Cichorium. Dens Leonis. Endivia.
Lactuca. Umbellatae. Celeri. Asparagus. Capitatae. Cinara.
d. Fungi. e. Radices. Raphanus. Rapum. Umbellatae. Daucus. Pastinaca. Sisarum.
Semiflosculosae. Sco. ^o^era. Tragopogon. Batta^as. Alliaceae. Porrum. Cepa.
Allium.
f. Semina. Avena. Hordeum. Secale. Milium. Triticum. Oryza. Mayz. Fagopyrum.
Medulla farinosa. Sago. Radix farinosa Salep. Legumina. Pisa. Fabae. Phaseoli.
Nuces oleosae. Amygdalae dulces. Avellana. Cacao. Castanea. Juglans. Pistacia.
g. Sepiariae. Olivae.
h. Fermentati potus. Cerevisia. Vinum.
i. Condimenta and condita. Aromata. Saccharo, Sale, vel Aceto condita.

2. Ex ANIMALIBUS.
a. Lac Foeminae. Asinae. Equae. Vaccae. Ovis. Caprae.
b. Quadrupeda. Bos. Ovis. Caper. Cervus. Glires. Lepus. Bestiae. Sus.
c. Aves -- Gallinae. Gallus Gallinaceus. Meleagris Gallopavo. Pavo Cristatus.
Tetrao Perdix. Coturnix. Lagopus. Tetrix. Urogallus. Anseres. Anas domestica.
moschata. Boschus major. Querquedula. Anser domesticus. ferus. Cygnus.
Pelecanus Bassanus. Alca torda. Grallae. Ardea. Scolopax. Tringa. Charadrius.
Haematopus. Fulica. Rallus. Otis. Passeres. Columba. Alauda. Turdus. Emberiza.
d. Pisces. Salmo Salar* trutta. hucho. alpinus. eperlanus. thymallus. Cyprinus
barbus. carpio. gobio. tinca. caephalus. rutilus. alburnus. brama. Perca
fluviatilis. Gadus aeglesinus. merlangus. morhua. molva. virens. callarias.
Cyclopterus lumpus. Scomber scombrus. thynnus. Trigla cuculus. Mugil. Esox
lucius. Clupea harengus. sprattus. encrasicolus. alosa. Pleuronectus flesus.
Pleuronectus solea. platessa. maximus. hippoglossus. Ammodytes. Muraena
anguilla. conger. Anarrhichas. Amphibia nantia. Petromyzon. Raia batis.
Accipenser Sturio.
e. Insecta. Cancer pagurus. gammarus. squilla.
f. Vermes. Sepia loligo. Testaceae. Patella vulgata. Helix pomatia. Buccinum
undatum. Turbo littoreus. Solen Siliqua. Cardium edule. echinatum. Venus
Chione. Ostrea maxima. edulis Mytulus edulis. Volucrum Ova.

II. ADSTRINGENTIA.
1. Ex FOSSILIBUS.
Terrae. Bolus. Cimolia. Osteocolla. Aluminosa. Alumen. Lapis Hibernicus.
Metallicae, ex Cupro. Cuprum. AErugo. Vitriolum caeruleum. Ex Ferro. Ferrum.
Haematites Rubrica fabrilis. Vitriolum viride. Ex Plumbo. Plumbum. Cerussa.
Lithargyrus. Minium. Ex Zinco. Zincum. Calaminaris Lapis. Tutia. Vitriolum
Album.
2. Ex VEGETABILIBUS.
a. Senticosae. Agrimonia. Alchimilla. Argentina. Caryophyllata. Frag^ria.
Quinquefolium. Rosa. To mentilla.
b. Stellatae. Aparine. Gallium. Rubia.
c. Vaginales. Acetosa. Hydrolapathum. Oxylapathum. Bistorta. Rheum.
d. Filices. Filix florida. Lingua cervina. Trichomanes. Mus^i. Muscus.
e. Acerba. Cydonea mala. Mespila. Mora Pruna Sylvestria. Sorba.
f. V^riae. Anch^sa. Bal^^^ssia. B^unella. Hyper^cum. Lythrum. Millefolium.
Myrtus. Plantago. Polygonatum. Sanicula. Sedum. Viscus Quernus. Urtica. Uva
Ursi. Succi inspissati. Acacia. Catechu. Hypocistis. (...) Draconis. (...).
Cortex Granatorum. Fraxini Quercus. Simaroubae. Lignum Campechense. Gallae.
g. Acida I. 1. a. XI. 1. 2. Vina Austera. Amara IV. i. Sedativa. Balsamica IV.
f.

III. EMOLLIENTIA.
1. Aqua et aquosa blanda.
2. Ex VEGETABILIBUS.
a. Columniferae. Althaea. Malva.
b. Farinosa et Mucilaginosa. Sem. Cannabis. Cydoniorum. Foenugra^ci. Lini.
Psyllii.
c. Oleraceae. Atriplex. Beta. Bonus Henricus. Spinacia.
d. Variae. Alsi^e. Branca ursina. Me^ilotus. Parietaria. Sapon^ria. Verbascum.
Rad. Li^iorum alborum. Cepae coctae.
e. O^eosa. Olea p^^ssa blanda.

3. Ex ANIMALIBUS.
Lac. Butyrum. Adeps. Axungia. Sperma Ceti dictum.
IV. STIMULANTIA.
1. Ex VEGETABILIBUS.
a. Ve^ticillatae. Cephalica. Betonica. Lavendula. S^aechas Arabica. Melissa.
Calamintha. Majorana. M^rum Vulgar. Origanum. Dictamnus Creticus. Rosma^inus.
Pectoralia. Hyssopus. Hedera terrestris. Pulegium. Stomachica. Mentha sativa.
piperitis. Nepeta. Cardiaca. Marum Syriacum. Satureia. Serpyllum. Thymus. (...)
Alex^pharmica. Salvia. Chamaedrys. Scordium.
b. Umbellatae. Ammi. Amomum. Anethum. Angelica. Anisum. Carum. Coriandrum.
Cuminum. Daucus Creticus. Foeniculum. Hipposelinum. Levisticum. Pimpinella
Saxifraga. Seseli Massiliense. Siler Montanum.
c. Siliquosae. Alliaria. Cochlearia. Eruca. Erysimum. Lepidium. Nasturtium.
Napum. Raphanus rusticanus. Sinapi. Thlaspi.
d. Alliaceae. Allium. Cepa. Porrum.
e. Coniferae. Abies. Pinus. Juniperus.
f. Balsamica. Terebinthina. Bals. Copaibae. Gileadense. Peruvianum. Tolutanum.
Gum. Guaiacum. Myrrha. Styrax Liquida.
g. Sudorifica -- Lig^a. Guaiacum. Sassafras. Santalum. Radices. China.
Contrayerva. Sarsaparilla
h. Aromatica fragranti^ra. Cinnamomum. Cassia lignea. Macis. Nux moschata.
Cary^phylli. Pimento. Minus fragrantia. Canella alba. Cort. Winteranus.
Zinziber. Acriora. Piper. Capsicum. D^biliora. Cubebae. Cardamomum minus. Grana
Paradisi Ingratiora. Galanga. Zedoaria. Serpentaria Virg. Debilissima.
Ba^^amita. Costus orientalis. Ginseng. Lilium convallium. Malabathrum. Nardus
Celtica. Indica. Cascarilla. Ligna. Aspalathus. Rhodium. Gummi. Benzoinum.
Labdanum. Styrax calamita.
i. Amara Calida. Abrotanum foemina. mas. Absinthium Romanum. vulgar.
Artemisia. Carduus benedictus. Carlina. Chamemaelum. Santonicum. Tanacetum.
Aurantior^^ Cortex. Aurantia Cu^^slaven^^^. Limonio^um Cortex. Centaurium
minus. Gentiana. China China^. Acorus ve^u^. Chamaepitys. Marrubium album.
Dictamnus albus. Lupulus. Trifolium palustre.
k. Amara frigida. Cichorium. Dens Leonis. Endivia. Lactuca. Fumaria.
l. Acria. Arum. Euphorbium. Imperatoria. Iris nostras. Persicaria urens.
Pyrethrum. Sedum minus acre. Staphisagria.
m. Vinum. n. Olea essentialia.
3. Ex ANIMALIBUS.
Cantharides. Millepedae. Cochinillae. 4. Nutrientia. Adstringentia. Sedativa.
Antispasmodica. Acida I. 1. a. XI. 1. 2. Alkalina X. b. Sales neutri.
V. SEDATIVA.
1. Strictius dicta. a. Rhaea^es. Papaver.
b. Umbellatae. Cicuta. Cicuta aquatica.
c. Luridae. Belladonna. Hyoscyamus. Mandragora. Nicotiana. Solanum.
Stramonium.
d. Variae. Lactuca. Laurus. Coffea. Thea. Crocus. Nymphaea.
e. Spirituosae. Vinum. Alcohol.
2. Acida I. 1. a. XI. 1. 2. Sales neutri. Emollientia. Adstringentia.
Antispasmodica.

VI. ANTISPASMODICA.
1. Ex FOSSILIBUS.
Ambragrisea. Succinum. Petroleum.
2. Ex VEGETABILIBUS.
a. Herbae foetidae. Aristoloc^ia. Artemisia. Atriplex olida. Cardiaca.
Cuminum. Levisticum. Meum. Matricaria. Pulegium. R^^a. Sabina
b. Gummi foetida. Assa foetida. Ammoniacum. Galbanum. Opopanax. Sagapenum.
Tacamahaca.
c. Camphora. d. Radices graveolentes. Cassumuniar. Paeonia. Valeriana
sylvestris.
e. Fuligo ligni. f. Olea essentialia. empyreumatica.
g. Alcohol. Liquor AEthereus.

3. Ex ANIMALIBUS.
Moschus. Zibethum. Castoreum. Sales alkalini volatiles. Olea empyreumatica. 4.
Adstringentia. Emo^lientia. Demulcentia. Stimulantia. Sedativa.
VII. ATTENUANTIA.
Aqua. Alkalina X. b. Sa^^s neutri. Sapones. Dulcia IX. c. Nutrientia 1. a. b.
c. d. Emollientia 2. c. d.
VIII. INSPISSANTIA.
Acida XI. 2. Alcohol. Nutrientia 1. e. f. 2. b. etc. Adstringentia.
Demulcentia a. b. d.
IX. DEMULCENTIA.
a. Asperifoliae. Consolida major. Cynoglossum. Pulmonaria.
b. Farinosa. Sem. Cucurbitae. Citrulli. Cucumeris. Melonis. Papaveris.
c. Dulcia. Saccharum. Mel. Uvae passae. Dactyli. Ficus. Cynosbatos.
Glycyrrhiza.
d. Mucilaginosa. Gum. Arabicum. Cerasorum. Senega. Tragacantha. Amylum.
Ichthyocolla.
e. Nutrientia. Emollientia. Sedativa.

X. ANTACIDA.
a. Fossilia. Calcarius lapis. Creta. Osteocolla. Animalia plerumque testacea.
Cancrorum chelae. oculi dicti. Cervi Cornu u^^um. Corallina. Corallium rubrum.
Lapis Bezoar orientalis. Ma^garitae. Ovorum testae. Ostreorum testae. Sepiae
os.
b. Sales alkalini. Alkali fixum vegetabile. fossile. Calx viva. Alkali
volatile.
c. Neutra. Borax. Tartarus solubilis. Sapo.
d. Stimulantia. Sedativa. Antispasmodica. Demulcentia.

XI. ANTALKALINA.
1. Acida nativa. Acetosa. Acetosella. Berberis. Ribesia. Tamarindi. Succus
Aurantiorum. Limoniorum.
2. Acida art parata. Vinum. Acidum vegetabile. muriaticum. nitrosum.
vitriolicum. Sal Sedativum. Succini.
3. Nutrientia a. b. c. d. e. g. Adstringentia 2. c. Demulcentia.

XII. ANTISEPTICA.
Acida I. a. II. e. XI. 1. 2. Alkalina X. b. Sales neutri. metallici.
te^restre^. Olea essentialia. empyreumatica. Vinum. Alcohol. Nutrientia 1.
Adstringentia. Stimulantia. Sedativa. Antispasmodica.
XIII. ERRHINA.
Mitiora. Beta. Betonica. Majorana. Acriora. Asarum. Euphorbium. Helleborus
albus. Iris nostras. Nicotiana. Ptarmica. Pyrethrum. Fossilia. Turbith
minerale.
XIV. SIALAGOGA.
Stimulantia externa. Angelica. Caryophylli. Imperatoria. Nicotiana. Piper.
Pyrethrum. Stimulantia interna. Hydrargyrus.
XV. EXPECTORANTIA.
Hedera terrestris. Hyssopus. Marrubium. Pulegium. Enula campana. Iris
Florentina. Nicotiana. Scilla. Petasites. Tussilago. Benzoinum. Styrax
calamita. Pix liquida. Sapo. Stimulantia b. c. d. f. Antispasmodica 2. b.
Demulcentia c.
XVI. EMETICA.
1. Ex FOSSILIBUS.
Cuprum. Hydrargyrus. Antimonium. Zincum.
2. Ex VEGETABILIBUS.
Asarum. Erigerum. Ipecacuanha. Nicotiana. Scilla. Sinapi. Raphanus rusticanus.
Amara IV. i. Cathartica.
XVII. CATHARTICA.
Acescenti^. Fructus acido-dulces I. 1. a. Pruna Brignolensia. Gallica. Cassia
fistularis. Tamarindi. Dulcia. Saccharum. Mel. Manna. Aqua. Serum Lactis. Lac
ebutyratum. Olera blanda I. 1. c. d. Olea blanda ex Vegetabilibus et
Animalibus. Sapo albus Hispanus. Rosae Damascenae. Viola. Polypodium. Sinapi.
Sulphur. Amara IV. i. k. VI. 1. a. Bilis Animalium. Balsamica IV. f. Salina.
Tartarus. Alkalina fixa. Sales neutri. Magnesia alba. Acriora. Antispasmodica
2. b. Aloe. Agaricus. Rhabarbarum. Seneka. G^nissa. Senna. Helleborus niger.
Mechoacanna. Turpethum. Jalapium. Scammonium. Soldanella. Arthanita. Ebulus.
Sambu^us Ramni baccae. Frangulae co^tex. Linum Catharticum. Chelidonium majus.
Gambogia. Mercurialis. Ricinus. Gratiola. Nicotiana. Helleborus albus.
Colocynthis. Cucumis asininus. Elaterium. Metallica. Aurum. Argentum.
Hydrargyrus. Antimonium. Emetica.
XVIII. DIURETICA.
a. Umbellatae Apium. Petroselinum. Chaere^olium. Daucus Sylvestris.
Foeniculum. Meum. Pimpinella Saxifraga. Siler montanum. Eryngium.
b. Stellatae. Aparine. Asperula. Rubia.
c. Variae. Alkekengi. Arnica. Arum. Asarum. Asparagus. Absinthium. Carduus
benedictus. Bardana. Dulcamara. Enula. Genista. Gramen. Linaria. Lithospermum.
Ononis. Pareira brava. Persicaria urens. Ruta. Sabina. Saxifraga alba. Seneka.
Scilla.
d. Acida I. 1. a. XI. 1. 2. Alkalina X. b. Sales neutri. Antacida a. Sal
Ammoniacum fixum. Sapo. Olera I. 1. c. e. Emollientia 1. 2. c. d. Stimulantia
1. b. c. d. e. f. k. 2.

XIX. DIAPHORETICA.
Vegetabilia. Angelica. Calendula. Crocus. Dulcamara. Opium. Ambragrisea.
Moschus. Zibethum. Camphora. China. Contrayerva. Serpentaria Virg. Guaiacum.
Sassafras. Sarsaparilla Seneka. Salvia. Scor^ium. Metallica. Antimonium.
Hydrargyrus. Aqua. Vinum. Acida vegetabilia. Alkali volatile. Sales neutri.
Olea Essentialia. Empyreumatica. Stimulantia. Sedativa. Antispasmodica.
Antacida a. Emetica. Cathartica. Diuretica.
XX. MENAGOGA.
Aloe. Castoreum. Crocus. Ferrum. Hydrargyrus. Stimulantia. Antispasmodica. 1.
2. a. b. Emetica. Cathartica. Diuretica.
Some substances mentioned in the Catalogue are not to be found in the Index,
as not being particularly treated of; but their qualities will be understood by
looking in the Index for the general title, class, or order under which each
substance stands arranged in the Catalogue. Thus the Alchimilla is not
mentioned particular^^ in the Index, but its general qualities will be
understood by those of the Senticosae, which is to be found in the Index, and
is the order to which is belongs.

INDEX.
A.
A Brotanum foemina, 284 Absinthium vulgar, ib. Absorbentia, 39 Abstergentia,
40 Acacia, 216 Acerba, 204 Acerbity in fruits, effects, of, 54 Acid of wine,
311 Acids in general, as Antalkalines, 430 -- particular, as Antalkalines, 435
-- muriatic, as Antalkalines, ib. -- vitriolic, as Antalkalines, ib. --
vegetable, as Antalkalines, ib. -- nitrous, as Antalkalines, 436 -- employed in
medicine, list of, 437 -- as Astringents, 219 -- as Sedatives, 360 -- as
Stimulants, 322 Acid taste of plants, 164 Acidity in fruits, effects, of, 55
Acorus verus, 302 Acria as Stimulants, 307 Acrid taste of plants, 165 Acrimony,
kinds of, 34 Adstringentia, 169 --, operation of 170 --, diseases in which they
are indicated, 173 --, diseases in which they are contraindicated. 175 --,
means of discovering them, 177 Ether, 376 Age, old, description of, 17
Agglutinantia, 41 Agrimonia, 193 Alcohol, 359 Aliment, difference of, 45, ^^0
--, vegetable, ^5 Aliment, choice of, 46 --, proper, what, 47 --, mixture of,
in the stomach, 52 --, vegetable, division of, 53 --, vegetable and animal,
comparison of, 149 --, effects on the mind, ib. Alkali, fossile, as attenuant,
410 --, vegetable, as attenuant, ib. --, volatile, 384 --, as antacid, 426 --,
as attenuant, 410 Alkalina, ib. Alkalines fixed, as antacid, 426 --, as
stimulants, 323 Alliaciae, 261 Allium, 262 Almonds, 84 Aloes, 481 Al^ine, 230
Alterants, what, 33 Althaea, 227 Alum, 182 Amara calida, 278 --, calida,
pharmaceutical treatment of, 344 --, frigida, 305 Amb^ag^i^ea, 362 Amphibia,
138 Amy^um, 419 A^^leptica, 35 Analysis strictly chemical, of little use, 2
A^chusa, 205 A^ge^ica, 254 Animals, what kind most proper for food, 121 --,
division of, 125 Anis^m, 255 A^^^yna, ^7 Anseres, 133 Antacida, synonyms to, 39
--, 420 Antacria, 38 Antalkalina, 39, 430 Antiphrodisiacs, 43 Anthelmintica, 44
Antimony, 467 Antiphlogistica, 37 Antiseptica, 39, 437 Antispasmodica, as
expectorant, 459 --, synonyms to, 37 Antispasmodics, definition of, 33 --,
fossile, 362 --, vegetable, 364 --, as Sedatives, 360 --, as Stimulants, 322
Aperientia, 39 Aphorisms, Linnaeus's commented on, 158 Aphrodisiacs, 43 Apples,
qualities of, 57 Apricot, 56 Argentina, 198 Aristolochia, 365 Aromata, 90 --,
where proper, ib. Aromatica fragrantiora, 272 Arum, 307 Assa foetida, 367
Aspalathus, 276 Asparagus, 66 Asperifoliae, 418 Assimilation of nutriment, 48
Astringency, in what parts of vegetables it is lodged, 178 Astringentia,
synonyms to, 35 Astringentia, fossile, 179 --, metallic, 186 --, vegetable, 194
--, why proper to be given in substance, 195 --, dose of, 199 -- as Sedatives,
360 -- as Stimulants, 322 Attenuantia, 405 --, synonyms to, 38 --, what, 34
Attrahentia, 36 At^iplex, 230 -- olida, 365 Auran^ia c^r^slavensia, 286
Aura^^^oru^ cor^e^, ib. Austere taste of plants, 164
B.
Balaustines, 206 Balsam Copaibae, 263 -- Gilead, 263 -- Gum Guiac. 263 Peruv.
263 T^lu, 263 Balsamics as astringents, 221 -- as cathartic, 482 Barley, 74
Beans. Vide Legumina. Bee^, qualities of, 126 Beet, qualities of, 63
Belladonna, 353 Benzoin, 458 Benzoinum, 276 Betonica, 249 Bile, as a cathartic,
478 Bittern, 137 Bitters as astringents, 221 Bitter taste of plants, 164
Bivalves, 147 Blood, denser in proportion to the rigidity of the vessels and
age of the subject, 11 --, human, account of, 388 --, of animals, as food,
effects of, 120 Blood vessels, effects of custom upon, 32 Boerhaave, his plan
of a Materia Medica the best, 2 Boles, 180 Borax, 429 Branca Ur^ina, 230
Brassica, qualities of, 74 ^^^ad, its use universal, 76 --, propriety of its
use, ib. --, different kinds of it, 77 --, when best prepared, 78 --, use of
baking it, ib. Brunella, 206 Buckwheat, 76 Bustard, 135 Butter, 86 Butter milk,
116
C.
Cacao nut, 84 Calamintha, 250 Calefacientia, 36 Camphire, 368 Canella alba,
273 Cannabis semen, 228 Cantharides, 318 Capsicum, 273 Cardiacs, 42 Carduus
benedictus, 284 Carlina, 285 Carminativa, 37 Carrot, 69 Caryophyllata, 188
Cascarilla, 276 Cassumunia^, 382 Castor, 381 Catechu, 216 Cathartica, 35, 474
Celeri, 65 Centaurium minus, 287 Cepa, 262 --, cocta, 231 Cephalica, 41 --,
verticillat. 249 Chamaedrys, 253 Chamaemelum, 285 Chamaepitys, 302 Cherries, 56
Chestnut, 83 Chicken, 130 China Chinae, 287 -- rad, 270 Cichoreum, 65 Cicuta,
351 -- aquatica, 353 Cimolia, 181 Cinara, 65 Clupea, 145 Coccinella, 321
Coffea, 357 Colocynthis, 484 Color of medicines, not to be relied on, for a
knowledge of their qualities, 2 -- of the blood different, cause of, 11 -- of
plants, 166 Columniferae, 227 Condientia, 39 Condimenta, 90 Conif^r^e, 227, 263
Consolida major, 418 Consolidantia, 41 Contrayerva, 271 Coot, 137 Copper,
virtues of, 186 --, dose of, 188 Coriandrum, 254 Corn, cerv, ustum, 424 Cotula
foetida, 285 Creta, 424 Crocus, 359 Cucumber, qualities of, 61 Cucumis
asininus, 484 Curlew, 136 Currants, qualities of, 58 Custom, effects of, 21
Cyclopterus lumpus, 144 Cydoniorum semen, 228 Cynoglossum, 418 Cyprinus, 144
D.
Dandelion, 65 Date, qualities of, 60 Daucus creticus, 254 -- sylvestris, 255
Demulcentia, 416 --, as expectorant, 469 --, synonyms to, 38 Dens Leonis, 65
Deobstruentia, 39 Deoppilantia, 40 Depurantia, ib. Detergentia, ib.
Diaphoretica, 35, 489 Dictamnus albus, 303 -- Creticus, 254 Digestiva, 40
Diluentia, 38 Discutientia, 40 Diuretica 35, 486 Drink, effect on the aliment,
87 -- blood vessels, ib. -- lymph, ib. Drupaceous fruits, qualities of, 54
Duck, tame, 133 --, Muscovy, 134 Dulcamara, 489 Dulcia, as Attenuants, 413 --,
as Demulcents, 419
E.
Earths, simple astringent, 179 --, saline, astringent, 182 --, absorbent, 424
Eel kind of fish, 145 Eggs of Birds, 148 Elaterium, 484 Emetica, 35, 460
Emollient substances, parts of in which their virtues reside, 225 Emollientia
ex animalibus, 232 --, synonyms to, 36 --, 22^ Emollients, indications of, 224
--, sensible qualities which discover them, 226 --, Pharmaceutical treatment,
ib. --, particular, ib. --, as Sedatives, 360 --, as Attenuants, ib. Endive, 65
Endivia, ib. Enula campana, 456 Epispastica, 36 Erodentia, 44 Errhina, 34, 439
--, synonyms to, 39 Eruca, 259 Erysimum, ib Essentia Limonum, 286 Evacuants,
what, 34 --, in general, 438 Euphorbium, 307 Expectorantia, 35, 445
Exsiccantia, 35 Exsiccants, as confounded with Astringents, 221
F.
Farinacea, as Demulcents, 418 Farinosa, 227 Fibers, moving, affected by
custom, 25 Fig, qualities of, 60 Filices, 202 Fishes, 140 --, used in food,
list of, ib. --, of their qualities in general, 142 Flounder kind of fish, 145
Fluids, state of, 11 --, distribution of 12 --, scarce alterable by medicines,
20 --, animal, nature of, 387 Foeniculum, 254 Foenugra^ci semen, 228 Food,
animal, 95 --, --, alkalescency of, 121 --, --, --, how determined. ib. --, --,
as to quantity of nutriment, 123 --, --, as to the nature of the fluids they
afford, 124 --, --, per^^^ra^^lity of, 123, 124 --, --, solubility of, ib. --,
--, strictly so called, 117 Food, animal and vegetable, compared, 101 --, --,
effects of, ib. --, --, in what proportion they ought to be mixed, ib. Food,
variety, effects of, 105 --, vegetable, bad effects of, 86 Fragaria, 198
Fraxini cortex, 217 Frog, 139 Fructus acido-dulces, 54 --, as Cathartics, 477
Fruits, when most proper to be used, 59 --, dry, ib. Fuligo, 385 Fumaria, 306
Fungi in general, 89
G.
Gadus, 144 Galanga, 274 Galla^, 218 Garlic, 70 Genista, 483 Gentiana, 287
Ginseng, 276 Globules red, of the blood, 390 Goat, flesh of, 127 Gold, 484
Goosberries, qualities of, 58 Goose, Solan, 135 --, tame, 134 Grallae, 135
Grapes, fresh, qualities of, 58 --, dry, qualities of, 63 Grouse, 132 Guiacum,
269 Guana, 139 Gummata foetida, 366 Gums, simple, 419 Gurnard, 144
H.
Habit, what, 22 Haematites, 192 Hair, color, form, and quantity, a mark of
the state of the solids, 10 Hare, 128 Heat, effect of, on fruits, 59 Hedera
terrestris, ^^1 Helleb^r* niger, (...) Hen, 130 Hepatics, 43 Herbae foetidae,
364 Heron, 137 Hesperideae fructus, 57 History, Natural, application of to the
Materia Medica, 151 Hog, 128 Humectantia, 36 Hypericum, 206 Hypnotica, 37
Hypocystis, 216 Hyoscyamus, 354 Hyssopus, 250
I.
Jalapium, 484 Ichthyocolla, 419 Idiosyncrasy, what, 9, 20 --, effects of, 53
--, effects on the fluids, 21 --, hereditary, ib. Immutantia, 39 Imperatoria,
307 Incidentia, 38. Incrassantia ib. Indication, what, 31 Indications in
Chiurgery, 40 Indurantia, 36 Infancy, description, of, 15 Insecta, 145 Insipid
taste in plants, 165 Inspissantia, 34, 414 --, synonyms to, 38 Iris Florentina,
^07 -- nostras, 183 Iron, 191 --, dose of 190 --, virtues of, (...)
Irritability increased by repetition of the impression, 23
L.
Labdanum, 277 Lactuca agnina, 65 --, as sedative, 356 Lactescency of plants,
160 Lamb, qualities of, 126, 127 Lamprey, 140 Lapis Hibernicus. Vide Slate.
Lapwing, 136 Lavendula, 240 Laurus, 356 Laxantia, 38 Lead, 192 Leek, 70
Legumina, qualities of, 81 Lenientia, 38 Lettuce, 65 -- lamb. Vide Lactuca
agnina. Levisticum, 254 Levity, what, 14 Lignum Campechense, 218 Lilior. albor.
rad. 231 Lilium convallium, 275 Limoniorum cortex, 286 Lini semen, 229
Linnaeus, his System of Natural History recommended, 151 Liquors, fermented,
effects of, 88 --, --, on what their varieties depend, 89 Lupulus, 303 Luridae,
353 Lymph, coagulable, of the blood, 388 Lythrum, 207
M.
Magnesia alba, 424 --, as cathartic, 478 Majorana, 250 Maiz, 75 Malt liquors,
318 Malva, 2^^ Manhood, account of, 303 Marrubium album, 252 Marum Syriac. 250
-- ^redica, knowledge of, what, 1 Maturantia, 40 Mechoacanna, 484 Medicines,
general division of, 32 --, virtues of, 151 Melilotus, 230 Melissa, 250 Melon,
qualities of, 60 Menagoga, 35, 491 Mentha sativa, 252 -- piperit, 251 Mercury,
442 Millesolium, 208 Millepedes, 321 Milk, 106 --, its nature, and general
qualities, 107 --, to whom best suited, 108 --, various kinds, of, 111 --,
rules for the use of, 113 --, examination of its parts, 114 Millet, 74 Morelle,
68 Mullet, 144 Mundificantia, 40 Muscus, 204 Mushrooms, 67 Musk, 380 Must of
wine, 309 Mustard, as emetic and cathartic, 258 --, as a cathartic, 478 Mutton,
qualities of, 126 Myrrh, 268 Myrtus, 208
N.
Nasturtium, qualities of, 63 Nephritics, 43 Nerves, the extent of their power
in the system, 6 Nicotiana, 355 --, as expectorant, 45^ Nuces oleosae, 82 Nut,
hazel, 83 Nutrientia, 45 --, as Attenuants, 413 --, as Stimulants, 321 --,
definition of, 33 --, synonyms to, 35 Nymphae substances, difference of, 47 359
O.
Oats, Odor of plants, what a mark of, 74 Oil, effects of, 85 --, nutritive,
85 Oils, empyreumatic, 375 --, essential, 377 --, expressed, as cathartic, 477
Olives, 85 Olea pressa blanda, as emollient, 231 Oleraceae, as emollients, 229
Onion, 70 Ophthalmica, 42 Opium, 331 Orache, 63 Oranges, China, qualities of,
57 Osteocolla, 181, 424 Oyster, common, 147
P.
Paeonia, 382 Parietaria, 231 Parsnep, 69 Partridge, 132 Pass^r^s, 137 Paste,
kinds of, 80 Peach, qualities of, 56 Peacock, 131 Pears, qualities of, 57
Pease* Vide Legumina. Pecora, what kinds used, 125 Pectoralia, verticill. 250
Pectorals, 42 Persica^ia urens, 308 Peruvianus cortex. Vide China Chinae.
Petasites, 458 Petroleum, 363 Pheasant, 131 Pigeon, 137 Pike, 145 Pimpinella,
254 Piper, 273 P^^^achio nut, 84 Pix liquida, 459 Plan of the work, 1 Plan^^go,
209 P^^v^^, gr^en, 137 Plumbs, qualities of, 56 Pneumonics, 42 Polygonatum, 209
Polypodium, 483 Pomaceous fruits, qualities of, 57 Pompion, qualities of, 60
Pork, 128 Porrum, 262 Potatoe, 71 Power, nervous, different state of, 13 --,
--, effects of custom upon, 28 (...) medicines to be chiefly (...) to, 20 Pruna
sylvestria, 205 Psylli^ semen, 2^9 P^armica, 39 Puddings, kinds of, 80
Pulegium, 250 Pulmonaria, 418 Pulmonics, 42 Pyrethrum, 308
Q.
Quail, 131 Qualities, chemical, of plants, 167 Quicklime, 411, 426
Quinquefolium, 198
R.
Rabbit, 128 Radish, 69 Rail, 136 Raphanus rusticanus, 257 Raspberries,
qualities of, 57 Re^^^geruntia, 37 Repellentia, 40 Repercutientia, 40
Reprimentia, 40 Reptiles, 138 Resolventia, 38 Restaurantia, 35 Rhabarbarum, 483
Rhodium, 276 Rice, 75 Robora^ti^, 36 Roots esculent, 68 Rosae Damascenae, 483
Ro^ma^i^us, 250 Rubefacientia, 36 Rubia, 200 Ruta, 365 Rye, 74
S.
Sabina, 366 Sago, 72 Salep, 71 Salmon kind of fish, 143 Salt, 9^ Salts,
neutral, as Attenuants, 412 --, as Antacids, 429 --, as Cathartics, 477 --, as
Sedatives, 360 --, as Stimulants, 323 Salvia, (...) Sanguis Draconis, 216
Sanicula, 210 Santalum, 270 Santoni^um, 286 Saponaria, 231 Sapones, 412
Sarcotica, 40 Sarsaparilla, 270 Sassafras, 269 Satureia, 252 Scammonium, 484
Scate, 140 Scilla, 457 Scordium, 253 Scorzonera, 69 Sedativa, synonyms to, 37,
323 Sedatives, definition of, 35 --, as Astringents, 221 --, as Stimulants, 322
--, particular, 331 Sedum, 210 -- minus acre, 308 Seeds, farinaceous, 73
Seneka, 483 Senna, 484 Sense, organs of affected by custom, 23 Sensibility,
diminished by repetition, 23 Senticosae, qualities of, 57, 197 Serosity of the
blood, 391 Serpentaria Virginiana, 274 Serpylium, 262 Sese^i Massiliense, 254
Sialagoga, 34, 442 --, synonyms to, 39 Siliquosae, use of, 90, 256 Silver, 485
Simaroubae Cortex, 217 Sinapi, 257 Sisten^ia, 36 Skirret, 69 Slate, 185 Smell
of Medicines, not to be depended on (...) a knowledge of their qualities, 2
Snipe, 136 Soap, 429 --, as expectorant, 459 --, as cathartic, 477 Solids,
simple, state of, (...) --, proportion between (...) the fluids, 10 --, (...)
manner of life, 20 -- (...) of custom upon, 22 Solubility of food, 51 --, how
diversified, 52 Solution of food in the stomach, how performed, 117 --, how
varied, 118 Somnifera, 37 Soporifera, 37 Soul, its effect on the body, 4
Specifics, 41 --, supposed, list of, 44 Spinach, 63 Splenetics, 43 Staechas
Arabica, 250 Sternutatoria, 39 Stellatae, 199 --, as Diuretics, 488 Stimulant
virtue, foundation in sensible qualities, 246 --, in what part lodged, ib
Stimulantia, synonyms to, 36 --, as expectorant, 459 --, manner of their
operation, 233 Stimulants, definition of, 33 --, effects of, 239 --,
indications of, 240 --, effects in the blood vessels, ib. --, on the nervous
system, 241 --, in the alimentary canal, 242 --, contra indications of in the
sanguiferous system, 243 --, remarks with regard to their use, 244 --,
pharmaceutical treatment of, 247 --, particular, 248 --, animal, 318 --, as
expectorant, 459 Stomach, its sympathy with the rest of the system, 8
Stomachica verticill. 251 Stomachics, 42 Strawberries, qualities of, 57
Sturgeon, 140 Styrax calamita, 276 --, as expectorant, 458 -- liquida, 268
Su^^^^spissati, 216 Sugar, nutr^^^^ 362 Sulphur, 47, 93 Suppurantia, 477 Swan,
40 Sweet taste of plants, 164 Sweetness in vegetables, effects of, 55
Syngenesia, 284
T.
Tanacetum, 286 Tartar, as cath. 476 Tartarus solubilis, 428 Taste, of great
use in discovering the qualities of medicines, 2 Tastes, arrangement of, 164
--, simple, ib. --, compound, ib. Teal, 139 Temperament, what, 4 Temperaments,
sanguineous, 18 --, choleric, 19 --, melancholic, ib. --, phlegmatic, ib.
Tension, effects of on the system, 22 Terebinthina, 263 Terra Japonica. Vide
Catechu. Texture of vegetables, effects of, 55 Thea, 357 Thoracics, 42 Thymus,
252 Tobacco. Vide Nicotiana. Tormentilla, 198 Trifolium palustre, 304 Turkey,
131 Turnep, 69 Turtle, 138 Tussilago, 458
U. V.
Valeriana sylvestris, 382 Vaginales, 201 Veal, qualities of, 126 Vegetables,
become acid in the stomach, 49 Venison, 127 Verbascum, 231 Vermes, 146 --, list
of used in food, ib. Verticillatae, 248 Vesicantia, 36 Vinegar, 92 Viper, 139
Viscus Quernus, 211 Umbellatae, 253 --, as diuretics, 488 Urtica, 211 Uterines,
43 Uva Ursi, 211 Vulneraria, 41
W.
Walnut, 83 Water, 406 --, as a cathartic, 477 --, as emollient, 226 --, as
attenuant, 406 Wheat, 75 Wine, as stimulant, 309 --, as sedative, 359 --, of
different countries, remarks on, 316 Wines, austere, as astringent^^ 220
Winteranus Cortex, 273 Woodcock, 136
Y.
Youth, description of, 16
Z.
Zedoaria, 274 Zibethum, 381 Zinc, 194 Zinziber, 273
FINIS.

