AN ESSAY UPON GOVERNMENT, ADOPTED BY THE AMERICANS WHEREIN, The lawfulness of
REVOLUTIONS, are Demonstrated in a Chain of CONSEQUENCES from the Fundamental
Principles of SOCIETY.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and sold by the Booksellers. MDCCLXXV.

CONTENTS.
THE original of government, Page 15 Definition of government, Page 19 What is
to be meant by society, ibid Definition of Property, Page 21 Whether government
be from God or man, Page 24 The authority of Government only from God, Page 27
The authority of Government not from the people, Page 28 The authority of
Government from God, but the form from Man, Page 31 Unity and order to be
preserved, Page 35 Unity and order in religion, Page 36 To govern by parties a
false maxim, Page 38 Divisions in Society to be healed, Page 39 The magistrates
power in religious matters, Page 40 The magistrates power over the priesthood,
Page 42 The rule of laws, and the measure of obedience, Page 45 The rule of
conscience in making laws, Page 46 How far our rights are to be maintained,
Page 47 The power of every Society to alienate rights, Page 48 The necessity of
putting laws in execution, Page 52 How laws are to be regulated and executed,
Page 55 Laws to be few and plain, Page 55 Laws to be gentle and easy, Page 57
Nothing burdensome to be imposed without Necessity, Page 58 How to regulate
the execution of Laws, Page 59 The measure of submission to government, Page 61
What resistance of governors may be lawful, Page 68 The late civil war
condemned, Page 93 The revolution justified, Page 97 How far any form of
government may be altered, Page 70 What form of government is best, Page 115
AN ESSAY ON GOVERNMENT.
MY design in the following papers is, to endeavor to establish a right Notion
of Government from natural and certain Principles; a Work at first view not
very easy to be done, considering how much men differ on this subject, and how
intricate and entangled they have made it.

Amongst the many that have wrote upon this Point, there are but few who agree
in the same Scheme; and amongst the many Schemes that have been drawn, I doubt
there are hardly any, which are not imbarrass'd with some obstinate difficulty,
that the Author would be glad to be fairly rid of.

The several Notions of Government.
As to the late Civil Wars, it is pretty well known, what Notions of Government
went current in those Days. When Monarchy was to be subverted, we know what was
necessary to justify the Fact; and then, because it was convenient for their
purpose, it was undoubtedly true in the Nature of Things, That Government had
its Original from the People, and the Prince was only their Trustee, to execute
the Office they had put into his hand, which they might resume when they saw
fit.

This was the Doctrine that was commonly received, and the only Doctrine that
relished in those Times.

But afterward, when Monarchy took its Place again, and a new Scene of things
appeared upon the Stage, another Notion of Government came in Fashion, Then
Government had its Original entirely from God, and the Prince was accountable
to none but Him; so that let Him do what he would, He was not to be opposed,
and what Injury soever we might suffer by Him we must wait for a Redress, till
the Day of Judgment.

Then Princes were tuti Imperii Majestate, their Majesty was their Protection,
and their Character their Sanctuary, and as they were entrusted by none but
God, so there was nothing left for Subjects, but the Glory of obeying. These
Notions of Government went glibly down, according to the Times, they were
vented in.

And now, upon another turn of things, when People have a liberty to speak out,
a new Set of notions is advanced; now Passive Obedience is all a mistake, and
instead of being a duty to suffer oppression, it is a Glorious Act to resist it;
and instead of leaving Injuries to be redressed by God, we have a natural Right
to relieve ourselves.

Now amidst these contradictions, which have each been managed with art and
dexterity, it is hard to find where the Truth lies. Each notion has passed for
true Sterling in its turn; and if we were to judge by the same Rule, that such
Principles are too commonly received by, we must then judge according to our
Interest, and according to the humor of the Times we live in; and though we may
not happen to be right, yet we shall generally be allowed to be so, and we are
sure to be of the strongest Side.

But after all, there is a Right, and a Wrong, however Prejudice, or Interest
has perplexed, and entangled them; and as it will be a very fair step to the
discovery of the Right, if we can find what Notions are Wrong, so I will
endeavor to lay down some Propositions, as Rules for this purpose, by which we
may form a certain Judgment, and when we have by this means cleared away the
Rubbish, we may the more easily find the Jewel, that lies buried in such a Heap
of Confusion.

Principles to be granted.
NOW these Rules I will build upon such Principles only, as the greatest Part,
if not all Mankind are agreed in; And therefore I will take it for granted.

PRINCIPLE I.
First, THAT as the Wisdom of God made the World for some End, so whatever that
End was, it is the duty of every man to pursue it to his power.

PRINCIPLE II.
Secondly, THAT whatever Means are in the nature of things necessary to that
End, the same are so many Laws, and Rules of Action, and so many necessary and
natural duties to be observed in the pursuit of that End.

PRINCIPLE III.
Thirdly, THAT Means, as such, are only for the sake of the End, and by
consequence as the End must be more valuable then the Means, so the value of
the Means must rise or fall, and our duty and obligation to make use of 'em,
must be greater, or less, according as they are more, or less necessary to the
End; And if so, from hence it will follow,

That when any thing, which is in its own nature a necessary Means to an End,
shall, by being applied in such and such a manner, prove destructive of that
End; so far as it is our duty to pursue the End, so far it is our duty to
reject that application.

These are such Principles as few will disallow; and I believe it will hardly
be denied me further,

PRINCIPLE IV.
Fourthly, THAT the End for which God made the World, was to do Good, or, in
other words, that every thing might be Happy according to its Nature, and by
consequence as Mankind are of a sociable Nature, and cannot be truly Happy
without Society, it must have been one End of that Wisdom that made us for our
Happiness, that we should be united in Society, and therefore it must be our
duty, not only to support Society, but to do it in such a Way as is most for
its Happiness. (See Principle I.) And therefore all notions must be false, and
all actions unlawful, that tend either to the Destruction, or Misery of Society.

PRINCIPLE V.
Fifthly, BY the Happiness of Society is to be meant chiefly, the Security of
every one's Rights and Properties.

PRINCIPLE VI.
I WILL take it for granted, and I believe most men are pretty well agreed,
that Government is necessary to the Happiness of Society; and, by consequence,
it must be an indispensable Truth, that Government ought to be maintained.
(Principle II.) And therefore those notions of Government must be false, and
those actions unlawful, which tend to the destruction of Government, that is,
which tend to the making of Government precarious, and the introducing disorder
and confusion. And if so,

Then, should we so far ascribe the Power of the Government to the People, as
to give them a Right to resume it when they please; as this would undoubtedly
make Government precarious, and tend to Civil discord and confusion, this
notion must necessarily be false, and such an action of the People unlawful.
But then,

PRINCIPLE VII.
Seventhly, AS Government is only a means to an End, and as the End is to be
preferred before the means, so it must by consequence be a certain Truth, That
in Government the End must chiefly be regarded, and therefore that notion of
Government must be false, and that action unlawful, which is contrary to the
End, and Reason of Government.

And as all men, I suppose, will agree in this, that the End of Government is
the Happiness of Society; That notion of Government must be false, and that
action unlawful, that is contrary to the Happiness of Society. And if so,

Then, should Government be so far ascribed to God, as to give the Prince an
absolute Authority over his People, to dispose of their Rights, as he sees fit,
without any Power in the People to oppose it, as this must make the Happiness
of Society precarious, and tend to their utter misery and ruin, this notion
must necessarily be false. But yet, for the same Reason,

PRINCIPLE VIII.
Eighthly, SHOULD a Resistance of Governors be so far allowed, that upon every
mere pretense of oppression, or indeed upon every real injury, it may be lawful
for subjects to resist; as this would not only make Government precarious, but
would hazard the peace and happiness of Society, this notion must by
consequence be false, and that Resistance unlawful. And if so,

Then from hence it will follow, that, as there is a Resistance lawful, so
there is a Non-resistance necessary both to the safety of Government, and the
welfare of Society. And if so,

PRINCIPLE IX.
FROM all these considerations put together, it will follow, as a certain
undeniable truth, that that notion of government must be the only true one,
which secures the Government from the Insults of Rebellion, and protects the
People from the Oppression of Tyranny.

These are all the Principles I desire to be granted; these I think are such,
as will hardly be denied; and if so, from these we may be enabled to form to
ourselves a certain, and regular Scheme of Government, such as I believe, all
Men will agree in, that are governed by right Reason which is then only said to
be right, when it agrees with the Natures, and Reasons of things.

To make a short Essay of this kind, is the design of this treatise, and to do
it the more clearly, it will be necessary, first, to show what I mean by
Government; and for this Purpose, I think it may not be improper to look back,
and inquire after its Original, and search out the Root, from whence it grew.

The Original of Government.
AND as to this it is certain, that whether 'twas derived from God, or Men, the
Original Reason, and Occasion of it was, the Corruption, or Imperfection of
human Nature.

For, though there would have been something like Government in a State of Purity
and Innocence, (had Mankind continued in that State) as there would have been a
difference of Degrees, of Superiority and Inferiority, as of Parents, and
Childern, and though they would probably have had some Rules of Order, as there
are supposs'd to be amongst the Angels of Heaven, yet there would have been
nothing like (what we call) Government now in this State of Corruption we are
in; that is there would have been nothing like a Government of Coercion.

For it is evidently demonstrable from Principles of Reason, That the State of
Man's Innocence was a State of Perfection, wherein, as Reason was given us for
our Guide, so all our Powers and Faculties, our Rational Will, and Bodily
Operations were entirely Subject to its direction, and therefore as there was
on need of any other Laws, than what our Reason would furnish us withal, in
things that lay within its reach, so we have no ground to think there would
have been any other. But whatever Reason should have enjoined us, either to do,
or avoid; whilst we had continued in this Perfection, every one would have
observed of his own voluntary Motion, and no sooner would our Understandings
have approved any thing as necessary, but our Wills would have prompted us to
action.

This was undoubtedly the true State of Man's Innocence, and in such a State as
this is, all Government would be absolutely useless, and unnecessary, but that
in our own bosoms.

For where men are entirely governed by Reason, there can be no Covetousness,
nor Ambition; no Envy, nor Ill Nature; no Jealousies, nor Fears; no Enclosures,
nor Property; no Meums, nor Tuums, but all things would naturally be common: no
man would have any Right to any thing, more than another; nor any man have any
Right to more than he should want: nor any longer than those wants should
continue; and every man's wants would be regulated by Reason; so that as God
made enough of every thing for every one's necessities, so right Reason would
not admit of any contention, because in the nature of things there could be no
Reason for it.

And had Man continued in this State, wherein every one was a Law unto himself,
and had a Court of Chancery in his own breast, what need could there be of any
other Laws, any other Government, but this?

But now in this our corrupted State, we have a strange backwardness very often
to what our Reason approves, and as great a proneness to what it forbids; so
that we stand in need of what a State of Innocence would have had no occasion
for.

This I lay down as the Original of Government, and though there is no part of
this notion, that I do not think I have a substantial Demonstration for, yet I
propose it only as a notion, which I shall lay no great stress upon, and
whether true or false, it is not very material to my following design.

However, thus much is certain, and allowed on all Hands, That whatever a State
of Innocence might have occasion for, Reason alone, in the State that we are
now in, is not a sufficient guide, and security to us: But it is evident, we
want external motives to excite us to, and encourage us in what is good, and
powerful restraints to keep us from what is bad; without which, considering the
Exorbitancy of men's Passions, Mankind would insult and incroach upon one
another; the stronger would oppress, and overrun the weaker, and the World
would run into confusion.

And from hence it was, either by human Contrivance, or divine Appointment,
that Mankind became formed into regular Societies for the security of each
other's Rights, and Properties, and devised such Laws of Encouragement to
Virtue, and Restraint from Vice, as they have thought most suitable and proper
for that End. And,

Definition of Government.
THE due Administration, Application, or Execution of these Laws, which the
Society has devised for the security of their several Rights and Properties, I
call Government; which definition, as I think it cannot be well disputed, so I
shall all along take it for granted.

What is to be meant by the Society.
BUT here it is to be observed, that when I use these Words (which the Society
has devised) I do not mean by this, that all the whole Society, in every member
of it, must be personally consenting to the making of every Law, before it be
enacted a Law of the Society; this cannot be in the nature of the thing, and
therefore the making of Laws must necessarily be entrusted by every society in
some particular hands, and as some methods must be appointed, and some rules
observed in the doing of it, so when any Law is decreed by those persons, after
that method, and according to those rules appointed by the Society, I call that
a Law of the Society.

Thus far then, I think, the Case is plain, that the Original Reason of
Government was the Imperfection, or Corruption of human Nature; and if the
Security of the Rights, and Properties of the Society is, as it is certainly,
the End of all Government (Principle IV. and V.) from hence it will follow.

That the Determination of Property must necessarily have been before the
settlement of Government; this being only a Means for the securing of Property,
and by consequence Government could not be founded in any Primary Law of
Nature, if Property it self was not.

Now by a Law of Nature, I mean some Necessity in the nature of things,
obliging me to do such, or such an action, from the relation, that action bears
to such, or such a necessary End.

And when I use the Word Primary Law of Nature, I refer to the Two different
States of Mankind, the first before, the other after the Fall: And according to
these two different States, I suppose there are different Sorts of natural
Laws, and different Rights, and Obligations.

For whatever is in the nature of things absolutely necessary to our Happiness
either to be done or enjoyed, Nature, gives us a Law, as to that thing, and not
only lays an Obligation on us, but conveys a natural Right to us, either to do,
or enjoy it; and as it is evident there are a great many more things necessary
to our Happiness, since our nature became corrupted, than before, so by
consequence there must be a great many more natural obligations, and natural
Rights in this, than in the former State. And accordingly I distinguish the
Laws and Rights of Nature into Primary, and Secondary Laws and Rights; and it is
in this sense that I say, Government could not be founded in any Primary Law of
Nature; that is; there could be no natural Necessity of it in a State of pure
Nature, for the securing of Property, if there was no such thing as Property to
be secured by it.

Definition of Property.
Now by Property I mean, such a Right to any thing, as to make it my own,
exclusive of all others Right, or Claim to it; And that there could be no such
thing as this in a State of Purity, except in our first Parents themselves,
seems to me, I must confess, little less, than demonstratively certain.

For a State of Purity is a State, where all things are governed by right
Reason; and as Reason is then only Right, when it agrees with the natures and
reasons of things, so no man could have any natural Right to any thing any
farther, or any longer, than as Reason should judge he had a natural want of
it; and had Mankind continued in this State of Purity, as all their wants would
have been regulated by Reason, so (it were easy to prove, if there were
occasion) all things would have continued common, as I said before.

But when this State of Purity was lost and instead of all their Operations
being governed by Reason, the Flesh being to lust against the Spirit, and the
Members to wage war against the Mind, when men's Lusts and Appetites grew heady,
and extravagant, as their wants would naturally increase by the increase of
their Lusts, so from the increase of their wants, there would arise a necessity
of larger supplies, and these larger supplies would naturally beget monopolies
and enclosures, and those enclosures would as naturally beget contention, and
contention as naturally beget confusion.

Now whether out of an obvious sense of this, Mankind might not of themselves
agree upon a certain division of such portions of lands, as they thought
convenient for their families.

Or whether our First Parents, who were the only persons, who could have any
pretense to any Property in any thing, might not make a distribution to their
children, and allot them their respective portions for the prevention of
dispute.

Or whether they might not leave their Children at liberty to take what they
pleased, and give them some general Rule of Property, That whatever any one
should possess, he should enjoy, as his own, which we call the Law of
Occupancy: And so as families increased, they might transplant themselves, and
whilst they had the range of the World before them, they might take to
themselves without Injury to any one, what they should find their occasion
required.

Whether it might be this, or any other Way, it is not possible to determine at
this distance, nor is it indeed very material to be inquired into, were it not
to gratify our curiosity: Which way soever the division came, it is certain,
that one time, or other their was some division, or appropriation made, and
from this division, there arose a Property.

And now the great Question comes in place, How Mankind happened to fall into
this method of securing their Properties, which we call Government, whether by
the Appointment of God, or by the Agreement, and Contrivance of Men.

Whether Government be from God, or Man.
THIS is the great business in dispute, and one would wonder how it is capable
of being a dispute, if men would but examine things not with their prejudices
but their Reasons.

I must confess, it is plausibly alleged, that considering how necessary
Government is to the welfare of Mankind, it would be an unworthy reflection
upon the Wisdom, and Goodness of God, to have lest the World without such a
provision, as is absolutely necessary to their Happiness; and therefore some
conclude, that Government was the Appointment of God himself.

This, I say, is very plausibly alleged, and if there were any thing in
Government so dark and intricate, as not to be discovered by natural Reason, we
may conclude it was made known by Revelation.

Because he who made us to be Happy, as is already supposed, (Principle IV.)
cannot let us want any thing necessary to our Happiness; and if we cannot come
at it in an ordinary, we may conclude, he will supply us in an extraordinary
way.

But there can be nothing of this nature supposed in the whole business of
Government; their is nothing that can require any such extraordinary Revelation
concerning it.

AXIOM I.
FOR it is self evident, that Mankind, as being naturally sociable creatures,
are naturally capable of entering into Societies of themselves; without an
extraordinary Revelation; and that therefore there needs no extraordinary
commission from God to empower them to do, what he has already, by their very
nature, directed them to.

AXIOM II.
Secondly, SINCE Mankind, as is supposed, are made to be happy; it is
self-evident, that Mankind, when formed into regular Societies, have no need of
any extraordinary commission from God, to make such Laws as they think
necessary to their Happiness, these being only the means for the attainment of
that End, that he himself made 'em for: And if so, then

AXIOM III.
Thirdly, IT can be as little doubted, but that there can be no need in such a
Case, of any extraordinary commission from God, to give men Power to execute
those Laws they had a natural Power to make; this being nothing more, but a
Power to make use of the necessary means for the attainment of a necessary End.

These are plain Truths, not capable of dispute, and from these we shall easily
resolve this point. For, if Mankind needed no extraordinary Revelation to teach
them to enter into Societies; and if they needed no Revelation to teach them to
make such Laws, as might be necessary for their Happiness, and if they needed
no Revelation to give them Power to apply those Laws to that End, according as
the circumstances of such Societies should require, in which the whole notion
of Government is absolved; then it is beyond contradiction plain; That there is
no Reason to ascribe the Original of Government to God, so far as relates to
the outward formation of Societies, and the making, and executing Laws.

These Things, as they are within the reach of Reason, so they are ordinarily
left to the determination of Reason, and there was probably never any
Government in the world, excepting that of the Jews, that can in this respect
be said to be Jure Divino.

The Authority of Government only from God.
BUT yet it does nevertheless appear, and that too from this very argument I
have urged, That the sole foundation of this Power of making and executing
Laws, and the reason of our obligation to submit to them, is derived entirely
from the authority of God.

For we see the very reason of forming Societies in the way of Government, is
founded in the Happiness of Mankind as the End which God at first designed, and
the only reason of their Right to exercise any Power in those Societies is, its
being a necessary means to that End.

And therefore it is God's having made Mankind for Happiness, and Government's
being necessary to that Happiness, which is the true, and only foundation of
the authority of Government.

So that it is a certain, and indisputable truth in the nature of things, that
it is by God alone, that Kings reign, and Prinies decree Justice, that
Government in general is of Divine Authority.

And indeed, as this is the only true foundation, so it is the only sure
support of it. For without this, I cannot see, how we can give any account of
Government at all.

The Authority of Government not from the People.
FOR if the Authority of Government arises merely from an agreement of a People
with one another, it will follow from thence, That no Governor can lawfully
exercise any other Power over any one, than every one has a Power to agree to;
and by consequence no Govement can have Power to take away Life, because no man
has an absolute Power to dispose of it.

But if we ascribe the Authority of Government to God, and consider it in the
view that we have set it, as a necessary means in the nature of things for the
Attainment of a necessary End appointed by God, we have then a Right given us
by God to use it, as a means in order to that End, and therefore so far as the
taking away the life of a man is necessary to the security of any Society, That
Society has a Right to take it away, even by God's own appointment.

Nay, the argument holds good even in a Private case, and the same reason will
justify every man to do the same thing in his own defense; and as it is
universally allowed to do so, so it is the only reason, that will do it; but
it is much stronger, when offered in behalf of a Society, as much as the whole
is better than a part.

Besides, if Government were founded only upon the agreement of a People one
with another, as every one has a Soul and Reason of his own, and not only a
natural Right to judge and choose for himself, but also to act according to his
own, and not another's Judgment, any farther than it becomes his own; so I must
freely own, upon this Principle, I do not at present see, how any man can be in
duty obliged to submit to any other Govenment, than what he himself approves,
and agrees to; which, as it is a notion that would make Government precarious
and tends to disorder and confusion, we have already shown it must mecessarily
be false (Principle VI.)

But if Government be found upon the natural appointment of God, as being in
the nature of things a necessary means to our Happiness, it then becomes every
one's duty to support it, and by consequence to submit to the Laws of it, though
perhaps he may not approve of them; and has not personally agreed to them; and
if the Laws be such, that he cannot in conscience comply with what they
command, he must patiently bear the penalties they inflict. And this is the
meaning of that Expression of St. Paul, Romans 13.1, 2, 3, etc. which has given
such occasion for dispute; That we are to be subject to the Laws of the Higher
Powers of every Society, because all Power is from God, and the Powers that be,
are ordained of God: That is, because every Society has a Power from God to
make such Laws, as are necessary for the welfare of that Society, and every
Ruler entrusted by the Society with the execution of those Laws, executors that
Authority, that it is ordained by God, and therefore is not to be resisted in
the execution of those Laws.

The Authority of Government from God, but the Form from Man.
So that to sum up all in one word, we see the foundation upon which the
Authority of Government is built, is, the Authority of God, who having made us
for Happiness, has thereby given us a Right to Government, as it is a necessary
means to that Happiness.

And therefore upon this Principle, mankind being by nature sociable Creatures,
have naturally run into Societies of themselves, and have linkt themselves into
common bodies, and devised such Laws for the Happiness of the whole, as their
several circumstances have required.

And as the different circumstances of People have created different Interests,
so these different Interests have created different Societies and Governments,
wherein they have not only different Laws, but different forms of
Administration.

And therefore some Societies are Governed by a Monarchy, others by an
Aristocracy, others by a Democracy; and of these some are absolute, others
mixed, some are dependent, others independent.

So that in short, as the welfare of Society is the End and Reason of all
Government, so the different Interests of different Societies is the reason of
the different Forms of it: And as it cannot be doubted, but that these
different Forms were devised by men, so though the Authority of Government be
from God, yet the appointment of the Persons to execute that Authority is
purely, and entirely the Ordinance of Man. And this gives an account of that
Expression, 1 Pet. 2.13. of being Subject to every Ordinance of Man for the
Lord's Sake, by which is meant, that those who are entrusted with the
Government of Societies in any kind of Form, are only the Ordinance of Men, but
yet though they are so, they are nevertheless to be submitted to, for the Lord's
sake, because they execute that Power in behalf of the Society, which every
Society has from God.

Consequences from the foregoing Principles.
THUS far then, I think, we have cleared our way; and if so, from hence we may
be able to deduce some such certain, and evident Corollaries, as will give us a
just, and easy view into all the nicest cases relating to Government.

COROLLARY I. The Reason of Power, in Princes, and Obedience in Subjects.
First, FROM hence we may certainly discover the true Nature of all Political
Power, and the true Reason of our Obedience and Submission to it.

For if it be true, as we have supposed (Principle IV.) that God made Mankind
for Happiness, and that they should live together in Society: and if it be
likewise true, as we have thence inferred (page 26.) that God thereby
authorizes every Society to put themselves under such Forms, and to make and
execute such Laws and Rules, as they find necessary for their Happiness; it
will hence follow, by an obvious consequence, That though it be left to to the
Society to judge what is necessary, yet the Power of making that into a Law,
and obliging others to submit to it, is entirely derived from God.

And as this Power must necessarily be entrusted by every Society in some
particular hands, and ought to be executed according to some certain Rules so
what so ever those Person, so entrusted, shall think necessary to be done, the
Society ought to be determined by; and whatever Laws they shall make according
to those Rules are by consequence to be esteemed the will and command of God;
unless he has in time past, and till he shall in time to come, signify his
will, that it shall be otherwise.

And as the Administration of these Laws must necessarily be entrusted in one,
or more hands, whom we call Governors; so whatever these Governors shall do
according to those Laws, is so far done by the Authority of God.

And as those Laws cannot be disobeyed without sin, so neither can those
Governors be resisted, or opposed in the execution of those Laws, without
rebellion and that not only against them, but also against God, by whose
authority they act.

COROLLARY II.
Secondly, IF Government be necessary the welfare of Society, and if it be
true, as we have inferred from thence (Principle VI.) That those notions are
false, and therefore ought to be avoided, that tend to disorder and confusion;
from hence it will follow,

Unity and Order to be preserved.
THAT every Society ought to provide and every member of that Society Submit to
such methods, as they think necessary for Unity and Order.

And since the Authority of God is the only foundation, and the only sure
support of Government, and by consequence, of Unity and Order; and since it is
evident to every understanding, That without a due sense of this Authority of
God, which I call Religion, there can be no certain basis for Truth, or Justice
or Confidence amongst Men, which are the bonds and ligaments of Society, the
joints, by which its members are united; but on the contrary all falsehood, and
deceit, avarice and ambition, rapine, and violence, murder, and oppression,
malice and revenge will be lawful, so far as they can be secret, and without
the reach of human Laws; it will follow,

That it ought to be the care of every Society, that Religion be established,
and maintained amongst them.

This is so necessary, that even Atheistical Politicians advise its
Preservation and Encouragement, merely out of a Principle of worldly policy, as
being so servicable to the ends and purposs of Government, as if it had been
only the invention of men.

And therefore they who are enemies to Religion, are so far enemes to Society
and traitors to the Government they live under.

Unity and Order in Religion.
BUT then as Religion ought to be the Care of every Society, as necessary to
Unity and Order, so it ought to be equally their Care, that Unity and Order in
Religion be maintained.

And as Religion cannot be maintained without some Form of worship, and some
Rules of Order, so it will follow, That in every Society, there ought not only
to be some such Form, and Rules established, but also that that Form, and those
Rules be so contrived, as far as possible, that every member of the Society may
unite in them, and conform to them.

And since we have already shown in the foregoing Corollary, That the Laws of a
Society are to be obeyed, as the Laws of God, so far as they are agreeable to
his Will; it will Follow, That every member of a Society ought to comply with
that Form of Worship, and submit to those Rules of Order established amongst
them, so far as they are not contrary to God's Will.

And therefore, so far as any one wilfully opposes such Rules of Unity and
Order established by any Society, as a means of its Preservation, so far he is
an enemy to the Society, and disobedint to God, by whose authority they are
enjoined:

For though it is certain, that Religion, as such, is not the business of
Government, the chief End of which is the security of our Rights, and
Properties (Principle V.) yet so far as Unity, and Order may be a necessary
means of perserving the peace, and welfare of Society, and thereby a means of
preserving the Rights, and Properties of it, so far it may fall under the Power
of any Society, or Government, as they have a natural Right to all such means
as are necessary to their preservation

And if so, from hence it will follow,

To Govern by Parties a false Maxim.
THAT it must be a false Maxim of Policy in any Society, to govern by Factions
and Parties, that is, by division, either in Church, or State.

For every division in any degree, is in a Political, what we call a disease in
a Natural Body, which as it weakens its strength, so it tends to its
destruction; and though these diseases may be kept under by skilful heads, and
seasonable applications, and their natural tendency may be restrained a while,
yet they always impair the constitution for the present, and no man can be sure
of the event.

Divide and rule has been ancient and it is a certain Maxim for a Kingdom
divided against it self, divide about what they will, whether sacred, or civil
matters; it is all one, such a Kingdom cannot stand.

And as it was observed of old in the conquest of this nation, by the Romans,
that our homebred discords made way to it, (dum singuli pugnant, universi
vincuntur,) so we observe of any other people. For we rarely find any
Government over turned, but division had a hand in the work.

And therefore it is the Interest of every Society to encourage Unity, and heal
Divisions.

And as for the same reason it will follow,

Divisions in Society to be healed.
Secondly, THAT where any divisions happen in a Society, they ought as far as
possible to remove all occasions of 'em, and apply all proper methods for the
cure of them.

And as Unity is, as we have shown, the duty of every member of a Society, not
only out of respect to the authority of God, but also the welfare of Society,
so every member of the Society ought to unite, as far as possible, and if out
of weakness, they cannot comply in every thing they ought, yet they ought out
of duty and interest, to comply in every thing can,

For where there is a Rightful Power to command, there is a duty to obey and we
see every Society has a Power granted them by God to injoin every thing, that
they think necessary for the Happiness of the Society, and consequence every
thing necessary to Unity and Order, without which Society cannot be mintain'd.

The Magistrates Power in Religious Matters.
BUT then, as the Authority from God is founded only in the nature of things
(for we are here speaking only of natural Principles, without supposing any
Revelation as yet) so it must be such an authority, as the nature of things
will allow of; that is, such as cannot command, or in join any thing contrary
to the nature of things, that is contrary to the nature of God, or Man; or
contrary to the natural Relation of things with respect either to Truth or
Goodness.

And therefore, as it is evidently contrary to the Goodness, and therefore to
the Will of God, to authorize any thing that is injurious to our innocent
fellow creatures, so all such rules of Unity and Order, as are of this nature,
are absolutely unlawful and unjust, unless it could be supposed, that, the
welfare of the Society could not be maintained, nor the Rights and Properties
of it secured without them:

And so likewise, as it is apparently the Right of every rational creature
granted by God Himself, nay, as it is a duty required of every rational
creature, that he govern himself by Reason, and by consequence that every one
should judge, and choose for himself, so it is unlawful for any Society to
impose any Rules of Worship, or Relgious Order upon their members, which they
in their judgment cannot lawfully comply with: Because this is not only to
deprive them of their natural Right of judging for themselves, but also to
require what they cannot do, without a breach of their duty to God.

And therefore whatever Power Societies have to put themselves under Religious
regulations, yet it can be only under this limitation, that they leave it in
the power of every member of it, to comply, or not comply with them, according
as they conceive them to be lawful, or unlawful, that is, that there be a
Liberty of Consciecne.

But nevertheless where the Religious regulations imposed are allowed to be
lawful, and no Scruple of Conscience is raised against them, there the Society
have a Power to command, and the People are under an Obligation to obey,
according to the Laws of Nature.

But here you will say, If every Society has a Power to appoint what Modes of
Worship and what Rules of Order; they thinknecessary, they must by consequence
have a Power to appoint what persons shall perform Religious Offices, which
some think of dangerous consequence to assert.

The Magistrates Power over the Priesthood.
BUT be it how it will, it is certainly true in a State, where we suppose no
other Revelation of God's Will concerning these matters, but the natures of
things to guide the Reasons and Operations of Mankind.

In such a State, I say, it is certainly true: For if Religious Offices must be
performed, the persons must be appointed either by God, or Man; if by God,
since we suppose no other Revelation, but the nature of things, there must then
be some commission granted by God in the nature of things to some particular
persons, by which God must be supposed to have given them an Authority to
execute those Offices before, and above all other People: But this, I suppose,
is what no man will pretend to, and therefore all those things must be
determined by Men according to the rules of the Society, who are left the only
Judges of what is convenient, where God has not yet revealed his Will; and
those persons who are thus dedicated to God's service according to the Rules of
every such Society, are as much the Ministers of God, as if they had been sent
by an extraordinary Commission from God himself.

But where God has thought fit to reveal his Will, there the Society are no
longer Judges of these things: their own Reason is no longer their Guide, but
God's Revelation; and though before they had a Power to do, and injoin, what they
thought fit, here they are to act as God injoins, and their Power is de
termin'd by the Rule of the Revelation.

But then, as this Revelation is their Rule, so they are not to be determined
by it any farther, than it reveals; and by consequence where the Revelation is
silent, there is no revealed Rule, and therefore there must be the same Power
remaining in the Society, which they had before that Revelation was given.

And therefore, though every Society has a natural Power to appoint the Persons,
and prescribe the Qualifications for Religious Offices, where God has left them
only to their own Reasons, yet if God has by any Revelation appointed those
Offices to some particular Persons and has given them the appointment of others
under some certain Regulations, there of the Power the Society is limited and
they have no more Power to act contrary to this, than they have Power to act
contrary to God's Will.

And indeed, as no Society lawfully act any thing, but what they think is for
the welfare of the Society, so they can have no reason to act contrary to such
a revealed appointment, unless they could suppose, that God did not know what
was best to be done in every Society, or would prescribe any thing, that is not
for the welfare of the Society.

The Question therefore in this case is what Revelation God has made concerning
it, either directly, or indirectly whether he has expressly appointed any
particular men to execute Religious Offices before him, or whether he has given
any commission to them to appoint others, and how far that commission reaches.
For so far as there is such a Revelation, so far all Authority is bounded, and
the Power of the Society can reach no farther, than to regulate the excution of
these Offices, and to appoint such things both as to the Persons, and their
Offices, as God has not determined by that Revelation.

And as this ought to be done by the Society, so it ought to be done in such a
manner, as they shall think best for the support of Unity and Order, and the
security of the Rights and properties of the Society.

COROLLARY III. The Rule of Laws and the Measure of Obedience.
Thirdly, IF it be true according to the Principles we have laid down, That the
Welfare, or Happiness of the Society is the End of all Government, then it must
be the End of every thing that is done in the way of Government, and by
consequence must not only be the End of making and administering Laws, but also
the End of all Obedience, and Submission.

And if so, from hence we are taught a certain Rule, by which all Laws ought to
be made, and a certain measure, according to which all Governors ought to be
obeyed.

The Rule of Conscience in making Laws.
First. IF the welfare of the Society be the End, and therefore the Rule of
making Laws, it ought by consequence to be the End, and the only End of every
person entrusted in that concern: And though the persons so entrusted, are the
absolute Judges of what is for the Welfare of the Society, and therefore may
make what Laws they please, yet it is certainly an Abuse of their Power, for
which they are highly answerable to God, should they oppose any thing that they
think is, or agree to any thing they think is not, for the Welfare of the
Society they are acting for.

And if as we have already supposed, (Principle 5.) The Welfare of Society
consists in the security of its Rights and Properties, then as the whole is
made up of parts, so each Person, as a member, and part of the whole, has a
claim to be secured in his Rights and properties.

How far our Rights are to be maintained.
BUT then, as the whole is more valuable than any part, so the security of
every particular person ought to be consulted, and provided for, only so far as
is consistent with the welfare of the whole.

And if so, no Maxims of Policy can be just, nor any Laws be Lawful, that
deprive any one of his Right, or entrench on his Property, any farther than as
the welfare of the whole requires it.

And as the Laws, that are made for the security of our Rights, are in their
nature to be supposed for the Welfare of the whole, so long as they are allowed
to continue in Force: so no man can be Lawfully deprived of his Rights under
any pretense of the Public Good, any farther than these Laws allow.

And by consequence, should any person, or authority whatsoever dispose of the
Rights of any member of the Society for any other reason, or in any other
manner, then the Laws of the Society direct, they would not only do an injury
to him, but would also so far act contrary to the welfare, as they act contrary
to the Laws of the Society.

The Power of every Society to alienate Rights.
BUT then, as the Society has a Power to make, so by consequence for the very
same reason, they must have a Power to alter Laws, and therefore a Power to
alter, or alienate our Rights.

But yet, as the security of every man's Right and Property ought to be
provided for, in making Laws, as has been just now proved, so far as consists
with the welfare of the whole; so it will not be Lawful, even for them, to
alter any Law on purpose to alienate any particular Right, any farther, than as
they are convinced, the necessary support of the Society requires it.

For it is certain from the very nature of Government, that every member of a
Society has a Right to be protected in every thing he enjoys by the Rules of
the Society.

But yet it is as certain, That no man can have a Right to injure the Society,
as it is certain, that the whole is better than a Part.

And therefore, As the End of making Laws is the security of the Rights of of
the Society, so whatever Rights those Laws give any private person, or persons,
they are naturally supposed to be granted only so far, as they are consisting
with the security of the Public.

And therefore whenever whose persons, who are entrusted by the Society, shall
judge any Rights, the Laws have given us, inconsistent with the security of the
whole Society, they very lawfully may, and it is very expedient they should,
alter those Laws, and alienate those Rights, which they never could intend by
those Laws to give.

And therefore, though in making and repealing Laws, it be necessary to enquire
into the Rights of the particular persons concerned, and how far they shall
entrench upon those Rights in their proceedings, yet where the Public security
requires any thing as necessary to be done, there a Private Injury ought to be
no Bar against that, which appears to necessary to the Public Good.

But then, As that cannot be a necessary means to an End, where the End can be
attained without those means, so that cannot be said to be necessary to the
Welfare of the Public, without which the Welfare of the Public may be
maintained.

And therefore we ought not to deprive any one of his Rights, without a due
satisfaction to him, under any pretense of the Public Good, where the Public
Good can be secured another Way.

To illustrate this a little, let us recollect a known Case. In a late Reign
there was a Bill in Parliament for the Exclusion of the then Duke of York, from
his Succession to the Crown. The Laws of the Land had given him a Right, and
the King, and Parliament had a Right in themselves, to alienate that Right, if
they should think it necessary for the security of the Rights and Properties of
the Society.

Now, though Birthright was a Popular Cry at that Time, yet that was a weak
Objection to the Thing, if the Welfare of the whole required it to be done.

And therefore the proper Question in that, and all such like cases ought to
be, how far it is necessary to the Public Good, that is, how far the Rights and
Properties of the Society can be secured without this, or that proceeding.

And upon a strict enquiry into this, had they who are the only Judges of this
matter, I mean the King and Parliament, agreed in their Opinion, and past the
Bill, He would immediately have lost his Right, and should he afterward have
laid any claim to the Succession, he would have been guilty of High Treason,
and should any one have protended to assert his Right, he would have been
guilty Rebellion.

But should the King, and Parliament have passed the Bill upon any other
consideration, than as they conscientiously thought it indispensibly necessary
to the Preservation of the Society in the their Rights and Properties; should
the Parliament have moved it out of prejudice to the man, or the King have
consented to it for the madness of the people; or should either have done it
out of any either motive, than as they were thro'ly satisfied, 'twas so
necessary to be done, that the Rights of the Society could not be secured any
other way they would have been guilty of great Injustice, and Oppression.

But we had been concluded nevertheless. For we are not Judges of their
actions, much less their Intentions; But they are the Judges, and the only
Judges of the Public Good, and therefore we are to submit to their
determinations, unless we will make all our Laws useless, our Constitution and
Government precarious; which whatever notion tends to, we have already shown to
be False ( Principle VI.)

And thus directed to a certain Rule to guide our consciences in making Laws,
which is the welfare of the Society in the security of their several Rights,
and Properties. And as no Laws ought to be made, but with an Eye to this End,
so from hence it will follow.

The Necessity of putting Laws in execution.
THAT whatever Laws are made, ought therefore to be put in execution, so as to
attain the End they were made for.

'Twas a reproach the Romans cast upon the Athenians, that they showed their
wisdom in making good Laws, but their folly in neglecting to observe and
execute them.

And 'twas a Just Reproach, no doubt. For 'twere every whit, as well to have no
Laws at all as not have them executed, and observed.

But then, As it is necessary, that Laws once made, should be carefully
executed, so they ought to be executed only for the End, for which they were
made; and by consequence not in any other Sense, than they are supposed to be
made in, nor for any other End, than the welfare of the Society in the security
of their Rights and properties.

And therefore should any person prosecute, or any officer execute any Law upon
any member of the Society, who has offended against it, and is therefore justly
liable to it, out of prejudice, or passion, malice, or revange, or any other
principle, but the Welfare of Society, though they really do nothing, but what
the Law requires, and do actually promote the Interest of the Society, yet they
are highly blameable for what they do; And though they are not blameable in
respect of the Society they belong to, yet they are blameable in the sight of
God, who has made, not our own humor, and and private resentments, or any
other thing, but the Welfare of the Society, the End of every thing that is to
be done in the way of Government, wheher in making or executing Laws.

But should any person endeavor to pervert the natural meaning of the Law by
any art, or dexterity, he is master of, or any authority, he is invested with,
and so get it executed in any other sense, than he thinks was intended by it,
he would be highly blameable upon that account, not only in respect of God, but
the Society.

Nay, though he should do it upon this Principle only, that he thinks it for the
Welfare of the Society, that the Law should be taken in the sense he gives it,
yet if he is sensible it is not the true sense, that is, the sense that was
intended by the makers of the Law, it is certainly an offense against God, and
the Society. Because God has obliged us to submit to the Rules of the Society,
and the Society having appointed such, and such persons, the only Judges of
their welfare and what Laws are necessary for that purpose, who are by
consequence required by God, and the Society, not only to submit to the Laws
they make but also to the sense they make them in, so far as it is a lawful
sense.

And therefore, so far as we shall endeavor to impose any private sense upon
the Law, contrary to what we think was intended by it, so far we endeavor to
pervert the Rules, and Orders of the Society, by making the Welfare of the
whole to depend upon our private Judgment.

Secondly, If the end of making, and and executing Laws be the Welfare of the
Society, in the security of their Rights and Properties, from hence we have a
Rule for the regulation of the Laws, and the manner of the execution of 'em in
every wise and Good Government.

How Laws are to be regulated and executed.
FOR If this be the End of all Laws, it is not only necessary to every wise,
and Good Government, that their be Good Laws made, but that they be managed so,
as shall be thought best to answer the End of their making, and by consequence
such as shall be most likely to be observed.

And therefore First, As no man can doubt, but that those Laws are most likely
to be observed, which are few in number, and therefore easy to be known and
remembered, and plain in their meaning, and therefore easy to be understood, so
it seems to be a necessary care of every Society, that the Laws be as few and
and as plain, as possible.

Laws to be Few and Plain.
A Multitude of Laws Politicians have always looked upon, and Societies have
always found, a burden, and 'twas a complaint of Tacitus, that whereas Rome
had formerly abounded with horrid, and detestable vices, so in his time, it was
as much pestered with a multitude of mischivious and unnecessary Laws, which
proved a remedy as bad as the disease.

But it is, doubtless, a much greater burden to a Society, when its Laws are
expressed in such terms, as are doubtful, and ambiguous, because this will not
only produce continual disputes but will make all their Rights uncertain, and
precarious.

And therefore from hence it will follow, That it is the Interest of every
Society to exclude all such persons from making Laws, whose private advantage
it may be to perplex, and entangle the sense of them.

Laws to be Gentle and Easy.
AGAIN, If the Laws of a Society ought to be made so, as that they may most
probably be observed, then as they ought to be as few, and as plain, so they
ought to be as gentle, and easy, as possible. And therefore,

First, It seems to be a necessary care of every Society, not to make any such
Laws, as they know, or may reasonably think before hand, a great part of the
Society, will not submit to, unless the Welfare of the Society so far requires
it, as that it cannot be secured any other way.

Let the Principle upon which they will oppose the Law, be what it will,
whether weakness, or perverseness, it is all one, for since it will not be
observed, it should not be enjoined; Because such opposition may beget
confusion, which as it may hazard the peace and Welfare of the Society, ought
therefore to be avoided, as unlawful, unless the hazard be greater on the other
side.

And as the Reason of making, and continuing Laws is the same, so from hence it
will follow.

That, if they ought not to make Laws, which they know beforehand will be
opposed, for the same Reason it does not seem Proper to continue such Laws, as
they afterward find, are so opposed;

And therefore as all Laws ought to be so made, so they ought for the same
reason to be so altered, as far as possible, that they may be observed All. But
still this is to be understood, so far only as consists with the Welfare of
Society.

Nothing Burdensome to be Imposed without Necessity.
AGAIN, If all Laws ought to be as gentle and easy, as possible, then it seems
to be a necessary care of every Society, that no more burdens be imposed upon
it is members, than are absolutely necessary for the Welfare of the Whole.

And as every member of the Society is a sharer in the Welfare of the Whole; so
all such Impositions, ought to be so ordered, as that every one shall bear a
share in the burden.

But then, as the Welfare of the Whole consists in the security of the Rights,
and Properties of the Society and by consequence as the must have the most
benefit by such security, who have most to loose, and therefore most to be
secured, so they ought to bear the greatest share of the burdens that are
imposed.

And therefore whatever burdens are laid upon the Society, ought, as far as
possible, to be equally proportioned, according to the several Rights and
Properties of the several members of the Society.

Thus we have a Rule for making Laws, and from the same Principle we have,

How to Regulate the Execution of Laws.
Secondly A Rule whereby to regulate the manner of execution of 'em.

For if the End of making Laws be the Welfare of the Society in the security of
their Rights, and properties it is not only necessary to every good Government
that the Laws be executed with an Eye to the End for which they are made. viz.
The security of Right and Property, but also in such manner, as that End shall
be best attained, and our Rights and Properties best secured.

We have already observed, that it is a just Reproach to make Laws that we
never execute; but yet it is certainly the very same thing, whether the
execution of Laws be totally neglected, or whether they be executed in such a
manner, as that the End, which was intended, cannot be attained.

For though a Law be never so wisely contrived for the security of Right and
property, yet if in obtaining the benefit of that Law, I must spend more time,
and be at more charge, than my Right, and property is worth, it is the same
thing to me, as if there were really no such Law.

Short Injustice, the Persian Proverb says, is better than long Justice

And therefore it seems to be a necessary care of every good Government, that
in the manner of executing the Laws of of the Society, no such unnecessary
delays be allowed, as shall frustrate the just proceedings of the Law, nor any
such burdensome charges be required, as shall defeat the benefit, and
intention of it.

Thus we see what improvements may be made of this Principle: It might be
carried a great way farther, if there were occasion, but this is sufficient for
a general hint; it furnishes us, you see, with an in fallible Rule for the
Making and Executing Laws: And from the same Principle we have.

The Measure of Submission to Governors.
Secondly, A like certain Rule, by which to measure our submission to
Governors, who, according to our definition of Government, are the
Administrators of the Laws.

This has been the subject of great disputes, and, as it has been managed, it
has been made a matter of very great difficulty; whereas, according to these
Principles, which I have here laid down, there is nothing capable of a more
easy and certain resolution.

For if the Welfare of Society be, as we have shown (Principle IV. VII.) the
End of every thing, that is done in the way of Government, it must by
consequence be the End of all Authority and Obedience.

And though the Authority of Government be from God, as we have shown (page 27,
28, 29, 30.) and though Obedience be therefore due to Governors out of duty to
God, from whom their Authority is derived, yet God cannot be supposed to
command any such Obedience to any Governor, nor can any person pretend to exact
Obedience from any people, any farther, than He is their Governor.

And therefore when any such Governor shall cease to govern them, his Right to
their Obedience must cease too.

And since according to our forementioned definition (page 20) Government is
the Admistration of such Laws, as the Society has devised for the security of
their Rights and Properties, it will follow,

That a Man must then cease to Govern his People, when he either ceases
entirely to act, by Death, or Resignation, by Abdication or Conquest, or when
he ceases to act for the security of the Rights and Properties of the Society
he is set over, That is,

When he either actually invades the Rights and Properties of the Society, or
lays aside those Laws that are made for their Security.

When therefore any Governor does this, as He thereby ceases to Govern that
People, so that People are discharged from their Obedience to Him, as their
Governor, and the reason of their Allegiance being ceased, their duty and
obligation must likewise cease.

This seems to be a necessary and unavoidable consequence, and this I take to
be the foundation of all Oaths to Conquerors, viz. That their late Governor
ceases to Govern them.

And certainly, if ceasing to be a Governor in the Case of Conquest, will
justify the alienation of our Allegiance, where he ceases to Govern, not by any
act of his own, not by voluntarily refusing to govern, nor by neglecting the
Rights and Welfare of his People, but is deprived of his Government by rapine,
and violence, perhaps contrary to the inclination, and true interest of the
People; I say, if this will justify, as all allow, the argument is much
stronger in the case supposed, where a Prince shall voluntarily invade, or
designedly overturn the Rights of the Society.

Unless any one will be so extravagantly absurd, as to call that Government,
which is contrary to the very notion of Government, where instead of
administering, and executing Laws, he acts directly contrary to 'em, and instead
of protecting and maintaining the Rights of his People, he becomes an oppressor
and destroyer of them, both which are as directly opposite to Government, as
Light is to darkness, or Health to Sickness.

But that we may make this still clearer, let us state the argument another Way;

We have already proved, That every Governor acts by the Authority of God; and
therefore has a divine Right to his subjects Obedience (page. 30.) yet as that
Right is founded upon that Commission He can by consequence have no Right to
Obedience, farther than his Commission reaches, and therefore where he has no
authority to command, the People can be under no Obligation to obey: And if so,
Then since the Welfare of Society is the End of all Government, and since the
Authorty, of Government, and the Obedience of Subjects is founded only on this
bottom as they are necessary to that End, (ib. page 23) The Welfare of Society
must by consequence be the Bounds both of the Subjects Duty, and the
Government's Authority, and therefore God cannot be supposed to allow any
Government to command, nor enquire any People to obey, any farther than it is
for the Welfare Society.

And as the Welfare of the Society consists in the security of their Rights and
properties, and as the Laws that are made for their security, are supposed to
be for their Welfare, so long as they are in Force, so when any Governor shall
invade the rights of his subjects or lay aside those Laws, which are made for
their security, as he acts contrary to the Welfare of the Society, so he acts
without Authority, and Commission from God, and therefore can have no Right to
be obeyed.

In a word, As every Governor has his Commission from God, for the Welfare of
his People, so that which gives him a title to their Obedience, gives them a
title to his Protection.

And as He who invades the Rights of the Prince or Governor, must thereby
forfeit all claim to his Protection, so He who invades, or destroys the Rights
of his people, by the same reason, forfeits his claim to their Obedience.

The Rights of both are founded on the same bottom; The Welfare of the Society
is the end and reason, and rule of both: It Is the very reason of the Authority
of Government, as it is derived from God, and it is the reason of this or that
Family's being appointed to execute that Authority by the Society.

And therefore when Governors act contrary to the Welfare, that is, contrary to
the Laws of the Society, they act contrary to the reason of Government and
Obedience; and that they should be obeyed in such a case, is contrary to the
Intention of God and Man.

And as no Governor, who is but the Administrator of the Law, can have a Right
to punish his Subjects for not doing what by Law it was not their duty to do,
much less for not doing, what by Law it was their duty not to do, so on the
other hand, no Subject can be under any Obligation to submit to that
punishment, when the Governor had not a Legal Right to inflect.

This Argument contains the sense and Substance of what is, or I think, ought
to be meant, by that which is so often talked of in this dispute, viz. a
Prince's breaking the Original Contract, that is, his acting contrary to the
Original Reason of Government.

For as the End and Reason for which all Rulers were originally entrusted with
their power and privileges by their respective Societies, and for which such
Societies put themselves under their several respective Forms of Government,
was the security of their Rights and Properties; so whosoever first took that
Trust upon him, took it for this End, and upon this Condition; and by
consequence there is a Tacit Contract supposed in the very nature of the Trust
itself, That upon his discharging his duty to them, they will be under such
obligations to him, because it is given by the people, and taken by the Prince
for this very End and Reason. And as this End is the foundation of all
Government; so wherever any Government is, this Tacit Contract is necessarily
supposed to go along with it, as being founded in the very nature of the thing;
And as this Tacit contract is the Bond of Union between the Governor and the
People, so when this contract is broke; the Bond of Union is broke; and by
consequence the Society is as much discharged from the obligations of that
Union, as if that contract had never been made.

And as a Prince must necessarily be said to break his contract, and by
consequence disolve his Union with his People, when he wilfully and disignedly
acts contrary to the end and reason of his Trust; so his People are by
consequence discarged from their obligations to him, and may lawfully defend
themselves against him.

And therefore in such a case it is undoubtedly certain, That Governors may be
lawfully opposed, and resisted.

Thus far must be true in general.

What Resistance of Governors may be Lawful.
But the Question is, what kind of Resistance, this must be; for some sort of
Opposition and Resistance, all men allow.

All men allow, That should a Prince command any thing unlawful, either by the
Laws of God, or his Kingdom, we are obliged to disobey; which is a kind of
Opposition, and Resistance.

Or should a Prince invade our Rights where the Law has provided a remedy in
the Case; all men allow, that it is not unlawful, to oppose that invasion in
the way of the Law, and to make use of that remedy against the Prince.

This therefore is not the Resistance in dispute; but the Question now is, what
we may do, as to a forcible Resistance of him, so that supposing a Prince
should invade the Rights of his subjects, where they can have no remedy by Law,
or should commamd any thing unlawful to be done, and make them suffer in their
Rights for not obeying, how far they are obliged to submit to that suffering,
or whether they may oppose and resist him by violence.

Now an Answer to this, I will only observe, That if according to the 4th and
5th Principles, The Welfare, and by consequence the Rights and properties of
the Society ought to be maintained, then we must have a Right by nhe Law of
Nature to all those means that are absolutely necessary to that End, which all
Societies are obliged to maintain, (Principle IV.) and by consequence any sort
of Resistance must be Lawful, so far as it is necessary to the security of our
Rights and properties.

But then, as that only can be said to be necessary to an End, without which
that End cannot be attained; so that Resistance only can be Lawful, without
which our Rights and Properties cannot be secured.

When therefore any Prince invades the Rights of the Society, or lays aside
those Laws, which are made for their security; and the Society has no
imaginable way left to maintain those Laws, and to secure and defend those
Rights, but by open and violent Resistance, that Resistance is by consequence
necessary, and lawful.

But here then the Question will be, what Rights those are, which be of such
Importance to the Society, as that its Welfare cannot be secured without them?

For it is very certain, a Society may have Rights, which though they should be
invaded, yet are not so essential to its Welfare, as that when they are lost,
the Welfare of the whole must be destroyed.

The Welfare of the whole consists undoubtedly in the Welfare of 'its parts,
and therefore the Rights of the parts are the Rights of the whole in some
sense; but yet it would not be Lawful for a Society to take Arms upon a prviate
Injury and Oppression, even though there should be no other way to get it
redressed.

Because this may be done either through rashness or neglect, or the Prince may
be mistaken or misled; or if not, however the Welfare of the whole does not
depend upon private injury, and the Prince himself may nevertheless be very
intent upon the Welfare of the whole.

But suppose the Injury be public and universal, and the Prince invades the
Rights of the Society, in common, yet there are likewise some common Rights of
the Society, which their Welfare does not so depend upon, as that their
Happiness shall be destroyed by the loss of 'em.

For perhaps their Rights may be only invaded in some few single instances,
without any visible design to subvert the constitution of the Society.

Or perhaps it may be only in some such cases, which if continued, might be of
dangerous consequence, and tend to the destruction of the Society, but singly
are no great oppression in themselves.

And therefore in such cases it would not be lawful to rise against a Prince,
because the Welfare of the whole does not require it; Nay the Welfare of the
whole requires the contrary, because this would make all Government precarious,
and destroy all Peace and Order in Society.

But where the Prince or Government shall designedly invade the Rights of the
Society without redress and by the course of his proceedings shall evidently
show, that he intends to invert the constitution, so that whereas there are
Laws made, as Rules for him in the preservation of their Rights and Properties,
he will not make those Laws, but his own Will, his Rule, by the means of which
the welfare of the Society will become precarious; by the Sixth and Seventh
Principles, it will be lawful for the Society to relieve themselves.

But then it must be with this proviso, That the remedy be not worse than the
disease.

For if the methods we take to right ourselves, will in human probability make
the Society more unhappy, than our suffering the present Injuries from the
Prince will do; we have then a greater obligation to suffer, than resist, and
that from the very reason of our Resistance, viz. The Welfare of the Society.

And therefore since it is plain to all men's Observation, That a violent and
tumultuary Resistance of Princes is commonly attended with war and desolation,
blood and ruin, it will follow,

That whatever we suffer from our Princes, unless the injury and oppression be
of such great importance to us, as to contervail the hazard of these
consequences, and sad effects of our Resistance, we are obliged to suffer and
submit to them; because it is more for the welfare of the Society so to do, as
it is better, of the two evils to choose the least.

And though they happen to have the burden continued upon them for some time,
though it be ever so long, yet if they are obliged to consult the Welfare of the
Society, they are obliged to suffer still, either till they have a prospect of
Righting themselves without the hazard of those dismal effects of their
Resistance, or else till they are like to be as miserable by their suffering,
as they can probably be by their Resistance.

And that a Society may certainly be in many cases, but especially when their
Religion is at stake, the preserving of which, as it is of more and greater
consequence, than the loss of all other things besides, as much as the soul is
better than the body, so it will be always a just reason for Resistance,
whatever the Society suffer by it.

But when I speak of Religion here, I must not be understood to speak of the
Religion of some particular persons only:

For if every private person had a power to raise an insurrection against his
Prince, upon the account of his Religion, this would open a gap to continual
Rebellion, and therefore must be false by the Sixth and Seventh Principles,
because it would make all Government precarious, and hazard the Peace and
Welfare of Society.

And therefore it is to be observed, That as I am all along speaking of the
Rights of the Society, so when I speak of their Religion, I mean, the Religion
of the Society, that is the national established Religion: And this is then
only said to be at stake, when the Laws that are made for thr security of that
Religion are laid aside, and such methods are visibly taken for the introducing
a contrary Riligion, as are contrary to Law in an Arbitrary Tyrannical way,
without the consent and contrary to the judgment of the Society.

And therefore in such a case, every Society has a power to defend their
Rights, which the Prince is endeavoring to take away, because the consequence
of not Resisting, may tend more to the Misery of the Society, than the
consequence of Resisting can do,; as much as the loss of Heaven to themselves
or their posterity, is of more importance and concern to them, than the loss of
all other things besides.

And if so, from hence it is plain, that the foundation of Government,
Obedience and Resistance, is the same; They all stand upon the same foot, and
are all branches of the same root, and there is the same reason for All, as
there is for any of 'em

And therefore, if it be a good argument, for the Divine Authority of
Government, as we have before shown, ( Page 29.) That it is a necessary means
to the Happiness of the Society, a necessary End appointed by God in the very
nature of things; it will follow, that it must be as good an argument of a
Divine Commission for Resistance, when it is a necessary means to the same End,
which, as it is the only thing that can make it Lawful, so it is the only Rule
to judge by, when and how far it may be so.

But who shall be judge of this necessity, is the Question; and it has always
been the great difficulty in stating this controversy.

But after all, I take it to be such a difficulty, as has arisen chiefly from
the manner of stating and handling this point.

For many, who have wrote upon this subject, have, too commonly, contented
themselves with what they thought a confutation of the doctrine of
Non-Resistance in general, from thence infering the lawfulness of the contrary;
but not having determined the just bounds, how far we are obliged to suffer,
before it can be lawful to Resist, they have left the point they contend for
altogether useless, if not dangerous.

For though it be lawful to Resist in case of oppression, yet we have shown it is
not so in every oppression ( Principle. VIII.) and therefore, unless they show
us, how far we are to bear oppression, before we Resist, they realy do nothing
to any purpose, but on the contrary, put a sword into mad-mens hands, and set
open a door to Rebellion, and Confusion.

They show us indeed a remedy for our grievances, but it is such a one, as we
had as well be without, as not to know when, and how to use it, without the
same danger, as when we had it not: And it is this, that has given occasion for
this puzzling Question, Who shall be judge?

Whereas, as we here set the case, there does not seem any room for this
objection.

For, as we have here laid down a Rule, by which we are to measure our
Submission to Princes, every one must be a Judge of Resistance, so far as he is
a Judge of this Rule.

And therefore, since we have here shown, that it is not lawful to make head
against our Prince upon a private injury, nor,

Secondly For a public, unless it be of dangerous consequence to the
Constitution, and such as is notoriously intended for its destruction, and such
too, as he refuses to redress; nor,

Thirdly, Even then, unless the damage the Society actually does, or which is
the same thing, unavoidably will, suffer by it, if not prevented, be as great a
misery to them, as the consequences of their Resistance will probably be.

And since this may happen in Civil matters, but especially when Religion is at
stake, which it certaintly is, when the Laws that are made for its security are
laid aside, and another contrary Religion introducing, by methods contrary to
Law, without the consent, and against the judgment of the Society,

1. Then, as every sensible honest man who undestands the Constitution and
Laws, is capable of judging of these things, that is, is capable of judging
when a Prince is acting contrary to the Laws of the Established Religion, and
setting up another in its stead:

2. And as every sensible man is capable of comparing the present injuries the
Society suffers, with blood, and plunder, and all the sad consequences of Civil
War;

3. And as every sensible man is capable of judging whether there be a prospect
of righting themselves without the hazard of these sad consequences:

So every sensible man must by consequence be capable of judging, when it may
lawful to Resist.

But though every sensible man may be a competant judge in this case, to the
satifaction of own conscience, yet in such a Government as ours is, where the
Interests of the People are entrusted in some particular hands, as amongst us
in Lords and Commons, who have a Right in the disposal of affairs; as they are
therefore the best and the proper judges, how far the Rights of the Society are
invaded, and what is necessary for their security; so it seems but natural to
conclude, where a Parliament can be had, that no Resistance ought to be made,
till the Parliament has declared their unsufferable grievances, and sought
unsuccessfully for redress.

And therefore, 'its the interest of the Society to have frequent Parliament,
as a necessary means of security to the constitution. For as the constitution
cannot well be supposed capable of being overturned upon a sudden, so in the
case of any Injury to the Society, by frequent Parliaments, we can never be
without a convenient opportunity, and a proper method of relief.

But as it was not so in former Reigns, so where the Judgment of Parliament
could not be had, every man was then to judge for himself, and to act according
to his conscience.

But then, as the proper method for redress of grievances in a Parliamentary
Monarchy, is by the way of Parliaments; so by consequence, in case of an
injury, or oppression from our Princes in those times, the first thing every
one ought to have endeavored after, was, the Liberty of a Parliament; which if
the Prince would consent to, then all other extraordinary methods would be
unlawful; For it is the necessity of Resistance that alone can make it Lawful.

And as that can never be a necessary means to an End, where the End can be
attained without those means, so that can never be necessary to the security of
the Rights and Properties of the Society, without which they may be otherwise
secured, and by consequence Resistance can never be said to be necessary, where
the Prince is willing to redress the grievance, and consent to any other
reasonable means of their security.

And therefore, could it be supposed that the Lords, and Commons could agree to
declare for Resistance in such a case, that Declaration would doubtless be
unlawful.

And though they must be supposed the best Judges of the several Interests of the
Society, yet as they are but a part of the Society, we are not obliged by the
Rules of the Consttiution to act according to their Judgment, any farther than
we ourselves are satisfied, it is Lawful, and by consequence we cannot be
obliged to Resistance by any Declaration they should make, any otherwise than
we ourselves should judge it necessary.

There may be many cases, where I may be obliged not to act without the
Judgment of others; but there can be no case, where I can be obliged to act
against my own, where the morality of the action is in dispute.

And since we have already shown, that every sensible man is capable of
Judging, when it may be Lawful to Resist, and thereby satisfy himself in
joining with any Declaration of Parliament, where it can be had, or in using
any other methods, he thinks to be necessary, where the Judgment of Parliament
cannot be had, he ought not by consequence to join with any such Judgment of
Parliament, any farther than he is convinced within himself it is a Just and
Lawful Judgment, and may Justly and Lawfully be joined with.

As this is a Matter of the last importance, so we ought to be very wary how we
act in it, and therefore we ought never to venture on an attempt of this
nature, without being sure of the ground we go on.

A wise and good man would not do any thing, that may reasonably be doubted
whether it be Lawful; and therefore though we are as certain, as we can be of any
thing, that Resistance is Lawful, yet we should in prudence rather choose to
suffer too much than Resist too soon.

The utmost degree of what is Lawful, is the very edge of sin, and one would
not willingly come so near, as to split the hair.

And therefore when we think it necessary to Resist, the Necessity of our
Resistance ought to be very certain; The Injury suffered ought to be so very
notorious, that every eye may see it, and the danger to be prevented ought to
be so very apparent, that no reasonable man can doubt of it.

For this is a remedy for the diseases of the Body Politic, like those, that
are sometimes used for the Natural Body, which either Kill, or Cure; and
therefore we ought to be tender in the use of them, unless it be in an
evidently dangerous, and desperate case.

But though in such a case a People may have a Right to Resist, yet here a
material Question will arise, Whether a People may not give away their Rights,
and by consequence their Rights of Resistance?

For since, as we have before shown, (Page 31, 32.) every one is obliged in
duty to God to obey the Laws of the Society, so far as they are agreeable to
the Will of God; if the Society has made a Law to forbid Resistance, and
thereby given away their Right to it, it must be therefore unlawful to Resist,
so far as they had a Power to make that Law, and give away that Right.

But that they have not a Power to make such a Law, and give away this Right,
is as certain a truth as that they have not a Power to act contrary to the Will
of God.

For we have already shown ( Principle IV.) That it is the Will of God, that
the Happiness of Society be maintained and by consequence, that such Resistance
be made by every Society, as in the nature of things is absolutely necessary to
secure and maintain their Happiness. And therefore for any Society to make a
Law against all resistance absolutely is to forbid that, as unlawful, which God
has made necessary; and therefore to do that, which they have not a Power to
do, because it is contrary to the Will of God.

It may seem strange to some to say this, which is a doctrine so contrary to
the common prejudices; but we see it must be so in the nature of things, if the
Welfare of Society ought to be maintained.

But yet it may be plausibly urged in this case, That every one has a Power to
dispose of his own, and if he thinks fit, may make himself a slave; he may
either give away his Right and Property, or he may oblige himself not to defend
'em, whenever they shall be taken from him; And what a man may do of himself,
he may do by another, that is duly commissioned to act for him; and whatever is
so done by another for him, lays as great an Obligation on him to perform it as
if it were done in his own Person.

And therefore, as in every Society, there is a necessity, that the affairs of
the Public be entrusted in some particular hands to act for the whole; so
whatever those Persons so entrusted do for the Society, must be understood, as
done by the whole, and to lay as great an obligation on every member of the
Society, as if it had been done by themselves in person: And therefore if they
make a Law to give away our Rights, or forbid the necessary defense of 'em,
every member of the Society is by consequence to be supposed under a necessary
obligation to keep that Law.

But in answer to this; Though it must be allowed, as an undoubted truth, That
every one has a to Power dispose of his own Rights, so far as they are his own,
considered simply, and of himself alone; yet if he be considered relatively, as
a member of Society; so far as the Rights of others depend upon his defending
and maintaining his own; they are not then entirely his own, and he has no such
Right to give 'em up, but on the contrary, is under an Obligation to defend
'em, it being the duty of every member of the Society, to do what is necessary
to the Welfare of the Society.

This may be illustrated by the Case of the Robber who takes away our goods,
though the goods perhaps be such, as we are content to lose, and give up our
Right to, rather than prosecute the offender; yet so far as the non-prosecution
of the offender, may be of ill consequencce to Society, as we are members of
Society, and obliged to support the Society, we are under an obligation in
conscience to prosecute, and the Society has a Right to that prosecution. And
should an Oath be given us not to prosecute, that Oath, would be Ipso facto
void, as being an Oath against a prior Obligation, an Oath against doing
Justice, and therefore an unlawful Oath.

And by the same reason, if Resistance be a real Duty, and a Right, which in
cases of necessity the Society may demand of us, when an Oath of Allegiance is
given to Subjects, it must be understood in such a sense, as it is Lawful to be
performed in, and by consequence in such a sense, as to allow of such
Resistance, as the Society has a Right to, otherwise it would be an Oath to the
Prince to do wrong to the people, and therefore an unlwful Oath, and by
consequence, Ipso facto void.

And so likewise as to other part of the argument, though a man may do that by
another, which he has a power to do of himself, and is as much obliged by what
is so done, as if it were done by himself, yet nothing can be said to be done
by another for us, so as in Equity and Reason to lay an Obligation on us any
farther, than as he who does the thing, is empowered and commissioned by us; or
as the thing he does is agreeable to the End and Reason of that commission he
received from us.

Should an Attorney for Instance, or a Guardian, that is empowered to act in
our stead in the security of our Rights, give away those Rights he was
empowered to preserve; it cannot be said, he had a commision to do this, or
that this ought to oblige in reason, and conscience where we have a power to
help ourselves. And for the same reason, though in every Society, the Rights of
the whole are supposed to be entrusted in some particular hands, yet as this is
done only for support of Government, the End of which is, the Welfare of
Society in the security of their Rights and Properties; it will follow, that
those persons so entrusted to act for the whole, are not to be understood to
have any commission to do any thing, that is contrary to the End and Reason of
their trust and commission; and by consequence must be understood to have no
commission; and therefore no Right to inslave the Society, by giving up their
common Rights and Properties, or forbiding us to defend 'em in case of
necessity, this being contrary to the very Endand Reason of that constition, by
which they are powered to act for Society. They have a power, no doubt, to give
away any Right, the alienation of which is absolutely necessary to the Welfare
of the whole, and if we could suppose we had any Right granted to us, of
resisting our Governors in any such manner, or for any such Reasons, as is
inconsistent with the Welfare of the whole, they have, doubless, a power to
give it away, (and if they should not give it away, it would be void in itself,
as being in the nature of things unlawful;) because, by the Seventh Principle,
any action is unlawful that is contrary to the Welfare of the Soicety: But to
give away all our Rights and Properties at once; or, which is the same thing,
to for bid us the means that are so necessary to their preservation, that they
cannot be secured without them, this they have no more Power or right to do,
than they have a Right to authorize Thieves and murderers to take away our
lives, or goods, or to oblige us not to defend our selves against them.

The case is the same both with Prince and People; for as the Prince, who is
the Minister of God for good, cannot be supposed to have any commission from
God, to ruin or destroy his people so neither can they who are entrusted with
the affairs of any Society to conrive and manage for the Welfare of the whole,
be in reason supposed to have any commission to give away their Rights or
properties, in which their Welfare does consist. (Principle V. P. 12.)

But on the contrary, they are obliged in Duty to God and their country, to
maintain and defend their trust, and by consequence are obliged to such
Resistance, as is absolutely necessary to that End.

This is so very plain a case, that I dare appeal to any one's common Reason,
though never so great a Bigot to his Notions, whether he should not think it a
Traiterous and Unlawful part, should they who are entrusted with the Interests
of a Society, knowingly and wilfully give 'em up into the absolute disposal of
their Prince: And if it be unlawful to give them up, it must be then their duty
to defend them, and by consequence it must be equally their duty to defend them
by all such ways and means, as are absulutely necessary for their defense.

And therefore, as I said before (page 70 71.) in all such Governments, as ours
is, where the Interests of the Society are entrusted with a Parliament, as they
are obliged in duty to defend them, so in a regular course of things, where a
Free Parliament can be had, the First Defense of our Rights should begin there,
and nothing should be done by others, till they have used their best endeavors
for redress.

And if a Free Parliament cannot be had, or if they have endeavored for relief
in vain, then every one must be lest to his own conscience, to act as he thinks
best for the Welfare of the Society, according to the foregoing limitations;
(page 69, 70.)

Thus, I think, we have a full resolution of this Point, and such a one as
seems impossible to be false, if my foregoing Principles be true.

But yet, I Am very sensible, notwithstanding this, there are many with whom
this doctrine of Resistance will not relish, by reason of that impious and
horrid abuse of it in the barbarous murder of King Charles I.

As there are others, on the other hand, who are as much afraid of
Non-Resistance lest is should strike at the Revolution in favor of King
William.

Whereas it is evident, these extremes in opinion can never be justified on
either hand.

For we have already shown, there is a Lawful Resistance, tho it may be abused;
and there is a Non-Resistance necessary, though it be often mistaken; and the
light we have now set them both in, will give us a just view of those events,
the one of Great and Glorious, the other of Scandalous and Execrable Memory.

The Late Civil War condemned.
First, According to the Principles here laid down, we have a horrid Idea set
before us of the detestable Murder of King Charles the First, and the irrgular
and unjust proceedings of the People in that unnatural Civil War.

For, First We have shown, that a few single Instances to the prejudice of a
people, is not a sufficient cause of Resistance, if the Prince, upon the
people's putting in a claim to their Rights, and informing him of the wrong, is
willing to redress the Injury; and if he should not be willing to do this.
Secondly,

We have shown (page 64, 65.) That even then it will not be lawful to resist,
unless the Injury be a greater misery to the Society, than the consequence of
Resistance is like to be. And if so,

Then nothing can justify that Civil War. For though it must be confessed that
some irregular actions were done by the King, yet it must be confessed too on
the other hand, that they were such, as he was advised were lawful to be done,
and such as when done, were no great oppression in themselves.

And as for the bad consequences of his proceedings in those particulars, when
his people expressed their uneasiness at them, and put in a claim to their
Rights in Parliament, he was not only willing to redress their present
grievance, but to comply with any means, that could be thought reasonable to
prevent any future inconvenience: And this he did in so full a manner, that
even the then pretended Parliament themselves voted his concessions
satisfactory.

And when he had done this as Resistance could be no longer necessary, so it
could by consequence be no longer lawful.

And therefore to proceed in the manner they did, must be Rebellion in the
highest degree, or else there could be no such thing in nature.

But granting he had made no satisfaction to his people, nor given any new
security for their Rights and Properties; nay, supposing he had continued to
oppress them, yet we have further shown, that in such a case the King only
forbids his right and ceases to Govern his People, and by consequence can
forfeit no more than his Government.

As He refuses them his Protection, so they may refuses him their Obedience,
but this does not give them any Power over his Person;

And therefore for them to put him to death, even though they had been the whole
body of the people, but much more for a few particular persons to do it, and
that too contrary to the general sense of the people, must be murder in the
highest degree, or there can be no such thing in nature.

This is not only true from the Principles laid down; but it is also evident,
even from our famous Magna Charta, so often quoted to justify Resistance; even
this puts the Person of the King out of the People's Power, even whilst it
gives them a Power to distress him in his Castles, or use any other means for
their security; and sure if this be of any authority, the King has as much
Right to the benefit of it on his part, as the People can pretend on theirs;
and if it gives them a privilege to secure their own Rights, so it gives him a
Right to be secured in his Person.

So that this must be a horrid and detestable wickedness, if Murder and
Rebellion be so:

And therefore they who pretend to justify this Fact, must be men of barbarous
and cruel Minds, and governed more by their passions than their consciences.

If such Principles and such Practices upon such Pretenses were to be allowed,
they would make the Right of Princes and the Peace of Society, the most
precarious thing that can be, and lays open to the Insults of every Massinello,
who has but impudence enough to charge the Government with Popery or Tyranny,
or being in a French, or Dutch Interest, and cunning enough to time it with
some popular discontent,

And therefore as by the Sixth Principle already laid down, these notions must
necessarily be false, and such facts unlawful; so they ought to be abhorred and
discouraged by every wise and good Man, who has any regard to his duty or
interest, to the Society's peace, or his own safety,

But though our notions of Government do thus evidently demonstrate the
unlawfulness of those practices in the late Civil Wars, yet they do,

The Revolution justified.
Secondly, As fairly justify the late Revolution.

For if it be lawful to oppose a Prince and withdraw our Obedience, as we have
shown, (page 64.) when he either invades the Rights of the Society, or lays
aside those Laws that are made for their security, and especially when our
Religion is at stake.

And if our Rights and Religion were at stake, when we saw all our mounds
pulled down, and our enclosure laid open, and a contrary Religion setting up
amongst us; when a dispensing Power was maintained to void all the Laws that
were made for our security, and such Presons put into Places of Trust, as our
Laws forbad to be entrusted. When our Properties were to be held at the Will of
the King, who evidently showed, it should be no longer than he should find it
for his purpose not to destroy them.

If our Rights and Religion were at stake, when Popery was planting it self in
our Universities, and the members deprived of their Legal Properties contrary
to Law, for not doing that, which was contrary to their Oaths, to make room for
Papists unqualified by Law and all this with a High Hand by the bare Authority
of the King, only because he would, and for this End only, as was notoriously
evident, that he might corrupt the fountain, from whence our Religion is to be
nourished and supported, and the lower streams to be supplied

If our Rights and Religion were at stake, when under these Oppressions, the
injured subjects put in their claims by humble and obedient Petitions, which
was the only method in their power, because a Free Parliament could not be had,
but all without any redress or prospect of it; nay with an assurance of the
contrary from the King himself, who, though they endeavored to convince him of
his error, that he was acting contrary to Law, yet nevertheless declared, he
would be obeyed.

And when all these proceedings were supported by the power of a standing Army,
without the consent, and contrary to the Judgment of the Parliament, and some
part of that Army commanded by Popish Officers, and a great Part of it made up
of Irish Papists, who were by Interest and Principle engaged to destroy, both
our Properties and Religion.

If our Rights and Religion were at stake in these cases, as no reasonable man
can, and, I believe, no unprejudiced Man will, and I Am sure, in those times no
sensible man did question, but on the contrary, the circumstances were so
notorious, and the danger so apparent, not from one, or two single Instances,
but from a continued Series of Actions, that every heart was filled with Fears,
and Complaints were heard in every mouth, Then certainly we had, or there can
be no such thing, as a just and lawful Cause of Resistance. And if it was just
to proceed thus far, considering the Prince we had to do withal, was not only
inflexibly bigoted to Popery, and resolutely bent upon the ruin both of our
Religion and Constitution, but one who could be bound by no ties of conscience,
as being regardless both of his Promises and Oaths, and therefore could neither
with safety nor prudence be confided in; it must therefore be necessary in the
nature of things, and by consequence, be just and lawful, if the Welfare of the
Society ought to be supported in the Scurity of their Rights and Properties, to
seek out some other methods to secure them by: And since they, who were then
entrusted with the Rights of the Society, and were the proper, and only Judges
of what was best for the Society, established the Crown upon a Protestant
Prince, as the best, and as it was apparently the only way to secure the Rights
and Religion of Protestants, against the like attempts and hazards for the
future; it must by consequence be the duty, as well as it is the interest of
every member of the Society to submit to it. (COR. I. page 31.) had it stood
upon no other foot but this.

But the Right and Title of his present Majesty, does not depend upon this
alone: He Injoys his Crown by an Hereditary Right devolved upon Him from the
Princess Sophia. And this Right was settled and confirmed to Her by all that
Legal Power and Authority, that can give any Right in any Society, that is, by
the Power of the Crown, and Parliament, with whom all the Rights of our Society
are lodged,

So that if His present Majesty has not a Right to Govern us, it must be either
upon this account, that the Crown and Parliament, have not any Right to
determine the Succession of the Government, or else that the Succession has not
been Legally settled by a Lawful King, and Parliament.

This is the hinge of the whole dispute; And as to the first of these, It is
very certain, that as the Right of Governing any Society is the Ordinance of
Men, and therefore may be determined, and settled by Men, so every Society must
have a General Right to it, according as is best for their own Welfare, ( Page
42.) And as we have this Right in common with other Societies, from the nature
and reason of things, so we have it likewise by our particular constitution, as
being a Right declared by Law, to be inherent in the Crown and Parliament. So
that whatsoever is so done by the Crown and Parliament, they have a Natural and
Legal Right to do, and as the interests of the Society is lodged in them, the
Society must be determined by 'em: And since this is the foundation of our
present Settlement, and the King succeeds to the Throne by this, as He must
have a Legal Right to Govern, we must be obliged in Duty to Obey.

The only remaining Difficulty is, Whether this Settlement was Legally made by
a Lawful King, and Parliament?

Now as to this Objection, it may be answered, That, though this Settlement was
made in the Reign of King William, who had not a Regular Hereditary Right, yet
if the Revolution was, as we have proved it Lawful, as being a necessary, and
therefore Lawful Means for the attainment of a Lawful End, He must therefore be
a Lawful and Rightful King: And by consequence must have a Power and Right to
do, what any other Lawful King could do.

But when we consider further, That by the Law and Constitution of our Kingdom,
the Authority of the King in Possession is allowed, however He came by that
Possession, and that All Acts of Parliament passed by Him, are equally to be
Obeyed, as of equal Force with theirs, whose Titles were Indisputable, (as Dr.
Higden has demonstrated) then this Act of Parliament for the Settlement of the
Crown, must be as valid and obliging as any other Act of any other King and
Parliament could be, that is, it must give the King as good a Title to the
Crown, and make it as much the People's Duty to Obey, as any other Act of
Parliament could do.

But here we may still consider further, That this Settlement was not only made
by King William, but was afterward confirmed by the Authority of Queen Ann,
whose Right and Title every one allowed, even they who refuse All glance to the
King: And if she had a Right, as undoubtedly she had, then she had a Right to
do in Her Reign, what the Crown had a Right to do in any Reign, and since she,
an undoubtedly Lawful Queen, has confirmed the Succession in the Protestant
Line, by the concurrence of an undoubtedly Lawful Parliament, (which they had
an Inherent Right to do) it will follow, that His present Majesty had, as just
a Right to the Succession, and has now as just a claim to our Allegiance, as
Reason, and Law can give Him.

And as the same Power, that could and did settle it thus, could and did
actually exclude all others, and therefore has not only given Him a Right, but
has by consequence given Him the only Right; so it is the Duty of every Subject
not only to receive Him for their Prince, but for their only Rightful and
Lawful Prince, against all other Pretenders whatsover.

COROLLARY, or INFERENCE IV.
Lastly, IF all the Principles we have laid down, and the Reasonings thereupon
be True, from hence we are taught the Obligations, that Governors and Subjects
have upon 'em, and the Duties that are severally required of 'em, in order to
an happy Government.

For if the End of all Government be the Welfare of Society, then He only can
be a good Governor, and they only good Subjects, who consult the public Good in
their several capacities; The Prince the Welfare of His Subjects, and the
Subjects the Welfare of their Prince.

And as the Public Welfare consists in the security of the Society in their
Rights and Properties; so it is not only the Duty, but the Interest of a
Prince, to maintain the Rights of his People, and the People to support the
Rights of the Prince.

And as the Laws of the Society, are the Rules of the several Rights of the
Society, so those several Rights cannot be secured, unless those Laws be the
Rule of their several Actions; that is, unless the People observe every thing,
that the Laws repuire, and the Prince command nothing, but what the Laws allow.

And as Laws are not only made, as Rules, but as a common Security to the
Rights of the Society, so the common Security must necessarily consist in the
punctual execution of the Laws, and so far as the Society are wanting in this
respect, that is, so far as the Prince shall pretend to dispense with them, and
the People be careless in the Execution of 'em, so far they are defective in
their Duty, and wanting to the Common Good and Security.

For as the Prince and People are but one Society, united together for the
Welfare of the whole, they must have a Right to each other's duty, as necessary
to the Common Good, and by consequence so far as either part, that is, either
Prince, or people are wanting in their respective duties to each other, so far
they are wanting to the Common Good, which God has obliged them to consult.

And therefore those Persons, who shall contribute toward this, by magnifying
the Prerogative of the Crown so far, as to oppress and destroy the Rights of
the People, or under a pretense of maintaining the Rights of the People, shall
lessen the Security of the Crown, are equally Enemies to the Common Good, and
equally False to God and their Country.

Thus we have gone through the Essentials of Government, relating both to the
Governors, and Subjects, and shown the Obligation they have to one another; By
the same Principles we may be able to model our notions of the several Forms of
it, and it particularly shows us in the first place, how far any Form of
Government may be altered.

COROLLARY V. How far any Form of Government may be altered.
We have already shown, that every Society has an Inherent Right, to put
themselves under any Form of Government that is absolutely necessary to their
own Welfare, according to their several circumstances; and as all Forms of
Government were originally the Ordinances of men, so they are by consequence
alterable by men, and therefore there can be no such Right of Governing in any
Person, or Family, as is properly, and in its own nature Indefensible: But
then, though all Forms of Government were the Ordinances of men, yet as they were
Ordained for the Welfare of Society, so far, and no farther ought they to be
altered, than the Welfare of the Society requires the alteration.

And since the Welfare of the Society consists, as we have shown, in the
security of the Rights and Properties of the Society, that Form of Government
only can be said to require an alteration, under which the Rights and
Properties of the Society cannot be secured:

And as they who are entrusted with the Interests, and employed to act for the
Welfare of the Society, are the only proper Judges of its Welfare, so by
consequence they are not only proper Judges, when, and what alterations shall
be made, but they are the only Persons, that can make 'em. And therefore in any
particular Constitution, suppose this of ours in this Kingdom, where the
Interests of the Society are put into the hands, and left to the disposal of
the Crown, and Parliament, though this Form of Government was originally the
Ordinance of the Society, and is therefore alterable by any Society, yet it is
not to be done by any other Persons, nor in any other manner, than by the
concurrence of the Crown and Parliament. The Crown cannot do it without the
Parliament nor the Parliament without the Crown. For though we suppose the rights
of Princes are entirely owing to the People, and the People had a Power
originally in themselves, not to have united under the Form, yet after they
have consented, and submitted to it, the Power they had once, is given away, so
long as that Union continues, and the Power and Prerogative they have given
their Prince are as much His Right, whilst He does the duty of their Prince, as
the Privileges they reserve to themselves are Theirs.

And therefore as he cannot Lawfully invade their Privileges without Tyranny
and Oppression, so neither can they Lawfully resist His Power, nor Entrench on
His Prerogative without Treason and Rebellion.

And by Consequence in such a Case, no alteration can be made by either,
without the mutual consent of both.

This must necessarily be true, I say, so long as this Union and Constitution
continues:

But should this Union and Constitution expire of it self, or be any otherwise
broken and dissolved, by which the People are discharged from their Obligations
to their Prince, and are by consequence reduced to the state they were in,
before that Union and Constitution was made, as they have then the same Natural
Right to settle themselves again, either in the same, or any other Form, as if
they had never been settled before; so whatever the Persons in that Case do who
are entrusted with the Interests of the Society, every Member of the Society,
is obliged to submit to.

But here then the Question will be, How this Union and Constitution can Expire
of it self, or can be so broken and dissolved, as to put the Society into such
a State, as if that Union and Constitution had never been made.

Now this may be, First, Upon a supposition that the Royal Family, by whom the
Society has agreed to be Governed in Succession, is extinct, and so no Person
has any Legal Claim to Govern them; In such a Case the Society may put
themselves under any other persons or any other Form, because the former
constitution is expired: Or,

Secondly, The Union and Constitution may be dissolved, when the Prince will
not submit to the Terms and Conditions of the Constitution, nor perform the
Contract by which they are united: For as the End and Reason of Government is
the Welfare of Society in the security of their Rights and Properties, so the
different Forms and Constitutions are only several means to this End:

And therefore when a Prince takes upon Him the Government of a People, it is
in the nature of the thing supposed, and He does thereby virtually Contract and
Agree, not only to consult the Welfare of that People, but to do it in that
way, that they have appointed: So that for Instance in such a Government as
ours, where we have not only our particular Rights and Properties, assured to
us by Law, but also such a certain Form and Constitution, where no Rights can
be alien'd, nor Laws be made, but by the Advice and Consent of Parliament, it
is in the nature of the thing supposed, and He who takes upon Him this
Government, does thereby tacitly Contract, that He will not only preserve our
Rights and Properties, but that He will Govern in this way, and according to
the methods of this Constitution.

And therefore when a King shall invade our Rights and Properties, and wilfully
and designedly take them from us, and thereby destroy the very End and Reason
of his Authority; or when he will not govern us by Law, nor with the Advice and
Consent of Parliament; he overturns the Society, and dissolves the
Constitution, the Bond and Union between him and the Society, by which alone he
becomes their Head, and they become his People: And if after due applications
and proper methods, such as are prescribed before; He persists in this Injury
without redress, the People are as much discharged from him, as if he had never
been their Head; and by Consequence may lawfully consult their own Welfare in
any other Way, that is necessary to that End, as if that Constitution had never
been made. And whatever they do in such a case, who are then entrusted with the
Interests of the Society, to act in that Juncture for the Welfare of the whole,
it is the duty of the whole to submit to; because they are in that case the
higher Powers, and indeed for that time the whole Power; which Power is agreed
on all hands, it is absolutely unlawful to resist or disobey, either by opposing
what they have a Right to do, or by refusing what they have a Right to impose.

This gives us a Right Notion of Revolutions in Government, and as it shows us
how far Revolutions may be Lawful, so it teaches us how they are to be
regularly managed, and by what method they ought to be confirmed, which is not,
we see, by Popular Tumults, or by any domestic Military Force, imposing such a
change upon us, because they have strength enough to do it, but it ought to be
done by the whole Society, that is, by the Consent and Approbation of such
Persons, with whom the Interests of the Society are entrusted.

Indeed, in the Case of a Rovolution brought about by the Conquest of a Foreign
force, where we are put under a necessity of submitting to the Conqueror in
such a way, and upon such Terms as He shall impose, here no certain Rules can
be prescribed, as being an extraordinary case; Only in general it may be said,
that as the only just Foundation of submitting to Conquerors, is, the necessity
of it to the Welfare of the Society, so they, who undertake to settle that
Submission, ought to get the best Terms they can for the Society, that is, not
only for themselves, but for the Whole, and this ought to be the End of every
step they take in the Settlement of that Submission.

But in the case before us, we have supposed a Revolution to arise from the
natural dissolution of the Constitution, by which, though the Society have an
Inherent Right, to put themselves under any other Form, and make what
alterations they think fit, yet it cannot be regularly said to be done by the
Society, unless it be done by such Persons only as are appointed by the Society
for that purpose; by which it may appear to be the Act of the Society, and it
cannot be Lawfully done by them, for any other End, or upon any other reason,
than as it is necessary for the Welfare of the Whole.

And this gives us occasion to reflect with pleasure, upon the kind Providence
of God, in our late Revolution, by which, He not only delivered us, and our
Posterity, from the apparent ruin of our Liberties and Religion, but also gave
us a happy opportunity, of doing it by the concurrence of the whole Society, in
a regular Convention of Lords and Commons; And by this means, having left no
room for reasonable men to object against the thing, or the manner of it, He
has provided both for our safety, and our satisfaction.

COROLLARY VI. What Form of Government is best.
FROM the Principles of Government before laid down, as we have resolved the
former point, how far any Form of Government may be altered; so here we may be
instructed in that famous Question, What Form of Government is best?

This is a frequent Question in the Schools; but it is much more so among
Politicians, and of fatal consequence to many Societies.

Amongst us in England, it is a kind of Heresy in Politics, not to give the
Preference to Monarchy; And indeed, as Monarchy is the most ancient and
universal, so one would be apt to conclude it the most natural, and therefore
the most eligible Form:

And of all Forms of Monarchy, the absolute would probably be best could we
suppose our Princes would be always wise and good; could we be always sure of
Persons, whose entire aim would be the Welfare of their People, and whose
prudence would always direct them for the best; and could we be sure, they
would be always in wise and good hands, an absolute Form of Monarchy would seem
best fitted, to answer all the occasions of the Public.

But considering the infirmity and corruption of human Nature, it cannot be
expected, but that we must sometimes fall into the hands of wicked and
designing Counselors: And therefore since we can never hope, but such an
absolute Dominion must, some time, or other, degenerate into Tyranny and
Oppression; this must be a false Notion of Government, as tending to the
destruction of the End of Government.

And since we have already shown, that Government is only a means to an End,
which End is the Welfare of Society, in the security of their Rights and
Properties; if Monarchy be the best Form of Government, That by consequence
must be the best Form of Monarchy, where the Rights and Properties of the
Society are best secured: And as the Rights of any Society are most likely to
be best secured, where nothing can be done in relation to their Rights, without
the Advice and Consent of all Parties concerned, and where every Estate and
Condition of Men in the Society have a share in the disposal of the Affairs of
the Society; so that Form of Monarchy must by consequence be best which is
established upon this foundation which we call a limited mixed Monarchy.

But however perfect and natural a Form of Government Monarchy of any kind may
be, yet it can only be said to be generally best, but not absolutely and
universally so: For if the different Forms of Government arose, as we have
supposed, from the different circumstances and interest of people, it will
follow, That the Goodness of any Form can only be measured by the particular
circumstances and interests of the People, that are subject to it: And as the
Interests of People vary with their circumstances, so the Forms of Government
may be various, and yet each be best in its proper Place, and by consequence
one Form of Government may be best for this People, another for that: But yet
what form would be best for any particular People, would be a very hard matter
to distinguish nicely, were we now to form a new Society in a wild and
uncivilized country.

For to judge of this exactly, it would be necessary perfectly to understand
the nature and situation of the place, the temper and circumstances of the
people, the manner of their subsistence with themselves, and their relation to,
and dependence upon others;

And yet, after all, when we perfectly understand this, whether there be any
particular Form of Government so necessary to the Welfare of any people, as
that they would not be able to subsist under any other, it is very hard to say.
Though by a long Observation of the United Provinces, Politicians tell us, it is
so with them; and that no other Government but that they live under, could
possibly be maintained amongst them; yet as Monarchy seems to be the most
perfect, and the most natural Form, so we may reasonably think, that, generally
speaking, that Form of Monarchy, which is already shown in its own nature,
would be generally best for any people.

And where they varied from it at any time, as far as can find, it has not
arisen from any inconsistency there is in Monarchy, as such, to the Interests
of those Societies that are otherwise modelled; but only from some accidental
circumstances relating to the then present time and place, or the present
temper of the people, when those Societies were formed.

And therefore in the first Formation of a Society, the particular occasions
that then offer themselves, seem to be the Rule, and the only Rule for the
first Formation of the model of their Government. But when a Society is already
formed and a model of Government has been long established, the only Rule of
judging in this case, is the welfare of the Society under it; and as the
Welfare of the Society does not consist in the largeness and extent of their
Dominions, much less in the Granduer and flutter of their Princes, but in the
enjoyment of their Rights and Properties; so when any Government has been long
continued, and the People live easily and comfortably under it, and have a
prospect of continuing so, and for that reason may be thought to like it best,
That Government no doubt is best for that People:

And if so, then since the Government of England is not only a Monarchy, and
such a kind of Monarchy, as is best in its self, as being limited and mixed,
where every State and condition of Men in the Society, have a share in the
disposal of their Rights and Properties, but also such a Monarchy, as we have
lived for many ages easily and comfortably under, and have a prospect of
continuing so for ever; and therefore such a Monarchy as we universally like;
it will follow from hence, by an unavoidable consequence, That this Form of
Government is best for England.

And by consequence it must be a standing Maxim of English Politics, That this
Form of Government ought to be maintained; that is, it ought to be maintained,
as it is established in England; and therefore not only as a Monarchy, or
Kingly Government in one Person; but also such a sort of Kingly Government, as
is limited and and mixed where no Laws can be made by the King, but by the
concurrence of the People, that is, by the Advice and Consent of Parliament.

And as this is already proved to be the best Form of Government upon this
consideration, That in it every State and Condition of Men in the Society, have
a share in the disposal of their several Rights: And as their are different
Estates and Conditions of men amongst us, considered either a Clergy, or Laity,
having not only different and distinct Rights upon this account, but also as
they are distinguished in to Lords, and Commons:

And as the Parliament is made up of all these, so it shall follow, That if the
Monarchy ought to be maintained under the Parliamentary Limitation established
in England; it ought to be so, as that each of these different Conditions of
Men, considered as Lords and Commons, and Clergy, may enjoy their respective
Parliamentary Rights, and Privileges, so as each to have a share in the
disposal of Affairs.

This is the Constitution of the Monarchy of England, and therefore whatsoever
tends to the preservation or destruction of this, in any one of these several
respects, is so for preservative or destructive of the Interest of England, and
by consequence ought either to be avoided, or pursued; or.

If therefore we reflect upon this Constitution of the Monarchy, and what is
necessary to its Preservation in its several parts, that is, what is necessary
for the support and preservation of the Monarchy it self, considered as the
Government of a single Person; or, 2dly, What is necessary for its support and
preservation, considered in conjunction with the Two Houses of Parliament, that
a due balance between 'em be mantain'd; or, 3dly, What is necessary to its
support and preservation, as a Parliamentary Monarchy made up of the Three
Estates of the Kingdom, under the Influence of their Head; if, I say, these
things be considered distinctly, this will give us all the general Maxim of
Policy, relating to the Constitution of our Monarchy.

What these Maxims are, may easily be discovered by any one of any observation
and experience, and 'twould be useful to every English Subject, to have a
distinct and perfect Knowledge of them, but since the just consideration of
that matter would swell this Paper beyond its bounds, and make it less useful
for my design; I think it proper to proceed no farther, till I have more
leisure and convenience.

Thus you have a View of natural Politics, relating both to the duty of
Governors and Subjects, set forth in a series of necessary and unavoidable
consequences from evident, and undoubted Principles.

I leave every one to judge, whether it be or not.

But as Truth is the necessary Relation, that things bear to one another, as to
agreement, or disagreement, when from certain Principles, we are able to form
consistent Schemes of things, as, hanging together in a regular chain, one part
necessarily depending on the other, in a natural and easy connection, this looks
very like a connection of Truths.

This I take to be the only way of coming to any certainty in the knowledge of
any truth, and this is the method I have here taken, and this I have pursued
with that Indifference, which becomes every one that would not be deceived.

I have had no Regard to interest, prejudice, or party, but only to the
discovery of Truth, and as I have not wished to find it, rather on one side,
than an other, so, if I am mistaken, I am not in love with error, but am ready
to renounce, upon due conviction, whatever shall appear to be so.

But then it is to be observed, That I take my notions to be necessary
consequences from certain and undoubted Principles, the only true way to
convince me of mistake, is to show me some error, consequences deduced from,
them: For so long as these are allowed to be true, and no Law be discovered in
these respects, if Demonstration be argument, my Scheme cannot be false.

This, therefore, I leave it with the Reader, and if any one shall think fit to
oppose what I have said, if he consider the Subject with the impartiality of a
Philosopher, and treat the author with the civility of a Gentlman; I shall be
very glad to be better informed, and think myself obliged to him if I am Wrong,
that he would give himself the trouble of setting me Right.

FINIS.

