A REPLY TO AN ADDRESS

To the AUTHOR of a Pamphlet, entitled, A Candid Examination of the "Mutual
Claims of Great Britain and her Colonies, etc.

BY THE AUTHOR OF THE CANDID EXAMINATION.

NEW YORK: Printed by JAMES RIVINGTON. M,DCC,LXXV.

A REPLY TO AN ADDRESS, etc.
WHEN the Advocates of a cause descend to the low chicanery of asserting the
most evident untruths, of imposing meanings on words which they do not import,
and perverting the arguments of their opponents to points, the contrary of
which they most solidly prove; it is difficult to determine whether they
exhibit clearer evidence of weak heads, depraved hearts, or a bad cause. A
conduct so destitute of candor and honor, may tend, for a time, to raise a
mist before the eyes of the weak and ignorant, and seduce the credulous and
unwary; but cannot, for a moment, draw the sensible part of mankind into those
snares which your ambition and destructive schemes of independence have
already, in idea, prepared for them. The sight of the Americans, too long
blinded by your sophistical distinctions, and incoherent arguments, is daily
growing clearer. True information respecting their rights and duties, and your
pernicious designs, are pouring in upon them. And were you not transported and
infatuated with the wild scheme of raising your own importance upon the
separation of two great countries, whose interest and safety are inseparable;
you would perceive that the honest and wise in both, are raising a firm
opposition to your measures; and that, like the viper in the fable, you are
gnawing a file, which will wear out your own teeth before you will blunt the
softest part of it.

To convince you of this truth, if possible, and disabuse mankind, whom you
have been deceiving by your wild and novel ideas of government, ever since the
unhappy era of the Stamp Act, I mean to trace you through all your artful
meanders and sophistical labyrinths; and to show to the world, that your last
doctrines are as replete with fallacy and absurdities, as those which are long
since exploded by all America. But before I enter upon a particular Reply to
your Answer, I will take a general View of it; and there every Reader will find
that its sole aim is to show that the several Colonies are not members of the
British state, but so many distinct, independent states, vested by their
respective inhabitants with a "legislative power, as SUPREME and as UNLIMITED
as the power of the legislature of Great Britain, This Gentlemen, is throwing
off the mask with a witness. The cloven foot, which has hitherto been artfully
and industriously concealed, by those who understand the management of your
designs better than yourselves, is here exhibited to our view in all its horrid
deformity. The black scheme of independence, which is to rear its head out of
the ruinous horrors of a civil war, is now boldly asserted and published; and
nothing less than a total separation of each Colony from the Parent State, is
the avowed object of your ambitious designs. Permit me, in the name and behalf
of the virtuous and loyal part of America, to thank you cordially for blabbing
this long concealed and most important secret. It will instruct them, in
future, to be upon their guard against your maneuvers, and enable them to
oppose, with success, the ruin you are preparing for them.

It is a disagreeable task to travel through all your groundless assertions,
sophistical inconsistencies, and ill-founded principles. They display so great
a want of candor, so much mean subtilty, and so little regard for truth, that
it is painful to find human nature capable of descending to such low
expedients. However, unpleasing as the task may be, my duty to my country shall
prevail.

In the first paragraph of your Answer, you begin with a malevolent untruth --
one so shameless and easily detected, that I should not waste paper in resuting
it, was it not on account of those who are apt to swallow assertions without
examination. You there tell us, I have labored to show, "that America has no
rights at all, and that we are the most abject slaves on earth. Knowing that I
had done the reverse, and ever wished to put the mildest construction on human
conduct, even upon yours, however injurious, I sought for an apology for this
bold asseveration, through all the pages of the pamphlet; but not finding any,
I turned to your Answer, and in the latter end I find you confess your "Remarks
are hasty, that is, as I conclude, passionate and rash. This construction,
charity commanded me to put on your conduct; for to suppose that you could
publish to the world so manifest an untruth, with temper and deliberation, is
to suppose that you are lost, not only to all sense of candor, but character.
Because whoever has, with temper, perused the pamphlet, ^^ust know, that from
page 32 to 62, more than one half of it is devoted to show the reverse of your
assertion -- that " America has the most important rights, drawn from the same
^o^r^^ -- end as firmly established on the same principles, as those of the
Parliament: that though by our emigration to a country, for which the
constitution had not provided a representation, we had lost the enjoyment of
those rights, yet we had neither surrendered, forfeited nor lost those rights
themselves; but that on the contrary, we ought, in justice as well as policy,
to be restored to the first and great right of English freedom, a participation
of the supreme authority, and all the other rights of Enlishmen, upon such
principles of liberty and policy as shall suit our local and other
circumstances. Nor did I stop here; but offered a variety of cogent arguments
to induce the Americans to petition for, and the State to grant, them -- Thus
endeavoring, from the most disinterested motives, to lend my small aid toward
uniting two great countries by the firmest bands of political freedom, into one
grand and illustrious Empire: Under which union, upon every principle of reason
and policy, all our present grievances must be relieved, and we shall hold the
best of all political securities against the future. Let this union be
established, and all the fetters upon American manufactures, and all the
burdens and prohibitions peculiar to American trade and commerce, must be
removed. The American merchant will enjoy the same ^^ght to trade to every port
and place, where, by treaty, the merchant in Britain may trade -- and the
American manufacturer will be at liberty to set up every kind of manufacture.
Because, under this union, the cause and reason of all those burdens,
prohibitions, and unjust distinctions between an English subject in Britain,
and one in America, cease of course. For, when America shall, by the union, be
restored to a capacity of discharging, with justice and punctuality, all her
duties to the state, and particularly that first and most essential one, of
granting the necessary and just aids to the state; and the state shall have the
like political security with respect to America, which it has as to its other
members, that she will do so: No reason can possibly subsist why the Americans
should not enjoy the same rights and privileges which the other subjects of the
state do enjoy. Nor can it be of the least consequence to the state, whether a
subject grows rich by his labor or commerce in the city of London, or on the
Ohio; provided it can obtain a just and reasonable proportion of his wealth,
when necessary for the protection and safety of the Empire. Upon this obvious
principle of reason and justice, Calais, Wales, Chester, Durham, and Scotland,
upon their respective unions with the English government, were taken into its
bosom, and vested with all the rights of English subjects. And upon the same
principle, they cannot be denied to America. Such must be the happy effects of
an union between Great Britain and her colonies -- Such the fortunate change in
favor of America, which would emerge immediately from a condition the most
slavish, limited in her manufactures, restrained and prohibited in her
commerce, and bound by laws, in the making of which she does not participate,
into all the rights, liberties and freedom, of the most free state upon earth.
Is it possible that any men whose minds are not fraught with dark and sinister
designs, can, upon cool reflection, prefer to a condition replete with such
important benefits, an ignis fatuus, which must lead us into the distressful
state of a conquered people, after being reduced by the calamities of a civil
war!

But to follow you now closely; you say, that I have laid it down as a
principle that there must be in every state a "supreme legislature, universal
in extent over every member; -- that the British Parliament is the supreme
legislature of the colonies, and that the Colonists are therefore subject to
its laws. Now this is a partial and corrupt representation of the doctrine of
the pamphlet: -- It is but one half of the truth: -- Because, although I have
asserted, that the Parliament is, ever has been, and must, from the nature and
reason of civil society, continue to be, the legislature of the Colonies while
they remain members of the British State, there being no other; yet I have also
added, and substantially proved, that in order to give the laws of Parliament
the same equitable and constitutional obligation in America, which they carry
with them in Britain, some new provision, some constitutional union between the
two countries, should be adopted, to restore the Colonists to their ancient and
essential right of participating the power of making the laws: That this right
was originally, and yet is, of the essence of the English government -- That
without it, the parliament is as absolute and despotic over the colonies, as
any monarch whatever who singly holds the legislative authority; to which I
have subjoined many solid reasons to induce the colonies to ask for, and the
British state to grant it. But all this part of my argument you chose to omit;
because it contains a flat contradiction to your groundless charge: For it now
evidently appears, when the doctrines of the pamphlet are taken and considered
together, that they are as different from your representation of them, as Light
is from Darkness -- Truth from your assertions.

Finding that the necessity of a supreme legislature in every state was too
clearly proved to be denied, you have been obliged to confess it: And in order
to show that every Colony is an independent State, and consequently not subject
to the supreme power of Great Britain, you have, without shame or remorse, had
recourse to a number of the most fallacious, absurd and sophistical positions.
You begin with acknowledging, that "wherever men have, from a state of nature,
entered into a state of society, there must be somewhere lodged a power to make
laws obligatory on all the members of that society; and then you ask, "Whether
we have not a legislature in Pennsylvania, in the hands where the community
have placed it? This you say, cannot "be denied -- It Is power within the bounds
of the province, is as supreme and as unlimited as the power of the legislature
of Great Britain. -- "Here," you add, "the principle of Mr. Lock applies. In
support of these dogmatical asseverations, you have not offered to the public a
single shadow of proof! Nay you have not even attempted to carp at, much less
to deny or refute, those incontestible facts and arguments, which demonstrate
the contrary, and are to be found in the pamphlet from page 10 to 24. -- But in
what an unfortunate situation have you involved yourselves, if I should show
that not one of this group of assertions, to which you would apply your
doctrine, is founded in truth or fact -- that they are all inventions of your
own brain, contrary to your own knowledge of the facts, and that they never
existed elsewhere? What think you will become of your Application? To evince
this will be no arduous task: For, 1st, The Pennsylvanians did not "from a
state of nature enter into a state of society; but some of them were originally
members of the British State, who emigrated from one part of its territory to
another, with intent to populate that territory, and to extend the commerce and
interests of the nation, of which they still remained a part; and the others
came from other established societies, which they relinquished, in order to
become members of the British government. 2dly, The legislature of Pennsylania
is not "in the hands where the community have place it: But where the
Representative of the supreme legislature of Great Britain originally "placed
it;" who had no authority to discharge it from its subordination to the British
State, or to render it " supreme" and independent. In 1682, King Charles, as
Representative of the State, ^and under its signature, formed the territory of
P^nnsylvania into an inferior and subordinate body politic, by virtue of the
power constitutionally vested in him to constitute inferior Corporations. In
this grant, Section 4, among other privileges, be granted to William Penn, and
his heirs, and to his and their Deputies and Lieutenants, "by and with the
advice, assent and approbation of the freemen of the country, or of their
delegates and deputies, to make laws for the good and happy government of the
said country. Under this authority Mr. Penn, in the year 1701, constituted the
present Assembly, and vested them with their present rights, powers and
privileges, many of which were shortly after confirmed by laws of the Province,
which were transmitted to the Sovereign for his approbation, and became
confirmed under the terms of the original grant. 3dly, I have shown in the
pamphlet, that no Representative of any State ever held a power to constitute a
supreme and independent legislature, not "subject to the regulations of the
civil "government;" and that this is inconsistent with the nature of society.
And I will next show you, that "the power of the legislature of Pennsylvania,
is not supreme, and as unlimited as the power of the legislature of Great
Britain, by the words of its constitution; nor supreme in any sense of the
word, which I will define for your sakes who do not appear clearly to
understand the meaning of it. Supreme -- is highest in authority; or as Mr.
Lock has it, " having none equal in power; and in this sense you may find that
all authors on government use it. Now the legislative power of Pennsylvania is
not " supreme," but restrained and limited in a variety of instances, by the
express words of the grant under the authority of which it has been
established, and by the power which gave it existence. The laws which this
legislature is empowered to make, are confined to such as are "not repugnant
to, but as near may conveniently be agreeable to the laws and statutes. and
rights of the kingdom of England; and the proprietor, who is the first branch
of this legislature, is made answerable for "every wilful defualt or neglect
permitted by him, against the laws of trade and navigation, and such other
forfeitures and penalties as by acts of parl^ament in England are or shall be
provided; and in case of failure, the representative of the British state has
reserved a right, "to resume the government of the province or country, and to
retain the same until payment shall be made thereof To this I may add, that the
power of laying all manner of taxes is expressly reserved to the Parliament.
Thus we find that the legislature to which you would apply Mr. Locke's idea of
supreme, having none equal in power, is an inferior, limited and restrained
legislature -- having no power by its constitution to make any laws which shall
be repugnant to the laws, statutes and rights of a superior; and bound, under a
forfeiture of its rights, to yield obedience to such legislative acts as were
a^ the time of its institution, or should afterward be provided by that
superior. Such, I say, is the legilslature which you have either the ignorance
or folly of imposing on the public, "as supreme and as unlimited as the
legislature of Great Britain.

But it seems, I myself have proved sufficient to show "that each [colony]
legislature is supreme within its own circle; for I have said, "that each
colony in the present constitution is capable, by its own internal legislature,
to regulate its own police within its particular circle of territory. And can
you then, without a blush, assert that, from, this acknowledgment, you can,
upon any fair and logical principle, infer that "each coony legislature is
proved to be supreme^ Is your knowledge in politic law, or the nature of
government so totally defective, as not to teach you -- that a power "to
regulate its own police, is common to almost every subordinate and inferior
corporation which has a power to make laws, and which notwithstanding, remains
subject to the supreme authority of the state? Has not the corporation of
London a competent^ power to make laws "for regulating its own police?" Has it
not a particular code of its own laws by which that police is governed? And
does it not yet remain subject in all things to the jurisdiction of Parliament?
Is not this the case also of the corporation of Bristol, and many others in
England? Look into the charter of incorporation of the city where you live, and
which you ought to understand, and you will there find, that full power is
granted to the corporation to make "such, and so many good and reasonable laws,
ordinances, and constitutions, as shall seem necessary and convenient for the
government of the city: And yet I do not believe that any men, yourselves
excepted, will conclude from thence, that the city of Philadelphia is possessed
of a supreme legislative authority.

It also seems, in your novel and refined ideas of government, "it would be
irregular and monstrous to suppose us subject to two legislatures. Surely your
pen has here written what your understanding did not dictate. Can you give me
an instance in any civilized society where this is not the case? In all complex
systems, whether mechanical or political, the subordinate wheels or powers must
be actuated by, and submit to, one supreme first mover; and every inferior
power, which is more than one remove from the first, must be governed by the
secondary or intermediate powers, as well as the primary; all acting in
concert, and adding to its strength. And therefore the learned author, whose
sense you have grossly perverted, speaking of these inferior politic bodies,
tells you, " Whatever right they possess, or whatever power they hold over
their members, is all under the determination of the supreme authority, which
it ought on no account to oppose or overbalance; for otherwise there would be a
state within a state; which would "render it irregular and monstrous. Are not
the members of every corporation in England subject to the authority of
Parliament?

Fatigued as I am by my researches into the numerous absurdities upon which you
have endeavored to erect the supremacy and independence of the colonies, I
should stop here, did not one yet remain, upon which you greatly rely, still
more profoundly stupid than all the rest. You tell us, "this supreme power of
each colony, is subject to our sovereign's negative."

Could the great Mr. Lock arise from the grave, and hear his idea of a "
supreme power," thus corrupted and applied to a power subject to the control
of another; I much doubt whether all his philosophy and religion could suppress
his resentment at such unintelligible jargon and horrid nonsense. In your
notions of government then, it seems, that a "supreme power, i. e. a power
highest in authority, having none equal in power, may be subject to a power
higher than the highest, or to one superior, which can repeal and annihilate
all its acts. Again -- this supreme power of the several colonies, is in your
sense of things, subject to the power of the King -- and yet not to the
legislative authority of Great Britain, which that King represents, and from
which he derives all his powers; and without whose authority, Mr. Lock
expressly declares, he "is but a single, private person, without power, without
will, that has any right to obedience!

Thus upon a candid examination, all your arguments adduced to show that the
"legislatures of the several colonies are supreme, are either founded on false
facts; or are inconclusive, or absurd; and cannot " apply" to any principle, to
be found in any treatise on politic law or government whatever.

Equally unsuccessful you will be found in your attempt to prove, that the oath
of allegiance, taken by the subject in America, is not taken to the King as
Representative of the British state, but as a distinct Representative of the
several legislatures of the Colonies. You ask. "Where is the absurdity of
supposing that an oath of allegiance, taken by a Pennsylvanian, to be taken to
him, to the King as Representative of the supreme legislative power of
Pennsylvania? Here we perceive, in order to seduce the Coloniests from their
connection with the British State, his Majesty is vested with a new capacity,
unheard and unthought of before; and when its propriety or necessity is
enquired into, it will be found as wild and absurd as it is novel. You
yourselves have told us, that the legislative authority of Pennysylvania is
placed in the Governor and Assembly; and you know that all the other colony
legislatures are either vested in a Governor and Assembly, Governor, Council
and Assembly, or Proprietor, Governor, Council and Assembly, or Governor and
Council alone. You also know that they derive all their authority from the
representative of the British state; and yet you insist that this
"representative is the distinct representative of these several inferior
legislatures. That is, in other words, that the representative of the whole
state, is a distinct and separate representative, of its several subordinate
parts. Or, that he is the representative of his own representative, of his own
delegates, or substitutes: A representative being a person who acts in the
place of another, a substitute in power. And thus to serve your own ends, you
make his Majesty act in the place of, and as a substitute in power to, every
inferior Governor, -- Council and Assembly in America, who derive all their
powers from him. What will you at length make of his Majesty and the
Parliament? You first took it into your learned, heads, philosophers-like, to
conceive that the supreme legislative authority, which is indivisible in its
nature, was, like matter, divisible ad infinitum; and under this profound
mistake, you began with spliting and dividing it, until by one slice after
another, you have hacked and pared it away to less than an atom. And not
content with thus mangling the most beautiful and regular political system in
the world, your barbarian pens have now attacked, with equal glee, the royal
authority. Your first attempt was to degrade his Majesty from the illustrious
office and dignity of a King of the realm, and all its appending dominions, to
the inferior office of King of America, a part of those dominions. Since the
congress, you have thought that rank too exalted for him; and therefore have
dubbed him only King of each inferior colony. And now you are graciously
pleased, in the abundant overflowings of your loyalty toward him, to drag him
down lower still, to the mean office of an inferior representative, or
substitute, of the representatives and substitutes of his own power. And thus
from the fertility of your amazing geniuses, you have, out of the ingredients
which compose the supreme authority of the British state, formed an ^dol of
your own, which indeed you may safely "worship," without breach of the
commandment, as it truly bears not the least resemblance to "any thing that is
in the heavens above, or that is in the earth beneath, or in the waters under
the earth.

But let me ask you, in what treatise on government did you find this
newfangled distinction? When, and by what act, have the colony legislatures
delegated their executive powers to his Majesty? When did his Majesty give up
his representative capacity of the British Legislature, and condescend to
accept of this new, inferior delegation? Pray tell us this in your next modest
and learned performance.

You may possibly here ask, do not the oaths of allegiance, as now taken,
enforce an obedience to the laws of the colonies, as well as to the laws of
parliament? I answer, they certainly do. But yet they are not taken to the
King, as a distinct representative of each colony Legislature, no more than the
oath of allegiance administered to a citizen of London, is taken to him as a
distinct representative of the laws of that corporation; but to him as
representative of the whole state, from which every subordinate authority, and
the colony legislatures in particular, originally derive their powers; and to
which, whenever they cease by forfeiture, or otherwise, they all revert; and
from which also they must reflow, being grantable only by its representative.

But conscious that you could not efface the sacred obligation of the oaths of
allegiance, and pervert their true meaning by this refined distinction, you
take other ground, and ask, "does not every American acknowledge that he is
bound by the common law of England, and such statutes as were made before the
settlement of the colonies, -- and which are applicable to our situation? Is
not the King supreme executor of those laws? And where is the absurdity of
supposing the oaths of allegiance to relate to him as supreme executor of those
laws, which we acknowledge do bind us; and at the same time rejecting the
absurd and dangerous idea of its including an obligation to be bound by every
law which the British parliament has, or may make? -- To what do you intend to
reduce the meaning of these oaths at last, by your absurd suppositions? You
first, by a supposition, are for confining their force and obligation of
obedience to the laws of the colony legislatures; -- and then by another
supposition, to the common law, and such statutes as were made before the
settlement of the colonies; and I verily believe when you shall make your third
supposition, which I suspect will not be until you have better hopes of success
in your schemes, you will " suppose" they have no meaning at all. Permit me to
answer your questions, in your own way, by asking you others. Under what
authority do you claim the benefits of the "common law and those statutes," but
that of the British State? Did you not bring them over with you as members of
that (...) ever acknowledging and submitting to (...) supremacy, until the year
1765? How old you otherwise obtain them? ^id you get them from France or Spain;
or did you pick them up in a state of nature? or did you adept them by compact
among yourselves? When, where, and how was that compact formed and established?
By what right or law do you claim these benefits, and disclaim the authority of
future acts of parliament? -- Do you not take the oaths of allegiance in
pursuance of the direction, and under the authority, of the statute made in his
present Majesty's reign? Are not the words of the oath the same in America as
in England? Does the change of place change their meaning? And has not that
meaning been ascertained, and known, to all Englishmen, for centuries? And has
it not ever been held to enforce the most solemn ties of obedience to the
authority of the state, unfettered with, and perfectly clear of, those
groundless distinctions you have lately invented? -- You yourselves, in the
characters of British subjects, took these oaths in October last, in the words
of the statute, and in the sense the statute intends, to the representative of
the British Parliament, "as rightful and lawful King of the realm, and the
dominions thereunto belonging. -- And you swore you took them in the " common
sense and understanding of the words, without any equivocation, mental evasion,
or secret reservation whasotever, Do not, therefore, Gentlemen, trifle with
such sacred things; -- play with your new, exploded distinctions, between taxes
laid for the purpose of revenue, and for the regulation of trade; between
internal and external taxation; and between an English and an American war, for
to you we are indebted for them; but sport not with the established meaning of
the most sacred covenants, made in the presence, and under the invocation of a
most JUST, TREMENDUOUS and AVERNGING OMNIPOTENCE. Suffer not your consciences,
like the willow, to be bent by every gale that seems to blow successs to your
infatuated schemes. But if you are resolved to sacrifice your own morals, at
the altar of your ambition, stop there. Do not corrupt the morals of your
innocent fellow subjects, whose leisure, or abilities, will not suffer them to
inquire into your fallacious doctrines. You may perhaps believe you have a
right to sport with your own; but remember you can have none to debauch the
morals, and sport with the present and future happiness of thousands.

Having shown the futility of your arguments, upon which you have attempted to
superstruct the supremacy and independence of the colonies, and the right in
Americans to impose what meaning they please on the oaths of allegiance; I will
trace you still farther in your absurdities. You say I am for "reducing the
legislatures of the colonies, to the degrading situation of MERE corporations.
And though you acknowledge, in substance, all I have said on the subject, to be
true, viz. "That the King may erect the inhabitants of particular districts,
into inferior communities, with municipal rights and privileges; yet it
requires more than this to show that the colonies are MERE corporations, "Nor,"
you add, "does it follow that the King can grant to MERE corporations full
legislative powers. It is much more easy to assert than prove; and more
difficult to answer nonsense than sense. Convinced of these truths, you have
often pestered me more with your dogmatical assertions and nonsense, in a few
lines, than by all the sense in your whole performance. I confess I do not
understand what you mean by a " mere corporation." And yet I suspect you have
annexed to it some emphatic idea. The dictionaries tell us it is a corporation,
or a corporation only. Now a corporation, or a mere corporation, if you please,
is an inferior body politic, established under the authority of the principal
society; and in the English government, they are established by a charter from
the King, or representative of the British state, in whom the power of
incorporating inferior and subordinate societies, or bodies politic, is vested
by the constitution. This power, or the practice of it, is not peculiar to the
British government. We find them in almost all civilized states, being
necessary to render the grand system more manageable and regular: But these
political bodies, receiving their existence, and deriving all their powers from
the principal state, must be subordinate. The histories of all states give no
instance of the contrary. And all authors upon politic law, agree that an
independent corporation within the territories of the principal state, is a
monster, a thing out of nature; -- and that the supreme authority itself can
have no right to establish a thing so inconsistent with the uniformity and
safety of the state. Hence the colonies can be considered only as corporations,
or subordinate bodies politic, vested with legislative powers, to regulate
their own internal police, under certain regulations and restrictions, and no
more. But you contend, that though the King may incorporate inferior
communities, with municipal rights and privileges, it does not follow that he
can grant to mere corporations" full legislative powers! This is strange
jargon, and amounts to this -- That though the King may do an act, yet it does
not follow that he can do it. One of these municipal rights which is usually
granted by the Crown to inferior corporations, is authority to make all
necessary laws for the regulations of its internal police: And I know of no
bounds by which this prerogative is restrained, either by the principles of
politic law, or those of the English constitution; except that he cannot
discharge the corporation or its members from their obedience to the supreme
legislature. But let us gratify you by supposing, as you contend, that the
reverse is true; and that the King by his prerogative of incorporating inferior
communities, could not grant "the full powers of legislation" which he has
granted to the Colonies; in what an unhappy predicament are they involved? For
if he has not such power, under this prerogative, you, with all your wisdom,
and knowledge of the English constitution, cannot derive it from any other
source, or find it elsewhere; and it must be of necessary consequence, that the
legislation of the Colonies has been granted without authority, and is
therefore void. Such are the blessed conclusions of your arguments -- such the
mischievous tendency of your doctrines! From whence learn how dangerous it is
for men to dabble in sciences they do not understand; or to attempt to
vindicate rights they know nothing of.

You find great fault with my idea of representation; and after taking much
pains to misrepresent all I have said upon the subject, without offering a
single argument, you content yourselves with drawing the conclusion that
"enough has been said to show it to be erroneous. Had you said that I had not
founded American rights on the partial representation of personal property in
England, you would have been much nearer to truth. And you might have
perceived, had not your "Remarks" been too "hasty," that my design was to
establish them on a more tenable and solid foundation -- to trace the right to
a participation in the legislative authority from that principle, which in the
English constitution was original, and remains permanent and unaltered to this
day; carefully avoiding to support them, as you have done, on props and pillars
which might be prostrated by the most trivial blasts. It was for this reason I
did not choose to tread on the ground of personal representation, or that of
personal property, which is very partial and inadequate, and originally did not
form a part of the English constitution. For let me tell you what you seem to
be strangers to, that anciently, and for many ages, none but the proprietors of
lands were represented in parliament; that even the Burgesses represented lands
within their buroughs, and that neither the Ceorles nor Thanes, who were the
farmers, living on rented estates, however wealthy, were represented; except
such Thanes who held their lands of the Crown and paid for them "in service
which related to the public. And in confirmation of this truth, you will find
that our ancestors when they sought for and obtained a perfect restoration of
the ancient constitution, all they asked of King John to grant them, in this
respect, by Magna Charta, was to summon to parliament those who represented the
landed interest, viz. " The Abbots, the Earls, the greater Barons, and the
Tenants in capite." Every novice in politics knows that since the Conquest, a
number of corporations and buroughs hold rights, either by prescription or
grant, to send members to parliament, in some of which the trade, and not lands
are represented; and also that this kind of representation was not a part of
the ancient constitution, but an innovation -- that it is esteemed by all good
judges a rotten and dangerous part of the constitution; and therefore I do not
believe there are more than two novices in the world who would censure or carp
at a person for not fixing on it as a pillar to support American liberty.

It would occupy the leaves of a folio, minutely to follow you through all the
gross absurdities of your ideas of representation -- Having answered them in
general, I shall content myself for the present with giving the Reader one
other specimen of your knowledge of the English constitution. After giving us a
truly ridiculous idea of English representation, drawn from the petty
democracies of Greece, you tell us -- "therefore it is provided by the English
constitution, that the people (meaning all men of property, whether landholders
or others) shall exercise this power by their representatives. This is the
principle of representation by which every man of property in England has a
voice in Parliament. Now I will not take upon myself to deny, but it may be
possible that these two political magicians may, from their profound
researches, have discovered some ancient, and hitherto latent manuscript which
has taught them, that our ancestors formed their representation upon the model
of the Grecian democracies; -- because I would not wish to suspect that they
could venture, without some kind of authority to advance a fact so universally
contradicted. -- However, I affirm that every author who has written on the
English government, within the last thousand years, informs us, that it was
originally established by our ancestors, the Anglo-Saxons; and that the
legislative part of it was, in all probability, taken from the forms of their
governments in their own country, where the proprietors of the land composed
the legislature. But whatever this manuscript may have told them, certain I am
it never could inform them, that "every man of property in England has a voice
in Parliament. In every corporation which sends members to Parliament, the
right to vote is confined to the members of the corporation; to the exclusion
of all the other inhabitants, however wealthy. In London, that great and
populous city, none can vote but those who are made free of the city. In
Bristol, the case is the same. In others, the members of Parliament are chosen
by twelve only; and in some, by less. So that it is generally allowed, that not
one thirtieth part of the inhabitants of Britain, holds by the constitution, a
right to vote. Do you not, Gentlemen, know this to be fact? If you do, how far
beneath the characters of men of veracity and honor have you descended to
advance untruths, so easily detected?

You next make a feeble attack on the Plan of Union proposed in Congress, with
a view to prevail on the members to desert their wild and destructive schemes
of independence; and to adopt, in its stead, some system of negotiation with
Great Britain. The amount of your objections is, that the Delegates, mentioned
in the plan, who are to be freely chosen by and from among the people, are not
to be trusted. And after supposing what, in the nature and reason of things, is
altogether improbable, that they will be corrupted, though their election
should be annual; you say, "the trust is too sacred. -- That neither wisdom nor
policy would "dictate the leaving the liberties of a country to the virtues of
any men, however conspicuous, I much suspect, Gentlemen, whatever your
declarations may be, was that trust offered to either of you, as protectors of
the colonies, like your great master, whose steps you are as yet following at
humble distance, you would reject it in appearance only; but would take care,
if you could find the means, to secure it in substance. This most certainly is
what you aim at. It follows from your own position. For if the "liberties of a
country." are not to be left "to the virtues of any men, however conspicuous,"
and yet are to be committed in trust at all, it must of course, be to one man
-- a Protector. And who can that protector be, but one of yourselves? But let
me seriously ask you, Where can the liberties of mankind be so safely reposed
as in the hands of their representatives, who are accountable to them, and who
cannot destroy or injure their rights without destroying or injuring their own?
Is not this the very predicament, in which, sound policy has ever placed the
liberties of all free people? Has human wisdom ever invented a better, or one
more safe? But it seems the "fallibility of human nature" has taught you, that
there are "other props and pillars" upon which you mean "to support your
liberties." What they are, you have not been so obliging as to inform us; but
left us the task of finding them out; which is by no means a difficult one. For
making the doctrines of your whole performance the clue, we readily discover,
that these "props and pillars" can be nothing else, but the fire and sword, the
civil wars, into which you are, by your system of independence, unnecessarily
leading your deluded country.

After having thus, in vain, attempted to show that the plan is "idle,
dangerous, whimsical, and ministerial; you ask, "If it was indefensible, why
did not the author enter into the argument with a Gentleman from Virginia, who
challenged him to it; and who said he could prove it big with destruction to
America? You have unwillingly given a just and reasonable answer to your own
question, and vindicated the author against the charge you intended to asperse
him with: For you add, "it is true, he did say he would defend it, if the
Congress would appoint a day for that purpose; but this was when all was hurry,
and the forms of business only, delayed their breaking up. Here you have for
once lost your usual art. It is a difficult task for men, however hackneyed in
deception, to continue uniform in it. Truth will now and then, in spite of all
the pains to suppress it, pop out. For it seems by your own confession, when
this challenge was made, " all was hurry," and the Congress was about to break
up. And do you think that this was either a proper time to give or to accept of
a challenge to discuss, by fair argument, the merits of a plan, in which, as
was acknowledged by a Massachusett^ Delegate, questions of greater magnitude
than ever were agitated in any state were involved? Was it candid in the
Virginian to propose it? And was it not justifiable in the Author, and the
other advocates of the plan, who were a majority of the men of the first
abilities in the Congress, to decline it? And was it not all that reason or
honor required of the author to tender an acceptance of the proposal the next
day or any other day which should be appointed? Especially, when he knew it had
been previously determined at the new tavern to expunge it, with the rules
taken on it, totally from their minutes. However, that gentleman and his
colleague, who in a manner pledged himself to do so, have now had sufficient
time to show it, "big with destruction to America;" and yet they have chose not
to undertake a task so arduous, I might say impossible. And now I call on you,
and all your independent compeers, to prove this plan, in any respect,
inconsistent with the freedom of America. You have been nibbling at it for some
time, in your private cabals, and now in public; but you find your assaults
have not even ruffled its scarf-skin. You have read it, and meditated upon it
over and over again; and yet you know not what to do with it. It stands, like
an impregnable bulwark, in the path to your independence; and you know not how
to remove it. Here is your great objection against it; and for this only reason
you fret, and fume, and rage so much about it.

Before I conclude this head, let me tell you that, although the author is
confident no good objection can, with propriety or reason, be made against the
plan by America, seeing she denies a representation in Parliament: Yet he
neither is, nor ever was, tenacious of it: That his great aim, as he declared
in Congress, in proposing it, was to prevail on them to take the ground of
rational accommodation and negotiation with the parent state: And therefore
that he would most cheerfully adopt any other which should be thought more
eligible, and better tend to those necessary and salutary purposes; should the
one proposed, on examination, be rejected. In the same disposition of mind, the
Author still continues, from a full conviction, arising from a long and mature
consideration of the subject, that the ruin of America can only be averted, by
a candid state of her grievances; and some rational propositions of a union
between the two countries, upon a constitutional plan. And as to his
inclination to be sent over as a "Delegate" to solicit the cause of America,
with which you charge him -- He never entertained the wish. He will make
himself extremely happy at the accomplishment of so great and good a work, let
it be performed by whom it may. But, Gentlemen, he never looked for such a
charge from you. And had not that same desire existed in one, if not both of
your breasts, you never had made the charge. Had he, like one of you, signified
such a desire to a Delegate in Congress, and thereby prevailed on the Delegate
to propose him alone to solicit the petition to his Majesty; and further like
you, had his mind been so puffed up with vanity and conceit of his own
abilities and importance, as officiously to accept of the delegation, in
Congress, before it was offered, or he could possibly foretell the determination
of a Majority; and afterward had he met with the mortification of a refusal: I
say, had the Author of the Plan acted this vain and forward part, your charge
would have had some foundation. But you know he did not: And therefore I cannot
avoid applying to you the old Latin adage, Turpe est Doctori cui culpa
redarguit ipsum.

You, in the next place, inperiously ask, "How dare you, Sir, in the face of
America, assert, that they, the Congress, have proposed no plan of
accommodation, and that every page conveys sentiments of independence?" I will
tell you, Gentlemen -- was I capable of being bullied by your menaces; was I to
be intimidated and frightened by that lawless power which you have greatly
contributed to erect in America, I should not dare to do it. But as that is not
the case, unawed by all your tyrannous edicts, when the welfare of my country
demands it, I dare to speak the truth, and to arraign the conduct of men who
are leading that country to her ruin, however dignified and potent they may be
in their own, or in the opinion of their minions. Re-examine their claim of
rights, the great basis of American pretensions, and we shall find that the
claim of the congress is an exclusive right of legislature in all cases of
taxation and internal polity; and that to the legislature of Great Britain,
there is not left the least authority to make a law of any denomination or kind
whatsoever for the colonies. And you yourselves have now insisted that the
legislature of every colony is equally supreme and as unlimited as the
legislature of Great Britain. Are not these clear, evident declarations of
independence? and do you think you have already, by your despotic authority, so
effectually subdued the spirit of liberty, and even the freedom of speech, that
we dare not call facts by their true and proper names? If you do, you are
grossly mistaken. But it seems that the Congress did propose to the Crown "to
place American in the situation she was in before the year 1763, and all our
complaints will subside. This you say is "a plan of accommodation." But this is
all finesse and delusion, too flimsy not to be detected by the penetrating eyes
of a (...) Parliament -- For although they artfully (...) the Crown that upon a
repeal of the sta^^^ (...) the year 1763, "their complaints will subside; yet
in the claim of rights, page 6, they tell the world a different story -- They
are there only to subside " for the present." What, in common sense, is the
meaning of all this, but that if you will repeal those obnoxious statutes, we
will be content until we find it convenient to be otherwise; or until we are
better prepared: And then we intend to insist upon a repeal of all those "many
infringements and violations of the foregoing rights [alluding to every right
contained in the claim of rights] "which we pass over for the present; and if
our demand is not granted, we will oppose force to force. Such is your blessed
plan of accommodation intended to restore harmony between the two countries!

One word more before I conclude; you say the author of the plan of union,
"signed the association. That it certainly was the act of all who signed it --
And that he has firmly agreed and associated under the sacred ties of virtue,
honor and love of his country, to carry the association into execution. That
he signed the association is true. But that he and a number of other delegates
did not sign it as their private act, or as binding on themselves or their
constituents, is as true. Nor was the signing of that gentleman and a number of
others who voted against many parts of the association, and particularly the
non-importation agreement, which many foresaw would be ruinous to America, held
or esteemed in congress as their private act, and which they pledged themselves
to see carried into execution: Otherwise, the congress knew they never would
have signed it. And therefore to prevail on them to sign it, it was said it
should be done by order of the congress; and then it would be the act of a
majority, and not of each private person, nor his particular act. That such was
the case of a speaker of assembly who signed a bill or other legislative act by
order, though against his judgment, which could not be considered as his private
act, but that of the majority who made the order. In consequence of this mode
of reasoning, an order was made, and the clause next preceding the delegates
names was added to the association in these words. "the foregoing association
being determined upon by the congress, was ordered to be signed by the several
members thereof, and thereupon we have here unto set our respective names
accordingly. Now, however just this reasoning may be thought, it was the
reasoning of the congress and it was one, among other reasons, which prevailed
on the author of the plan, and a number of other delegates to sign the
association. Thus you find that the last effort of your malevolence to slander
the character of this gentleman, has, like the rest, proved abortive; and must
recoil upon yourselves, as both of you were in congress and knew of the order
and the reason of making it.

I will now conclude with giving you my serious advice. I think you stand in
much need of it; and I assure you I really intend it for your benefit, and it
must be owing to your own perverseness if it should prove otherwise. Take it
therefore ill or well I care not. Know then that there is such a thing as
honor and candor in argument, and that whoever deserts them for the sake of
perverting truth, loses character, and must be despised by all sensible and
honest men. Believe, that a bad cause can never be supported by sophisms, bold
assertions, or evident untruths; and that the fair cause of liberty requires no
such aids. Do not persuade yourselves, that by your sophistry you can render
that "supreme" and independent, which in its nature is limited, subordinate and
dependent: Nor that you can, by your futile distinctions, pare away the
established meaning of the most sacred things -- nor induce the honest and
virtuous to perjure themselves, and with the load of that perjury in their
hearts, to take up arms against their lawful Sovereign. Lay aside your reveries
of independence, and your high expectations of gratifying your ambition on the
ruins of your country; for the virtuous and the wise of that country are aware
of your design, and will prevent your success. Persuade not yourselves to
believe what one of you has said, that "you can find employment in America for
all the British troops. For you may as well attempt to scale the moon, and
wrench her from her orbit as withstand the power of Britain. Desert the men who
are pushing you with precipitation into sedition and rebellion; ^or the time is
approaching when they will desert you and leave you only the ostensible and
answerable objects; and then one of you may be " pitied" as a deluded man, and
the other will be despised as a bad man, and a deluder.

FINIS.

