THE CRISIS. NUMBER VII.
To the Right Honorable Lord APSLEY, Lord Chancellor of England.
My Lord, February 16, 1775.
I WAS a by-stander this day, when your Lordship and the House of Lords decided
the very important cause of Philip Thickness, appellant, and Peter Leigh and
others, respondents, and though unconnected with the parties, and consequently
uninterested in the event, I must own I was forcibly struck by a scene so novel
and unexpected. I stood, my Lord, with silent awe, at the bar of that tribunal
which I had ever been accustomed to consider, as the last refuge of injured
justice, I expected to hear a question of law, of infinite nicety, discussed
with wisdom, and decided with integrity. Judge then, my Lord, my astonishment,
when instead of that decency in debate, which ought to be observed even in the
lowest court of justice, and which I had ever thought in a peculiar manner
characteristic of the House of Lords, I saw proceedings which would have
disgraced a Polish diet! Yes, my Lord, in all my experience of courts of
justice, I never saw Judges so avowedly corrupt, so indecently profligate as
your Lordship and Lord Denbigh! Lord Camden delivered his opinion on the
question, in an argument that will carry, to the latest times, his fame, and
your disgrace.

Your Lordship, in answer to him, delivered your sentiments; I cannot call them
an argument, because there was nothing that resembled a chain of reasoning; and
indeed your Lordship seemed more to rely on the letter you had received from
Sir William De Gray, and the conversation you said you had with Sir Eardley
Wilmot and Sir Stafford Smythe, than on any reasons you could advance in
support of your decree. When Lord Camden, with a decency becoming the occasion,
and the place in which he spoke, reminded your Lordship how improper it was for
a Judge, deciding so nice and difficult a question of property in the highest
tribunal of the kingdom, to talk of opinions of men, not Judges in that court,
who had given their sentiments in private, probably without much consideration
of the subject, most certainly without hearing the facts stated, and the
question discussed by counsel, what treatment did he meet with? Lord Denbigh's
attack upon him was the attack of a ruffian, hired to carry through a
profligate measure by assassinating every man who should attempt opposition?
Your Lordship's language was somewhat more decent; it was the language of
ignorance, delivered with that insolence which a week and a vain man feels,
confident in a corrupt majority. Has your Lordship still to learn, that the
opinion of a Judge, though delivered in the course of a cause in open court,
and handed down in print, yet if it is on a point, not before him as a Judge,
is never allowed to be cited even by counsel in argument? And wisely so
established, my Lord, for the law of this country gives credit to the opinions
of the Judges only on those points which are necessarily brought before them in
the course of judicial proceedings. On these points, when they have heard the
arguments of counsel, they decide, if erroneously, the injured party has his
remedy by appeal, if corruptly and iniquitously, the decision of the Judge
appears on the record, and he is amenable to his country's justice. Lordship
ignorant that this is the law, or can your Lordship say, or will any other man
say for you, that in the course of his attendance on courts of law, he ever
before knew a private letter, and private conversation, adduced by a Judge, not
as arguments furnishing reasons for an opinion, but as authorities in law, to
warrant his decision? My Lord, I will defy your Lordship, with all your long
list of advisers, from the hollow hearted Lord, who made you Chancellor, down
to the lowest driveller who feeds your vanity with flattery, to say that such a
sight was ever before exhibited in a court of justice. From the existence of
courts of law in this island, no man, ever before this day, saw a private
letter produced, read, and relied on as authority by a Judge, pronouncing
judgment. Are the arguments of council mockery? Or are they supposed to suggest
matter, to be weighed by those who are to decide. The judgment of your Lordship
and the House of Peers this day was avowedly founded on the authorities of men,
who had never heard the question discussed by counsel. If this mode of deciding
is to prevail in courts of justice, arguments by counsel are needless. Your
Lordship can decide without hearing them. Nothing more is requisite than for
your Lordship to write a letter to some friend, his answer read in court by
your Lordship will stand in the place both of authority and argument. Is this
the way in which justice is to be dispensed to the subject, in the supreme
tribunals of the country, the Chancery, and House of Lords.

O, seats of Talbot and of Hardwicke, from whence those great and god-like men,
with pure hearts, and wisdom more than human, shed on this happy land the
fragrant dews of justice, from whence the vanquished suitor was wont to retire
satisfied, by the arguments he had heard, that he had been mistaken in his
claim, how is your glory faded! The wretched thing, who now fills the place of
your late bright inhabitants, attempts not to give reasons for his decisions;
but tells the suitor, in plain terms, that he decides the cause on the
authority of a letter from one of his friends, who had never heard the facts
openly stated, or an argument from counsel on the subject. My Lord, were I to
tell a man, bred up in the courts of Talbot and of Hardwicke, that a Chancellor
of this country had decided a question on an executory devise, on the authority
of a letter from Sir William De Gray, who had never heard an argument on the
question, he would tell me it was a LIE; it would be impossible to be true, it
would be as repugnant to all ideas of a Chancellor's proceedings, as if I was
to tell him, that on the first day of the term, I had seen the Chancellor
carried round Westminster Hall in Bacchanalian triumph, the train, mace, and
purse born by three drunken trulls, picked out of a brandy shop at Temple Bar.
My Lord, men's minds are formed by what they have been accustomed to. Those who
remember the polished manners and elegant arguments of former Chancellor's, are
shocked at your Lordship's brutal decision. Sic volo, sic jubeo. My Lord, I do
not use these expressions as merely similar to your Lordship's, I do aver that
since your Lordship has had the custody of the great seal, I have heard you
decide a question at law, argued by an eminent council, in these very words, --
I am of a different opinion. I heard your Lordship decide in these words, I
heard that very decision reversed as erroneous. My Lord, your Lordship's
conduct is become too glaringly despicable. When the great seal had been taken
from Lord Camden, for daring to speak his sentiments in parliament, and the
ever to be lamented York had, by a virtuous death, atoned too severely for the
weakness of an unguarded moment (for who can withstand the persuasion of Kings.
when they become suitors) the gap was to be stopped. It was necessary that the
office of Chancellor should be filled. Your Lordship was pitched upon by Lord
Mansfield, as a man who being too weak to form opinions of his own, would pay
implicit obedience to his dictates; and, in character of the great law officer,
avow legal opinions, his patron might be unwilling to risque. This was the
ground on which your Lordship was made Chancellor. The nation saw it, and
lamented that an office of such infinite importance should be disposed of from
such motives, and to such a man. For my Lord, do you think the world ever
considered you as a lawyer. Those, who had attended Westminster Hall, knew that
your abilities as a man, and your knowledge as a lawyer, were below contempt.
They knew that in the character of an advocate you had never got L.200 a year,
in all the courts of Westminster taken together. They were astonished when you
were made a Judge, but they were exasperated when you were made Chancellor. In
the discharge of the duty of that office, they saw that your decisions were
ever unsupported by argument, from hence they were led to suspect that your
decrees were made by others. This they suspected, but they did not know it,
till your Lordship, in the debate of this day, put the matter beyond a doubt.
You will say, perhaps, a Chancellor may ask the assistance of those whose
judgment he esteems. True, my Lord, but let him call on them in the character
of assessors, that they may hear the arguments of council, that they may be
answerable for the doctrines they lay down, and that the suitor may know by
whose opinion his property is bound. My Lord, this is your character drawn with
more truth than by those sycophants who tell you that you are a greater
Chancellor than Hardwicke, Talbot, or Camden! No man ever doubted about your
head; the conduct of this day has fixed men's opinion of your heart. My Lord,
it was a foul proceeding.

It was a black day's work, justice seemed in eclipse.

The suitor had seen with grief in what weak hands the great seal was
entrusted, but when he saw that if your ignorance led you to decide
erroneously, a packed House of Peers might be brought together to sacrifice his
property to your vanity, he was struck with horror. My Lord, the nation will
not bear it, and after the scene of this day, your Lordship cannot hold the
Great Seal.

JUNIUS.
P. S. When the decree was affirmed, there was not above five or six Lords in
the House, besides Lord Camden, and the present Chancellor. Lord Paulet (to his
honor be it recorded) moved to have the Judges called in. This motion was
overruled, and he retired. It was the Duke of Chandois, Lord Denbigh, Lord
Cathcart, and Lord Galloway, who took upon themselves to decide a nice question
of law, which ought to have been argued with wisdom and discretion, but which
was debated with passion, and decided by party zeal. In short, what raised the
Chancellor, ruined the suitor -- THE TIMES.

Note. When the House of Lords were met to hear the cause, a message was sent
to Lord Mansfield by the Chancellor, to know if he would attend. But the
Chancellor very well knew he would not attend. He knew that Lord Mansfield
could not resist the arguments of Lord Camden, and that he must concur with him
in reversing the decree. Lord Mansfield therefore staid in Westminster Hall, to
decide the property of twentyfive pounds, and neglected his duty to attend,
where ten thousand pounds were at stake as well as the honor of the nation. He
well knew the honest zeal of Lords Catchcart and Galloway, the villainy of Lord
Denbigh, and the folly of the cajoled Duke of Chandois, he knew that they would
attend constantly, to take notes in order to form a determination they went
into the House prepared for; namely, to affirm the decree, and do for Lord
Mansfield what he durst not do himself.

Lord Mansfield's personal dislike to the suitor has long been well known. When
he appeared at the bar of the King's Bench, to receive judgment for libelling
Lord Orwell, Lord Mansfield jumped from the seat of justice, and with fury in
his eyes, and an agitation of body consonant thereto, exclaimed -- Commit him!
Commit him! An indecency of behavior which astonished the whole court.

Since writing the above, I have seen a letter from Sir William De Gray, in
answer to one from the appellant, requesting to know, whether the letter read
by your Lordship in the House of Peers, was read with his privity. Sir William
De Grey's answer is in these words: SIR,
I am entirely a stranger to what has been passing in the House of Lords upon
the subject of your letter, not knowing till a day or two ago, that there was
any cause depending there, in which you were interested; and then only in
casual conversation.

I am, etc. WILLIAM DE GRAY.




On this letter I shall make but one comment. Either Sir William De Grey's
answer to the appellant contains an untruth, or your Lordship has practiced, on
the House of Peers, an imposition of the blackest dye.



[To be continued.]
(Price TWO PENNIES.)


