THE CRISIS. NUMBER XXVIII.
By his Excellency THOMAS SHAW, PROTECTOR and DEFENDER of MAGNA CHARTA, and the
BILL of RIGHTS.
A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS the infatuated multitudes of royal Neronian dependants, catamites,
pimps, and parasites, too many to be enumerated; have long conducted themselves
as parricides and traitors in a fatal progression of crimes against the
constitutional liberties of the British empire, and have at length proceeded to
avowed and open rebellion against the laws of the land, and the lives of
Englishmen in England and America, and the good effects which were expected to
arise from the patience and lenity of the people, have been often frustrated,
and remonstrance proved ineffectual and now rendered hopeless, from the
obstinacy and cruelty of the sovereign, by the influence of their infernal
counsels, and confederacy, it only remains for the people, who have the supreme
power, as well for the punishment of those guilty parricides, as for the
protection of the innocent, to prove they do not bear the sword in vain.

The infringements which have been committed upon the sacred rights of Magna
Charta, and the people of Great Britain and America, are too many to enumerate
on one fide, and all too attrocious, too infamous, and too diabolical to be
palliated on the other. All unprejudiced, unpensioned, and unplaced Englishmen,
who have been witness, (or even heard) of the late transactions, in this
kingdom and America, will find, upon a transient review, marks of premeditation
and conspiracy to destroy the constitution of the British empire, that would
justify the fullness of chastisement; and even those who are least acquainted
with facts, cannot fail to receive a just impression of the enormity, in
proportion as they discover the arts and assiduity, by which their bloody
designs have been falsified and concealed. Those parricides, the authors of the
present bloody measures and unnatural revolt from the laws, never daring to
trust their cause, or their actions, to the judgment of an impartial public, or
even to the dispassionate reflection of their followers and adherents, have
uniformly placed their chief confidence in the suppression of truth; and while
indefatigable and shameless pains have been taken to destroy the real interest
of the people of England and America, the grossest forgeries, calumnies, and
absurdities, that ever insulted human understanding, have been imposed upon
their credulity, by the King, and those miscreants. The Press, that
distinguished appendage of public liberty, and when fairly and impartially
employed, its best support, has been invariably prostituted by those pensioned
rascals, Hume, Johnson, Kelly, Shebbeare, and other ministerial hirelings, to
the most contrary purposes. The animated language of ancient and viriuous
times, calculated to vindicate and promote the just rights and interests of
mankind, have been applied by the King's minions, to countenance the most
abandoned violations of those sacred blessings and not only from the flagitious
ministerial prints, but from the slavish harangues of prostituted Peers, and
venal Senetors, men have been taught to depend upon activity in shedding of
blood, for the security of their places, pensions, and persons, till to
complete the horrid profanation of terms and of ideas, the name of God has been
introduced in addresses and in the pulpit, by a groupe of rotten Popish
Bishops, to excite devastation and massacre.

The minds of men, such as Gage, Percy, Burgoyne, Clinton, and How, and the
King's mercenary soldiers, having been thus gradually prepared for murder, a
number of armed troops to the amount of eighteen hundred, and upwards, on the
19th of April last, at Concord, cowardly attacked about sixty peaceable
Americans, who not expecting so consumate an act of savage barbarity,
unprepared for vengeance, and willing to decline it, made use of their arms
only in their own defense. Since that period, the mercenaries, deriving
confidence from impunity, have added insult to outrage; have repeatedly fired
upon, and barbarously killed many of their fellow subjects with cannon and
small arms; and with a preposterous parade of military arrangement, they try to
frighten, and mean if possible to enslave America, while part, of their body
make daily and indiscriminate invasions upon private property, and with a
wantonness of cruelty, peculiar in this reign, and ever incident to lawless
power, carry depradation and distress where ever they turn their steps. The
action of the 19th of April, and the cruel, bloody, and inhuman circumstances
attending that day's carnage, are of such notoriety, as must baffle all
attempts to contradict them; and the flames of buildings, the cries of helpless
infirm old men, women and children, wantonly slaughtered in cold blood, spread,
and will for ever stand a melancholy confirmation of the subsequent assertions.

In this exigency of Neronian cruelty and complicated calamities I avail myself
of the last efforts within the bounds of my duty, as a peaceable subject, to
spare the effusion of blood; to offer, and I do hereby, in the name of the
whole people of England and America, offer and promise a most gracious pardon,
to all the mercenaries who shall forthwith lay down their arms, and return to
the duties of peaceable subjects and faithful Englishmen, loyal to the laws and
the constitution, excepting only from such pardon, John Stuart, Earl of Bute,
and William Lord Mansfield, the authors and promoters of bloodshed and cruelty,
whose crimes are of too flagitious a nature to admit of any other consideration
than that of condign punishment.

And to the end that no person within the limits of this proferred mercy may
plead ignorance of the consequences of refusing it, I by these presents
proclaim not only the persons above named and excepted, but also their
adherents, associates, and abettors, meaning to comprehend in those terms, all
and every person and persons, of what class, denomination, or description
soever, who have appeared in arms against the sacred laws and constitution of
the British empire, and shall not lay down the same as aforesaid; and likewise
all such as shall so take up arms after the date hereof, or who shall in any
wise protect or conceal such offenders, or assist them with money, provisions,
cattle, arms, ammunition, carriages, or any other necessiry for subsistence or
defense, or shall hold secret correspondence with the mercenary murderers, by
letter, message, signal, or otherwise, to be rebels and traitors to the British
coustitution, and as such to be treated.

And whereas, during the continuance of the present bloody and unnatural civil
war in America, justice cannot be obtained by the common law of the land, the
course whereof has for a long time past been violently impeded, and wholly
interrupted by the King and his paracidial minions and military cut throats,
from whence results a necessity, in order to preserve the dear bought rights of
Englishmen and hallowed constitution of the empire, for using and exercising
the Lex Talionis or Law of Retaliation; I have therefore thought fit by the
authority invested in me by Magna Charta as a Freeman, to publish, and I do
hereby publish, proclaim, and order the use and exercise of the Lex Talionis,
or Blood for Blood, within and throughout Great Britain and America, so long as
the present unhappy occasion shall necessarily require, till the sons of
freedom shall gain a decisive victory over tyranny and lawless power, till each
parricide and traitor shall be brought to the block or the gallows, or
otherwise fall a sacrifice by the hands of a much injured and enraged people,
and till the liberties of England and America are settled upon a sure and
lasting foundation, not to be again shaken by any tyrant of the house of
Brunswick; whereof all true Englishmen are hereby required to take notice, and
arm themselves -- with a resolution as well to maintain their rights, as to
resist, encounter and subdue the mercenaries and traitors above described.

To these inevitable, but I trust salutary measures, it is of a far more
pleasing part of my duty to add the assurances of protection and support to all
who in so trying a Crisis shall manifest no allegiance to tyrants, but an
affection for the sacred constitution of their country; So that such persons as
may have been induced to join in the present royal and ministerial measures for
destroying the laws, liberties, and lives of their fellow subjects in America,
may return to their respective callings and professions, be no longer the
instruments of murder and public ruin, but stand distinct and separate from the
parricides of the constitution, till God in his mercy shall turn the hearts of
tyrants, and restore peace to this distracted land, now polluted with innocent
blood.

Given at London, the 28th day of July, in the 15th year of the tyrannical
reign of his merciful Majesty George the third, Defender of the Romish faith,
traitors, and murderers, etc. Anno Domini, 1775. THOMAS SHAW.
By his Excellency's command, THOMAS BRADHAW, Secretary.

GOD SAVE AMERICA.
Notwithstanding the Royal lying Gazette has given us an account, signed by
that bloody monster in human shape, Genesis Gage, of another massacre in America,
on the 17th of June last, wherein this modern Kirk exto^^s his officers and
mercenary soldiers, stimulated by liquor, and promises of plunder, to slaughter
their fellow subjects, for their valor and bravery, and boasts his having
gained something like a victory, over the brave and virtuous Americans,
fighting for liberty, whom that wretch calls rebels; yet the Public may depend
this pretended superiority of his troops, conduct of his officers, and mighty
victory is a LIE; and it will soon be proved, from unquestionable authority,
that he has lost some hundreds of his men, more than is mentioned in the
Gazette, which contains the most notorious falsehoods, and infamous impositions
on the Public, calculated to deceive the people here, and to spirit up the few
remaining troops we have in England, to embark with the greater readiness to
the field of slaughter in America, there to fall a just sacrifice to the
injured laws, and glorious liberties of the Brtish empire: It will likewise
appear that Genesis Gage's army with all the advantage of artillery, and the
assistance of several ships of war, and armed vessels, was obliged to retreat
to their barracks and sneaking holes in Boston, under the protection of the men
of war.

If it was ever necessary to rouse the sleeping genius of England, to excite a
generous emulation of our warlike forefathers and to animate every Briton, by
their example, to fight valiantly, to conquer nobly, or perish gloriously in
defense of his country -- This is certainly the time.

If it was ever necessary for the people of England to rise altogether as one
man and (...) a torrent on the bloody tyrannical invaders of their lives and
liberties, and overwhelm them in the midst of their fancied insolent security
-- it is surely at this time.

If it was ever necessary for the people to enter into an association, to
express and fully explain in a Manifesto the causes of their discontent; and to
declare they take up arms to put a stop to the encroachments of those who
govern in the King's name; to bring to condign punishment the betrayers of
their country; to preserve their rights and liberties from farther violations;
to restore the laws and the constitution now tottering to its base, to their
pristine vigor; to prevent the inhuman slaughter of their fellow subjects in
America by the hand of lawless power; to enforce a due obedience to Magna
Charta from the King and his ministers; to oblige his Majesty to dismiss those
parricides and traitors who surround his throne, and to restore the ancient
independence and freedom of parliaments: If such a measure was ever necessary
to preserve the people and kingdom from slavery and ruin. -- it is NOW. But
alas! It is (I fear) in vain to appeal to the reason or to the passions of
Englishmen, they seem to have lost their very nature and genius, they seem to
have forgot the arts of war, and the blessings of freedom; they have fatally
degenerated into luxury and vice, and at last become insensible to every
generous sentiment of public liberty; they have lost the virtue, the courage,
and bravery of their glorious ancestors; and are now looked upon by surrounding
nations, as a herd of pusillanimous drones, devoted to slavery, or doomed to
destruction.

LONDON: Printed and published for the Author, by T. W. SHAW, in Fleet Street.

NEW YORK: Reprinted by John Anderson, at Beekman's Slip.


