THE CRISIS. NUMBER VIII.
To the Lords SUFFOLK, POMFRET, RADNOR, APSLEY, and SANDWICH.
How glorious the era, thrice happy the day,
When private interest to public gives way;
When bribes cannot tempt your Lordships to sell
The birthrights of freemen to tyrants of hell.
How glorious the era, thrice happy indeed,
When traitors and minions are sentenced to bleed;
When justice shall reign, and at heaven's great call
The proud seed of hell just victims do fall.

My Lords,
YOU have a peculiar claim to an address from the authors of the Crisis, and it
shall be our business in this paper to preserve, if possible, the perishable
infamy of your names.

The motion made by Lord Radnor, on Monday the 27th of February, concerning
number III. of the Crisis, was unjust and villainous, the paper contains nothing
but the most sacred truths, and therefore could not be a false or scandalous
libel; the amendment of the epithet treasonable, proposed and supported by the
Lords Pomfret, Suffolk, Apsley and Sandwich, was infamous, and of a piece with
every other proceeding of the present reign, and present ministry. It showed,
in a particular manner, the bloody minded dispositions of prostituted Court
Lords, the instruments of murder and public ruin. The immaculate Lord Sandwich
insisted that the word treasonable should stand part of the motion, as a proper
foundation for bringing the authors to exemplary and condign punishment.
Suppose, my Lords, this infamous amendment to the Radnor motion had been
carried, and it had stood a false, scandalous and treasonable libel, could the
mere ipse dixit of a few venal Lords make that treason, which in the literal or
constructive sense of the word was not so.

The author of number III. is perfectly well acquainted with the statute of
treasons, passed in the reign of Edward the IIId. and likewise with the various
expositions and interpretations of it. He well knew, the paper was written upon
the true principles of the Revolution, and that it could be justified by the
laws of the land; he well knew (though there is hardly any villainy but what
court sycophants may do with ease) that it was not in the power of Lord
Mansfield, with all his chicanery, with all his artifice, with all his abuse of
the law, with all his perversion of justice, with all the aid of false
construction, and forced inuendos, to bring it within the meaning of that
statute; he well knew the disposition of the sovereign and his minions, and
that nothing would, or can satiate royal Scotch, or ministerial revenge, but
the blood of those who oppose the present most horridly cruel, and most
infamously wicked measures of government; and, my Lords, he well knew the
shocking prostitution of hereditary peerage, and the barefaced treachery and
villainy of a purchased majority in the House of Commons.

Has there not, my Lords, been innocent blood enough shed in this reign, that
your Lordships should still thirst for more. Why should your Lordships be so
desirous of stopping every channel of public information, the infamy of your
actions are sufficiently known, and will be handed down to the latest ages of
time, while your names will stink in the nostrils of posterity.

The statute of treasons, my Lords, passed in the 25th year of the reign of
Edward the IIId. was an act of vast importance to the public weal; for till
then, there was hardly a word spoke, or a paper written, but what was deemed
treason, and the parliament, which passed it, were called Benedictum
Parliamentum, the Blessed Parliament.

The substance of this statute is branched out by my Lord Cook into six heads,
which we shall here give, with some observations of our own, to show your
Lordships, and the world, that number III. of the Crisis is not within the
meaning of either of these heads, and that by your amended motion you designed
to lay the ground work of a prosecution, the most cruel and infamous ever
carried on in this country, worse than those which, without proof or the color
of guilt, took away the lives of the great Lord Russel, and Algernoon Sidney.

The first head is concerning death; by compassing or imagining the death of
the King, Queen, or Prince, and declaring the same by some overt deed. By
killing or murdering the Chancellor, Treasurer, Justice of either Bench,
Justice in Air, Justices of Assize, Justices of Oyer and Terminer, in their
places, during their offices.

The second, is to violate, that is to know carnally, the Queen, the King's
eldest daughter unmarried, the Prince's wife. The third is levying war against
the King.

The fourth, is adhering to the King's enemies, within the realm or without,
and declaring the same by some overt act.

The fifth is, counterfeiting the Great, the Privy Seal, or the King's coin.

The sixth and last, by bringing into this realm counterfeit money, to the
likeness of the King's coin.

First. To compass and imagine, is to contrive, design, or intend the death of
the King; but this must be declared by some overt act, declaring by an open act
a design to depose or imprison the King, is an overt act, to manifest the
compassing his death. I believe, my Lords, the author of number III. of the
Crisis is not under the predicament of this exposition.

Second. By the word King is intended, 1. A King before his coronation, as soon
as ever the crown descends upon him; for the coronation is but a ceremony. 2. A
King de facto, and not de jure, is a King within this act, and treason against
him is punishable, though the right heir get the crown.

Third. Note, It is very strange, but in the printed stature book, it is there
said, probably attainted, which is a gross error; for the words of the record
are, et de ceux provablement soit attaint, and shall be thereof provably
attaint; and it is amazing to me that so gross a mistake should be suffered,
since my Lord Cook has so expressy observed the difference in these words
following, 3. Inst. fol. 12 In this branch, says he, four things are to be
observed. 1. This word (provablement) provably, that is upon direct and
manifest proof, not upon conjectural presumptions, or inferences, or strains of
wit, but upon good and sufficient proof; and herein the adverb (provablement)
provably has great force, and signifies a direct and plain proof; and
therefore the offender must provably be attainted, which words are as forcible
as upon direct and manifest proof. Note, The word is not probably, for then
commune argumentum might have served, but the word is provably be attainted. 2.
The word attaint necessarily implies that he be proceeded with, and attainted
according to the due course of law, and proceedings of law, and not by absolute
power, or by other means, as in former times had been used; and therefore if a
man does adhere to the enemies of the King, or be slain in open war against the
King, or otherwise die before the attainder of treason, he forfeiteth nothing,
because (as the act says) he is not attainted; wherein this act has altered
that, which before this act, in case of treason, was taken for law. And the
statute of 34 Ed. III. says nothing to the King, but that which was in esse,
and pertaining to the King at the making of that act. And this appears by a
judgment in parliament in ann. 29, H. VI. that Jack Cade, being slain in open
rebellion, could no ways be punished, or forfeit any thing, and therefore was
attainted by that act of high treason. 3. Of open deed, per apertum factum,
these words strengthen the former exposition of (provablement) an overt act
must be alleged in every indictment upon this act, and proved compassing by
bare words is not an overt act, as appears by many temporary statutes against
it. But there must be some open act, which must be manifestly proved. As if
diverse do conspire the death of the King, and the manner how, and thereupon
provide weapons, powder, poison, harness, send letters, and the like for the
execution of the conspirators. If a subject conspire with a foreign Prince, to
invade the realm by open hostility, and prepare for the same by some overt act,
this is a sufficient overt act for the death of the King. 4thly, A conspiracy
is had to levy war, this is no treason by this act, until it be levied,
therefore it is no overt act, or manifest proof of the compassing the death of
the King within this act, for the words are de ceo, etc. thereof, that is, of
the compassing of the death. The wisdom of the makers of this law would not
make bare words to be treason, seeing such variance commonly among the
witnesses, about the same, as few of them agree together.

In the preamble of the statute of 1 Mar. (concerning the repeal of certain
treasons declared after this statute of 25 Edw. IIId. and before that time, and
bringing all things to the measures of this statute) it was agreed by the whole
Parliament, that laws justly made for the preservation of the commonwealth,
without extreme punishment, are more often obeyed and kept than laws and
statutes made with great and extreme punishments, and in special such laws and
statutes so made, whereby not only the ignorant and rude unlearned people, but
also learned and expert people, minding honesty, are often times trapped and
snared, yea many times for words only, without other fact or deed done or
perpetrated. Therefore this act of the 25th Ed. IIId. does provide that there
must be an overt act. 5thly, As to treason, by levying war against the King we
must note, that though conspiring or compassing to levy war, without a war de
facto, be no treason, yet it may conspire a war, and only some few actually
levy it, all are guilty of the treason. Raising a force to burn or throw down a
particular enclosure is only a riot, but if it had been to have gone from town
to town, to throw down all enclosures, or to change religion, or the like, it
were levying of war, because the intended mischief is public. Holding a fort or
castle against the King's force is levying war. 6th, Counterfeiting the Great
or Privy Seal is treason, but it must be an actual counterfeiting thereof,
compassing to do it is no treason; affixing the Great Seal by the Chancellor
without warrant, is no treason; fixing a new Great Seal to another patent is
great misprison, but no treason, being not counterfeiting within this act; but
aiders and consenters are within this act. 7th, Treason concerning coin is
counterfeiting the King's coin; and this was treason at common law, and
judgment only as of petty treason; but clipping, etc. being made treason by
other statutes, the judgment is to be drawn, hanged and quartered. Money here
extends only to the proper money of this realm. 8th, As this statute leaves all
other doubtful matters to be declared treason in parliament, but not to be
punished as such, till so declared. So in succeeding Kings reigns abundance of
other matters were declared treason, which being found very grievous and
dangerous by the statute 1 Mar. it is enacted, that thenceforth no act, deed or
offense, being by act of parliament or statute, made treason, petty treason, or
misprison of treason, by words, writing, cyphering, deeds otherwise however,
shall be taken, had, deemed or adjudged to be high treason, petty treason, or
misprison of treason, but only such as be declared and expressed to be treason,
petty treason, or misprison of treason, by this statute of 25 Edw. IIId.

Here we rest the matter, my Lords, convinced the author of Number III. is not
within the meaning of this statute, nor any exposition of it, and that the
design of your Lordships, in adding the epithet treasonable, was wicked, base
and infamous, and will be sure to secure to you the contempt and detestation of
every honest man.

[To be continued.]
(Price TWO PENNIES.)


