AN EARNEST ADDRESS TO SUCH OF The People called Quakers As are Sincerely
Desirous of SUPPORTING and MAINTAINING THE CHRISTIAN TESTIMONY OF THEIR
ANCESTORS.

Occasioned by a Piece, entitled, The Testimony of the People called Quakers,
given forth by a Meeting of the Representatives of said People, in Pennsylvania
and New-Jersy, held at Philadelphia the Twenty-fourth Day of the First Month,
1775.

EZEKIEL. viii. 15, 16. Then said he unto me, Have thou seen this, O son of man?
turn thee yet again, and thou shall see greater abominations than these. And he
brought me into the inner court of the Lord's house, and behold, at the door of
the temple of the Lord, between the porch and the altar, were about five and
twenty men, with their backs toward the temple of the Lord, and their faces
toward the east, and they worshipped the sun toward the east.

ISAIAH ix. 16. For the leaders of this people cause them to err, and they that
are led of them are destroyed.

PHILADELPHIA, Printed for JOHN DOUGLAS M'DOUGAL, 1775.

AN Earnest Address, etc.
Esteemed FRIENDS,
OUR worthy Ancestors, whose names are held in religious Remembrance amongst
us, for their labors of love and the hardships which they endured in their
endeavors to establish the pure and genuine doctrines of Jesus Christ, set out
with this one fundamental doctrine, That the Light in every man's breast was
the true Light of Christ; and if duly attended to would lead us out of the
errors, mistakes and prejudices which had corrupted the religious principles of
mankind in general, so that we should no longer walk in darkness, nor follow
the lying and deceitful Vanities of this World; but that we should be enabled
by the divine principle of Grace and Truth to resist the Temptations of the
Devil, and to overcome those fleshly and worldly lusts which hold the people of
this World in captivity to Sin.

THEY taught in the demonstration of the Spirit and with power, that nothing
was so great an obstacle to the growth of this divine Principle as insincerity
and a disregard to Truth, and they therefore exhorted all men in singleness and
sincerity of heart, to attend to the internal Teacher, and carefully to avoid
every deviation from Truth or appearance of deceit -- They saw in the light of
Divine Wisdom the inconsistency of a Christian Profession with every degree of
cunning and guile, either in words or actions. And their honest and upright
testimony in this respect exposed them frequently to the insults and mockery of
wicked men. Indeed so earnest were these Mockers to catch them in some
deviation from Truth, that they often asked them the most silly questions,
trying if they could thereby ensnare them in their words; but they witness,
that the Good Hand was with them, and preserved them from speaking any thing
contrary to Truth in their answers. -- And,

THEY have left to all men a most certain and standing evidence of their
carefulness to avoid even the least appearance of Untruth in many "forms of
sound words" now used among us, whereby they avoided the possibility of being
found guilty of any falsehood in their conversations, engagements or promises;
and were enabled to preserve the Testimony of Truth clear and unspotted --

THUS by a scrupulous and conscientious adherence to the leadings of Truth in
the minutest things, our forefathers attained to a strength and stability in
religion which enabled them to bear up against the many trials and severe
persecutions, which were suffered to come upon them for the trial of their
faith, and the exaltation of the Truth which they professed -- And by the
openness, sincerity and steadfastness of their conduct, they at last obtained
this testimony, even from their enemies, that they were an innocent,
inoffensive and well meaning people. And though they were exposed to much in
human and cruel treatment on account of their religious profession, and in
derision were called Quakers, yet the Virtuous integrity of their lives, and
their strict and simple adherence to Truth, by the blessing of that God who
dwells with the single-hearted, and hates all hypocrisy and lies, enabled them
to persevere and to support their Testimony, and at last procured them relief
from almost every thing which the Pure Light in their minds could not suffer
them to submit to, or partake of.

I therefore felt a strong inclination to lay this part of their conduct before
you, that you might be enabled to see the steps whereby our ancient Friends
attained a stedfastness in the Truth, and that having their example before our
eyes, and seeing the blessing nd success which attended them, we might be
excited to follow their footsteps; especially at this time of trial, which the
Lord has permitted to try our Faith, and to show who are his and who are not.
-- Suffer me then to stir up the pure Mind in each of us by way of remembrance,
to excite all such who are truly engaged in the work of an inward and spiritual
reformation, to take care to preserve themselves unspotted, to be cautious not
to suffer their minds to be led astray on the one side or the other, and by all
means to avoid the artifices and cunning of those* who, forsaking the divine
leadings, study to turn every dispensation of Providence to the worldly
advantage of the society, by bowing to the wicked while in authority, and
thereby wounding their own consciences, and in the end bringing dishonor on
our testimony and the principles which we profess.

THERE is nothing more certain both from the declarations of Scripture and the
experience of Friends, especially such as adhered steadily to the Light of
Grace in their own hearts, than that the duty of a truly spiritual man consists
in declining to take part on either side in any political contention or
quarrel, in constantly renouncing all worldly policy, and in patiently waiting
for deliverance from the Lord -- And so far have the spiritually minded men of
former ages been from appearing anxious to preserve the favor of those in
power, by any seeming compliance with their arbitrary proceedings, that they
have found it their duty to remonstrate against their oppressions, and to
denounce the Vengeance of him who hates all injustice and cruelty against them,
unless they repented -- And the boldness and Christian plainness with which our
worthy Ancestors reproved the oppressors of their day, is surely the strongest
proof of their integrity of heart.

THIS part of their behavior, if duly attended to, will enable us to perceive
the difference between them and some amongst us, who at present are high in
profession; but whose conduct and the little regard which they show to the most
essential principles of our Religion will, if approved by the society, not only
subject us to the just censure of the World, but render us entirely unworthy of
that favor with which the divine Goodness has hitherto blessed us.

THAT I may not be wanting in my duty, or appear willing to condemn our leading
Friends without advancing proofs of their guilt, I would not only request you
to remember, that what the colonies contend for, is their right, and by Friends
acknowledged to be so, and then tell me, whether our last Yearly Meeting
Epistle is not a most striking and shameful deviation from that honest boldness
and plainness of speech which distinguished our ancestors, and whether the
scriptures of Truth, or the history of Friends can show such another testimony
against rulers who seemed determined to carry their unjust and oppressive
measures into execution by fire and sword -- Ask the Prophets of old in what
language they spoke to the men in power when they acted unjustly. Consult the
first founders of our society, men who spent their lives in establishing the
principles which we profess, and then declare whether they spoke such language
to those in power. -- If they did not, if they acted with a boldness at that
time unknown, and, in the utmost plainness of speech, denounced the Judgments
of God against oppression in their Rulers, and if their language was not such
as the leading members of our society speak at this time, let us calmly
consider which has the best title to that Divine Guidance and Inspiration which
makes the most distinguished principle of our profession.

MY appeal is to the honest hearted, who are willing to examine their own
conduct and the conduct of our leading men in the Light of divine Truth -- To
such alone I address myself, and from them alone I expect a true and genuine
reply -- Whether did those ancient Friends, amongst whom the worthy founder of
this province stood foremost, who called upon the People to assert their rights
and assured them that then was the time; or our Meeting for Sufferings, who
lately called upon our Elders to deal with every one of the society who joined
with the people to defend their rights, act under the influence of the divine
Spirit? -- I firmly persuade myself, that every ingenuous mind which regards
the Testimony of Truth, and attends to the Witness in his own heart, will
readily determine to whom the preference is due -- And an honest attention and
obedience to that witness will always enable him to oppose that spirit which is
not of God -- For if the Gospel directs us to yield up a part of our right
rather than to enter into contention about it, much more does it command us not
to strike hands with the oppressor. A righteous and just man may defend his
property; but he is a villain who either attempts unjustly to deprive him of
it, or abets the man who does. --

THIS Epistle when considered as a religious publication, given forth by a
people heretofore remarkable for their steady opposition to, and bearing
testimony against oppression in their rulers, is highly blamable, but when
compared to the piece, entitled, "The Testimony, etc." it becomes innocent and
laudable. For what think ye my friends will the world say when they behold this
Testimony? with what indignation must that Holy Spirit whose leadings we
profess to follow, view a publication, given forth as it were under the
sanction of all the Friends in both provinces with a manifest design to justify
the oppressive measures of government, and to brand with the worst of epithets,
those whose greatest fault is, that they contend for their right in a pacific
manner?

THESE things have pained my heart, and filled my mind with sorrow and
affliction, and I could not rest until I had in some measure pointed out their
inconsistency with our profession, lest you, whose earnest and continual
waiting for the divine manifestations may have prevented from attending to
public affairs, should, through a confidence in the sincerity of those who have
given forth this testimony, be induced to give your approbation thereto, and
thereby bring a reproach upon Truth and the principles we profess to the world.

FOR there are some things asserted therein, which I fear will be a reproach to
our society as long as they remain upon record; because they have so slight a
foundation in truth, that the whole conduct of Government and of the people is
a proof of the contrary. I cannot therefore help looking forward with anxious
distress, and viewing with anguish of spirit the Gulf into which they are about
to plunge the society by a hasty forsaking of the true path, and forgetting to
wait upon the Guidance of that Spirit which alone can perserve us from the
snares of the world and support us in the hour of Temptation.

WHILE men, who seemed to be employed to sow divisions amongst the people, and
who openly appeared to pay no regard to truth, have for some months past
continued to condemn the public proceedings as subversive of all Government,
and calculated to throw off all allegiance to the King, and to assert that all
our grievances might have been redressed had we applied in a legal and
constitutional manner, I did not suffer my mind to be troubled on account of
their falsehoods -- I thought Truth could suffer but little from men who paid no
regard to a good Conscience -- And I knew the just cause of the people would
not be injured by their representations; for Administration knowing them to be
employed by themselves, could not consider their declarations and assertions as
truths to be depended on; but only as means employed to serve their cause.

BUT when I beheld a People, whose religious standard is truth and sincerity,
incautiously drawn in by those, who call themselves their representatives, to
assert that, From their past experience of the clemency of the King and his
royal ancestors they have grounds to hope and believe, that decent and
respectful addresses, from those who are vested with legal authority,
representing the prevailing dissatisfactions and the cause of them, would avail
toward obtaining relief, ascertaining and establishing the just rights of the
people, and restoring the public tranquillity; and deeply lamenting that
contrary modes of proceeding have been pursued; which have involved the
Colonies in Confusion, and appear likely to produce Violence and Bloodshed, and
threaten the subversion of the constitutional government, and of that liberty
of conscience, for the enjoyment of which, our ancestors were induced to
encounter the manifold dangers and difficulties of crossing the seas, and
settling in the Wilderness, -- I felt an involuntary sigh arise within me, and
I could not repress the emotions of my spirit --

FOR would not any one, who did not know the true state of the proceedings of
the colonies, upon reading such a paragraph, extracted from the public
Testimony of the people called Quakers, imagine, that no attempt had ever been
made by our assemblies to obtain a redress of our grievances; but that
immediately upon our first notice of their existence we had broken out into the
utmost violence and most daring opposition to Government -- But let the
following detail of facts show the injustice, not to say falsehood, of such a
representation.

As soon as the acts of parliament of which we complain were known in America,
the Assembly of the Massachusetts Bay sent a decent respectful address to the
King, complaining of the infringement of their rights, and praying for a
redress; and to add the greater weight to their petition, they wrote circular
Letters to all the other Assemblies on the continent, requesting them to join
them in addresses to his Majesty.

THIS the Assemblies of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, Connecticut,
New York, New Jersey, Lower Counties, and Virginia all joined them in -- The
other Assemblies highly approved the Measure as well as those who petitioned,
and only declined petitioning for the present until they knew the fate of the
applications they had made by their agents before the arrival of the Circular
Letter: -- However, every Assembly from Nova Scotia to the Florida's petitioned
some time after, as any one may satisfy himself by consulting their proceedings
for the Year 1768.

Now, here was a fair experiment made of that mode of application for redress,
which our representatives (as they call themselves) so strongly hint had never
been tried, and of the success of which, they appear so confident, and wherein
every Assembly from Nova Scotia to the Florida's united. -- But what was the
consequence? Did the King pay any regard to their applications and addresses,
though conceived in the most decent and manly terms? No. The Minister,
(Hillsborough) as soon as he heard of the measures which the Massachusetts Bay
Assembly had taken, sent a circular Letter to all the Governors of the other
colonies, desiring them to use their utmost endeavors to prevent their
Assemblies from joining with that of the Massachusetts Bay, and condemning
their circular Letter as a measure of a most dangerous and factious tendency,
calculated to inflame the minds of his Majesty's good subjects in the colonies,
to promote unwarrantable combinations, and to excite and encourage open
opposition to, and denial of the authority of Parliament, and to subvert the
true principles of the constitution; and therefore he exhorted the several
Governors to exert their utmost influence to defeat this flagicious attempt to
disturb the public peace -- And to add the greater weight and solemnity to
these proceedings of the Ministry, and the more effectually to frighten the
colonies into a tame submission, and make them sick of attempting to join in
petitioning for redress of grievances, the House of Lords was employed to
resolve in the most violent manner against their proceedings. --

SUCH a representation of their conduct, and the measures persued at home in
consequence thereof, alarmed our Assemblies; and they, in justification of
their measures, passed a few resolves expressive of the innocence, prudence and
constitutionallity of their measures, and asserting their right to join in
petitioning his Majesty, denying the factious tendency of the Circular Letter
and the Right of parliament to tax the colonies, and declaring, That the Right
of taxing the colonies remained in themselves alone -- This was all they did in
opposition to all the disrespect and contempt thrown upon their just and modest
applications to the Throne; yet this so enraged the court of Great Britain,
that the ministry sent express orders to the Governors of the respective
Colonies to dissolve every Assembly which refused to rescind the resolves they
entered into on the occasion. -- Dissolutions highly injurious to the colonies
accordingly took place -- and because the minister had committed some blunders,
which showed his ignorance of the constitution of some of the colonies, and
exposed his political abilities, there soon followed another letter from his
Majesty, ordering the Governors to lay no more of the Ministers letters before
our Assemblies; but only such parts as they should have his Majesty's express
commands for. -- Thus are our Assemblies for the future to be excluded from the
knowledge of the true source of their calamities and the spirit of the
ministry, except only such part of it as they may guess at from the conduct of
their Governors -- Nay the Minister was so dissatisfied with the conduct and
petitions of our assemblies, as well as with the behavior of their agents,
that he told one of the agents, the business of the colonies would never be
well done until it came to be transacted by the Governor and Minister only; and
that he saw no advantage in the Assemblies having agents. -- This I think needs
no comment -- for if that could take place, the complaints of the people would
be for ever shut out from the ear of the King. -- In this situation of our
affairs, had not our Assemblies prudently dropped the matter, and left the
people to take it up in the manner they should judge best, it is highly
probable we must, long 'ere now, either have submitted to slavery, or come to
an open rupture. --

THIS treatment of our assemblies, and the spirit of dissolving them which then
took place, and has continued ever since, as is evident from the dissolution of
the Virginia assembly last May, etc. effectually put it out of their power to
do any thing in their legislative capacity, and left us without any resource
except in the spirit of the People -- And so sensible were friends, as well as
all ranks of people at that time, of the absolute necessity of either
submitting to slavery or exerting themselves in some other way for our relief,
that our Merchants, amongst whom are some of the most respectable Friends, who
but a few Months before refused to enter into a Non-importation agreement, now
came into it with the greatest cheerfulness, and adhered to it with the utmost
fidelity, as is evident from their conduct and proceedings at that time. --
From the several Papers published in the Appendix you will be able to judge for
yourselves of the truth of the facts I have here related.

WHAT I have already related, I doubt not, has fully satisfied you of the
King's disposition to hearken to American Petitions; but when I add to this,
that the town of Boston, at a legal meeting, most earnestly and humbly
petitioned the King to grant them an opportunity of clearing themselves from
the unjust representations which they conceived their Governor (Bernard) had
made of their conduct, by laying before them those letters of his wherein they
stood accused of riots and tumultuous meetings, and that this their just and
equitable request met with a Fate which adds little honor to Government, or
the Clemency of the King, That their Governor was encouraged to dissolve their
assemblies as often as they attempted to enter on the subject of their
Grievances, by assurance from the ministry, that he need not fear their
withdrawing his support, for that he should be provided for -- That this
provision has been actually made accordingly -- When I call to your Minds, that
their petition to have their late governor removed, for his having not only
followed the steps of his wicked predecessor, but even exceeded him, was
treated with every indignity possible to be shown upon the occasion, except
being burned by the hand of the common Hangman -- and that every speech from
the throne, since the year 1768, which mentions America, breaths the same
spirit which prompted the Minister at that time to dissolve our assemblies for
daring to petition the King, I think it will put it beyond all doubt, that
there was not, nor is to this day, the least relief to be expected by America
from the petitions of our representatives. --

BUT that the King's disposition to hear the petitions of his people may be
more fully known to, and understood by you, I will lay a few facts before you
which are not connected with our present dispute. -- The Assembly of Virginia
petitioned to have a stop put to the importation of Slaves from Africa, a
matter which Friends as a society, (and to their honor) have much at heart --
their petition was rejected -- and a number of respectable inhabitants in this
City the next year applied to our House of Assembly, praying them to back the
Virginia petition by one from our House; but our Assembly declined it, giving
for reason, that they knew it would not be regarded, and they did not think it
prudent to bring the practice of petitioning into further contempt, by using it
when there was not the least hope of success: -- Yet, that they might testify
their approbation of the measure, they passed an act laying an additional duty
of Ten Pounds on every Negroe brought into the province for sale -- but this
act met with the fate of the Virginia Petition -- it was rejected by the Crown!
The city of London petitioned, remonstrated, and petitioned again on the affair
of the Middlesex election; but without success -- Fifteen Counties (in England)
joined them; but they met with no better fate -- The city of London petitioned
against the passing of the Quebec bill; but to no purpose. -- Whence then have
those, who call themselves our representatives, their "past experience" of the
clemency of the King, and his readiness to hear the petitions of his people? I
must confess, that no part of his public conduct affords any thing but the
strongest proof of his determination to hear none of the complaints of his
people -- but to treat them with contempt as often as they dared to offer them.
I will not deny his Clemency to the two Kennedies, and to Balf and M'Quirk, the
two Chairmen concerned in the riots at Brentford, who were tried for being
present at and aiding in the murder of George Clarke -- The evidence against
whom by all accounts was short, clear and possitive; they were therefore
convicted and received sentence of Death -- but his most gracious Majesty
respited them during his pleasure, which I believe yet remains, and for no
other reason that has ever been assigned, as far as I know, but because they
were then in the service of the Ministry -- and assisted them in what they did
to carry the election in that place. --

THESE being the facts from which his Majesty's clemency toward the colonies
is to be eestimated, and this the only experience they could have had -- I ask,
whether the paragraph which I have extracted from "the Testimony" is true or
false? My dear friends, we are to answer to God and to the witness within us
for every part of our conduct -- let us then seriously bring this "Testimony"
to the Touchstone, and try if we can approve it and be guiltless: -- And if we
cannot, let us not shrink back with fear, but trust in God, follow the Light in
our hearts, and renounce all hypocrisy and lies.

IT may be observed, that I have said, the testimony published by those who
"call themselves our representatives;" and it may be asked if they were not
really the representatives of our society, and appointed for this particular
purpose? It seems to be insinuated that they were. All I can say to it is, that
I never heard of their being appointed for this purpose, or of their being the
representatives of our society -- but that they were only a standing committee
of intelligence and advice for ordinary occasions -- Our society in these
provinces being represented by our General Yearly Meeting, and by no other body
of men. -- I know of no law by which these meetings are established -- yet I
think them legal meetings, and should think it a high insult upon us, were they
branded with such Names as these, Combinations, Insurrections, Conspiracies,
and Illegal Assemblies: -- For as Francis Howgil, a man who was one of the
greatest Ornaments of our society both for the Purity of his Life and Doctrine,
whose sermons will be admired as long as our christian Profession shall remain,
and whose Title to divine Inspiration few amongst us will question, well
observes in his advice to the army, etc. "It is not names, Titles,
Denominations and Words, that can alter the Nature of Things. A Tyrant will
call every Opposition to his Will by the name of Treason and Rebellion; but,"
as the good man justly remarks, "the Lord is so far from accounting it such,
that he is the very Means of raising up that Opposition and supporting it while
it continues to withstand arbitrary Power, and to aim at nothing but the
Welfare and Freedom of the People."

I WELL remember the solemnity with which a worthy elder, late of the city of
Burlington, at the time when this meeting for sufferings was first appointed
and established, expressed his fear of the dangerous use which that meeting
might make of their appointment, and most seriously and weightily pressed the
Yearly Meeting to limit and restrict their proceedings, expressly, to Matters
of discipline and cases of sufferings; and am well assured it was never
designed to meddle with politics -- Happy had it been for the society, had this
meeting for sufferings given due attention to the simple, manly and forcible
Christian Counsel of a worthy member of it, who, during the debates on the
present testimony, advised and entreated that meeting "not to mix politics with
religion," asserting, that they were "distinct and separate things."

HAD this testimony been designed simply for the purpose of clearing the
society of the odium which may be thrown upon us by the world, where was the
Necessity of branding the conduct of others with such opprobrious terms? Why
has it been translated into German, and handed through Lancaster County with so
much care? Does not this look as if we rather meant to blacken the proceedings
of other people than to justify our own conduct?

UPON what principles can the conduct of some of the members of the meeting be
accounted for? What obligation could there be upon any member of it to engage,
to a servant of the Crown, that something of the kind of this testimony should
be published, and even allow him to assure General Gage that he might depend on
its being done -- And, immediately after the publication of it, to hand a large
number of them to that servant of the Crown to forward to the General? How must
these men feel who have been forward in this shameless transaction, if, from an
apprehension in the Ministry of a division among us, they should proceed to the
shedding of blood? Let the blood which may be shed in the contest be upon their
heads! but let the society be held guiltless -- Let us, my friends, enquire who
were the supporters of this dangerous measure, and guard against them -- The
mark of Cain be upon them!

AN APPENDIX: Containing such Extracts from the Proceedings of the Government
at Home, and the Assemblies of the Colonies, as tend to prove the Truth of the
Facts asserted in the foregoing Address.
The honorable House of Representatives, of the Province of Massachusetts Bay,
in the Year 1768, preferred an humble, dutiful and loyal petition to the King;
of which the following is a copy.

An humble petition to the King's most excellent Majesty.
MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN,
YOUR Majesty's faithful subjects, the representatives of your province of the
Massachusetts Bay, with the warmest sentiments of loyalty, duty and affection,
beg leave to approach the throne; and to lay at your Majesty's feet their
humble supplications in behalf of your distressed subjects the people of the
province.

Our ancestors, the first settlers of this country, having with the royal
consent, which we humbly apprehend involves the consent of the nation, and at
their own great expense, migrated from the mother kingdom, took possession of
this land, at that time a wilderness, the right whereof they had purchased for
a valuable consideration, of the council established at Plymouth, to whom it
had been granted by your Majesty's royal predecessor King James the first.

From the principles of loyalty to their Sovereign, which will ever warm the
breast of a true subject though remote, they acknowledge their allegiance to
the English crown: and your Majesty will allow us with all humility to say,
that they and their posterity, even to this time, have afforded frequent and
signal proofs of their zeal for the honor and service of their Prince, and
their firm attachment to the parent country.

With toil and fatigue, perhaps not to be conceived by their brethren and
fellow subjects at home, and with the constant peril of their lives, from a
numerous, savage and warlike race of men, they began their settlement, and GOD
prospered them.

They obtained a charter from King Charles the first; wherein his Majesty was
pleased to grant to them and their heirs and assigns forever, all the lands
therein described, to hold of him and his royal successors in free and common
socage; which we humbly conceive is as absolute an estate as the subject can
hold under the crown. And in the same charter, were granted to them and their
posterity, all the rights, liberties, privileges and immunities of natural
subjects, born within the realm.

This charter they enjoyed, having as we most humbly conceive punctually
complied with all the conditions of it, till in an unhappy time it was vacated.
But after the revolution, when King William and Queen Mary, of glorious and
blessed memory, were established on the throne; in that happy reign, when to
the joy of the nation and its dependencies, the crown was settled in your
Majesty's illustrious family, the inhabitants of this province shared in the
common blessing: Then they were indulged with another charter; in which their
Majesty's were pleased for themselves, their heirs and successors, to grant and
confirm to them as ample estate in the lands or territories as was granted by
the former charter, together with other the most essential rights and liberties
contained therein; the principal of which, is that which your Majesty's
subjects within the realm have ever held a most sacred right, of being taxed
only by representatives of their own free election.

Thus blessed with the rights of Englishmen, through the indulgent smiles of
heaven, and under the auspicious government of your Majesty and your royal
predecessors, your people of this province have been happy and your Majesty has
acquired a numerous increase of loyal subjects, a large extent of dominion, a
new and inexhaustible source of commerce, wealth and glory.

With great sincerity, permit us to assure your Majesty that your subjects of
this province, ever have and still continue to acknowledge your Majesty's high
court of parliament the supreme legislative power of the whole empire. The
superintending authority of which is clearly admitted in all cases, that can
consist with the fundamental rights of nature and the constitution; to which
your Majesty's happy subjects in all parts of your empire conceive they have a
just and equitable claim.

It is with the deepest concern that your humble suppliants would represent to
your Majesty, that your parliament, the rectitude of whose intentions is never
to be questioned, has thought proper to pass diverse acts imposing taxes on your
Majesty's subjects in America, with the sole and express purpose of raising a
revenue. If your Majesty's subjects here shall be deprived of the honor and
privilege of voluntarily contributing their aid to your Majesty, in supporting
your government and authority in the province, and defending and securing your
rights and territories in America, which they have always hitherto done with
the utmost cheerfulness; if these acts of parliament shall remain in force; and
your Majesty's commons in Great Britain shall continue to exercise the power of
granting the property of their fellow subjects in this province, your people
must then regret their unhappy fate in having only the name left of free
subjects.

With all humility we conceive, that a representation of your Majesty's
subjects in this province in the parliament, considering their local
circumstances, is utterly impracticable. Your Majesty has heretofore been
graciously pleased, to order your requisitions to be laid before the
representatives of your people in the general assembly, who have never failed
to afford the necessary aid to the extent of their ability, and sometimes
beyond it; and it would be ever grievous to your Majesty's faithful subjects to
be called upon in any way that should appear to them to imply a distrust of
their most ready and willing compliance.

Under the most sensible impressions of your Majesty's wise and paternal care
for the remotest of your faithful subjects, and in full dependence on the royal
declarations in the charter of this province, we most humbly beseech your
Majesty to take our present unhappy circumstances under your royal
consideration, and afford us relief in such a manner as in your Majesty's great
wisdom and clemency shall seem meet.

Circular LETTER.
Province of Massachusetts Bay, Feb. 11, 1768. To the Honorable the Speaker of
the Honorable House of Representatives of the province of -- SIR,
THE House of Representatives of this province have taken into their serious
consideration, the great difficulties that must accrue to themselves and their
constituents, by the operation of the several acts of parliament imposing
duties and taxes on the American colonies.

As it is a subject in which every colony is deeply interested, they have no
reason to doubt but your house is duly impressed with its importance; and that
such constitutional measures will be come into as are proper. It seems to be
necessary, that all possible care should be taken that the representations of
the several assemblies, upon so delicate a point, should harmonize with each
other: The House therefore hope that this letter will be heartily considered in
no other light than as expressing a disposition freely to communicate their
mind to a sister colony, upon a common concern, in the same manner as they
would be glad to receive the sentiments of your or any other House of Assembly
on the continent.

The house have humbly represented to the ministry, their own sentiments: That
his Majesty's high court of parliament is the supreme legislative power over
the whole empire: That in all free states the constitution is fixed; and as the
supreme legislative derives its power and authority from the constitution, it
cannot over-leap the bounds of it, without destroying its own foundation: That
the constitution ascertains and limits both sovereignty and allegiance; and
therefore his Majesty's American subjects, who acknowledge themselves bound by
the ties of allegiance, have an equitable claim to the full enjoyment of the
fundamental rules of the British constitution: That it is an essential
unalterable right in nature, ingrafted into the British constitution, as a
fundamental law, and ever held sacred and irrevocable by the subjects within
the realm, that what a man has honestly acquired, is absolutely his own, which
he may freely give, but cannot be taken from him without his consent: That the
American subjects may therefore, exclusive of any consideration of charter
rights, with a decent firmness adapted to the character of freemen and
subjects, assert this natural constitutional right.

IT is moreover their humble opinion, which they express with the greatest
deference to the wisdom of the parliament; that the acts made there, imposing
duties on the people of this province, with the sole and express purpose of
raising a revenue, are infringements of their natural and constitutional
rights; because, as they are not represented in the British parliament, his
Majesty's commons in Britain, by those acts, grant their property without their
consent.

This House further are of opinion, that their constituents, considering their
local circumstances, cannot, by any possibility, be represented in the
parliament; and that it will forever be impracticable that they should be
equally represented there, and consequently not at all; being separated by an
ocean of a thousand leagues: That his Majesty's royal predecessors, for this
reason, were graciously pleased to form a subordinate legislative here, that
their subjects might enjoy the unalienable right of a representation. Also that
considering the utter impracticability of their ever being fully and equally
represented in parliament, and the great expense that must unavoidably attend
even a partial representation there, this House think, that a taxation of their
constituents, even without their consent, grievous as it is, would be
preferable to any representation that could be admitted for them there.

Upon these principles, and also considering that were the right in the
parliament ever so clear, yet for obvious reasons, it would be beyond the rule
of equity, that their constituents should be taxed on the manufactures of
Great Britain here, in addition to the duties they pay for them in England, and
other advantages arising to Great Britain from the acts of trade; this House
have preferred a humble, dutiful and loyal petition to our most gracious
Sovereign, and made such representation to his Majesty's ministers, as they
apprehended would tend to obtain redress.

They have also submitted to consideration, whether any people can be said to
enjoy any degree of freedom, if the crown, in addition to its undoubted
authority, in constituting a governor, should appoint him such a stipend as it
shall judge proper, without the consent of the people, and at their expense;
and whether, while the judges of the land, and other civil officers, hold not
their commissions during good behavior, their having salaries appointed for
them by the crown, independent of the people, has not a tendency to subvert
the principles of equity, and endanger the happiness and security of the
subjects.

In addition to these measures, the house have wrote a letter to their agent
Mr. DeBert, the sentiments of which he is directed to lay before the ministry;
wherein they take notice of the hardship of the act for preventing mutiny and
desertion, which requires the governor and council to provide enumerated
articles for the King's marching troops, and the people to pay the expense: And
also the commission of the gentlemen appointed commissioners of the customs to
reside in America, which authorizes them to make as many appointments as they
think fit, and to pay the appointees what sums they please, for whose
malconduct they are not accountable -- From whence it may happen that officers
of the crown may be multiplied to such a degree as to become dangerous to the
liberty of the people, by virtue of a commission which does not appear to this
House to derive any such advantages to trade, as many have been led to expect.

These are the sentiments and proceedings of this House; and as they have too
much reason to believe that the enemies of the colonies have represented them
to his Majesty's ministers and the parliament, as factious, disloyal, and
having a disposition to make themselves independent of the mother country, they
have taken occasion, in the most humble terms, to assure his Majesty, and his
ministers, that with regard to the people of this province, and as they doubt
not of all the colonies, that the charge is unjust.

The House is fully satisfied that your assembly is too generous and enlarged
in sentiment, to believe, that this letter proceeds from an ambition of taking
the lead, or dictating to the other assemblies: They freely submit their
opinion to the judgment of others, and shall take it kind in your House, to
point out to them any thing further which may be thought necessary.

This House cannot conclude, without expressing their firm confidence in the
King, our common head and father, that the united and dutiful supplications of
his distressed American subjects, will meet with his royal and favorable
acceptance.

Signed by the Speaker.

VIRGINIA, May 9, 1768.
SIR,
THE House of Burgesses of this colony proceeded, very soon after they met, to
the consideration of your important letter, of the 11th of February 1768,
written in the name and by order of the House of representatives of your
Province; and I have received their particular directions to desire you to
inform that honorable House, that they applaud them for their attention to
American Liberty, and that the steps they have taken thereon, will convince
them of their opinion of the fatal tendency of the acts of parliament
complained of, and of their fixed resolution to concur with the other colonies
in their application for redress.

After the most deliberate consultation, they thought it their duty to
represent to the parliament of Great Britain, That they are truly sensible of
the happiness and security they derive from the connexions with, and dependence
on Great Britain, and are under the greatest concern that any unlucky incident
should interrupt that salutary harmony, which they wish ever to subsist. They
lament that the remoteness of their situation often exposes them to such
misrepresentations, as are apt to involve them in censures of disloyalty to
their Sovereign, and the want of a proper respect to the British parliament:
whereas they have indulged themselves in the agreeable persuasion, that they
ought to be considered as inferior to none of their fellow subjects in loyalty
and affection.

That they do not affect an independency of their parent kingdom, the
prosperity of which they are bound to the utmost of their abilities to promote,
but cheerfully acquiesce in the authority of parliament to make laws for
preserving a necessary dependence, and for regulating the trade of the
colonies. Yet they cannot conceive, and humbly insist, it is not essential to
support a proper relation between a mother country and colonies transplanted
from her, that she should have a right to raise money from them without their
consent, and presume they do not aspire to more than the natural rights of
British subjects, when they assert, that no power on earth has a right to
impose taxes on the people, or take the smallest portion of their property,
without their consent, given by their Representatives in Parliament. This has
ever been considered as the chief pillar of the constitution; without this
support no man can be said to have the least shadow of liberty, since they can
have no property in that, which another can by right take from them when he
pleases, without their consent.

That their ancestors brought over with them entire, and transmitted to their
descendants, the natural and constitutional rights they had enjoyed in their
native country; and the first principles of the British constitution were early
engrafted into the constitution of the colonies. Hence a legislative authority,
ever essential in all free states, was derived, and assimilated as nearly as
might be to that in England; the executive power and the right of assenting or
dissenting to all laws reserved to the crown, and the privilege of choosing
their own representatives continued to the people, and confirmed to them by
repeated and express stipulations. The government thus established, they
enjoyed the fruits of their own labor with a serenity which liberty only can
impart. Upon pressing occasions they applied to his Majesty for relief, and
gratefully acknowledged they have frequently received it from their mother
country: Whenever their assistance was necessary, requisitions have constantly
been made from the crown to the representatives of the people, who have
complied with them to the utmost extent of their abilities. The ample provision
made for the support of the civil government, in the reign of King Charles the
second, and at his request, and the large supplies voted during the last war,
upon requisitions from his Majesty and his royal grandfather, afford early and
late instances of the dispositions of the assemblies of this colony, and are
sufficient proofs that the parliament of Great Britain did not, till lately,
assume a power of imposing taxes on the people for the purposes of raising a
revenue.

To say that the Commons of Great Britain have a right to impose internal taxes
on the inhabitants of this continent, who are not and cannot be represented, is
in effect to bid them prepare for a state of slavery. What must be their
situation should such a right be established? The colonies have no
constitutional check on their liberality in giving away their money, cannot
have an opportunity of explaining their grievances, or of pointing out the
easiest method of taxation, for their doom will generally be determined before
they are acquainted that the subject has been agitated in parliament, and the
commons bear no proportion of the taxes they lay upon them. The notion of a
virtual representation, which would render all our rights merely ideal, has
been so often and so clearly refuted, that nothing need be said on that head.

The oppressive stamp act confessedly imposed internal taxes, and the late acts
of parliament, giving and granting certain duties in the British colonies,
plainly tend to the same point. Duties have been imposed to restrain the
commerce of one part of the Empire that was likely to prove injurious to
another, and by this means the welfare of the whole promoted; but duties
imposed on such of the British exports as are necessaries of life, to be paid
by the colonists on importation, without any view to the interests of commerce,
but merely to raise a revenue, or in other words to compel the colonists to
part with their money against their inclinations, they conceive to be a tax
internal to all intents and purposes. And can it be thought just or reasonable,
restricted as they are in their trade, confined as they are in their exports,
obliged to purchase these very necessaries at the British market, that they
should now be told they shall not have them without paying a duty for them?

The act suspending the legislative power of New York, they consider as still
more alarming to the colonies, though it has that single province in view. If the
parliament can compel them to furnish a single article to the troops sent over,
they may, by the same rule, oblige them to furnish clothes, arms, and every
other necessary, even the pay of the officers and soldiers, a doctrine replete
with every mischief, and utterly subversive of all that is dear and valuable:
For what advantage can the people of the colonies derive from their right of
choosing their own representatives, if those representatives when chosen, not
permitted to exercise their own judgments, were under a necessity (on pain of
being deprived of their legislative authority) of enforcing the mandates of a
British parliament.

This, Sir, is a sketch of their sentiments, as they are expressed in a
petition to his Majesty, a memorial to the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and in a remonstrance to the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of
Great Britain in parliament assembled. In all these proceedings the council of
this colony have concurred, and have directed their agent, James Abercromby,
Esquire to join Edward Montague, Esquire the agent for this colony, in applying for
redress of the grievances they so justly complain of. Copies were delivered to
the president of the council, now commander in chief, who is desired to
transmit them to the secretary of state appointed by his Majesty to manage the
affairs of North America, and Mr. Montague is enjoined to consult the agents of
the other colonies, and to cooperate with them in every measure that shall be
thought necessary to be taken on this critical point.

They trust they have expressed themselves with a firmness that becomes freemen
pleading for essential rights, and with a decency that will take off every
imputation of faction or disloyalty. They repose entire confidence in his
Majesty, who is ever attentive to the complaints of his subjects, and is ever
ready to relieve their distress; and they are not without hopes that the
colonies united in a decent and regular opposition, may prevail on a new House
of Commons to put a stop to measures so diriectly repugnant to the interests
both of the mother country and her colonies.

In the name and by order of the House of Burgesses,

I am with the greatest respect, Your most obedient humble servant, PEYTON
RANDOLPH, Speaker.

To the Honorable the Speaker of the House of Representatives in the Province
of the Massachusetts Bay.
Colony of New Jersey, May 9, 1768.
SIR,
AS soon as the House of Representatives of this colony met, which was on the
12th of April, I laid your letter of the 11th of February before them.

Sensible that the law you complain of, is a subject in which every colony is
interested, the House of Representatives readily perceived the necessity of an
immediate application to the King, and that it should correspond with those of
the other colonies; but as they have not had an opportunity of knowing the
sentiments of any other colony, but that of the Massachusetts Bay, they have
endeavored to conform themselves to the mode adopted by you.

They have therefore given instructions to their Agent, and enjoined his
attention to the subject of their petition.

The freedom with which the House of Representatives of the Massachusetts Bay
have communicated their sentiments upon a matter of so great concern to all the
colonies, has been received by this House, with that candor, the spirit and
design of your letter merits. -- And at the same time, that they acknowledge
themselves obliged to you for communicating your sentiments to them, they have
directed me to assure you, that they are desirous to keep up a correspondence
with you, and to unite with the colonies, if necessary, in further
supplications to his Majesty, to relieve his distressed American subjects.

In the name and by order of the House of Representatives, I am, Sir, your most
obedient humble servant, CORTLAND SKINNER, Speaker.

To the Honorable the Speaker of the House of Representatives in the Province
of the Massachusetts Bay.
To the Hon. THOMAS CUSHING, Esquire Speaker of the late House of Representatives
of the province of the Massachusetts Bay.
December 31st, 1768. SIR,
BY order of the General Assembly of this colony, I am to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of the 11th of February last, and am directed to assure
you, that they are much obliged to your House of Representatives, for freely
communicating their sentiments, on a subject so interesting to all the
colonies; and are so far from considering it as a desire of dictating to the
other Assemblies, that they highly applaud them for their attention to American
Liberty, and hope the measures they have taken, on this important occasion,
will fully convince them, that the General Assembly of the colony of New York
harmonizes with those of the other colonies in their representations for
redress; -- they perfectly agree with your house, in their opinion of the fatal
consequences which must inevitably attend the operation of the several acts of
parliament, imposing taxes and duties in the American colonies; and have
therefore prepared petitions to his Majesty, and the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and a rerepresentation to the Commons of Great Britain, praying
relief from the grievances they labor under. They entertain with your house
the firmest confidence in his Majesty's known clemency, and tender regard for
all his subjects; and the candor and justice of the British parliament; and
are not without hopes, that the united supplications of all the colonies will
prevail on our most gracious Sovereign, and the Parliament, to grant effectual
redress, and put a stop, for the future, to measures so directly repugnant to
the true interest of the mother country and the colonies. In the name, and by
order, of the General Assembly,

I am, with the greatest respect, Your most obedient humble servant, PHIL.
LIVINGSTON, Speaker.
P. S. Robert Charles, Esquire Agent for this colony, at the court of
Great Britain, is instructed to cooperate with the Agents of the other
colonies, in their applications for redress.



Colony of Connecticut June 11th, 1768.
SIR,
BY order of the House of Representatives of this colony, I am to acknowledge
the receipt of your letter of the 11th of February last, communicating the
sense which the Representative Body of your province have of the great
difficulties to which they and their constituents must be subjected by the
operation of the several acts of the British parliament by you referred to, and
the measures they have gone into for obtaining redress of those grievances.

Your letter was laid before this House of representatives early in the session
which is now just closed. They consider the said acts of parliament in their
nature, tendency and operation, as matters of serious concern and very
interesting importance to this and all the English American colonies, and are
of opinion that no constitutional measures proper for obtaining relief ought to
be neglected by any, and that it is of importance their measures for that end
should harmonize with each other, as their success may in a great degree depend
on their union in sentiment and practice, on this critical and interesting
occasion.

The House therefore very kindly accepted your letter, and are persuaded from
the importance of the cause, the laudable zeal, and the generous exertions of
the province of the Massachusetts Bay, from time to time, in favor of her
constitutional freedom, that it proceeded only from a hearty concern for the
just rights, the common interest and welfare of these colonies.

This House are desirous ever to cultivate the strictest friendship and harmony
with the neighboring colonies, and with none more than yours, and will be
always ready to receive with the utmost candor their opinion in any matters of
general concern, and equally willing on all proper occasions to communicate
their own sentiments on any subject of our common welfare, in full confidence
they would meet with the same friendly and candid acceptance.

This House have also taken into their serious consideration the operation of
the said acts of Parliament, and are deeply sensible that this, in common with
her Sister Colonies, must thereby be involved in great difficulties, which are
perhaps a prelude to still greater, and have pursued measures for obtaining
redress similar to those adopted by the House of Representatives of your
province.

We cannot but entertain, with you, the strongest confidence in the King's
royal clemency, justice and goodness, and that the united, dutiful
supplications of his faithful distressed subjects, in America, will meet with a
kind and gracious acceptance.

In the name, and by order of the House of Representatives, I am Sir, with
great esteem and respect, your most obedient humble servant, ZEBULON WEST,
Speaker.

To the Honorable the Speaker of the House of Representatives in the Province
of the Massachusetts Bay.
To the Honorable THOMAS CUSHING, Esquire Speaker of the Hon. House of
representatives of the province of Massachusetts Bay.
Charlestown, South Carolina, July 10, 1768. SIR,
YOUR letter, directed to the Speaker of the Honorable House of
Representatives of the Province of South Carolina, dated the 11th of February
last, is just now come to my hands.

The commons House of Assembly of this province, ever attentive to the rights
and privileges of themselves, and their constituents in particular, and the
liberties of America in general, before their last adjournment, Ordered, the
committee of correspondence, to write to the agent in Great Britain, and
instruct him to join with the agents of the other provinces in America, in
obtaining a repeal of the several acts of parliament, which have lately been
passed, laying duties in America; and to endeavor to prevent the clause for
billeting soldiers in America, from being inserted in the next mutiny act which
shall be passed. And that they do further instruct the agent, to join the
agents of the other provinces, in all matters where the general interest of
North America is concerned. -- In consequence of this order, I have the
pleasure to acquaint you, that the committee of correspondence have, by letter
of the 15th of April last, given ample instructions to Mr. Garth, the agent, on
these important points.

The House adjourned on the 12th of April last, and have been since prorogued;
and as the time of their existence by law, will expire on the 18th of September
next, I think that they will not meet again; but that they will be speedily
dissolved, and writs be immediately issued for the election of a new Assembly;
for which reason, I am afraid, I shall not have an opportunity of laying your
letter before the present House; but this, I hope, will not be attended with
any inconvenience, as the steps are already taken, which you have so fully and
warmly recommended.

Persuaded, that notwithstanding the invidious light, in which his Majesty's
faithful colonies have been represented to their mother country, the time will
soon come, when they will have a fair and candid hearing, the consequence of
which must be a relief from all their grievances. I am, with great respect,
Sir, your obliged, and obedient servant,

P. MANIGUALT, Speaker of the Commons House of Assembly of the Province of
South Carolina.

Province of Georgia, 16th June, 1768.
SIR,
YOUR respected favor of the 11th February came to my hand only a few days
since. I am sorry it is not in my power to give you so full and satisfactory an
answer thereto, as the importance of the subject requires: The members of the
present Assembly of this province have but lately been elected, and though the
writs were returnable, and the House required to meet the first of this month,
yet our Governor thought proper, prior thereto, to prorogue the Assembly until
November; for this reason, Sir, I can only, for the present, reply to your
favor as a private person, or late Speaker, and inform you, that before the
dissolution of the last Assembly, the House took under consideration the
several late acts of Parliament for imposing taxes and duties on the American
colonies, and being sensibly affected thereby, ordered their committee of
correspondence to instruct our provincial agent, (Mr. Benjamin Franklin) to
join earnestly with the other colonies agents in soliciting a repeal of those
acts, and in remonstrating against any acts of the like nature for the future:
This instruction has been transmitted to Mr. Franklin, and I have no doubt but
he will punctually observe it. When the assembly meets I will lay your favor
before the House; and I am assured such measures will be pursued in consequence
thereof as will manifest their regard for constitutional liberty, and their
respect for the House of Representatives of the province of Massachusetts Bay,
whose wise and spirited conduct is so justly admired. I am, Sir, with the
utmost respect, your most obedient Servant,

ALEXANDER WYLLY.

To the Honorable the Speaker of the House of Representatives in the Province
of the Massachusetts Bay.
These are sufficient, as a proof, of what is advanced in respect of the
Colonies Application to the King. Other Colonies did the same.

Circular. No. 6.
WHITEHALL, April 21, 1768. GENTLEMENT,
I HAVE his Majesty's Commands to transmit to you the enclosed Copy of a Letter
from the Speaker of the House of representatives of the Province of
Massachusetts Bay, addressed by Order of that House to the Speaker of the
Assembly of each Colony upon the Continent of North America.

As his Majesty considers this Measure to be of a most dangerous and factious
Tendency, calculated to inflame the Minds of his good Subjects in the Colonies,
to promote an unwarrantable Combination, and to excite and encourage open
Opposition to, and a denial of, the Authority of Parliament, and to subvert the
true Principles of the Constitution -- It is his Majstey's Pleasure that you
should immeditately, upon Receipt hereof, exert your utmost Influence to defeat
this flagicious Attempt to disturb the Public Peace, by prevailing upon the
Assembly of your Colony to take no Notice of it, which will be treating it with
the Contempt it deserves.

The repeated Proofs which have been given by the Assembly of your Colony of
their Reverence and Respect for the Laws, and of their faithful Attachment to
the Constitution, leave little Room in his Majesty's Breast to doubt of their
showing a proper Resentment of this unjustifiable Attempt to revive
Distractions, which have operated so fatally to the Prejudice of this Kingdom
and the Colonies, and accordingly his Majesty has the fullest Confidence in
their Affections, and expects they will give him the strongest Proofs on this
and every other Occasion.

I am, with great Truth and Regard, Gentlemen, yours, etc. HILLSBOROUGH.

Extract of a Letter from the Earl of HILLSBOROUGH, dated Whitehall, April 22d,
1768.
IT gives great concern to his Majesty to find that the same moderation which
appeared by your letter No. 3, to have been adopted at the beginning of the
session in a full Assembly had not continued, and instead of that spirit of
prudence and respect to the constitution, which seemed at that time to
influence the conduct of a large majority of the members, a thin House, at the
close of the session, should have presumed to revert to and resolve upon a
measure of so inflammatory a nature as that of writing to the other colonies on
a subject of their intended representation against some late Acts of
Parliament. -- His Majesty considers this step as evidently tending to create
unwarrantable combinations, to excite an unjustifiable opposition to the
constitutional authority of Parliament, and to revive those unhappy divisions
and distractions which have operated so prejudicially to Great Britain and the
Colonies -- After what passed in the former part of the sessions, and after the
declared sense of so large a majority when the House was full -- His Majesty
cannot but consider this as a very unfair proceeding, and the resolutions taken
thereupon to be contrary to the real sense of the Assembly, and procured by
surprise; and therefore it is the King's pleasure, that so soon as the General
Court is again assembled at the time prescribed by the charter you should
require of the House of Representatives in his Majesty's Name, to rescind the
resolution that gave birth to the circular letter from the speaker, and to
declare their disapprobation of and dissent to that rash and hasty proceeding.

His Majesty has the fullest reliance on the affections of his good subjects in
the Massachusetts Bay, and has observed with satisfaction that spirit of
decency and love of order which has discovered itself in the conduct of the
most considerable of its inhabitants, and therefore his Majesty has the better
ground to hope that the attempt made by a desperate faction to disturb the
public tranquillity, will be discountenanced, and that the execution of the
measure recommended to you will not meet with any difficulty.

If it should, and if, notwithstanding the apprehensions which may be justly
entertained of the ill consequences of this factions spirit which seems to have
influenced the resolution of the Assembly at the conclusion of the last, the
new Assembly should refuse to comply with his Majesty's reasonable
expectations, it is the King's pleasure you should immediately dissolve them,
and transmit to me, to be laid before his Majesty, an account of your
proceedings thereon, to the end his Majesty may, if he thinks fit, lay the
whole matter before his Parliament, that such provisions as shall be found
necessary may be made, to prevent for the future a conduct of so extraordinary
and unconstitutional a nature. -- It is not his Majesty's intention that a
faithful discharge of your duty should operate to your own prejudice, or to the
discontinuance of any necessary establishment -- proper care will be taken for
the support and dignity of government.

No. XI. Circular. Duplicate.
Whitehall, Sep. 2, 1768. GENTLEMEN,
THE King having observed that the governors of his colonies have, upon several
occasions, taken upon them to communicate to their Councils and assemblies,
either the whole or parts of letters which they have received from his
Majesty's principal Secretaries of State; I have it in command from his Majesty
to signify to you, that it is his Majesty's pleasure, that you do not, upon any
pretense whatever, communicate to the Assembly any copies or extracts of such
letters as you shall receive from his Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State,
unless you have his Majesty's particular directions for so doing. I am,
Gentlemen,

Your most obedient humble Servant, HILLSBOROUGH.

Governor and Company of the Colony of Rhode Island.
Extract of a Letter from DENNYS DE BERDT, Esquire to THOMAS CUSHING, Esquire received
by the last packet, London, April 5, 1769.
SIR,
FROM the above account, it is plain that my Lord Hilsborough's representation
of my conduct, respecting the petition of the house, is a mere artful trifling
with words and forms, and convinces me of what I have before suspected, that
his Lordship is not pleased with your petitions or the spirit which produces
them.

He freely expresses his disapprobation to all agents, and recommends that the
business of the province should be transacted by the Governor with the
Secretary of State, which I am sure would not prove beneficial to the people.

The Resolves of the Lords spiritual and temporal in Parliament, assembled,
etc. referred to in the foregoing Narrative, viz.
Resolved,
THAT the votes, resolutions and proceedings of the House of representatives of
Massachusetts Bay, in the months of January and February last, respecting
several late acts of parliament, so far as the said votes, resolutions and
proceedings import a denial of, or do draw into question the power and
authority of his Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in Parliament assembled, to make laws and
statutes of sufficient force and validity, to bind the colonies and people of
America, subjects of the crown of Great Britain, in all cases whatsoever, are
illegal, unconstitutional and derogatory to the rights of the crown and
parliament of Great Britain.

Resolved* That the resolutions of the said house of representatives of the
province of Massachusetts Bay, in January last, to write letters to the several
houses of representatives, of the British colonies on the continent, desiring
them to join with the said house of representatives of the province of
Massachusetts Bay, in petitions which do deny or draw into question the right
of parliament to impose duties and taxes upon his Majesty's subjects in
America; and in pursuance of the said resolutions, the writing such letters, in
which certain late acts of parliament imposing duties and taxes are stated, to
be infringments of the rights of his Majesty's subjects of the said province,
are proceedings of a most unwarrantable and dangerous nature, calculated to
inflame the minds of his Majesty's subjects in the other colonies, tending to
create unlawful combinations, repugnant to the laws of Great Britain, and
subversive of the constitution.

The Humble ADDRESS of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
WE Your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal in Parliament assembled, return Your Majesty our humble Thanks for the
Communication Your Majesty has been graciously pleased to make to Your
Parliament of several Papers relative to public Transactions in Your Majesty's
Province of Massachusetts Bay.

We beg Leave to express to Your Majesty our sincere Satisfaction in the
Measure which Your Majesty has pursued for supporting the Constitution and for
inducing a due obedience to the Authority of the Legislature, and to give Your
Majesty the strongest Assurance that we will effectually stand by and support
Your Majesty in such further Measures as may be found necessary to maintain the
civil Magistrates in a due Execution of the Laws within Your Province of
Massachusetts Bay; and as we conceive that nothing can be more immediately
necessary, either for the Maintenance of Your Majesty's Authority in the said
Province, or for guarding Your Majesty's Subjects therein from being further
deluded by the Arts of wicked and designing Men, than to proceed in the most
speedy and effectual Manner for bringing to condign Punishment the chief
Authors and Instigators of the late Disorders; we most humbly beseech Your
Majesty that you will be graciously pleased to direct Your Majesty's Governor
of Massachusetts Bay to take the most effectual Method for procuring the
fullest Information that can be obtained concerning all Treasons, or
Misprisions of Treason, committed within his Government, since the Thirtieth
Day of December last, and to transmit the same, together with the Names of the
Persons who were most active in the Commission of such Offenses, to one of Your
Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State, in order that Your Majesty may issue
a special Commission for inquiring of, hearing and determining the said
Offenses within this Realm, pursuant to the Provisions of the Statute of the
Thirty-fifth Year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, in case Your Majesty
shall, upon receiving the said Information, see sufficient Ground for such a
Proceeding.

A genuine copy of a letter from a committee of merchants in Philadelphia, to
the committee of merchants in London.
Philadelphia, April 8, 1769, GENTLEMEN,
FROM your letters of the 4th and 26th of January, we observe the attention you
have paid to the memorial sent you by the merchants and traders of this city,
and the pains you have taken to obtain relief from the grievances therein
complained of; for which we thank you.

The answer you received from the department to which you applied, seems to
afford little hopes of obtaining redress, in a way that will put an end to the
unhappy difference that has arisen between Great Britain and her American
colonies.

We are told that the act imposing duties on glass, paper, etc. "is
inexpedient; but that such had been the unjustifiable conduct of some in
America, that the administration were of opinion the present juncture was not a
proper season for a repeal."

It were to be wished that administration would never err, or that those
affected by the errors of government would make known their complaints in a way
the least offensive; but as from the frailty of human nature neither is to be
expected, it would become persons in power to consider whether even the
"unjustifiable behavior" of those who think themselves aggrieved will justify
a perseverance in a measure confessed to be wrong. Certain it is that the
wisdom of government is better manifested, its honor and authority better
maintained and supported, by correcting the errors it may have committed, than
by persisting in them, and thereby risking the loss of the subjects affections.

We are at a loss to know what behavior the minister refers to, or who those
are with whose behavior he is disgusted. The Americans think that no people,
who have any regard for liberty, could in their circumstances show a more
respectful behavior. It is true, they cannot acquiesce in the Parliament's
claim to tax them; and considering themselves as British subjects, who cannot
of right be taxed but by their representatives, and knowing that the loss of
this privilege involves in it a loss of liberty, they conceive that earnest and
direct applications against acts of parliament, which destroy it, not only
justifiable, but necessary; and that their peaceable submission to such acts,
till the result of their applications is known, is the greatest proof they can
give of their affection for their parent country, and respect for the
parliament of Great Britain.

The administration, it seems, "are firmly resolved to oppose a repeal with
their utmost strength, while it shall be insisted on by threats from our side."
-- We are apprehensive that persons in power were greatly abused, and that the
people of America have been grossly misrepresented by some who wish well neither
to Britain nor America; otherwise the steps which they have taken to obtain
redress could never be looked on as threats. It is very unfortunate that the
dispute, which we fondly hoped was buried, and would have for ever lain dormant
under the repeal of the Stamp Act, is again revived by the late acts for
raising a revenue in America.

In a dispute of so important a nature, in which liberty is concerned, it is
not to be wondered if free born British subjects are warmed, and if every
argument is urged that can have any weight to secure to them a blessing they so
highly prize. Threats they never intended, but as all the American colonies
were equally affected, it was thought that their joint petitions would have
more weight; and for this end the several assemblies communicated their
sentiments to each other: This step, to the inexpressible surprise of all
America, is represented by Lord Hilisborough in a late letter as a flagicious
attempt, a measure "of a most dangerous and factious tendency, etc." The
dissolution of assemblies that followed this letter, and the measures pursued
to enforce the Acts in America, awakened the fears, and exasperated the minds
of the people to a very great degree.

They therefore determined not only to defeat the intent of the Acts, by
refraining from the use of those articles on which duties were laid, but to put
a stop to the importation of goods from Great Britain. Heretofore they had
almost entirely confined themselves to the use of British manufactures, and
from their affection to Great Britain showed a fondness to imitate her
fashions; but matters being now carried with so high a hand, they though it it
improper and injudicious to indulge that humor. This is the only threat we
know of, and if this is sufficient to engage the ministry to oppose a repeal of
the acts, we apprehend the ministry must by a change of measures endeavor to
regain the affections of the people before they can be induced to alter their
determination.

But we are told, that "if a proper disposition appears in the colonies, and
their merchants in a succeeding session shall think proper to petition
parliament on the principle of inexpediency only, there was every reason to
believe that no part of Administration will object to the repeal." In a matter
of so great consequence we should have been glad if the minister had declared
what "the proper disposition" is which he expects from the colonies.

The Americans consider themselves as British subjects, entitled to all the
rights and privileges of freemen. They think there can be no liberty without a
security of property; and that there can be no property if any can, without
their consent, deprive them of the hard earned fruits of their labor.

They know that they have no choice in the election of members of parliament,
and from their situation never can have any. Every act of parliament therefore
that is made for rasing a revenue in America, is, in their opinion, a depriving
them of their property without their consent, and consequently are invasions of
their liberty.

If then the acts cannot be repealed while the ministry objects, and if to
remove the objections the Americans must give up their sentiments, we must
heartily confess we have little hopes of a repeal ever taking place; much less
it is to be expected that the merchants will presume to petition parliament on
the principle of inexpediency only, when every assembly on the continent are
applying for a repeal on the principle of right. The merchants are too sensible
how jealous the Americans are of their liberty ever to hazard such a step. We
apprehend that advantage may have been taken from a supposed disunion of the
colonies, and therefore think it our duty to inform you, that the merchants of
this province have always agreed with the other colonists in opinion, "that the
late revenue acts were unconstitutional;" though they refused to adopt a
measure which at one time they believed to be premature. They were sensible
that mutual interest is the best cement of nations; that by trade and commerce
the union between Great Britain and the colonies is best preserved. They knew
that multitudes in Great Britain would be suffers by a suspension of trade with
her; they were willing therefore to try what could be done by a memorial to
their friends in England, who had so generally, and to so good purpose,
interposed before, and contributed so much to the repeal of the stamp act; but
no sooner were they apprized that no hope remained of a repeal in this session,
than they unanimously entered into the very agreement which some months before,
when proposed to them, they had declined.

This agreement being formed on mature deliberation, we are of opinion the
people of this province will firmly adhere to it. We are glad to hear the idea
of raising taxes in America begins among all ranks with you, of every party, to
lose ground: Happy had it been for both countries if it had never been started:
However, if the acts complained of are repealed, and no other of the like
nature are attempted hereafter, the present unhappy jealousies will, we
believe, quickly subside, and the people of both countries in a short time
return to their usual good humor, confidence and affection.

As it is uncertain whether the parliament, if they should think proper to
repeal the acts, laying a duty on tea, paper, glass, etc. imported into
America, will directly enter into a consideration of our other grievances, we
must content ourselves for the present with bearing our testimony against the
several regulations of which we complained in our memorial, and earnestly
request you to use your endeavors to obtain redress of those matters whenever
you imagine there is a probability of succeeding. We are, Gentlemen,

Your assured friends, and humble servants, John Ravnell, Wm Fisher, Abel
James, Hen. Drinker, G. Roberts, Tench Frances, John Cox, junior, Cha Thompson,
John M. Nesbit, Robert Morris, James Meese, John Rhea, Dan. Benezet, William
West, Tho. Mifflin, John Gibson, Joseph Swift, Alex. Huston.


To Mr. David Barclay, junior, Daniel Mildred, Thomas Powell, Dennys De Berdt,
Christopher Chambers, Frederick Pigou, junior, and Richard Neave, Merchants in
London.

