Mr. MURRAY unmasked.

In which among other Things, is shown, That his Doctrine of UNIVERSAL
SALVATION, is inimical to Virtue, and productive of all manner of Wickedness;
and that Christians of all Denominations ought to be on their guard against it.
-- Those who name the name of CHRIST, are also warned not to Rebel against the
Light -- lest by indulging themselves to wish the Unscriptural Doctrine true,
hearing it preached, and making themselves of a Party to promote it, they be
given up to believe a lie.

With a Short APPENDIX, Taken from the ESSEX GAZETTE, Containing the Address of
Mr. CHANDLER, of Gloucester, to the People of his Charge, With regard to Mr.
MURRAY.

By A. CROSWELL, Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in BOSTON.

If it were possible, they would deceive the very Elect.

MATTHEW. xiv. 24. Take heed what you hear.

MARK iv. 24. If there come any unto you and bring not this Doctrine, receive
them not into your Houses, neither wish them God speed.

2d Epist. John, 10. v. The Second EDITION greatly Enlarged.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by J. KNEELAND, in Milk Street. MDCCLXXV.

Mr. MURRAY unmasked.
MR. JOHN MURRAY, a little before his late evangelizing tour to the Eastward,
while preaching, was pleased to inform his auditory, that he had been
misrepresented as holding Universal Salvation; declaring he did not hold that
doctrine, but only Universal Redemption.

It may be proper to weigh Mr. Murray's declaration in the balance; and to give
him credit for all the truth there is in it.

And here -- not to insist on his being recommended at first, as one of Mr.
Relly's religion, who is the principal man for universal salvation; nor on his
recommending Mr. Relly's works in favor of that doctrine, as profitable for
the people of this Town, which he could not have done with a good conscience,
if he had not been like-minded: He himself for several months, has been
preaching universal salvation in Boston, perhaps as plainly, as Mr. Relly, or
any one else ever preached it in England. The doctrine, that all who ever have
lived, or shall live on God's earth, shall be saved with an eternal salvation,
is so contrary to the scripture, and so evidently tending to fill the world
with sin and wickedness of all kinds, that it is not to be wondered at, if the
preachers of this gospel, who cannot have a divine boldness, walk in
craftiness, and sometimes would have people think they deny it; whereby they
deceive the hearts of the simple. The foundation principle of the universalists
is, that since the human nature suffered, when Christ died, all that partake of
it, let them be never so bad, are pardoned and dearly beloved of God. Mr.
Murray, is as full in this, as Mr. Relly. For he declared lately, three times
over, before some hundreds of witnesses, that he held, -- The Almighty loves
all men on earth, even the most wicked and ungodly, as well as he loves true
believers. How shocking this to christian ears! Nay shocking to the Deists
themselves! He is not orthodox enough for them: For they look on it as a
dishonor to God to suppose vicious and wicked men are interested in his
favor. -- Mr. Murray must make the matter up with his good friends as well as
he can.
Now holding this universal love, is holding universal salvation. For if wicked
men cannot, by all their wickedness, separate themselves from the love of God
while they live; none will say they ever separate themselves from it, in that
state of darkness and ignorance, which is supposed to be assigned to them after
death: They must therefore abide in the love of God; and as Mr. Relly expresses
it, When Christ who is their life shall appear, they shall all appear with him
in glory. I believe Logicians will say, the latter doctrine is inseperably
connected with the former. -- This therefore would be enough to convict him:
But besides, the tenor of his preaching bears, testimony against him. It is
observable, that wherever Mr. Murray goes, wise men are all of one mind, as to
what the principles are which he preaches: In Boston they see eye to eye; it is
plain as the me^i^ian sun, that what he chiefly aims at, is to make people
believe, that let them be never so wicked, God loves them as well as if they
were the best of sai^^s, and that whatever any may suffer in a state of
purgation, they at last, and all the world, shall be saved.

Oftentimes it requires no depth of understanding to know what his drift is; it
is level to the meanest capacity: Which was particularly the case, in his long,
irrational, wicked and waggish exposition of the parable of the grain of
mustard seed, and the birds which lodged in the branches of it, when it grew up
to a tree (Matthew. chap. 13.) which made so much sport for several evenings. All
people of common sense saw, his main design was to let them know, that when the
birds, i. e. the devils, departed from the branches, i. e. men and women, which
would be at the last day, then all the human race would be happy forever. It is
to this very doctrine, that he owes his popularity: By this he recommends
himself to the sons of infidelity. For a Deist looks upon a preacher, who is so
free with the Bible, as to hold all men shall be saved, to be near a kin, and
calls him brother in his heart. In a word, young rakes, and old sinners, those
who are hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, and have no thoughts of
turning to God, must bear a warm side to him, for the benefit they receive from
his labors; they are delivered from the qualms of conscience, and walk in the
broad way with greater comfort, because they learn they can never sin
themselves out of the love of God, and that if they serve the devil all their
days, heaven will be their everlasting home. But to proceed --

Mr. Murray's denying, that he holds universal salvation, is the more
astonishing, because he has declared, in so many words, that he looked on the
opinion, that all shall be saved, to be the very doctrine of the Bible.

In the narrative of his conversation with a young preacher, assistant to Mr.
Lord of Norwich, Aug. 8. 1774. After Mr. Murray had said, since our lives are
hid with Christ in God, it is absurd to suppose that any men are sanctified or
made holy in part (which alone ought to make christians on their guard against
him.) The dialogue proceeds in the following words: -- Quest. 4. Do you suppose
that all mankind will partake of the life that is hid with Christ in God? Answ.
I hope so: I wish all men happy. Quest. further. But is it your fixed opinion,
that all mankind will be happy, or saved with an everlasting salvation? Answ.
The scriptures day so. Quest. Where do they say so? Answ. In many places; as 1.
All flesh shall see the salvation of God. And again, they shall all know me.
And again, as in Adam all died, so in Christ the second Adam, shall all be made
alive. And in thy seed, says God to Abraham, (which seed intends Christ) shall
all the families of the earth be blessed. These texts rightly understood, don't
help the cause at all: The true meaning of them may be found in the Expositions
of Mr. Henry, Dr. Doddridge, and others.


A true copy A Gentleman in town has the whole copy.
attest. David Huntington.

The reader, will observe, that in this dialogue, Mr. Murray declares,
universal salvation to be the very doctrine of the Bible: Which declaration is
as contrary to that which he made from the pulpit, Dec. 14. as the east is to
the west.

As both parts of a contradiction cannot be true, that which he asserted at
Norwich, or Boston, must be false. The latter is so evidently false, that were
he to say over a thousand times what he said in the pulpit, wise men, however
bias'd in his favor, could not force themselves to believe it. One would think
this disovery would be humbling, and that he would be shy of showing his face
again in that pulpit, where he was left to say, he did not hold all men should
be saved, even though he could get into it, without breaking open doors and
windows, and appearing like a thief and a robber. But none of these things move
him: He can put on a bold face, and make his hearers laugh and giggle; and
while he is able to do this, he may be sure of a train after him, in all
populous places. His charging one also with printing a falsehood, for saying he
asserted, that those who know themselves to be the devil's children, and wicked
men ought at the same time to believe they were God's beloved ones; had no more
truth in it than the abovementioned declaration. And it is remarkable that
providence, which protects the innocent, brought it to pass, that he justified
him whom he had accused with his own mouth, three times over, in the great
congregation. What is the reason this preacher has so little regard to truth?
It is the easiest thing in the world to account for it: It is owing to the
gospel which he preaches. According to him, if any should be of the character
of him, mentioned in the Spectator, who took pains to avoid speaking truth, and
should lie like satan all their days, they would be as dear to God as any of
his saints; and these beloved liars, would at last be received into the
heavenly mansions, which Christ as their forerunner, is gone to prepare for
them! This is encouraging the lying business, quite as much as satan could
expect from a christian preacher! Nor is there any doubt but any one who
believes all this, would balk the truth, were he tempted to it, and thought
none would ever know it, but God who loves all liars so dearly, and will love
them forever. The Popish religion encourages one sort of lying; but this
encourages all sorts. And there is full as much reason that the men of this
Creed, should be disqualifyed for taking an oath, as the Papists themselves.
And there is no doubt, but if God should suffer it to spread in Europe and
America, the legislature would take care, that the proselytes should be legally
incapacitated for any offices which required an oath, and for being evidences
in any court of judicature. Nay, as has been hinted, not only lying, but all
sorts of wickedness are promoted by this new gospel. What glad tidings of great
joy must it bring to drunkards, animating them to go on impoverishing their
families, destroying their health, and drowning reason and conscience; to
believe that the almighty has no greater favorites on earth, than the
greatest sots, and that if they should die martyrs to Bacchus, they shall be
raised to eternal life at the last day?

The same may be said of whoremongers and adulterers. No doubt a dreadful sound
is sometimes in their ears, when they think of those words; Whoremongers and
adulterers God will judge; but how must they be heartned to believe that God
loves them as well as if they were chaste; and that they shall at last be
presented before the throne of Christ's glory with exceeding joy! It is easy to
see that knaves, cheats, thieves and robbers, must be multiplied and
encouraged, by the same comfortable gospel. To mention no more (I speaks now
only of the body) it is a murdering gospel. How easily can satan persuade a man
to gratify his revenge, or avarice, by shedding his brother's blood, who
believes that the words spoken to Daniel, O man greatly beloved of God, are
applicable to every murderer; and that all murderers shall have eternal life?
The shocking accounts we have heard or read of murders, are nothing for number
to what they would have been, if this bloody gospel had been commonly received:
And if God should suffer the leaven to spread in the christian world, one may
foretell, without a spirit of prophesy, that thousands and ten thousands will
be murdered by it. Those words of our Savior, by their fruits ye shall know
them; are applicable to doctrines as well as to men. Paul tells the Colossians,
the gospel he preached among them and others, brought forth fruit, i. e. the
doctrine of life and salvation by faith in Christ: Whoever received it as a
divine record, brought forth fruit unto God. But the gospel that all men shall
be saved, whether they believe or not, causes those who embrace it, as we have
seen, to bring forth fruit unto satan. And there is no doubt but satan would be
glad to have ten thousand preachers of it, spread up and down through all
Christendom. And as such preaching is so evidently inimical to all virtue, and
productive of all vice, no one can be a consistent friend to morality, who is
not an enemy to it. The judicious have observed, that if it were really true,
it would not be worth while for any to take pains in preaching it, since it
would only make people in all respects worse than they were before. It is
remarkable that Mr. Relly himself (so great was the force of truth!) owned in a
pamphlet which Mr. Mason answers, That the preaching of it, would not be for
the glory of Christ, nor for the real happiness of men. It seems as if it made
him shudder to think of the horrible crop of wickedness which would be produced
by sowing that seed. And were Mr. Murray to inform him that not only vain,
carnal, hardened, deistical persons rejoiced in his light; but that some FEW of
a more serious character heard him gladly; it would not he good news from a far
country, unless he has much more zeal for a bad cause, than he had when he
wrote that piece.

It may not be amiss to say something here of the pedigree of this doctrine of
universal salvation. It is not the Proton Pseudos; it is a derivative; it is
the very bad offspring of as bad a parent. The parental divinity to which it
owes existence (I will not mention the father's name) is, That the innocent
Jesus was not punished for guilty men; and that because the human nature
suffered, when Christ suffered, all that partake of it, are pardoned and loved
of God. As if Christ did not his own self, bear our sins in his own body on the
tree: This is denying the Lord that bought us! All who swallow universal
salvation, swallows this blasphemy Mr. Relly in his Union, for several pages
together, argues from the truth, wisdom, justice, holiness and love of God, to
prove it is absolutely impossible to be true, that Jesus Christ, who knew no
sin, was punished for guilty sinners of Adam's race. This Mystery of Iniquity,
which is a sort of bible to the party, is about to see the light in America: It
is to come out by thousands, like the smoke of the bottomless pit, to hide the
sun light of the gospel.
along with it. It is melancholy to think that the preachers of this gospel, so
bad in its effects, as well as pedigree, should meet with any encouragement in
town or country! But, whatever other encouragement he meets with, he has not
the comfort to think that serious christians, who know what he is after, pray
for the blessing of God on his labors. For, how dares any one go into his
closet and pray that God by his Spirit would influence people to believe it is
the doctrine of the bible, that God loves the devil's children as well as his
own; and that all Christ's implacable enemies when he comes the second time to
judge the world in righteousness, shall be blessed and happy for ever? Serious
admirers would tremble at this: And yet let me tell them, they cannot with a
good conscience encourage his preaching, unless they can find in their hearts,
to pray this prayer. And it is not only melancholy, but very surprising that
some of Mr. Whitefield's zealous admirers in one place and another, should
receive this man as a teacher sent from God. For what concord was thee between
Mr. Whitefield and him? Mr. Whitefield preached much legal terror; this man
none at all. Mr. Whitefield directed awakened sinners to get into a state of
justification, by looking to Christ the antitype of the brazen serpent: This
man preaches all men are already in a state of justification, without either
faith or works. Mr. Murray told the Public, he held, Justification by faith
with works; and yet he knew as well as that he had a soul in his body, that he
held what he was charged with, that men are in a state of justification without
faith, and without works too. This is most evident from his forementioned
threefold declaration before a cloud of witnesses, viz. 'that he held, that all
men, even the most wicked and ungodly under heaven, are interested in the love
of God, as much as true believers' What did he do with his conscience? It is
wicked to talk deceitfully for God. But Mr. Murray imitates the pious frauds of
the Romish Clergy, who establish a false religion with falsehood.
Mr. Whitefield was forever preaching regeneration, and the necessity of our
being sanctified by the spirit: Mr. Murray holdss it to be absurd to suppose
any christians on earth are sanctified by the spirit of God. In a word, Mr.
Whitefield, in his last visit, condemned universal salvation as doctrine that
peopled Hell! So that according to Mr. Whitefield, none go to heaven who
believe Mr. Murray's gospel! There is such a thing as witchcraft in religion. O
foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you? And all Mr. Whitefield's admirers,
whom Mr. Murray can persuade to admire him, may be said to be bewitched by him.

It is said to be the plan, that Mr. Murray is to have a Society, and a Meeting
House, provided for him. But it cannot be supposed they will have a church. For
they hold, the world is the church, and the church is the world; The word
church in scripture, don't stand for all the world, but for those who by
profession are separated from it. The original word signifies those who are
gathered from among men. Nothing can be more absurd, than to suppose all the
world are gathered from among men. A right understanding of the meaning of that
one Greek word, might have prevented a great deal of nonsense in preaching and
printing. Possibly Mr. Relly, who has used it so many years, may be unwilling
to part with it; like the Popish priest, who said, he would never part with his
old Mumpsimus, for a new Sumpsimus.
and own all carnal, wicked and atheistical persons to be their beloved
brethren in Christ Jesus. Nay, from their love to these diabolical members of
their catholic (worse than Roman catholic) church, they conclude they are
passed from death to life, and shall escape that Pugatory, which is to be the
portion of others. Besides we may argue they will have nothing to do with the
low ordinances of baptism, and the Lord's supper, because Oracle Relly, in his
idolized sermon on our life's being hid with Christ in God, speaks very
contemptibly of the spirituality of those who mind these visible things. One
may venture to say of their intended society, at least what Mr. Relly said of
the preaching his own doctrine of universal salvation; 'that it would not be
for the honor of Christ, nor the real happiness of men.' Nor would any thing be
more displeasing to those, who love the prosperity of Zion in this town and
elsewhere. For they who make the cause of Christ their own, and love the souls
of men, must feel their hearts pained within them to think, so great a
corrupter of the word of God should preach any where, and especially in
populous places; and more particularly at such a time as this. For New England
never saw so dark a day: It is a day of rebuke and distress from the Lord of
hosts, who dwells in mount Zion. The hearts of many are failing for fear; and
God is calling us loudly by his providence, as well as word, to repent. But
will Mr. Murray be of the character of those preachers, whom Paul styles
workers together with God? No: he will be a worker against God. He will
persuade people they have no need of repentance, by assuring them, if they
serve the devil all their days, God will love them as well as if they served
him; and that if they never repent, or are converted, their sins shall be
blotted out when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the
Lord. In direct opposition to Acts 3d. v. 19. The reason why the Author don't
multiply scripture passages against the impleaded doctrine is, that every
honest man who reads the bible, must be able to bring an hundred plain texts,
to prove, that only those who believe in Christ, and repent of their sins, will
be blessed and happy at the resurrection.


God's permitting this man to visit these parts, and to sow his tares so
plentifully in this distressed town, is very puzzling. The ways of heaven are
intricate and dark! But the scriptures not only assure us that there will be
heresies in the last days, but furnishes us with a reason, 1 Cor. xi. ver. 19.
For there must be also heresies among you, that they which are approved may be
made manifest among you: i. e. that such honest hearts as will bear the trial
may be set in view, and appear faithful by their constant adhering to the
truth, notwithstanding all temptations of seducers.

This is the reason that this man has been suffered to visit this land; and
particularly this town, viz. that it might appear who would be carried away
with every wind of doctrine, and embrace another gospel; and who would hold
fast the form of sound words delivered to us, and be like mount Zion that can
never be moved. The Author, with suitable respect to his fellow christians,
would propose what appears to him the will of God on this occasion.

We learn from Joh. ii. epist. v. 10. That if any man bring not this gospel,
which Paul preached, (and we are sure Mr. Murray does not) we are not to
receive him into our houses, nor to wish him God speed; i. e. any ways to
encourage him as a preacher It is a fault in those who are fully convinced of
the falsehood and danger of his doctrine, to hear him so much as once. To hear
him for curiosity, or diversion after such conviction, is what no conscientious
person will plead for. And we should all pray to God for ourselves (and others
too) that we may be established by him, and not suffered to fall from our own
stedfastness. We should pray, that we may be kept from believing the doctrine
of vicarious punishment to be false, and from believing the doctrine of
universal salvation to be true, in the face of a thousand texts of scripture.
We should take heed of an undue biass from others, either in a way of hope or
fear. And we should see to it, that we don't indulge ourselves in wishing the
doctrine true, in hearing it preached, and making ourselves of a party to
promote it; lest we be given up to believe a lie.

Here it may be said, cannot a man who believes that gospel, be in a state of
salvation? How can he be, if he hopes for salvation only because all shall be
saved? This hope is not founded on the word of God, but on a contradiction to
it, and cannot be the hope which makes not ashamed. It may be said, Joy is a
fruit of the spirit; and the proselytes say, they never knew what spiritual joy
meant, till they believed the glad tidings of great joy -- that the whole world
shall be saved. Mr. Baxter informs us it was common in his day for those who
embraced dangerous errors to boast of their uncommon joys. It is one thing for
a man's religion to make him glad; and another to have joy in the Holy Ghost.
Satan can easily help them to strong consolations, who are under strong
delusions. Only that joy can be from God, which is the effect of believing the
gospel of God, viz. that believers, and they only shall be saved. But may not
they whose faith is of the operation of God, afterward turn Universalists? It
is not easy to conceive that they who have been taught by the word and spirit
of God, should embrace a religion so contrary to both. But if it were possible
that one who had received Paul's gospel as the word of God, should afterward
receive Mr. Relly's gospel as the word of God, it could be only for a time;
otherwise the elect might be finally deceived. The writer can never think, one
who is not only almost, but altogether a christian, will ever live and die a
believer of the latter gospel.

But it is time to think of a conclusion. -- The author has used great
plainess of specch, and been fervent in spirit: Which will need no excuse with
those who realize that the glory of Christ, and the salvation of souls, are
concerned in the controversy. Nor is he careful about the event with regard to
himself: For one can never repent of what was done honestly for Christ, let the
consequences be what they will. His zeal has not been against the Man, but
against the Doctrine.

He can say with confidence toward God, that he wishes Mr. Murray all
happiness in this world, and eternal life in that which is to come! And that in
order to it, he may be a disbeliever of his own Gospel.

May GOD, by his word and Spirit, guide him into all truth: Or however keep him
from misguiding others.

FINIS.
APPENDIX. Containing the Address of Mr. CHANDLER, With regard to Mr. MURRAY.
My Brethren and Friends,
I HAVE much sorrow of heart, considering the state of affairs among us. -- I
am far advanced in life, and labor under threatening maladies, and know not
how soon I may be taken from you, and from this world. As one drawing near the
eternal world, I would give you caution. "Take heed what you hear." The seeds
of heresy are sowing and sprouting up among us; and souls are in danger of
being seduced into errors.

There is one, who calls himself John Murray, who has declared the following
things to be his settled opinion. -- That the whole human race, every one of
Adam's posterity, have an interest in Christ, and are God's beloved ones --
That the whole human race, every individual of mankind, shall be finally saved
-- That Judas shall sit upon a throne in the kingdom of heaven -- That at death
the good go into happiness, and the bad into an intermediate state, a place of
misery, to abide there for a certain season, but shall finally be saved; which
however dressed up in soft terms, and smooth expressions, is the very Popish
purgatory.

The substance of these things, and many other errors, he has openly avowed
and fully declared to be his sentiments, at my house, in the hearing of many
witnesses. These are unscriptural tenets, and notwithstanding all his
perverting of the holy scriptures, and wresting and torturing the word of God,
he was not able to produce one plausible proof, nor one rational argument for
the support of these pernicious principles. They naturally lead to many other
gross errors and Popish absurdities. -- And they are extremely dangerous to the
souls of men: They encourage, the wicked in their wickedness; for upon these
principles a man may live and die in sin, and yet get to heaven at last; he may
get drunk, and commit fornication and adultery; he may cheat, and steal, and
lie, and indulge all manner of carnal gratifications and be saved
notwithstanding. -- But you may say you don't discover any of these errors in
his preaching -- Why others who have beeen accounted serious, discerning,
judicious men, and whose judgment would heretofore have had some weight in your
minds, have discovered them in his public discourses.

But however he seems artfully to hide them. -- Your minds are not prepared to
receive them; your affections must first be broke off from your ministers, and
your minds filled with prejudices against them, by their being reviled and
vilified, and your affections set upon himself, and you brought to receive the
words of his mouth with an implicit faith, then doubtless these dangerous
doctrines, and many others will be inculcated.

My brethren and friends, I must caution you to take heed and beware of false
teachers -- Beware, lest ye be led away with errors, and fall from your
stedfastness -- Beware of false prophets* concerning whom our blessed Savior
has warned us, "that if it were possible they shall deceive the very Elect."

Samuel Chandler.
Gloucester, Feb. 3. 1775.

