THE CRISIS. NUMBER X.
SATURDAY, March 25, 1775.
LETTER II. To the Right Honorable LORD APSLEY, Lord Chancellor of England.
March 6, 1775. My LORD,
I SHALL begin this letter to your Lordship, with an extract of a letter I
addressed some time since to Lord Mansfield, because I know how exactly your
Lordship's capacity is fitted to think just as he thinks.

To him observed; -- to your Lordship I repeat it. --

"That in matters of private property we see the same bias and inclination to
depart from the decision of your predecessors, which you certainly ought to
receive, as evidence of common law; instead of those certain positive rules, by
which the judgment of a court of law should invariably be determined, you have
fondly introduced your own unsettled notions of equity and substantial justice.
Decisions given upon such principles, do not alarm the public so much as they
ought, because the consequence and tendency of each particular instance is not
observed, or regarded." But the day is now come, my Lord; the public have taken
the alarm; your Lordship's lawless decision, in the court of Chancery, in the
cause of Thickness and Liege, and the manner in which it was corruptly
affirmed, in the House of Lords, has shook the kingdom to its very basis. Till
that fatal day, my Lord, the supreme tribunal of this country stood
un-impeached and un-polluted, as to matters of private property; but that was a
day in which a deed was done, that even Lord Mansfield durst not become a
partisan.

That day, my Lord, was only a grievous day to the appellant, but it will prove
a fatal blow to Britain.

When the foundations of justice are so corrupted, that the first law officer
in the kingdom shall dare to stand forth, in the highest court of judicature,
knowing that he has assistant judges, determined to support him in reading
letters containing the opinions of men not judges in that court, in order to
affirm a decree unsupported by argument, and in direct contradiction to a
former and recent judgment of that house, the day cannot be very remote, when
the nation, the laws, and the violators of them will all be involved in one
common ruin.

Your Lordship is now brought to a greater tribunal than even the House of
Lords,

The Tribunal of the PUBLIC.

You stand charged, my Lord, at that awful bar, with setting at defiance those
laws you were so shamefully appointed to support, in order to affirm a wicked
decree, without law to sustain it, or an argument to give even a color to
shade it. You did it, my Lord, by the assistance of that Buckhorse Bully Lord
Denbigh, who assasinated justice, and stifled every idea of honor or humanity;
till he had driven every honest man, but Lord Camden, out of the House! He, it
is true, was not to be menaced from his duty by the grossest language, nor
frightened from his post by the foulest fiend who ever appeared in human form.

Are you not afraid, my Lord, to lie down in your bed, knowing, for you do know
it, that you have sacrificed a whole family to your vanity, and thereby ruined
a gentleman, who has eight children; the eldest of whom is next heir to a seat
in that house you have so openly dishonored, by plundering his father, and
family, of their legal property.

I have seen, my Lord, a copy of this gentleman's letter, written to his eldest
son, now at Gibraltar, the day after he was sacrificed at the altar of
ministerial justice.

In that pathetic letter, my Lord, the highly injured, and deeply afflicted
father, after informing his son with the foul doings of your Lordship, and your
wicked coadjutors, adds,

"And now, my dear son, let me call upon you, as your affectionate father, and
as your faithful friend (for be assured I am both) never to enter the House of
Lords, without casting your eyes about you, and saying, in this house my father
was defrauded of ten thousand pounds; and if ever you should be called to sit
in judgment there, never take your seat in it, without looking up to heaven,
and calling upon God, in a short prayer, to enable you upon every occasion to
divest yourself of party zeal, all personal pique, all private resentment, and
so to enlighten your mind, and direct your heart, that in all you say or do, it
may be conformable to that godlike precept of doing as you would be done by. If
you do not this; then, to God, I offer up this my fervent prayer, that you may
never have any voice where justice ought to be administered."

Can your Lordship sustain the horrid reflection of the deed you have done? Of
that BLACK DAY'S WORK! Can the soothing gentle manners of that flattering low
born He is the son of an old clothes man.
Perrin, or the smiles of your obsequious Register, divert you from feeling the
most pungent remorse? Or do they, by telling you, how much they approve your
decree, make your pliant mind easy? My Lord, I know they tell you so; but I
will tell you, my Lord, that they durst not say so to any lawyer.

There is but one opinion among them, and that is (you shall hear it, my Lord,
while Junius can hold a pen, and you the seals) that Lord Mansfield singled
your Lordship out as a vain, weak, and wicked wretch to support the same false,
and unsettled doctrines in the Court of Chancery, which he has so long, and so
shamefully practiced in the Court of King's Bench; and which he has address
enough to give sanction to, even without appearing in person, to appeals in the
House of Lords.

When Lord Camden, with that gentleness of manners, which ever accompanies
solid sense, and unshaken integrity, told your Lordship, that no man's opinion,
however high his station, or however great his abilities, if not a judge in
that court, could be produced or read, least it should influence any of the
Lords in their judgments; you had the boldness to stand forth, and casting down
your hat, with which you ought to have hid your face, you persisted in reading
Sir William De Grey's letter, because your bully, Lord Denbigh, said he would
read another to the same purpose, if he had it.

Sir William De Grey's letter was then read by your Lordship! His opinion, it
seems, coincided with the Duke of Chandois's, Lord Denbigh's, and the two
Scotch Lords, who sat for Lord Mansfield.

By these worthy Peers, my Lord, and two silent Bishops, your Lordship's (I
mean Sir William De Grey's) decree was affirmed without a division!

The week and feeble efforts of Lord Camden were overpowered by your Lordship's
great abilities, and nobly sustained by Lord Denbigh, and your other auxiliary
troops.

That Sir William De Grey's detection has produced in him both shame and fear,
is very obvious, for he never suspected you would so openly publish his secret
instructions, as his letter to the appellant, Thickness, will clearly evince;
and I make no doubt if I can prevail upon your Lordship to attend to what the
world thinks, and to understand what I say, you will be equally ashamed; though
I confess not equally criminal with Sir William De Gray. I say not equally
criminal, my Lord, for God forbid I should think the crimes of so contemptible
a wretch as your Lordship are equal to those of a man as capable of torturing
at once the laws, and involving them, and a whole family, in one common ruin,
as even Lord Mansfield himself.

Copy of Sir WILLIAM DE GREY's Letter to PHILIP THICKNESS, Esquire
SIR,
I AM very sorry that you press me so much to speak more explicitly upon the
subject of your letter.

I do not think that I can, with propriety, give an answer to the question you
are pleased to ask me.

Feb. 21, 1775. I am, Sir, your most obedient humble servant, WILLIAM DE GRAY.


In a former paper (No. VII.) I gave your Lordship a copy of Sir William De
Grey's first prevaricating letter to the appellant, Thickness. On that letter I
made but one comment. On this I shall, at present, make only one other. Either
Sir William De Gray (I will not blot my paper with calling him a Chief Justice)
cannot support Lord Mansfield's decree, and is ashamed to repeat your
Lordship's unmeaning jargon about substantive gifts, or he has received farther
orders.

I shall conclude this letter to your Lordship, by observing that there are
still a few people disposed to think favorably of you, and to impute the black
part of this transaction to Sir William De Gray; because they confess the
weakness of your head, and lament, as a national misfortune, that a man of such
contemptible abilities, as your Lordship's, and at such a time too, should
disgrace the British nation, in holding the highest law department in it,
without talents to acquit yourself with common decency, even in the lowest; but
some men are still willing to hope your are honest.

Now, my Lord, for their sake, and for your own also, either answer the
following question fairly and openly, or for ever decline holding out lights to
dazzel the world with false marks of your virtue or integrity. Would the
selling a living, to Dr. Dodd, or his buying it of you, have been half so
criminal as what you are now charged with?

Did not your late deceased brother, Mr. Benjamin Bathurst, keep his money,
when he had any, at Messrs. Hoare's in Fleet Street? And did he not frequently
over draw on that very respectable house? My Lord he did; you know he did; and
did not you, his executor, when you settled the affairs, and possessed his
property, refuse to allow that house a sum of money your necessitous brother
had over drawn upon it, under the shameful, shameful, did I say! under the
infamous pretense, that they could not recover it, the time being lapsed!

If this be true, my Lord, and facts you know are obstinate things, the world
will then be as fully satisfied about the rectitude of your heart, as they have
always been about the extent of your genius. They will then be of one mind, as
to your Lordship, whatever they think of JUNIUS.

I never yet knew a man perfectly sober, taking pains to convince every man he
met, that he was so; but a drunken man is always acting the part of a sober
one; when you rung the alarm about Dr. Dodd, I violently suspected you, and
soberly set you down for the man all the world will now believe you to be. And
therefore I must repeat, what I said before, the nation will no longer bear
with you; your Lordship cannot, after such foul proceedings, hold the great
seal.

Cambyses, King of Persia, finding that his Chief Justice, Sisamnes, had
pronounced an unjust sentence, caused him to be executed and flayed, and with
his skin covered the common seat of justice; then constituted Otanes, his son,
judge in his room. He sat, my Lord, upon his father's skin, which probably put
him in mind of his own: And Perrin will make the application for your Lordship;
and, if he be not ashamed, remind your Lordship of the fate of the two time
serving judges, Epsom and Dudley, who were hanged in the reign of Henry the
Seventh. Of this transaction one of the greatest lawyers, and most upright
judge this nation ever was blessed with, makes this remarkable epiphonema.

"Qui eorum vestigus insistunt, eorum exitus prehorres cant. -- Those that dare
tread in their steps, let them dread or expect the same dismal end."

In my next I shall lay before the public some farther traits of your
Lordship's public and private life, for be assured I will never drop my
attention to you while you continue to hold the seals.

The public are desired to observe the cunning of that most artful, as well as
most wicked of men, Lord Mansfield. His Lordship first planned the affirming
the decree, made by his Chancellor in the above cause, in order to reak his
private vengeance on Thickness; and then, in a matter in which he was totally
indifferent about the issue, he affects to correct Lords L -- Despencer, and
Denbigh, for interfering in nice points of law. This reprimand was taken in
good part, the two Lords were instanly convinced of their error. They made
proper and public acknowledgment of their ignorance in the tithe cause, but
Lord Denbigh's villainy, in the former cause, is to pass unnoticed.

JUNIUS.

[To be continued.]
(Price TWO PENNIES.)


