THE CRISIS. NUMBER XV.
SATURDAY, April 29, 1775.
-- Similis frondescit virga. --
A constant scourge -- still I Will renew the charge,
And lash the tyrant as his crimes enlarge.

A Foolish King grasps at wealth and power, as the ends, a wise King uses them
as the means of government. With the one they are gorgeous, vain appendages of
royalty; with the other, they are happy instruments of benevolence. A foolish
King eyes liberty askaunt, and execrates it as the bane of greatness; a wise
King knows that neither kingdom nor Sovereign can be great without it. The fool
endeavors to root up what the patriot King most assiduously cultivates. A weak
Prince is jealous of liberty in its lowest branches. Hence it is, that he not
only strikes at the rights and privileges of his people, but is mean enough to
envy the immunities of a corporation. He starts at shadows. In such a reign
even commercial meetings are odious, because they are composed of freemen. Even
Common-halls are an unlawful Congress; like that in America, they are deemed
rebellious associations. How sophistically do ministerial scribblers labor to
draw an artful veil over such political transgressions as Sovereigns without a
blush avow? Can the sagacious Doctor Johnson (that ministerial hackney) any
longer rally the well grounded jealousies of England and America? Can he now
ask these croakers of calamity, how slavery can be brought from America into
England? If he dares. I refer him for his answer to Lord Hertford (one of the
state nurserymen) who sowed a subtle feed or two of slavery, even in our
metropolis the other day. I hope, however, that these feeds will be severely
choked by the rank and stubborn weed of liberty. A weed it is now deemed in the
cabinet, and in the legislature, and in both condemned to be rooted up. A crop
far more promising is expected. The experiment of raising it by slow degrees
has just been made. His Majesty, sick of all addresses but those of his
faithful Parliament, has just declared, "that he will not receive, on the
Throne, any address remonstrance or petition of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
the city of London, but in their corporate capacity." Thus is the notice worded
by Lord Mansfield, Lord Chief Justice (not of the ceremonies) but of England.
The reason, or rather the design of this is plain. For all acts done in their
corporate capacity, the city of London is responsible as a corporation. Neither
the proceedings, the resolves, nor the Congress of a Commonhall, can forfeit
the charter of the city; the offenses (such as petitions) of the city, as a
corporation, may. In the one case they act in their political capacity, in the
other they do not. The Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Liverymen, are individuals,
but the Corporation has but one neck. This ministerial mousetrap is baited by a
Lord Chief Justice of England, whose duty it most clearly is, for I will teach
it him, to carry the balance with an even and an equal hand, between the just
prerogatives of the crown, and the undoubted privileges of the subject.

I make no doubt but a Mansfield and a Thurloe will conduct the intended scheme
as well as a Jefferies or a Sawyer. The memorable case of the seven Bishops in
James the Second's time, is now forgot at court, and petitions are once more
degenerated into crimes.

Though the actual annihilation of the city charter may not be intended, as it
cannot be the interest of the crown to check any source of wealth, yet the
menaces, and intimidating prosecutions of a rapacious ministry, may be expected
to have the same happy effects as threatening letters sometimes have among
thieves. They found it so lately, in the case of the East India Company, and it
is not improbable that their audacity may strengthen with their hopes.

Toys and baubles must be bought, and babyhouses must be crowded to amuse and
divert vacant Sovereigns, and ravens must have food. The numerous mouths of
corruption must be stopped. Too many stratagems, for the sake of wealth and
arbitrary power, cannot be tried. For gold every coffer, for power every vein
must bleed. The predictions of America, in respect to England herself, are now
verifying. They are coming forward, by slow degrees, at this instant. Our
ministers of late have had a strange appetite for charters. In Wilkes's case
they had the daring impudence to attack the great charter of England for the
sake of power. They have since been nibbling at the East India Company's, for
the sake of wealth and power both; the company compounded and acquiesced. They
are striking again at charters in America (as their retained and pensioned
advocate Dr. Johnson says) for the sake of power, and they now have their eye
upon the charters of London for a royal reason, -- for the sake of pursuing the
commercial interests of this kingdom.

But are the petitions of Common-halls, or Common-halls themselves so dreadful?
Are the meetings, or more properly the great Councils, of this metropolis so
terrible? Are they not the meetings of meritorious citizens and loyal subjects?
In both these capacities they have addressed, and in both they have offended.

How harsh and grating is the voice of truth! How unhallowed are the lips that
dare to utter it before the throne! Approach it, ye British slaves, upon the
knee; adore it with prostration, but profane it not with a petition! Upon this
mercy seat, alas, the Sovereign will no more receive petitions from his
faithful citizens and friends, from those who supply his wants, his
superfluities, his extravagancies, and his plenteous coffers. Upon this sacred
seat he can only listen to the sycophantic addresses of a corrupt and
destructive Parliament; those leeches of the realm who so largely drain, for
their own abandoned uses, those coffers which his repulsed citizens so largely
fill.

How like a God does a Monarch look encircled by treacherous minions and
rapacious flatterers! How like a mere mortal surrounded by subjects most
affectionate and sincere, who shower down at once both supplies and blessings
upon a Prince whom they honor, esteem and love!

But Kings should quit the tract of mortals, they should disdain the little
virtues of humanity! The spirit of a Monarch should aspire at an excentric
character beyond the reach of man. This will nobly lead him not to endure, but
to repel the humble suits of his aggrieved subjects; not to caress, but to
detest his people; not to sooth, conciliate and appease, but to menace, insult
and exterminate; not to human errors, but inhuman crimes; not to reformation,
but to murder. Not to justice, but to tyranny. Not to peace and honor, but to
remorse, hatred, calamity, resistance and the scaffold.

Let such Princes, like that unhappy tyrant Charles the First, seek in vain for
shelter amongst the fawning herds that idolize their vices, for the sake of
sharing their prodigality and profusion.

Let them try their faithful Scots, who, as they have often received the wages
of corruption, will a second time receive the price of blood.

Let them fly to the arms of those tender tyrants their preceptors, who have
thus carefully trained them to their ignominy and ruin from their cradle.

Whilst they repulse a suffering and an injured subject, let them fall, for
consolation, upon the friendly bosom of a Mansfield or a Bute. -- Let them, in
their frenzy, fly for succor to their Chancellor, -- not a York, alas, but an
Apsley, the poor shadow of a Mansfield! Let them most deservedly taste all the
bitterness of despair and find relief (though late) at last, in the generous
condescension and forgiveness of a despised, insulted, and oppressed people.

Astonished then, my Lord Mansfield, not at the humble, just petitions, but at
the lenity of their patient subjects, let them deliver up their minions to the
block, with shame and contrition resign the crown, and sleep ignobly with their
fathers; but let their infamy be recorded, that succeeding Princes may profit
largely from such weak and guilty annals.

CASCA.

(To be continued.)
(Price ONLY TWO COPPERS.)


