THE DUTY OF STANDING FAST IN OUR SPIRITUAL AND TEMPORAL LIBERTIES, A SERMON,
PREACHED IN CHRIST-CHURCH, JULY 7th, 1775.

Before the FIRST BATTALION of the City and Liberties of PHILADELPHIA; And now
published at their Request.

By the REVEREND JACOB DUCHE, M. A.

PHILADELPHIA. PRINTED AND SOLD BY JAMES HUMPHREYS, JUNIOR. THE CORNER OF
BLACK-HORSE ALLEY, FRONT-STREET.

M,DCC,LXXV.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY GEORGE WASHINGTON, ESQUIRE, GENERAL AND COMMANDER IN CHIEF
OF ALL THE FORCES OF THE UNITED ENGLISH COLONIES IN NORTH AMERICA, THIS SERMON,
AS A SMALL TRIBUTE OF RESPECT FOR HIS MANY AMIABLE VIRTUES AS WELL IN PRIVATE
AS IN PUBLIC LIFE, IS MOST HUMBLY AND AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED BY THE AUTHOR.

PRAYER before SERMON.
O THOU infinitely great and glorious GOD! whose providential sway extends
over all thy works! GOD of the armies of HEAVEN! guardian GOD of nations, as
well as individuals here upon EARTH!

LOOK down in mercy, we beseech thee, upon the whole human race! and hasten
that glorious period, in which all the kingdoms of the world shall become the
kingdoms of the LORD and of his CHRIST!

SHOWER down thy peculiar blessings upon the universal church, even the whole
congregation of christian people, to whatever sect or denomination they may
belong!

AND herein, accept our most fervent prayers in behalf of thy servant, but our
dread Sovereign Lord King GEORGE. Endue him plenteously with heavenly gifts,
and grant him in health and wealth long to live! Inspire him with the true
spirit of wisdom and government! Teach him, that his highest temporal glory
must consist in preserving to a free people their undoubted birthrights as
men, and as Britons!

REMOVE far from his Royal Person all those, who would seek to change his
government into oppression, and to gratify their own licentious desires at the
expense of the blood and treasure of his subjects!

SURROUND him with counselors eminent for their piety and virtue, well
acquainted with, and well affected to our happy constitution, equally
distinguished for their exemplary conduct in private life, and their
disinterested attention to the public weal!

EXTEND thy compassionate regards to the whole body of his subjects, as well in
Great Britain and Ireland as in these his American dominions. Heal, O Father of
mercies, heal, we beseech thee, our present unhappy divisions! Let us once more
rejoice in that delightful union and intercourse which has heretofore
subsisted betwixt us and our Parent-land; and remove every envious obstacle,
that may yet hinder us from embracing as brethren of the same family!

FOR this most desirable purpose, we pray, that thou would be in a peculiar
manner present with all those, who are entrusted with our great American cause,
as well in council as in the field! Give them wisdom to devise, and firmness to
execute, such measures for the restoration of public peace and harmony, as may
consist with that true Liberty, which is equally removed from base
licentiousness on the one hand, and as base submission and slavery on the other!

AND, while we are thus contending for our temporal rights, O suffer us not to
forget, or be less zealous for those more important spiritual privileges, which
have been purchased for us by a Redeemer's blood! deliver us from the bondage
of our corruption! Enable us to stand fast in our gospel freedom! And, after
seeking first the establishment of thy Kingdom and the righteousness thereof in
our hearts, may we hope and trust with full confidence in thee, our God and
Father, that all other blessings of a temporal nature will be added unto us!

THESE things we ask, not for any merits of our own, but for the sake and
through the merits of the dear son of thy love CHRIST JESUS our LORD, in whose
most blessed name and words, we humbly and affectionately address Thee, as Our
Father which art in Heaven! etc.

SERMON, etc.
GALATIANS, CHAP. V. Part of FIRST Verse. STAND FAST, THEREFORE, IN THE LIBERTY
WHEREWITH CHRIST HAS MADE US FREE.
GENTLEMEN of the FIRST BATTALION of the City and Liberties of PHILADELPHIA,
THOUGH I readily accepted of the invitation, with which you were pleased to
honor me, and am fully satisfied that there can be no impropriety in complying
with your request, yet I confess, that I now feel such an uncommon degree of
diffidence, as nothing but a sense of duty, and a sincere sympathy with you in
your present trying circumstances could enable me to overcome. The occasion is
of the first importance: the subject in a great measure new to me -- Throwing
myself, therefore, upon your candor and indulgence, considering myself under
the twofold character of a minister of JESUS CHRIST, and a FELLOW-CITIZEN of
the same state, and involved in the same public calamity with yourselves; and
looking up for counsel and direction to the source of all wisdom, "WHO GIVES
LIBERALLY TO THOSE THAT ASK IT -- I have made choice of a passage of scripture,
which will give me an opportunity of addressing myself to you as FREEMEN, both
in the spiritual and temporal sense of the word, and of suggesting to you such
a mode of conduct, as will be most likely, under the blessing of Heaven, to
ensure to you the enjoyment of these two kinds of Liberty. STAND FAST,
THEREFORE, IN THE LIBERTY, WHEREWITH CHRIST HAS MADE US FREE.

THE inspired Author of this excellent Admonition was so sensible of the
invaluable blessings and comforts that resulted from that free spirit, with
which JESUS CHRIST through his Ministry, had established his Galatian Converts,
that he was jealous of the least attempt to destroy or even obstruct in them
its life-giving operation. He could not brook the narrow spirit of those
Judaizing Christians, who, from the most selfish and illiberal motives, sought
to force a yoke upon the necks of their Gentile Brethren, which neither they
themselves nor their Fathers had been able to bear. These Gentiles too he
severely reproves for not maintaining their ground, and asserting their Gospel
Freedom against the insidious devices of their Brethren, who only wanted to
bring them into servitude, "THAT THEY MIGHT GLORY IN THEIR FLESH." -- "O
FOOLISH GALATIANS! WHO HAS BEWITCHED YOU?" He ascribes their blindness and
infatuation to some diabolical charm, which had locked up the powers of their
freeborn spirits, and made them tamely submit to slavish, carnal ordinances,
which the Gospel of JESUS had entirely exploded and abolished. He reminds them,
by a spirited explication of a most striking allegory, that they were not
"CHILDREN OF THE BONDWOMAN, BUT OF THE FREE;" that their observance of the
ceremonial law was a tribute, which they were not bound to pay; or, if they
should be so weak as to submit to it, that it could not emancipate them from
the bondage of earth and hell; but that their real freedom, their full and
complete justification, their happiness temporal and eternal were only to be
acquired by a vigorous exertion of those spiritual powers within themselves,
which, through the riches of GOD'S free grace in CHRIST JESUS, had been
communicated to their souls. He concludes this part of his address with the
truly noble and apostolical precept of my text: STAND FAST, THEREFORE, IN THE
LIBERTY, WHEREWITH CHRIST HAS MADE US FREE.

HAVING thus briefly opened the occasion and meaning of the words, I shall
proceed to show, in the first place, what we are to understand by that
SPIRITUAL LIBERTY, "WHEREWITH CHRIST HAS MADE US FREE," and what kind of
conduct that must be, which is here expressed by the words "STAND FAST."

I. HOWEVER severe, my dear Brethren, the loss of our temporal Liberties may
be, there is certainly a Bondage far more severe than this, yea, far more
cruel, than that of ISRAEL under their EGYPTIAN Taskmasters. A Bondage, not
only to men, but to the fallen spirits of darkness, seeking to exercise over us
a joint power and dominion with our own irregular and corrupt passions. A
Bondage universal, from which no Son of Adam has ever been exempt; a tyranny,
whose baleful influences have been felt from the fall of man down to this very
day. It has seized not only upon the body, but upon the soul. It has erected
its throne in the heart, and from thence imposes its arbitrary decrees. It is
confined to no age or sex, no state or condition of human life. High and low,
learned and unlearned, the savage and the sage, are alike the victims of this
despotic power, alike slaves by nature under this bondage of corruption.

IT is perpetually manifesting itself under a variety of forms, according to
our prevailing desires and pursuits. It follows us into the Sanctuary of God.
It steals into our private devotions. It gives a pharisaical tincture to our
best good works. It reigns as a master and absolute Sovereign in the wicked and
unregenerate. Yea, it frequently enters the most spiritual and regenerate
hearts in hostile form, and seeks to shake their confidence in the goodness of
their true and rightful Sovereign, and their humble hope of deliverance through
the redeeming power of his ever-blessed Son.

NOW, who would not wish to be delivered from such a bondage as this? And yet,
my brethren, such a wish cannot be formed, 'till, by divine grace, the
freeborn powers of the soul are brought to be sensible of their burden, and to
groan beneath the weight of oppression. "THE WHOLE (or they that think
themselves whole) NEED NOT A PHYSICIAN, BUT THEY THAT ARE SICK." The madman
hugs his chains, as if they were ensigns of royalty. Insensible of his
calamity, he cannot even wish for relief.

BUT no sooner does the child of grace, the offspring of Heaven come to feel
the bondage of the infernal usurper; no sooner does he find himself harrassed
and oppressed by the obedience which he exacts to his unrighteous laws; no
sooner is he convinced, that such an obedience must terminate in ever-lasting
slavery and wretchedness, than he awakens from his sleep of security, and turns
to and avails himself of that light, and strength, and spiritual courage and
constancy, which his Redeemer is ever at hand to impart, and without which he
feels himself absolutely unequal to the conflict, and incapable of extricating
himself from the ignoble servitude.

FROM hence then it appears, that the LIBERTY, WITH WHICH CHRIST HAS MADE US
FREE, is nothing less than such a release from the arbitrary power of sin, such
an enlargement of the soul by the efficacy of divine grace, and such a total
surrender of the will and affections, to the influence and guidance of the
divine Spirit, ("FOR WE ARE MADE A WILLING PEOPLE IN THE DAY OF GOD'S POWER")
as will enable us to live in the habitual cheerful practice of every grace and
virtue here, and qualify us for the free, full and uninterrupted enjoyment of
heavenly life and Liberty hereafter.

THESE glorious privileges being once obtained, the sinner being once
justified, and adopted into the family of God, and having received the seal of
his heavenly citizenship, the conduct recommended to him in my text as the most
effectual for the preservation of these privileges, is here expressed by the
words "STAND FAST:" that is to say:

"MAINTAIN, firm and unshaken, the ground which CHRIST has given you. Be ever
vigilant and prepared against the open or insidious attacks of your adversary."

HE is not commanded to march upon the Devil's ground, to seek out the temper
or the temptation, in order to make a trial of his strength, or merely that he
may have the honor of a victory: But only to "STAND FAST," to act upon the
defensive, and, armed at all points with a celestial panoply, to be ready to
resist and repel the most daring attempts of his perfidious foe: As well
knowing, that if he suffers himself to be taken captive, slavery and woe must
be his everlasting portion; but, if he comes off conqueror from the conflict,
that the life, liberty and joys of Heaven will be his everlasting reward.

THUS far have I traveled in a well known path, and spoken a language familiar
to most of you, and which you have long been accustomed to hear from this
Pulpit.

II. I AM now to strike into another path, which, though it may not always
terminate in such glorious scenes of never-ending felicity as the former, yet,
if steadfastly pursued, will conduct the sons of men to an happiness, of an
inferior kind indeed, but highly necessary to their present temporary state of
existence in this world.

IF SPIRITUAL LIBERTY calls upon its pious Votaries to extend their views far
forward to a glorious HEREAFTER, CIVIL LIBERTY must at least be allowed to
secure, in a considerable degree, our well-being HERE. And I believe it will be
no difficult matter to prove, that the latter is as much the gift of GOD in
CHRIST JESUS as the former, and consequently, that we are bound to stand fast
in our CIVIL as well as our SPIRITUAL FREEDOM.

FROM what has been said under my first head of discourse, I think it must
appear, that LIBERTY, traced to her true source, is of heavenly extraction,
that divine Virtue is her illustrious parent, that from eternity to eternity
they have been and must be inseparable companions, and that the hearts of all
intelligent beings are the living temples, in which they ought to be jointly
worshipped.

We have the authority of divine Revelation to assert, that this globe of earth
was once the favored spot, on which she was sent to reside, and that the first
man felt and enjoyed her divine influence within and around him. But the same
Revelation tells us, what our own experience cannot but confirm, that when man
lost his virtue, he lost his Liberty too; and from that fatal period, became
subject to the bondage of corruption, the slave of irregular passions, at war
with himself and his own species, an alien from his native country, a sorrowful
stranger and a weary pilgrim in this world of woe.

IT was not only to put him into a capacity of regaining his forfeited heavenly
bliss, but to mitigate, likewise, the sorrows of his earthly sojourn, that the
EVERLASTING JESUS, in and by whom GOD originally created man, vouchsafed to
communicate to him, when fallen, a ray of hope, a spark of heavenly light,
wisdom, power and goodness, by which, through the effectual workings of his
grace, he might, in future time, inspire him and his hapless posterity with
such principles as would lead them to know, contend for and enjoy Liberty in
its largest, noblest extent.

WHATEVER of order, truth, equity and good government is to be found among the
sons of men, they are solely indebted for to this EVERLASTING COUNSELOR, this
PRINCE OF PEACE. By nature surrounded with innumerable wants, which his own
single unassisted hand could by no means supply, exposed to innumerable
dangers, which his utmost strength and sharpest foresight could not possibly
ward off, it must surely have been this WISDOM OF THE FATHER, that first taught
man, by SOCIAL COMPACT, to secure to himself the possession of those
necessaries and comforts, which are so dear and valuable to his natural life.
And though no particular mode of government is pointed out to us in his holy
gospel, yet the benevolent spirit of that gospel is directly opposed to every
other form, than such as has the COMMON GOOD of mankind for its end and aim.

NOW this COMMON GOOD is matter of COMMON FEELING. And hence it is, that our
best writers, moral and political, as well Clergy as Laity, have asserted, that
true government can have no other foundation than COMMON CONSENT. It Is the
power, the wisdom, the majesty of the people committed to ONE, to a FEW, or to
MANY -- yea, in some hitherto favored states, the ONE, the FEW, and the MANY,
have been entrusted together, that they might mutually control and be
controuled by each other.

INASMUCH, therefore, as this solemn Delegation was intended for the good of
the whole; inasmuch as all Rulers are in fact the Servants of the Public, and
appointed for no other purpose than to be "A TERROR TO EVILDOERS, AND A PRAISE
TO THEM THAT DO WELL; whenever this divine order is inverted, whenever these
Rulers abuse their sacred trust, by unrighteous attempts to injure, oppress,
and enslave those very persons, from whom alone, under GOD, their power is
derived -- does not humanity, does not reason, does not scripture call upon the
Man, the Citizen, the Christian of such a community to "STAND FAST IN THAT
LIBERTY WHEREWITH CHRIST (in their very birth, as well as by succeeding
appointments of his Providence) HAS MADE THEM FREE?"

THE Apostle enjoins us to "SUBMIT TO EVERY ORDINANCE OF MAN FOR THE LORD'S
SAKE." But surely a submission to the unrighteous ordinances of unrighteous
men, cannot be "FOR THE LORD'S SAKE: For "HE LOVES RIGHTEOUSNESS, AND HIS
COUNTENANCE BEHOLDS THE THINGS THAT ARE JUST."

POSSESSED, therefore, of these principles -- Principles, upon which the
present constitution of BRITAIN was happily settled at one of her most glorious
and memorable aeras, and upon which alone it can still be supported --
Possessed of these principles. I trust it will be no difficult matter to
satisfy your consciences with respect to the righteousness of the cause, in
which you are now engaged.

THE struggle, it is true, is an unnatural one. The hard necessity of standing
upon our defense against our brethren, children of the same family, educated in
the same manners, the same religion with ourselves, bound together by a long
reciprocation of endearing offices, by a long participation of common
blessings, and of common dangers and distresses, mutually protecting and
protected by each other. -- The hard necessity, I say, of defending ourselves,
our just and undoubted rights against such unnatural adversaries, (though sadly
to be lamented, as one of the heaviest judgments with which Heaven could visit
us for our iniquities) ought not, however, to make us surrender at discretion,
or discourage us from "STANDING FAST IN THAT LIBERTY, WHEREWITH CHRIST (as the
great providential governor of the world) HAS MADE US FREE."

WE venerate the Parent Land from whence our progenitors came. We wish to look
up to her as the GUARDIAN, not the INVADER of her children's rights. We glory
in the name of children. But then we wish to be treated as children -- And
children too, that have arrived at years of discretion.

BUT, if we are to judge from the late ungenerous and ill-digested plans of
policy, which have been adopted by those whom she has entrusted with the
powers of Administration, we cannot but think, that they began to be jealous of
our rising glory, and, from an ill-grounded apprehension of our aiming at
independency, were desirous of checking our growth.

YET why this unseasonable and unrighteous jealousy? -- We wish not to
interfere with that commercial system, which they have hitherto pursued. We
have not even stretched our expectations beyond the line, which they themselves
had drawn. We wish not to possess the golden groves of Asia, to sparkle in the
public eye with jewels torn from the brows of weeping Nabobs, or to riot on the
spoils of plundered provinces. HERE perhaps it may be objected, that the
Americans do with a very ill grace censure their English brethren, either for
their iniquitous conquests in Asia, or for the luxuries thereby introduced
among them, whilst they themselves are rioting upon the labor of thousands of
their own species, torn away from their native retreats, from their dearest
relations and friends, and doomed to a most abject and perpetual slavery --

IN answer to this objection it may be asked -- Where did this infamous
commerce originate? And where is it still carried on with all the eagerness
which avarice can inspire? Where, but in England? -- By what means can it be
abolished? Surely by that power alone, which America acknowledges the parent
state may justly exercise over all her dominions, viz. the power of regulating
their trade? --

Is it not well known, that the legislatures of some of the colonies have done
what they could to put a stop to the importation of African slaves, by loading
it with the heaviest duties? And that others have attempted the total abolition
of it, by acts of assembly, which their Governor refused to pass, have then
petitioned the parent state for new instructions to their Governors on this
head, and after all, have failed of success?

IT is however, devoutly to be wished, that when a happy reconciliation once
takes place, this poisonous branch may entirely be shut out, before our great
commercial stream becomes so infected by the contagion, as to endanger the
health and security of the whole empire.


We rather tremble for the parent state, and would fain keep off from our own
borders, those luxuries, which may perhaps already have impaired her
constitutional vigor. We only wish, that what we have we may be able to call
OUR OWN; that those fruits of honest industry, which our ancestors had acquired
or those which have been, or may be added to them by the sweat of our own brows
should not be wrested from us by the hand of violence, but left to our own free
disposal; satisfied as we are in our consciences, that when CONSTITUTIONALLY
called upon, we shall not give "GRUDGINGLY OR OF NECESSITY", but cheerfully and
liberally.

And as to any pretensions to, or even desire of independency, have we not
openly disavowed them in all our petitions, representtations and remonstrances?
Have we not repeatedly and solemnly professed an inviolable loyalty to the
person, power and dignity of our SOVEREIGN, and unanimously declared, that it
is not with HIM we contend, but with an envious Cloud of FALSE WITNESSES, that
surround his throne, and intercept the sunshine of his favor from our
oppressed Land?

IF, notwithstanding all this, BRITAIN or rather some degenerate sons of
BRITAIN, and enemies to our common Liberty, still persist in embracing a
DELUSION, and believing a LIE -- if the sword is still unsheathed against us,
and SUBMIT OR PERISH is the sanguinary decree -- why then -- I CANNOT close the
sentence -- Indulge a Minister of JESUS! -- My soul shrinks back with horror
from the tragic scene of fraternal slaughter -- and the free spirit of the
citizen is arrested by the tenderness of Gospel love. -- GRACIOUS GOD! stop the
precious effusion of British and American blood -- too precious to be spared in
any other cause than the joint interest of both against a common foe! --

PAINED, as I am at this melancholy prospect, I mean not, however, to decline
addressing you in your military capacity, and suggesting such a conduct for the
preservation of your temporal rights, as by the blessing of Heaven, will be
most likely to ensure you success.

"STAND FAST" then.

I. "STAND FAST" by a strong FAITH and dependence upon JESUS CHRIST, the great
Captain of your Salvation. Enlist under the Banner of his Cross. And let this
motto be written upon your hearts, IN HOC SIGNO VINCES, "UNDER THIS STANDARD
THOU SHALL OVERCOME."

II. "STAND FAST" by a virtuous and unshaken UNANIMITY. Of such an unanimity,
you have a most striking example now before your eyes -- three millions of
people, or a vast majority of them, bound by no other ties than those of honor
and public virtue, voluntarily submitting to the wise Political Determinations
of an Honorable Council of Delegates assembled by their own free and unbiassed
choice. Avail yourselves of this illustrious example. Be unanimous in your
particular department. And as one refractory spirit may defeat the best-devised
plan of operations, and throw your whole Corpse into confusion, see that this
unanimity be productive of a just and becoming SUBORDINATION.

REMEMBER, the Gentlemen who command you are your Neighbors, Friends and
Fellow-Citizens, who have their ALL at stake as well as you. Their authority
has not been imposed upon you. They were invested with it by yourselves. It Is
surely your part then to support them in the just execution of it; not
doubting, but that on their part they will always consider, that they are not
called to lord it over mercenaries, but affectionately to command Freemen and
Fellow Sufferers. Accustom yourselves, therefore, to discipline now; or else,
when the day of trial comes, (which Heaven avert!) you will too late lament
your unhappy neglect.

III. STAND FAST" by an undaunted COURAGE and MAGNANIMITY. And here give me
leave to remind you, that there is a kind of courage, which seems to be merely
animal or constitutional. -- This may stand a Soldier in good stead perhaps for
a few moments amid the heat and fury of a battle when his blood and spirits are
set on fire by the warlike sound of drums and trumpets. But I would have YOU
possessed of more than this, even a courage that will prove you to be good
Christians, as well as good Soldiers, a firm invincible fortitude of soul,
founded upon religion, and the glorious hope of a better world; a courage, that
will enable you not only to withstand an armed phalanx, to pierce a squadron,
or force an entrenchment, when the cause of virtue and your country calls you
to such a service, but will support you, likewise, against the principalities
and powers of darkness, will stand by you under the assaults of pain and
sickness, and give you firmness and consolation amid all the horrors of a
deathbed scene.

SUCH a courage as this too will always be tempered with prudence, humanity,
and greatness of soul. It will never degenerate into Savage cruelty and
barbarity. If to spread undistinguishing ruin and devastation through a
country; if with more than Gothic rage, to break into the sweet retreats of
domestic felicity and drive the aged and the helpless from their once quiet
habitations -- O my GOD! if this be heroism, if this be military virtue --
suffer not our people to learn the destructive art. Let them rather continue to
be injured and oppressed themselves, than taught thus wantonly to injure and
oppress others. This caution, however, is unnecessary to you. Permit me, then
only to observe, that in our present circumstances, we contend not for Victory,
but for Liberty and peace.

NOR let me dismiss this head of advice without reminding you of the glorious
stand that has been already made for us by our northern Brethren, and calling
upon you to thank Heaven for his great and gracious interposition. Surely "the
Lord of Hosts was with them" -- surely "the God of Jacob was their refuge." --
Drop a pious tear to the memory of the illustrious slain -- and let them yet
live in the annals of American Freedom.

LASTLY, "STAND FAST" by a steady CONSTANCY and PERSEVERANCE. Difficulties
unlooked for may yet arise, and trials present themselves sufficient to shake
the utmost firmness of human fortitude. Be prepared, therefore, for the worst.
Suffer not your spirits to evaporate by too violent an ebullition now. Be not
too eager to bring matters to an extremity; lest you should be wearied out by a
continued exertion, and your constancy should fail you at the most important
crisis. Coolly and deliberately wait for those events which are in the hands of
Providence, and depend upon him alone for strength and expedients suited to
your necessities.

IN a word, my brethren -- though the worst should come -- though we should be
deprived of all the conveniences and elegancies of life -- though we should be
cut off from all our usual sources of commerce, and constrained, as many of our
poor brethren have already been, to abandon our present comfortable habitations
-- let us, nevertheless, "STAND FAST" as the Guardians of LIBERTY -- And though
we should not be able to entertain the Heaven-born Maid, with such affluence
and splendour, as we have hitherto done, let us still keep close to her side, as
our inseparable companion, preserve her from the violence of her adversaries,
and, if at last necessary, be content to retire with her to those peaceful,
though homely retreats of rural life, in which she was first entertained by our
venerable Ancestors -- determined to contend to the very last for such an
illustrious Prize, and never to part with her, but for the more sure and
complete enjoyment of her blessings in a World of Glory.

"NOW, THEREFORE, BE STRONG, O ZERUBBABEL, AND BE STRONG, O JOSHUA, THE SON OF
JOSEDECH THE HIGH PRIEST, AND BE STRONG, O YE Counselors, Generals, and PEOPLE
OF THE LAND; FOR I AM WITH YOU, SAYS THE LORD OF HOSTS. -- LOOK UNTO ME, AND
BE SAVED, ALL YE ENDS OF THE EARTH! Even so, grant, thou great and glorious
GOD, that to thee only we may look, and from thee experience that deliverance,
which we ask, not for any merits of our own, but for the sake and through the
merits of the dear Son of thy love CHRIST JESUS our Lord! To whom, with thee, O
FATHER, and thee O BLESSED SPIRIT! Three persons in one eternal GOD, be
ascribed all honor, praise, and dominion now, henceforth and forever!

FINIS.

