THE CRISIS. NUMBER XIV.
SATURDAY, April 22, 1775.
The present necessary defensive war, on the part of America, justified by the
laws of God, nature, reason, state and nations; and therefore no treason or
rebellion.

IT must be apparent to every Englishman, not blinded by malice or ignorance,
that the Americans, by raising forces, and taking up arms, have no intention to
offer violence to his Majesty's person, crown or dignity, nor to draw any
English blood; but only to defend themselves, their rights and liberties,
against encroaching violence and lawless power, to rescue his Majesty out of
the hands of his present evil malignant advisers, to bring him back to a just
sense of his duty, and those delinquents to condign punishment, who are now
engaged in a desperate conspiracy against the natural rights of mankind. The
Americans have endeavored, by every possible means, to accommodate the present
unhappy dispute with the King and his infernal minions, upon just, reasonable,
and honorable terms, but hitherto in vain. His Majesty having, contrary to his
oath, his duty, and the fundamental laws of God and the realm, sent an army of
mercenary soldiers to America against his subjects, for the avowed and open
purpose of robbing them of their peace, their rights, their liberties, their
properties, or their lives, and to impose unlawful taxes by force of arms; the
Americans may lawfully and justly, by the great principles of the constitution,
without any treason or rebellion, take up arms in defense of their privileges,
laws, lives, liberties and properties; even if the King were present to assist
and encourage his soldiers in this unnatural, bloody, and destructive civil war.

When a King throws off all restraint of law, and is bound by no principles of
justice or humanity, when he invades with open force the liberties and persons
of his subjects in a hostile manner, only to answer the most diabolical,
arbitrary, and infamous purposes, the people of England, and every part of the
British empire, will be justified in taking up arms, and resisting such
invasions and violence; otherwise they must fall a prey to his insatiable
rapine, and become the absolute slaves of arbitrary power, by way of conquest.

We have several instances in the history of this country, and in many ages, of
the people of England resisting, by force of arms, the oppressions, rapines,
unjust violence, and armies of their Princes raised against them; and they have
even encountered their Kings in open battle, and taken them prisoners;
sometimes expelled, and at other times deposed them from their royal authority,
when they became incorrigible, open and professed enemies to the kingdom, and
sought the ruin and desolation of their subjects; when by office, duty, oath,
and common justice, they were bound inviolably to protect them in liberty and
peace. Among many other examples of such proceedings, and the bravery and
virtue of our ancestors, are the following, viz. the case of King John, Henry
the Third, Edward the First, Richard the Third, and Henry the Sixth; nor are
these examples singular, all kingdoms, and in all ages, have done the same,
when their Kings (like the present Sovereign on the throne of England)
degenerated into tyrants, of which there are infinite precedents in history;
and such actions in every age and nation have always been deemed lawful and
just, as warranted by the laws of God, nature, reason, state and nations, all
which instruct not only particular persons, but whole cities and kingdoms, for
their own necessary defense and preservation, the support of human society and
liberty, to protect themselves against all unlawful violence and tyranny, even
in the person of their Kings, their ministers, or minions, to whom the laws of
God, nature, man, nor any civil nation, ever yet gave the least authority to
murder, spoil, oppress, or enslave their subjects, or deprive them of their
liberties or estates; resistance were it unlawful or unjust (as the pimps and
parisites of a court would insinuate) a few ambitious, bloody minded,
tyrannizing Kings might, without molestation, in a short space of time, ruin,
murder, or enslave the whole race of men; overturn the settled forms of civil
government, extirpate the christain religion, and destroy human society at
their pleasure; this, and worse, if possible, had been effected; nay, every
state and kingdom, had been totally subverted long ago by the worst of
monsters, lawless Princes, had not this just, natural, hereditary power of
resisting and opposing their illegal violence (inherent in the people)
restrained and prevented such bloody and destructive designs from being carried
into execution.

This necessary and defensive opposition, and resistance against regal
violence, which has ever been held lawful, and often practiced in almost every
kingdom, will justify the Americans, in taking up arms and resisting the
present arbitrary, cruel, and bloody measures, now carrying on against them, by
an infatuated, obstinate, perverse King, his infernal ministers, and their
agents, whose only object in view is the entire ruin of this once great, happy,
powerful, and flourishing kingdom, and the destruction of public liberty.

It is expressly declared by Aristotle, Xenophon, King Edward the Confessor in
his established laws, the Council of Paris in 829, by Bracton, Fortescue, and
even King James himself, that a King governing in a settled kingdom, ceases to
be a King, and degenerates into a tyrant, so soon as he leaves to rule by law,
much more when he begins to invade his subjects persons, rights, liberties, to
set up an arbitrary power, impose unlawful taxes, raise forces, and make war
upon his subjects, whom he should protect, and rule in peace; to pillage,
plunder, waste, and spoil his kingdoms; imprison, murder, and destroy his
people in an hostile manner; this they severally declared to be the highest
degree of tyranny, condemned and detested by God and all good men. The whole
state and kingdom therefore, in such cases as these, for their own necessary
preservation, may lawfully, with force of arms, when no other means can secure
them, not only passively but actively resist their Prince, in such his violent
and tyrannical proceedings; without resisting any kingly lawful authority, for
that is vested in the King's person, for the preservation and not the
destruction of the kingdom; because the illegal oppression and tyrannical
actions are not warranted, but prohibited by the laws of God, and the realm (to
whom he is accountable, and by whom he is justly censurable) he is no lawful
King, nor magistrate, but an unjust oppressive tyrant, a mere private man, who
by such proceedings has denuded himself of his just regal authority; so that
all those laws made for the defense of the King's person and sovereign power,
the suppression of insurrections, treasons, and conspiracies against him, while
he governs his people according to law, as by oath and duty he is bound, will
yield on countenance, encouragement, or protection to him in such tyrannical
and cruel oppressions, but more especially when he turns a public enemy to his
people, and proclaims open war against them; invades their laws, liberties and
persons, and exercises all manner of hostilities against them, the same as the
most barbarous and foreign enemy would do; it being contrary to common sense
and reason, to suppose that our laws, which strictly inhibit and punish the
very smallest violations of the public peace in all other persons, should
countenance, justify, and patronize them in the King, the first minister, and
supreme fountain of justice; and not permit the people, under pain of rebellion
and treason, so much as to defend their lives, liberties, estates and religion,
from the open violence of the King himself, or his malignant plundering
ministers and favorites. When as Fortescue and Bracton prove, Kings of all
others, both by oath and duty, ought to be more observant, and obedient to the
laws of God and the land than the very meanest of their subjects.

That precept of St. Paul, Romans xiii. 1, 2, 3, Let every soul be subject unto
the higher powers, etc. means no more than this, that as long as Kings legally
and justly execute the trust committed to their charge, and conferred on them
by God and the people, they must, and ought to be obeyed and submitted to,
without the least resistance private or public; but if they degenerate into
tyrants, and turn professed enemies to their people, by murdering, imprisoning,
or destroying them by open violence, or endeavoring by force of arms, to
subvert their laws, liberties or religion, and expose them as a prey to their
merciless blood thirsty soldiers, I dare confidently to affirm, it was never
the intention of St. Paul, much less of our laws, to inhibit subjects, under
pain of damnation, high in conscience, treason or rebellion, by defensive arms,
to resist Kings themselves or any of their mercenary adherents.

It was certainly never the intention of the Apostle, to establish in the world
any irrisistible lawless tyranny, or spoil of kingdoms, and butchery of
subjects, execrable to God and man in all ages, and in all persons who have
resisted them, even unto blood; he meant rather totally to suppress them. There
being scarce any more pregnant text against the tyranny, the boundless
prerogative, the illegal proceedings of Kings, and the higher powers in all the
scripture, than that of Romans xiii. 1st to 7th verse, if properly understood,
and rightly interperted, as Pareus and others prove; therefore the resistance
of the Americans, against our present seduced, malignant Popish King, is no
violation of any law of God or the land, but a just and necessary war, which
they have by every means, to the utmost of their power, endeavored to prevent,
and therefore no treason or rebellion within the meaning of any law or statute;
they are only arming themselves, for their own necessary preservation, and to
prevent their inevitable ruin, they mean not openly to assault the royal army
of butchers; and I believe there is no divine among the whole bench of Popish
Bishops, no casuist among the whole tribe of venal lawyers, except a few
prostituted court slaves, villainous enough to affirm that it is damnation in
conscience, or treason and rebellion in point of law, for our injured and
suffering fellow subjects in America, to take up arms for the preservation of
their lives, their liberties, and their property, but would rather deem it just
and honorable, nay a duty for every Englishman to venture his life, and his
fortune in their defense; in defense of the dear bought rights of his country,
and rather than live a slave, to die gloriously in the cause of public liberty.

[To be continued.]
[Price TWO PENNIES.]


