THE CRISIS. NUMBER XIII.
SATURDAY, April 15, 1775.
With rage from hell the tyrant's heart may glow,
But he is no Briton who can strike the blow.

EVERY Englishman must deplore the ill success, and abhor the unworthy
treatment which attended the two late conciliatory plans in relation to
America. Pregnant with good sense, benevolence, and sound reason, they will do
eternal honor to the wisdom, justice, policy, and humanity of the heads and
hearts that formed them. How different was the plan of North. Crafty, mean,
insidious, impolitic, irrational, shallow, and (like himself and his
coadjutors) beneath contempt. This was not treating with America, but insulting
her, every step against her hitherto has been founded in the greatest
inhumanity, the grossest ignorance, and the worst policy. I will proceed to
prove my assertions, and defy the whole cabal of ministerial slaughtermen to
confute me. I do not call upon the master-butcher, because he can only be
considered (after the part he has acted by asserting) an executive, and not as
a rational master in this business. -- First then, for the humanity of these
proceedings, let it be granted only, as it must, that the crown stands in the
same relation to America as a parent to her child, and my first assertion
proves itself. Have any gentle, tender, sensible means been used to reconcile
her? Have not her humble remonstrances, proposals, submissions and
supplications, been treated with contempt? Not suffered to lie upon the table
of a British House of Commons? Have they been deemed worthy of a thought by her
pious Sovereign? Has she not been branded with the ignominious name of rebel by
act of Parliament, for no other reason (I mean no true one) than because she
has wisely and calmly diliberated upon, remonstrated against, and steadily, but
not tumultuously, resented the repeated injuries she has received? As to riots
by mobs, they are not to be imputed to her as treason and rebellion. America
(as a nation most unconstitutionally oppressed) has hitherto only deliberated
upon her sufferings. She has not acted. My Lords Suffolk, Pomfret, Radnor,
Apsley, Sandwich, they have not acted. It is as yet no treason, my Lords, to
think, to advise, to fear, and to prepare. You cannot, you dare not, move to
annul (as you may wish) the statute of treasons in America. The Americans have
as good a right to that as your Lordships. I mean as yet, my Lords, because I
am not quite satisfied that (even in the present smuggled and corrupt
Parliament) the boldest and most venal prostitute durst make so dangerous a
trial upon the patience and long sufferance, of this kingdom. I will now inform
your Lordships that it is contrary to the law of nations to attempt the
destruction even of the most inveterate enemy by famine, until he has been
first solemnly summoned to submit. Have the Americans ever yet been (though if
men they shortly will be) in arms? Have they yet had a prospect of any other
terms than such as would make them slaves? Will they be weak enough to submit
to such conditions? The preliminaries, hitherto proposed, have been founded in
oppression, not in reason; they are fit for brutes, not men. The lenient, the
compassionate North has treated America like the assassin of an alley, with his
knife at her throat he has humanely left it at her choice to strip herself for
fear she should be stripped by him. Why have the ministry had recourse at first
to this inhuman scheme of famine? They fear the army will relent, when they
find they must wade through the Hood of their own countrymen. Their present
General (Gage) has, to his honor, declined the bloody task. Even a foreigner,
to whom the same command was offered, has revolted at the thought. Is not this
stratagem of starving freemen into slavery the most inhuman, as well as the
most cowardly of all others, especially when it is considered that all the
remonstrances of these unhappy sufferers have been rejected? I should insult
the reader's understanding by waiting for a reply, I therefore come to the next
ingredient in the American persecution, ignorance. I must first remark that
some of their wise Lordships were for having Maryland and Virginia (very remote
inland countries) prohibited from the fishery. Thus far have some of the great
and sage counselors of this nation been ignorant even of the situation of that
part of their fellow creatures, whom they wish to involve in the most dreadful
of all calamities, famine. But the very scheme itself is impracticable; these
wretched people cannot be totally destroyed either by butchery or famine; their
numbers are great and formidable; in such a vast extent of country their
resources will be endless; they are not destitute of arms already, and they
will be supplied with more in spite of our vigilant fleet. They have all the
materials necessary for war in the bowels of their country; they have artists,
handicraftsmen, manufacturers, and mechanics of all sorts; cattle of all kinds;
fruit of the earth in vast abundance; fine streams and rivers; though no doubt
administration (for the sake of consistency) will give strict orders, and pay
highly for the poisoning of these; but that will not easily be effected; these
people in general know the use of arms; they have perseverance, courage,
resolution, and above all (most prophetic Lord Sandwich!) they have virtue,
which can never be overcome. Should our army strike and fail, the hatred enmity
and revolt of America is fixed for ever; they never will submit to lick the
tyrant hand, which has once been raised against their liberties, their
properties, and their lives. Under the above considerations, the present scheme
of government must seem impracticable; if so, or if from rancour and resentment
it has been viewed but partially, it is the grossest ignorance to pursue it.
Should heaven interpose on the side of justice, we shall perceive our error too
late; but were our attempts by sword or famine sure of success, government is
only destroying its own vitals. -- What then is the policy of this unnatural
war? It is like the war between the belly and the other members; the whole
state must feel its consequences. Shallow North told the House of Commons (for
it is his) that the imports from the American Continent were inconsiderable.
Now, my Lord, you ought to know (and in honor you should have declared) that
the imports of that part of America into our sugar Colonies were the very life
of them; neither planters, nor Negroes, can subsist without them, particularly
in the prohibited, interidicted article of fish, which, when salted, is their
general food. Your Lordship, by your war, and your intended famine, has
effectually starved and ruined all the passive and obedient sugar Colonies, as
well as your declared enemies in America. Thus a most valuable fishery, a
considerable sugar trade, and thousands (perhaps millions) of innocent and
brave lives will be sacrificed by a narrow minded ministry to wicked views, and
insatiable resentments, in the reign of a Monarch born a Briton! An ancient
Pict, or a wild Indian (savage in their natures) would blush and shudder at
such proceedings. With the Colonies and trade the revenues must sink. If royal
profusion, and ministerial corruption, were to sink likewise, it would be well;
but they will still attempt to draw blood from the most impoverished veins. The
commercial, the landed interest, the public bank, at last, must feel the shock.
Then, perhaps, when famine threatens at our own doors, the British lion will be
roused. -- Then (for I will prophecy in my turn) comes a revolution, fatal to
minions, pensioners, placemen, knaves and tyrants; but happy for the nation, if
from the ashes of all these pests, the rights of suffering and insulted
Englishmen can be once more established. We shall find it to our cost, in vain
to send English soldiers (none but Scotch will do the business) against English
breasts. I am of opinion (let the wishes of the ministry be what they will)
that if every officer who goes upon this assassination were a Burgoyne, he
would be disappointed of the blood he pants for, his command will be a
sinecure, and his victory a brave and virtuous desertion. All who deserved the
names of soldiers, would throw down their arms, and embrace their gallant and
unhappy countrymen. An English army will not, and a navy cannot, destroy the
liberties of America; the ministry, who wish to deceive the nation, are (as
they frequently are) deceived themselves; they cannot execute their plan
without extraordinary and successive (almost perpetual) drafts of forces.
Should the patient spirit of this kingdom rise at such a time in arms, and
France and Spain add to the horrors of a civil war, even in the midst of these
calamities it will be some consolation that the advisers, abettors, and
detestable heads of these diabolical measures, cannot long escape the vengeance
of an injured people. CASCA.

Notwithstanding we have given almost the usual quantity of matter already, we
cannot here omit, without injury to our readers and the cause of liberty, the
spirited city remonstrance which will do immortal honor to the heads and hearts
of those who framed it.

The ADDRESS, REMONSTRANCE and PETITION of the CITY of LONDON.
"We your Majesty's dutiful and loyal subjects, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Livery of the city of London, beg leave to approach the throne, and to declare
our abhorrence of the measures which have been pursued, and are now pursuing,
to the oppression of our fellow subjects in America. These measures are big
with all the consequences which can alarm a free and commercial people. A deep
and perhaps a fatal wound to commerce; the ruin of manufactures; the diminution
of the revenue, and consequent increase of taxes; the alienation of the
Colonies; and the blood of your Majesty's subjects.

But your petitioners look with less horror at the consequences, than at the
purpose of those measures. Not deceived by the specious artifice of calling
despotism dignity, they plainly perceive that the real purpose is -- To
establish arbritrary power over all America.

Your petitioners conceive the liberties of the whole to be inevitably
connected with those of every part of an empire founded on the common rights of
mankind. They cannot therefore observe, without the greatest concern and alarm,
the constitution fundamentally violated in any part of your Majesty's
dominions. They esteem it an essential and unalterable principle of liberty,
the source and security of all constitutional rights, that no part of the
dominion can be taxed without being represented. Upon this great leading
principle, they most ardently wish to see their fellow subjects in America
secured in what their humble petition to your Majesty prays for, peace, liberty
and safety. -- Subordination in commerce, under which the Colonies have always
cheerfully acquiesced, is, they conceive, all that this country ought in
justice to require. From this subordination such advantages flow, by all the
profits of their commerce centering here, as fully compensate this nation for
the expense incurred, to which they also contribute in men and money for their
defense and protection during a general war; and in their Provincial wars they
have manifested their readiness and resolution to defend themselves. To require
more of them would, for this reason, derogate from the justice and magnanimity
which have been hitherto the pride and character of this country.

It is therefore with the deepest concern, that we have seen the sacred
security of representation in their assemblies wrested from them; the trial by
jury abolished; and the odious powers of excise extended to all cases of
revenue; the sanctuary of their houses laid open to violation at the will and
pleasure of every officer and servant in the customs; the dispensation of
justice corrupted, by rendering their Judges dependent for their seats and
salaries on the will of the crown; liberty and life rendered precarious by
subjecting them to be dragged over the ocean, and tried for treason or felony
here; where the distance, making it impossible for the most guiltless to
maintain his innocence, must deliver him up a victim to ministerial vengeance;
soldiers and others in America have been instigated to shed the blood of the
people, by establishing a mode of trial which holds out impunity for such
murder; the capital of New England has been punished with unexempled rigor,
untried and unheard, involving the innocent and the suspected in one common and
inhuman calamity; chartered rights have been taken away, without: any
forfeiture proved, in order to deprive the people of every legal exertion
against the tyranny of their rulers; the Habeas Corpus act, and trial by Jury,
have been suppressed; and French despotic government, with the Roman Catholic
religion, have been established by law, over an extensive part of your
Majesty's dominions in America; dutiful petitions for redress of those
grievances, from all your Majesty's American subjects, have been fruitless.

To fill up the measure of these oppressions, an army has been sent to enforce
them.

Superadded to this, measures are now planned upon the most merciless policy of
starving our fellow subjects into a total surrender of their liberties, and an
unlimited submission to arbitrary government.

These grievances have driven your Majesty's faithful subjects to despair, and
compelled them to have recourse to that resistance which is justified by the
great principles of the constitution, actuated by which, at the glorious period
of the revolution, our ancestors transferred the impartial crown of these
realms from the Popish and tyrannic race of the Stuarts, to the illustrious and
Protestant House of Brunswick.

Your petitioners are persuaded, that these measures originate in the secret
advice of men who are enemies equally to your Majesty's title, and to the
liberties of your people. That your Majesty's ministers carry them into
execution by the same fatal corruption which has enabled them to wound the
peace and violate the constitution of this country; thus they poison the
fountain of public security, and render that body, which should be the guardian
of liberty, a formidable instrument of arbitrary power.

Your petitioners do therefore most earnestly beseech your Majesty to dismiss
immediately, and forever, from your councils, those ministers and advisers, as
the first step toward a full redress of those grievances which alarm and
afflict your whole people. So shall peace and commerce be restored, and the
confidence and affection of all your Majesty's subjects be the solid supporters
of your throne."

The KING's ANSWER, which would do honor to any butcher, monster, or tyrant on
earth.
"It is with the utmost astonishment that I find any of my subjects capable of
encouraging the rebellious disposition, which unhappily exists in some of my
Colonies in North America.

Having entire confidence in the wisdom of my Parliament, the great council of
the nation, I will steadily pursue those measures which they have recommended
for the support of the constitutional rights of Great Britain, and the
protection of the commercial interests of my kingdoms.

[To he continued.]
(Price TWO PENNIES.)


