THE CRISIS. NUMBER IX.
SATURDAY, March 18, 1775.
The worst of all Tyranny is that established by Law.
To the KING.
SIR,
YOU ascended the throne of these realms with advantages, which, if properly
improved, would have rendered your reign not only glorious and happy, but have
made you the most powerful monarch upon earth; you might have kept the world in
awe. Yet, oh shame to tell, though the times demand it, you soon sacrificed
your own peace, the tranquillity, honor and interest of this great and mighty
kingdom, to the ambitious views, and pernicious designs, of your infernal
minion Lord Bute, and his profligate, abandoned adherents. Your accession to
the throne filled with joy the breast of every Englishman; but alas, it was of
short duration, you soon convinced them of their mistake, and the compliments
paid to your understanding, the calm hour of reason soon convinced us were ill
founded.

No sooner seated upon the throne of this vast empire, than you, like all other
Kings, as well as tyrants, made the people many and fair promises. You told
your Parliament, that the suppression of vice and immorality, the encouragement
of trade and commerce, and the preservation of peace and harmony amongst your
people, should be the rule of your conduct, and your principal study. How far
you have kept your word, the sacred pen of truth shall now declare.

Scarce seated in regal dignity before you drove from your presence and
councils, by the advice of your Scotch favorite, Lord Bute, every man of honor
and integrity, who was valued for his love to his country, and affection for
your family. You implicitly followed the advice of your Northern minion, and in
their room took those only who were the most conspicuous for their vices, and
the most abandoned in principle; these are facts which Sandwich, Bute, Grafton,
North, etc. will confirm.

These men you still continue to countenance, every scene of iniquity they have
been concerned in, and every act of violence, oppression, and murder they have
committed, has been by you tacitly approved, nay applauded. Adultery,
debauchery, and divorces, are more frequent now than in the corrupt and
profligate days of Charles the Second; these, Sir, prove incontestibly your
religious principles, and show how far you have suppressed vice and immorality.

It will now be necessary to inquire, how far you have encouraged trade and
commerce, was it by illegally imposing a stamp duty on the Americans, and
taxing those commodities which we supplied them with from this country, which
has stopped for near six years a great traffic between this kingdom and the
colonies? Was it by suffering, with the most shameful impunity, the Portuguese
to infringe upon the privileges of the English merchants at Lisbon, by which
many were not only injured, but almost totally ruined? Was it by blocking up
the port, and destroying the trade of the town of Boston, thereby reducing to a
state of miserable dependence more than thirty thousand people, and giving a
vital stab to the whole commerce of America?

We will now examine, Sir, how far you have preserved peace and harmony among
your people; was it by providing for all the beggarly relations, and miserable
dependents, of your Scotch minion, in preference to your English subjects,
especially those who were the chief instruments of placing your family upon the
throne? Was it by ordering the late Lord Hallifax to issue an illegal warrant
for apprehending Mr. Wilkes? Was it by rewarding that delinquent after he had
been found guilty of a breach of the English laws? Was it by screening your
minister behind the throne, who violated the rights of the freeholders of
England? Was it by rejecting the petitions of your injured subjects, and
laughing at the remonstrance presented to you from the first city in the world,
the great capital of the British empire? Was it by not granting the
supplications of your people, and meanly referring those petitions and
remonstrances to the consideration of those very men, whose conduct they
arraigned, and who were only the slavish tools of your abandoned ministers? Was
it by sending troops to Boston, depriving the people of their constitutional
rights; and, contrary to all the laws of this free country, enforcing the
tyrannical and oppressive acts of your abandoned Parliament with the sword, and
laying America under a military government? Was it by rewarding the profligate,
the corrupt, and the plunderers of their country, with titles and honors? Was
it by a tame dastardly submission to the insults of the Spaniards, and a
sacrifice of the honor of the British nation? These, Sir, are the means you
have made use of for preserving peace and harmony among your people. But, Sir,
the greatest piece of ministerial villainy, and diabolical cruelty, is still
behind, it is now going through the House of Lords, and you, Sir, will soon be
called upon to sign it; it is a bill for restraining the American fishery, and
starving to death, or driving to a state of desperation, more than 300,000
people; consider, Sir, the fatal tendency of this bill, determine no longer to
be the dupe of an abandoned set of men, act from yourself, and refuse to sign
an act of parliament, which must involve one part of the empire in a civil war,
and reduce thousands of your subjects to poverty and want. Let no consideration
prevail with you to execute a deed, at the idea of which humanity revolts;
consider, Sir, how much this will raise the indignation of your people here,
when they find you are destitute of the common feelings of humanity, and that
you can be so easily prevailed upon to sacrifice your subjects to the cruel
designs of your ministers and favorites. Give some proof of a determined
resolution no longer to pursue measures which must end in the destruction of
your kingdoms, and perhaps in the ruin of your family.

Consider, Sir, how despisable you appear in the eyes of the world; who,
instead of governing, suffer yourself to be governed; who, instead of being a
leader, are lead; who, instead of being a King, are nothing but a mere cipher
of state, while your favorite and ministers wear all the appendages to
sovereignty.

It has long surprised the kingdom, to think how you could bear such wretches
to prey upon you, to think how you could suffer them to aggrandize themselves
and creatures, to possess the greatest wealth, and to hold the first offices in
the kingdom; and all this by imposing upon you, by making you break your
coronation oath; by making you violate every promise you made with your people,
and by filling your ears with lies, instead of truth; how is it possible you
can bear such usage, which no sensible man in a private capacity can bear? And
be the dupe of the vilest of the creation, is so much beneath the dignity of a
man who pretends to govern, that it is astonishing such fiends should prevail
as they do; indeed they never could unless you, Sir, like them, was inclined to
establish an arbitrary system of government, and to set up your own will in
opposition to the laws of the land.

Let me advise you, Sir, as you regard your own prosperity, and the welfare of
your kingdom, let me conjure you, as you value your own safety, to consider
well the fatal and ruinous measures your ministers are pursuing, and you
sanctifying with the royal authority; consider the miserable, the unfortunate
situation of this country; think on the dangers which threaten it on every
side; consider we are now upon the eye of a civil war with our colonies; from
the present face of things, it is inevitable; trade and commerce is at a stand,
and all the horrors of wretchedness and want stare them in the face; consider,
Sir, the feelings of men reduced in the short space of a few days, through
wanton acts of power, from a state of ease and plenty to that of misery and
famine; I ask, is it possible for them to set bounds to their resentments;
consider, Sir, the French and Spaniards will not long remain idle spectators,
when once they see us deeply engaged in a war with the colonies. Throw off then
your supine indolence; awake from your lethargic state; and if you will not be
excited by the desire of doing good, awake at least to a sense of your own
danger; think when the general calamity comes on, who will be the objects of
public hatred. Will not the advisers of these destructive measures be the first
sacrifices to the popular resentment. When the merchants, traders, and
manufactures are starving, when the whole body of the people are in misery and
distress, what security, Sir, can you expect to find? Where will your ministers
conceal themselves? They will not be safe even within the walls of your palace!

Let these things, Sir, be well weighed, and no longer persuade yourself the
people was made for you, and not you for them; no longer believe that you do
not govern for them but for yourself; that the people live only to increase
your glory, or to furnish matter for pleasure: For once, Sir, consider what you
may do for them, and not what you may draw from them.

The people, Sir, think it to be a crime of the first magnitude to convert that
power to their hurt, which was intended for their good; and to obey a King,
while he acts in this manner, and tramples under foot all laws, divine and
human, argues not only a want of sense in the highest degree, but a want of
love for our country, and a disregard for ourselves and posterity.

Your subjects, Sir, are under no obligations to you, nor do they owe you any
allegiance any longer than you continue to protect them, and make their good
the chief end of your government. When a Prince assumes to himself an
extravagant, or an unlawful power, then all respect ceases, and he ceases to be
a King; whilst he protects and preserves his people in their just right, and
governs them by the laws of the land, all good men will love and esteem him,
and risk their lives and fortunes in his service; but when he begins to invade
their liberties, to set up an arbitrary power, to impose unlawful taxes, raise
forces, and make war upon his people, and suffer foreign states to insult and
injure them, then all virtuous and good men will detest and abhor him, and
endeavor to remove him from a throne he unworthily fills.

In such cases resistance is a virtue, and to say that some should passively
suffer, lest by resisting they should cause the ruin of many, is not a just
reason; because, in all probability, they will be the cause that millions
unborn shall live happy and free, and what can be a more noble, glorious, and
pious motive for suffering than to transmit liberty to posterity: For this our
fathers bravely fought, and many of them gloriously fell, to preserve
themselves and their descendants free, and to destroy the tyranny and despotism
of the Stuarts; and, Sir, let me beg you will remember with gratitude, to place
your family upon the throne of the British Empire.

The author of this paper is far from advising violent measures upon every
error, or misconduct of a Prince, but resistance becomes a duty, when they
attempt the ruin of the state, the subversion of liberty, or overturning the
constitution of the kingdom. It is notorious to the world, Sir, that your
ministers are guilty of all these black, and deadly crimes, and yet you screen
and protect them; the conclusions to be drawn from thence are obvious, and you,
like CHARLES, may live to see your FAVORITES FALL.

[To be continued.]
(Price TWO PENNIES.)


