THE CRISIS. NUMBER V.
Resistance to tyrants and the instruments of tyranny is justifiable, and
warranted by all the laws of God and Man.
To the PEOPLE.
AT a juncture like the present; when the national reputation of Britain, as
well as her absolute safety, stands tottering on the brink of destruction; when
liberty and freedom, the great pillars of the constitution, are, by force and
fraud undermined, and tumbling into ruins; when the bloody sword of tyranny is
drawn against America, and soon to be plunged into the bowels of her innocent
inhabitants; when the present Sovereign, aided by a despicable junto, the
rebel, outcast, and refuse of Scotland, and a parliament not returned by the
free suffrages of the people, are rioting with impunity in the spoils of an
insulted powerful kingdom; when they, by cruel oppression, have spread terror
and civil war in every part of the British empire; when they have destroyed or
suspended her trade, and sapped the credit of public security; when the most
iniquitous and unjust laws are daily passed to curb the spirit, and bind in
chains, the hands of a brave and free people; when St. James's is made the
SLAUGHTER HOUSE of AMERICA; when the Sovereign is become a national
executioner, and for a scepter carries a bloody knife; when by a most
scandalous and shameful profusion of the public money, we are hourly robbed and
plundered, to answer all the purposes of King-craft and villainy; when new taxes
are daily imposed upon the people in time of peace, to the almost entire ruin
of the state; when the minions of despotism a^^ increasing the land forces, for
the open and avowed purpose of wading knee deep in blood, through the liberties
of Britain; when the Protestant religion is openly subverted, and the British
subjects in Canada deprived of those great securities of their personal liberty
and property, the habeas corpus act, and trial by juries; when a suspending and
dispensing power is assumed by the crown; when opposition, to the most cruel
and wanton acts of lawless power, is deemed rebellion; when the Senators,
designed the protectors of the people, are become their destroyers; when the
appointed guardians of public freedom are become base apostates, and
conspirators against the liberties of mankind; when neither oaths, nor
conscience, can bind the Sovereign or his Ministers; when both public and
private justice is denied to a subject, nay to the whole body of the people at
large; when our lives are exposed to false accusations, and our persons to
arbitrary imprisonment, and heavy fines; when the judges before whom we are to
stand upon life and death, and before whom all cases, concerning liberty and
property, must be brought, too much devoted to the will and pleasure of the
crown, and enemies to the natural rights of mankind; when juries, who are to
decide our fate, packed, bribed, or modelled to the pernicious designs of a
wicked and detestable ministry; when every post, civil, naval, and military, is
filled by northern flatterers and their adherents, by men of no principles, by
parasites, pimps, catamites, and the advocates for arbitrary power; when the
people can see nothing but misery and slavery before their eyes; when this vast
and mighty empire, the admiration and envy of the world, is, through corruption
and villainy, fallen into ruins.

At such a juncture as this, and under these dreadful and alarming
circumstances of experienced and impending danger, it becomes the duty of every
Englishman to stand forth to defend his life, his liberty, and his property
from lawless violence, and to save his country from perdition.

So highly did our brave and virtuous ancestors value and esteem their rights,
liberties and privileges, that they spared neither blood nor treasure in their
defense, when invaded, as they too often were, by some of our Kings, who, in
the pursuit of lawless power, pulled down all the fences of liberty, and broke
in, like the present Sovereign, upon the constitution, so far that the lives,
liberties, and properties of the subjects of this realm were hourly in danger,
and many fell sacrifices to royal or ministerial vengeance.

Then it was that our generous forefathers nobly associated themselves in
defense of their inherents and legal rights, and made an offering of the best
and choicest blood in the kingdom to the shrine of Liberty, that we, their
posterity, might be free and happy. To them, and the glorious struggles they
made with power, we owe all the blessings we enjoy, and the English
constitution, our greatest boast, and their greatest glory.

It was in such times as these, when our brave progenitors behaved like
Britons, with a true patriot zeal, with which almost every breast was fired,
they spurned the yoke, and broke the chains that were prepared for them,
letting their king and his minions know, they would not suffer him nor them to
destroy their birthrights, and dispense with the known laws of the land, by
which they were resolved to be governed, and not by his will, or any other
lawless power upon earth.

Let us at this time, in this hour of imminent danger, follow so bright and
glorious an example, by a well timed noble resistance to the present royal and
ministerial plan, for subverting the laws and religion, and overturning the
constitution of the British empire, in England and America; a resistance that
will secure freedom to posterity, and immortal honor to ourselves; the field of
glory is open before us; let us rouse from a state of apathy, and exert
ourselves in a manner becoming of Englishmen, worthy of men who love liberty,
and deserve to be free. Let us show to the world, we are not to be enslaved by
one, nor by five thousand tyrants, for the sons of cruelty, corruption, and
despotism will pursue their bloody designs, with greater vigor, and with all
the unrelenting malice of barbarians, against our fellow subjects in America,
in proportion as we are tame and acquiescing; and if once they can succeed,
through our baseness and cowardice, the sword will be immediately turned
against us, the sacred constitution of our empire dissolved, and we shall fall
despised, unlamented, and detested, into the same horrible gulf of arbitrary
power.

Let us take advantage of the present opportunity, while our resentments boil
high, while every English breast is fired with indignation against those who
are the authors of all our past and present calamities, which now convulse the
state to its center; let us by all proper, just, and legal means, exemplary
punish the paricides, and avowed enemies of mankind; let neither private
acquaintance, nor personal alliance, stand between us and our duty to our
country; let all, who have an interest in the public safety, join in common
measures to defend the publc safety; let us pursue to disgrace, destruction,
and even death, all those who have brought this ruin upon us, let them be ever
so great or ever so many; let us stamp, and deep engrave in characters legible
to all Europe at present, and to all posterity hereafter, what vengeance is due
to crimes, which have no less objects in view than the ruin of nations, and the
destruction of millions; let us frustrate their present desperate and wicked
attempt to destroy America, by joining with our injured fellow subjects, and
bravely striking one honest and bold stroke to destroy them; nay, although the
designs of the conspirators should be laid deep as the center, although they
should raise hell itself, and should fetch legions of votaries from thence to
avow their proceedings, yet let us not leave the pursuit till we have their
heads and their estates.

Hear part of the address of your injured and oppressed fellow subjects in
America, to you upon this melancholy occasion, upon the dreadful prospect of
impending ruin; then let every Englishman lay his hand upon his heart, and
declare whether he does not think they have been most cruelly treated, and
whether he can in justice, conscience, and humanity draw the sword against
them; or whether he would not rather join with them, and endeavor to obtain a
decisive victory over tyranny, or fall gloriously with the liberties of his
country. These are their words.

"When a nation, led to greatness by the hand of liberty, and possessed of all
the glory that heroism, munificence, and humanity can bestow, descends to the
ungrateful task of forging chains for her friends and children, and instead of
giving support to freedom, turns advocate for slavery and oppression, there is
reason to suspect she has either ceased to be virtuous, or been extremely
negligent in the appointment of her rulers.

"In almost every age, in repeated conflicts, in long and bloody wars, as well
civil as foreign, against the many powerful nations, against the open assaults
of enemies, and the more dangerous treachery of friends, have the inhabitants
of your island, your great and glorious ancestors, maintained their
independence, and transmitted the rights of men, and the blessings of liberty,
to you their posterity.

"Be not surprised, therefore, that we who are descendents from the same common
ancestors; that we, whose forefathers participated in all the rights, the
liberties, and the constitution, you so justly boast, and who have carefully
conveyed the same fair inheritance to us, guarantied by the plighted faith of
government, and the most solemn compacts with British sovereigns, should refuse
to surrender them to men, who found their claims on no principles of reason,
and who prosecute them with a design, that by having our lives and property in
their power, they may, with the greater facility, enslave you.

"The cause of America is now the object of universal attention; it has at
length become very serious. This unhappy country has not only been oppressed,
but abused and misrepresented; and the duty we owe to ourselves and posterity,
to your interest, and the general welfare of the British empire, leads us to
address you on this very important subject.

"We call upon you yourselves, to witness our loyalty and attachment to the
common interest of the whole empire; did we not, in the last war, add all the
strength of this vast continent to the force which repelled our common enemy?
Did we not leave our native shores, and meet disease and death, to promote the
success of the British arms in foreign climates? Did you not thank us for our
zeal, and even reimburse us large sums of money, which, you confessed, we had
advanced beyond our proportion, and far beyond our abilities? You did.

"To what causes, then, are we to attribute the sudden change of treatment, and
that system of slavery which was prepared for us at the restoration of peace.

"Let justice and humanity cease to be the boast of your nation, consult your
history, examine your history, examine your records of former transactions, nay
turn to the annals of the many arbitrary states and kingdoms that surround you,
and show us a single instance of men being condemned to suffer for imputed
crimes, unheard, unquestioned, and without even the specious formality of a
trial; and that too by laws made expressly for the purpose, and which had no
existence at the time of the fact committed. If it be difficult to reconcile
these proceedings to the genius and temper of your laws and constitution, the
task will become more arduous when we call upon our ministerial enemies to
justify, not only condemning men untried, and by hearsay; but involving the
innocent in one common punishment with the guilty, and for the act of thirty or
forty, to bring poverty, distress and calamity on 30,000 souls, and those not
your enemies, but your friends, brethren, and fellow subjects.

"Admit that the ministry, by the power of Britain, and the aid of our Roman
Catholic neighbors, should be able to carry the point of taxation, and reduce
us to a state of perfect humiliation and slavery. Such an enterprise would
doubtless make some addition to your national debt, which already presses down
your liberties, and fills you with pensioners and placemen, We presume also
that your commerce will somewhat be diminished. However, suppose you should
prove victorious -- in what condition will you then be? What advantages or what
laurels will you reap from such a conquest?

May not a ministry with the same armies enslave you -- it may be said, you
will cease to pay them -- but remember the taxes from America, the wealth, and
we may add the men particularly the Roman Catholics of this vast continent,
will then be in the power of your enemies -- nor will you have any reason to
expect, that after making slaves of us, many among us should refuse to assist
in reducing you to the same abject state,"

[To be continued.]

