THE CRISIS. NUMBER XIX.
-- Sero sapiunt Phryges. False to your selves, the people and the state,
Like foolish Phrygians, you will grow wise too late.

ADMINISTRATION has now "let slip the dogs of war, the hellish Cerberus, with
her three heads, Burgoyne, How, and Clinton, is sailed. The dogmatic goose
quil of the fallacious Dr. Johnson, that hireling Quixote of an hireling
ministry, has promulgated a solemn sentence of attainder against all
revolutionists in Great Britain; -- Hear it ye Whigs, "And put in every honest
hand a whip,
"To lash the rascal naked through the world."


This pitiful retailer of apologies for ministerial treachery, has had the
impudence to declare with the effrontery of a Sandwich, or a Denbigh, that
whoever wishes success to America is a traitor to his country.

From this patriotic declaration, I presume the redoubted Doctor is at length
admitted into the Arcana of the ministry. He pronounces with as much insolence
as if he was assured of their intentions to pass a bill, (they have voices
enough to do it,) for declaring a new species of treason, namely, the wishing
success to oppressed America. I will venture to say, that every revolutionist
in England, Ireland, and the sugar colonies, have long since incurred the pains
and penalties of this law in embryo, if such a one there be.

No Englishman can wear two faces: Therefore if his Majesty, should for the
future, see as much ill humor and contempt in the faces of his English and
Irish subjects, as they observe in his, he must not be surprised. Bute and
Mansfield, will instruct him that the aspects and affections of a people are
beneath the notice of a sovereign who inherits them. But conscience in the
depth of night, will speak another language, that will remind him, that he has
rejected the supplications of millions in America, that he has at length
assented to their murder, that he has with an iron tongue and an iron heart,
rung the knell of expiring America.

It is a maxim of our law, (says the honest chancellor Fortescue) that no man
was ever yet condemned or sentenced by the mouth of the King himself: -- it is
not so now, -- the present sovereign has been advised to declare preremptorily
to his supplicating citizens of London, that, he is determined to pursue the
measures which his wise parliament have recommended. We know that these are not
conciliating but destructive measures: Under these measures America is either
to be destroyed, or lost forever to this nation.

The late royal answer to the petition of the city of London, fairly
interpreted, would run thus; Let it speak the language of despotism in despotic
terms, viz. Slaves, by daring thus to remind us of our oppressions in America,
you are yourselves traitors; by this libellous petition you aid and encourage
rebels. It is the duty of loyal subjects passively to obey our will. Our will
and pleasure is revenge. This resolve we think fit to notify by famine and the
sword. These are the lenient measures, which our Divan has advised, and these
we will pursue. Your confidence and affection we despise, we confide alone in
the wisdom of our Divan, by that great council your fancied rights and your
despicable commerce are wisely doomed, with our entire concurrence, to
destruction.

Thus we see how easily a deluded christian prince may speak the language of an
eastern tyrant; for this purpose we have fairly clothed an eastern spirit, in
an eastern garb; we have given the haughty sovereign's plain meaning in proper
words; we have not (like Lord Mansfield, who penned the vile harrangue) meanly
suffered the sentiments of an insolent mogul to be cramped by the poverty of
princely diction.

Upon Bute's and Mansfield's plans, sovereigns are divine vicegerents, sent
down from heaven, not in mercy, but in wrath, to indulge their own impious
lusts, and scourge mankind. Let such sovereigns, therefore, be consistent with
themselves; let them equally disdain the fetters of language and humanity --
Let them speak daggers to their people and salvation to their minions. But can
such a prince, conscious that his parliament has been infamously smuggled, by a
mean and execrable strength of the prerogative, (a sudden dissolution) for fear
of a national association against future treachery; conscious that the majority
of his and his minister's great council (it is no national council) are a set
of hirelings, filched into their seats, and corrupted to promote every despotic
lust of a deluded monarch; can such a conscious prince pronounce the doom of
millions, not only without emotion, but with composed stupidity? This is not
fortitude, but callosity of soul.

The whole European world is astonished at our persecution of America, even
foreign, and despotic princes, upon this occasion, have different feelings,
from the father of that people who are destined to destruction: Even princes,
who can send forth sword and famine by a nod, are astonished at our wicked
policy, and abhor it; even the natural enemies of Great Britain presume to
interfere with our infernal administration, they will not permit our government
(without reproaches, insults, threats, and animated declarations) to massacre
mankind: France, under the mask of humanity, presumes to make us sensible of
her great condescension, magnanimity, and moderation, in suffering American
murder to pass on freely and without control. She makes us understand that she
connives at this slaughter of our gallant subjects, for the sake of cultivating
a good understanding with the king of Great Britain, and the whole English
nation. But when she finds (as she shortly may) that this king and kingdom are
divided and trying the claim of freedom together in the field with France, who
professes so much magnanimity and moderation, remain neuter? Her humanity, her
honor will not suffer her. She will retaliate (...) former interpositions in
her government with the like strokes of political humanity. Spain, who has so
lately felt the force of English arms, will not permit us to turn them so
unnaturally against ourselves. She speaks in plainer terms: Let his persevering
majesty hear her humane menaces: She tells him boldly, that she will not tie up
her hands from relieving fellow creatures suffering under wanton unprovoked
oppression. Alas! blind, infatuated sovereign. -- Can thou not discern the
tendency of this artful Spanish declaration? Does not Spain already hold out
succor to America? Will not injured and despairing people embrace the offer?
Will they not rather submit to be aided by an enemy than murdered by a parent?
Will they not sooner change their names, their laws, their government, their
religion, in just resentment, than enjoy these flattering modes, these sounding
nothings in a state of slavery? Think again, wise Sire, before it is too late.
Let me ask thee, thou clement pious sovereign, are not the people, in whose
favor Spain has thus declared, thy fellow creatures also? Were they not under
the just reign of your lamented grandfather, your fellow subjects too? Could he
arise, one honest frown from him, would disperse your minions, annihilate your
pride, blast your execrable politics, and restore peace, commerce, and
protection, to the tottering constitution of the British empire.

The Spanish nation is brave, her pretext for interposing is a noble one; though
merely political, it is to be preferred to that which is tyrannical; it has, at
least, a plausible appearance, for it speaks the language of justice,
benevolence, and humanity. We find neither of these ingredients in the rigid
answer which lately repelled the petition of the city. Fas est et ab host
doceri.

Let Bute and Mansfield, the leaders of an infamous administration, let their
great council their parliament (I say again it is not the nation's) let the
head constable of this kingdom (the dupe of all the herd) for once receive
instructions from an enemy. The Spaniards distinguish justly between a
sovereign's right of reducing refractory subjects to just obedience, and making
war upon humble supplicants who petition for their rights. They discern a
difference (and there is a wide one) between just resistance and unnatural
rebellion. They tell us in manly (to America they are tempting) terms that
America shall not suffer unheared, unpitied, unredressed, and innocent. Though a
venal and corrupt majority, to gratify despotic spleen, have in a bloody act,
styled America rebellious, yet what sanction can such laws derive from venality
and corruption? Laws, to be sacred and obligatory must be consistent with the
laws of God, nature, reason, found policy and the constitution of the kingdom.
If they err in these respects, it is an error in the first concoction, they are
absolutely null and void in themselves, and are no more to be regarded than
"the laws of a parcel of drunken porters." I borrow this elegant comparison
from the mouth of a great man, who is, at one and the same time, a privy
counselor, a pensioner, a placeman, and a speaker of the house of commons.
Situations as compatible with that of speaker, as obligatory laws are with
venality and corruption.

I do not say that rebellious subjects are not to be chastised; but they must
first rebel, all civil chastisement besides, must be inflicted by the hand of
wisdom and justice, not by the scourge of the oppressor. The wanton power that
aggresses and afflicts, ought not to punish, but redress. What political wisdom
is there in driving a whole territory, a great nation of obedient (though not
passive) subjects to despair? What wisdom in loosing or exterminating? What
justice in refusing to hear the supposed delinquent before she turned
supplication into rage.

America professes all legal, but like the brave ancestry from whence she
springs, disdains passive obedience, she honors and revers kings, but despises
and defies tyrants.

If she conquers she will continue to support the liberty she wins, if she
falls, (believe me ye wretched, ye shallow ministerial politicians!) she will
not fall unrevenged, the crowns of France and Spain, will not continue neuter,
they will be the providential means of punishing our iniquity to America; they
will embroil a civil war here, and assist it there, they will conquer England
in America, they will be received there with open arms; in the last agonies of
American despair, they will be received as conquerors, and usurping tyranny,
will be expelled forever.

America (...) never condescend to enjoy the unessential name of Englishmen
under the lawless power, of a grand Mogul, and his detested Divan.

[To be continued.]

