A LETTER FROM A FRIEND TO SOME OF HIS INTIMATE FRIENDS On the Subject of
paying TAXES, etc.

WATERTOWN: Printed and Sold by ^. EDES, near the Bridge

1776

A letter from a Friend to some of his intimate Friends on the subject of
paying Taxes, etc
Dear Friends,
WITH a heart painfully apprehensive of the distressed (...) in general, and in
the American Colonies in particular, I (...) you. -- (...) experience (...) had
of your candor and christian concern for the (...) of mankind in an especial
manner manifested at (...), gives me sufficient reason to think that you will
(...) thus communicating my thoughts on that branch of taxation that at some
times ^^^leth scruples in the minds of some people; I mean when the cha^ges of
(...) blended with those that (...) in support of the various exigencies of
civil government. Although we, (...) concern not ourselves in setting (...) down
the kingdoms of the earth; nor (...) to have (...) in legislation, or execution
of human laws, yet (...) to all just laws and administration; and feel, deeply
feel (...) subjects in their various trials and conflicts; nor are we forgetful
of them in their (...) sufferings; but more especially these occasioned by the
unhappy disputes between Great Britain and the colonies; in which we expect to
continue to be sharers with them, until it shall please the Disposer of all
(...) to bring about a happy and lasting reconciliation, which (...) the hearty
prayer of and true well wishers to their country.

While my thoughts have been engaged in this afflicting some, I have entered
very closely into that part of it, which nearly concernous, ( viz) that of
Taxation. -- The peaceable profession which we have have long made to the world
(which constitutes a very amiable part of our religious character) will not
admit of our taking up arms, it is painful to think it is reduced to that of
Brethren's pouring out the blood of each other as water spilt upon the ground)
we may nevertheless, expect to be taxed in common with other people, to pay the
charge of the unhappy war, together with such civil charges as may arise for
the support of government; which I perceive is like to be matter of scruple
with some; yet, many others think they may as safely pay it, as many other
taxes which they have had no scruple of paying. They say, and I suppose truly,
that "Friends in England have freely (...) their taxes, when by far the
greatest part has been for the (...) military charges," if it be said, "but
not against our own nation." -- The upon examination will appear to be a
mistake, which will be further considered before I conclude. -- In the (...) it
has frequently been the case, that we have paid our taxes without (...) when
much the greater part has been for the charges of war. For instance, there is
the province of (...) Bay^ when it has been taxed near a^ hundred thousand
pounds their currency, for one year^ (...) twelve thousand of it (...) for
civil uses, that eighty thousand pounds or (...), (...) to (...) the charges of
war, but say they, "this tax came to (...) civil and military charges together,
which it was hard to separate" -- and perhaps the taxes we expect, will come to
(...) the same manner, (...) doubt they will, and be as hard to separate. --
(...) in the present case^ -- " we ought to separate them." -- (...) we do, we
shall show ourselves (...), which will justly (...) ^s to the censure of every
considerate person in being so very exact, as to examine into one case^ and not
the other: for we ought with as much ease and propriety, have examined the
(...) of the former general court of assembly, as of the present. -- If it be
further objected, that "we cannot consistently join in opposition to the king
and (...) so far as to pay a tax which will strengthen their opposers, (...)
are now almost the whole of the American colonies." -- If it (...) to follow
the example of our predecessors, I think we may (...) safely do it -- "Why,
what did they do"? -- I answer, they (...) from their very first appearance as
a separate society b^^n subject to such who were invested with the authority of
the nation, without meddling with the various disputes that have arisen since
their (...) concerning regal authority. and on whom it ought to (...) For a
further consideration (...), you may remember, that Friends made their
appearance in the reign of King Charles the First; who by his too much aspiring
after (...) alarmed the people; who, headed by Oliver Cromwell, (...) against
the king and took the (...) of government into his own hands, and (...) the
kingdom himself, under the character of lord (...).

Here we do (...) that Friend who had paid their ^l^^giance and their (...) to
the king, continued to pay them to Oliver Cromwell during the (...) he held the
reins of government: And what can be said of him, but that he headed the
populace, and was an opposer of kingly authority, not merely as such, but as it
became, through the hands of the king, subversive of the rights and priviledge^
of the people: What harder things can be said of these who are (...) the head
of the present opposition, that may render them less worthy of receiving taxes
to defray the charges of government. By all that I have been able to discover,
our society in England have ever made a point of being careful and exact in
paying all taxes that are legally assessed, except the Priests ^a^es

After CROMWELL, king Charles the second came to the throne, and they paid
taxes to him also. After which, the crown continued in the family of Stewarts,
until the disturbances in king James the second's reign; who by his favoring
popery, justly alarmed and incensed the people against him that thinking
himself not safe among a justly provoked people, took shelter in France, which
made way for the Prince of Orange. Here we ^^nd the line of (...) interupted
again, which devolved on them according to legal succession, and the Prince, in
conjunction with the people, opposing the then kingly government in James; much
the same as is laid to the charge of those who are at the head of the present
opposition; and Friends who were desirous to live in peace with all men, paid
taxes to him like wise; but say they -- "James favored popery and endeavored
to introduce popish government and therefore forfeited his right to the crown."
"Be it so -- but is favoring popery, the only instance in which the kings of
England can forfeit their rights to reign (...) a free people?" -- I should
think, that when the sword is put into the hands of a king to be directed for
the punishment of evil (...), and praise to them that do well, we might have
some reason to expect him to act in some measure, answerable to his exalted
station, and the trust the people have reposed in him, (as kingly authority
originates from the people) -- But if to the contrary he should act so far
below his exalted station as to turn the point of the sword at the vitals of
the people, it must be very alarmin^^ especially when they have conferred all
the favors upon him, that were in their power, confident with the safety of
the kingdom, he as fully forfeits his right to reign over them, as in the case
of popery, nor can we assure ourselves that the interest of popery is (...)
bottom of the present ministerial plan.

Every considerable man, no doubt, would be glad of such a form of government
as might be unexceptionable: but we have no reason to expect it, in this
imperfect state of things: Yet we ought to use all just and reasonable means to
rectify, all disorders in government, that are in the compass of our power,
consistent with the peaceable profession we make; and at the same time, to be
as careful not to complain without just cause, but be as content as we can,
under such a form of government, as it has pleased Divine Providence to cast
our loss: And it must be a very bad one indeed, that is not preferable to a
state of anarchy. I believe it may be very well allowed, that even the present
state of government in the Massachusetts Bay is better than none, and, if the
inhabitants receive any advantage from it, they ought to be willing to bear a
proportionable part of the charge that arises in support of it; tho it may not
be in such in state as they could wish -- in a word, let a man be under any
form of government he can imagine to himself, where he receives any advantage
by i^, and (...) he remains under (...) he ought to bear his proportion of the
charge of it: for the thoughts of having our lives and every thing that is near
and dear to us, lie wholly at the mer^^ of every invader, without any
possibility of redress from any (...) authority, (...) would incline us to be
willing to bear ou^ just proportion of the charge of such government as we are
under, if it should not in every respect be consistent with the most perfect
system.

Our Savior has set this matter in an indisputable light, to (...) by the
conversation he had with Peter on that subject, at a time when those who
received tribute money came to Peter (...) with him whether their (...) paid
Tribute or not, Peter said he did (...) Christ willing, it appears, to take
advantage of this opportunity to leave an example to future ages of his
approbat^^^ (...) taxes, in a case (...) to the prefect, in every (...)
essential to the present argument, and as an additional (...) the holy example,
introduced a conversation with Peter, not (...) for him to introduce it, or
propound any questions on the subject but prevented him^ as if with design to
remove every hesitation, proceeded thus, What thin^est (...) Simon, of whom do
(...) kings of earth take custom or tribute, of their own children or of
strangers? Peter says unto him of strangers. Jesus says unto him, Then are
the children free As much as if he had said, "then have they no just demand on
us, we being children, may very well refuse paying of it -- Nevertheless, least
we should offend them, it is best it should be paid, therefore I would have
thee do it," which he was (...) to do by an extraordinary miracle, I cannot see
how it is (...) for any thing to be expressed more clearly to (...) scruple. It
is further observable, that there is not one (...) objection (...) from Christ
or Peter, that part of (...) money went to de^^ay military charg^s, (for (...)
which we might expect to find here if any where, seeing they were then upon the
point of paying taxes. If it be urged, "that this happened before the abolition
of the Mosaical constitution, while (...) was lawful, and consequently the
paying tribute for the support of it," I answer, whether the law was wholly
abolished at that time or not, is not necessary to be enquired into in this
case, it is sufficient to our purpose, that the words of our Savior which are
commonly urged to disprove the lawfulness of war, were delivered in his sermon
on the Mount, sometime before the conversation he had with Peter concerning
paying (...); and if war was forbid in his sermon on the Mount, the paying
(...) ever after that must have affected his followers in the same manner as it
does at this day, unless it can be made to appear that the lawfulness of war
did not cease at the time when two generally supposed he forbid i^ ^ut that the
(...) thereof was reserved to some future period; which we have little reason
to (...).

Thomas Story, in the journal of his life explains this matter very clearly.
Pages 124, 260, to which (...) refer you, and only transcribe a few sentences.
The we are prohibited arms and fighting in person, as inconsistent (we think)
with the (...) of the gospel of Christ; yet we can and do, by his example,
readily and cheerfully pay unto every government, in every form, where we
happen to be subjects, such sums and (...) as are required of us by the
respective laws under which we live.

If our ^^ers pursue measures for the defense and support of (...) government,
that we think not strictly consistent with the (...) the gospel, even by
repeling force by force to the shed^^ (...) of human blood, it is out of our
power to (...); they (...) i^ the defense of government as (...) the (...) and
if their manner does not suit us, that may not (...), but we may receive as
much advantage from (...) as of they pursue such measures as we may think we
could (...) out. However, let them proceed in a hostile manner or not (...) the
defense of our rights and privileges, it is certain, if we receive advantage
from civil government, we ought to bear our part of the charge of maintaining
of it, or else have no recourse to (...) any case whatever; (...) it would be
very odd for us to seek protection against the (...) or abuse of our fellow
creatures, from an authority (...) we refuse to help to support. It may farther
be observed, (...) the tribute that Peter paid by our Savior's direction, was
at (...) when the Jews were under the Romans and Caesar at great (...) in
supporting his legions for the defense of his empire: (...) as Christ (...) the
hand of Peter, paid a (...). He must consequently pay a proportionable part of
such charge.

In one place Christ says, Render to Caeser the things that are (...) but i^
the instance before us, he sets us an example of paying the requisition of
civil authority, not only when the soldiers received a part of it, but even
where not strictly due, rather than give (...); although it helped to uphold a
government under which they ( i. e. the Jews) were reduced by the dint of
sword; an example of meekness that ought to have place in every considerate
mind; that whilst we remain steady to our testimony against shedding human
blood, we may preserve our consciences void of offense toward God and man, and
by no means, at any time, throw out (...) unbecoming reflections against those
in authority, nor mistake w^ll (...) scruple of conscience in paying taxes, or
is anything else nor give civil authority any unnecessary trouble.

It is be said that "Christ submitted to the paying of a tax, to show his
subjection to kingly authority," I answer, but I believe, not to show that he
gave the preference to kingly authority, for there appears to be a clear
instance to the contrary in that of Israel's asking for a king, at which time
it was showed them what the consequence would be, which they afterward felt to
their sorrow. 1 Samuel 8 chap. " He showed them what should be the manner of the
king that should reign over them: He will take (...) and appoint them for
himself, for his chariots, and to be his (...), and some shall run before his
chariots. And he will take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be
(...), and to be (...), and (...) take your fields, and your vineyards, and
your (...) yards, even the best of them, and give them to his servants (...)
will take your menservants, and your maid servants, and (...) goodle^^^ young
men, and your (...), and put them to his work. (...) will take the tenth of
your sheep: and ye shall be his servant (...) And they said, nay, but we will
have a king, etc." That, from (...) instance, or any other, we have little
reason to prefer a kingly government. -- The Evangelical Prophet Isaiah, seems
to have had a very lively idea of their being formerly governed by judges,
before they had any king and speaks of it in a way (...) manner that very
clearly indicates it to be far preferable to a kingly government, and
foretells, very clearly, its returns: chapter ^. v. 2^. 2^^ I will turn my hand
upon thee, and purely purge (...) thy (...) and take away all thy tin. And I
will restore the judges (...) and thy counsell^rs (...) at the beginning.
Afterward, (...) called the city of righteousness, the faithful city. -- (...)
comes our condition. I believe I may say, without (...) a very great
reformation must take place in the (...) denomination among us, when Zion shall
(...), and her converts with righteousness, v. (...).

But with respect to kingly government, I hope there are none among us, such
sticklers for a republic, but that it would be very ^^ceptable to all well
wishers to America, if the controversy between Great Britain and the colonies
should subside, and that things might return to their old channel.

The apostle Paul semms to have had a very great regand for civil government,
and discourses largely upon the subject in his 13 chapter to the Romans, and
carries the matter so far as to say, There is no power but of God; the powers
that be are ordained of God. Without criticizing particularly on what he faith,
we may safely conclude thus much from it; that all power capable of serving God
and mankind, whether by means of civil authority, or otherwise, is of God, and
no other; and that when this power is exercised by those in authority for the
good of mankind, they ought to be encouraged and obeyed in it; but whenever
they act from a contrary power and priciple, the mischievous effects of it will
presently appear, either less or more, to the distressing and corrupting the
people, that, when the wicked bear rule the ^end may very well be said to mourn.

To conclude, I meet with some, who appear to be well disposed persons, who
from some disagreeable circumstances they have (...) notice of, are led to
doubt of the sincerity of the (...) of some, who have some influence in the
American counsels^ and met they fear their designs are to enrich and (...)
themselves at the public cost. How well grounded there suspicions ^^ey, be, I
cannot pretent to say; but thus much I think I may say (...) safety, that I am
fully persuaded it is far from being the case (...) must of such whose conduct
therein, I have been able to (...) my jugdment about: but if there be any such,
who in this some of deep distress, act from motives so merconary and repugnant
to every idea of justice and humanity, they ought to be ranked among the worst
of enemies, as well as among the most impious of men. -- Let us now call to
mind, that it is a time that calls aloud for all closely to examine their
(...), tradition or ad^^ation, although of the best, will act be able to support
(...) the time that is (...) approaching; although it may be of excellent (...),
in regulating our manners, it rightly (...); now (...) others being firmly
established on the (...) of ages, as an everlasting foundation, be any (...) to
the day of our distress: We must experience this for ourselves, (...) into
(...); but I hope we shall, while the (...) is open to be, seek earnetly to be
(...) from the earth and (...).

With much respect, I am your sincere (...).


