THE CRISIS. NUMBER XXVI.
Molle Pecus, mutumque Metu.

VIRG. Mansfield derides and George such Suppliants scorns;
You're a tame herd; why don't you use your Immediately after the Remonstrances
in Mr. Beckford's Mayoralty, Lord Mansfield made the King in his speech mention
the distemper which raged among the horn cattle, this was cabinet wit, and a
standing joke at court.
horns.

ADMINISTRATION dare not, as yet (or else they would) deny the subjects right
of petitioning the King; but Bute and Mansfield, will not suffer even the
petition of the first city in the kingdom, to be received upon the throne. Can
their supreme Lordships give a reason why? I mean a solid reason. It is an
undoubted, and till now has been an undisputed right, which this grateful city
claims, a right, which no Royal tyrant in past ages has controuled.

This late political display of Sovereign insolence, has broken out, to dignify
the present reign; our Kings are still ready to receive a petition from the
greatest city in the universe, but they are the judges where -- at their Levee
-- or in their water close? -- Be it ordained henceforth, that all petitions
for redress of national grievances shall be received where they may be most
useful to the sovereign, and least likely to rise in judgment against the
minister.

Is it come to this at last, that one of the most essential rights of a British
subject is to be treated with indignity? Is it become a farce that may be acted
at a sycophantic Levee, and attended to with as much affected indifference as a
birthday ode? Is the ground and reason of this invaluable right forgot? Or are
the rights of the crown alone to be maintained, and those of the subject
trampled under foot? Let us enquire into the foundation of the subject's right
to address the throne; we shall then see with what propriety, policy, or
decency, this satisfaction is refused now. Whilst the sovereign has a right to
allegiance, the subject has an equal claim to protection.

These essentials from the bond of union, the reciprocal relation, between the
governor and the governed; that the state may enjoy the benefits arising from
this union, the King becomes the head of the body politic, by the suffrage of a
free people; the people remain members of this body politic, giving up their
natural rights, by compact with the sovereign, for the sake of protection and
good government. These are the two great ends which every subject has in view.
A King of England, on the other hand has not a single prerogative which is not
conducive to these two great ends. This is the true state of an English
Sovereign, and an English subject: in consequence, a good Sovereign may well
expect to be obeyed without reluctance; a loyal subject to be heard without
contempt; if the Sovereign's dignity must be maintained, the subjects
grievances must be redressed; the one is lessened by an insolent deportment,
and the other aggrivated by cold indifference. The Prince who will not hear
information, is a fool; he who persists in spite of it, is a Tyrant.

It is a maxim with us, "that the King can do no wrong;" the result of every
political evil, is imputed to his ministers, but the unthinking Prince who
checks Petitions to the throne, rashly takes every impolitic transgression upon
himself. To this injudicious conduct that weak tyrant Charles the first,
deluded by his ministerial sycophants, owed his ruin, he foresaw the storm
approaching, when it was too late to take shelter from its fury, his sufferings
(and just they were) should be a perpetual lesson for crowned heads, but alas!
they are kept (if possible) in infancy all their lives, at their hazard their
infamous dependants are to rife; a wise King would not only open his ears, but
his arms, to the information of his subjects, they are his creators, and they
ought to be his guides, they are in truth his only friends.

Till subjects commence slaves, neither weak Kings, nor wicked ministers, can
stand before them, no army is sufficient in a free country, to encounter civil
indignation and resentment, iniquity never can prevail till men have lost their
reason, those who dare to think, will dare to act. To injured subjects the
sharpest of all incentives is contempt, the happiest expedient is redress, the
sole right of exercising this lenient measure, lies in the breast of the
sovereign; if ministers are wicked he can discard them, if venal parliaments,
at the back of a minister, attempt to undermine the constitution, he can
dissolve them; without proceeding to this extremity, he can, and it is his duty
to withhold his assent whenever any act has improvidently passed the two
houses, which is likely to be pernicious to the nation.

In such times of corruption and iniquity, every member of the body politic has
a right to inform head (the King) of the approaching danger, in such times,
shall a great city be repulsed? If they are to be received with unusual
indignity, such an intended reception is equal to an actual repulse. That
Prince wants wisdom, who is not capable of reflecting that opulent cities are
the vital parts of his dominions, yet what treatment has the city of London
lately met with? have they not been charged with encouraging his Majesty's
rebellious subjects (as they are called) in America? Is it not treason to
encourage traitors? Yet my Lord Mansfield knows that the word (encourage) is
the word used by his Majesty, in his answer to the city petition. Now if
subjects have a right, (and who dare deny it?) to petition the sovereign, they
are entitled to some degree of decency, when they approach the throne with a
remonstrance; because these remonstrants are a most important part of those
people to whom the sovereign owes his existence and continuance. The Majesty of
a people resides in the collective body, not in a packed majority of smuggled
representatives in a venal house of commons, it is not from the luxurious and
corrupt, but from the industrious and commercial parts of the kingdom, that
this collective body will take its tone, they are the sinews of the state. The
rotten commons, and and still more rotten peers, are but as straws floating
lightly upon the surface of this great community these are the bees that make
the honey, and those the idle drones, that rob the public hives; yet these
alone are the persons whom the "King delights to honor," they alone are
received with smiles.

The incense of flattery is grateful, the voice of truth an abomination to the
throne, the sovereign (though not to be surfeited with supplies) is grown sick of
information; petitions are therefore to be received at levees, there they will
be handed to a Lord in waiting, (one of the corrupt gang) and neither opened
nor heard of afterward, but when petitions are received upon the throne, a
King cannot stop his ears; their contents, their reception, and the answer, are
notorious, the whole world may then look on, and either applaud the wisdom, or
be astonished at the justice of the sovereign.

Can tyrants who violate the laws of God, fear the sentence of this earthly
forum? Is it for this pusillanimous reason, public remonstrances are to be
treated like private petitions, presented by indignant individuals? Are the
city of London to be received like paupers in the corner of a levee? Do they
come for alms, or for redress? Do they come to solicit a pension, or to claim a
right? Do they sue for the performance of a jobbing contract made with a
perfidious minister, or for an establishment and due observance in futuro, of
that compact made between the crown and the subject, at the revolution? If they
come in the latter shape, the importance of their suit demands all the dignity
and attention of the sovereign.

If petitions of such a serious nature, can be baffled by a careless, light
reception at a levee of idolatrous placemen, and needy mendicants, every avenue
of honest information is shut up by the false friends of deluded Majesty; the
sovereign is still kept in a state of darkness and dangerous perseverance, for
the sake of a ministerial gang of public robbers, at the hazard of the
property, lives, and liberties of a whole empire.

The iniquitous proceedings of this atrocious gang in the last, and present
parliament, which they packed, fully justify me in branding them with the name
of public robbers. Let them look into the black journals of their guilty
houses. -- There they will find that individuals, corporations, electing
counties in Great Britain, (not to mention the vast continent of America, and
the colonies, merchants and manufacturers, dependent on it) have been deprived
of their rights, their liberties, and lives, by that Banditti, who call
themselves the King's friends, yet act like enemies to him, and to their
country.

These would open the way (should they at last meet with due attention) first
to their removal from the King's presence, and then to fatal enquiries -- To
the salvation of Great Britain and America, and to the punishment of that
infernal Gang of national Parricides. They, on the other hand, fearing only for
themselves, wish to stop all access to the Sovereign's ear, and evrey appeal to
his understanding, or his heart. England cannot look with unconcern upon the
sufferings of America. Her claims is just, she says, and she says truly, that
taxation (when it is for the single purpose of taking money out of her pocket)
and representation are, and must necessarily be reciprocal. In every other
respect she submits (as a Colony), to the Legislature of her Mother country;
she submits to all those laws of England, which affect the general system of
policy throughout the empire of Great Britain; but she says wisely, that the
money which she acquires by the sweat of her own brow, is not the money of the
people of England; and therefore cannot be given away by such persons as
represent the people of England only.

Thus stands the case of America, whom administration are laboring to bring
under the absolute yoke of their corrupt parliamentary majority: Unless they
can compass this, they know that neither America, nor Great Britain (whom they
keep like an apple in their jaws, as Hamlet says, first mouthed to be last
swallowed) can be effectually enslaved. Unless America can be massacred, and
her refractory numbers reduced, by sword and famine, within a possibility of
control, she will set a terrible example of spirit to her mother country, for
whom a net is likewise already spread. Till America is totally subdued, the
liberties of Great Britain cannot be finally extinguished. The aim of the
present despotic administration, and their servile majority is plain: They wish
to bring America not only under the yoke of our legislature, but of their
standing army, with which they will keep them under foot for ever, should they
conquer now. Should they fail in this diabolical design; America rising from
her ruins, will erect an empire of her own; an asylum for the distressed
subjects of her mother country; who, as they seem at present careless about the
rights, will at last retain the name of Englishmen. But should our parricides
succeed, and America be once subdued, the whole British empire will in due time
be slaves. Then will the patriotic scheme of our present virtuous
administration be complete; their friendship to their King, their affection for
their country; the vain confidence of the one, the well grounded distrust of
the other will appear. The secret machinations of the cabinet, the superior
wisdom of the Great Council of the nation, will be disclosed, to the eternal
shame and infamy of those, who must neither presume to call themselves Britons
nor men, if they long continue thus tamely to petition when they ought to act.
Then shall we all deserve the ridicule of the sarcastic Mansfield, and be, in
very deed, a tame herd of animals, among whom the worst of all distempers
(slavery) may be said to rage; whilst we dare not avail ourselves either of our
Hoofs, or Horns.

CASCA.
The Authors of the CRISIS present their respectful compliments to CATO, and
return him thanks for his spirited address to the King, which shall be made the
subject of our next number: The authors fear no tyrant, nor the instruments of
tyranny, and they will always pay particu^^^ attention to the future
correspondence of CATO, who breaths the Godlike sentiments of freedom. They
embrace this opportunity of contradicting a most infamous report, no less
industriously than falsely propagated by the emissaries of the present infernal
administration. "That the CRISIS was set on foot, and is countenanced by the
ministry as a pretense for laying a restraint on the Press." The authors beg
leave to declare in the most solemn manner, before God and Man, that such
assertions have not the least foundation in truth, and that they are circulated
by a tribe of pensioned rascals, who are employed to write down truth, and
establish falsehood, only with a view to deceive and mislead the people, and to
draw their attention from the true channel of faithful information, and from
that destruction with which they are now threatened. The CRISIS was set on foot
with a design to support and defend the constitutional rights and privileges of
England and America, which the authors hold equally dear with their lives. It
was set on foot at a time when the liberty of the press was nearly destroyed,
or rendered useless by ministerial prosecutions, a Scotch Chief Justice, and
the dastardly souls of narrow minded Printers, who were afraid to give a tyrant
his true appellation. The authors are determined to write like Englishmen,
unawed by fear, or prosecution, to speak bold truths, such truths as some would
fear to think. Freedom of speech and writing is one of the first, and most
glorious privileges of a free people: this the authors claim as a right, and
this they are firmly resolved to use and defend: for to this privilege we may
again stand indebted, for another REVOLUTION.




