THE CRISIS. NUMBER XXII.
BLOOD calls for BLOOD.
To the People of ENGLAND.
Friends, and Fellow-Countrymen,
LET me conjure you by all you hold dear, here and hereafter, by all the ties
of nature and justice, to rouse in defense of your persecuted brethern and
fellow subjects in America, who daily fall innocent victims to lawless power:
let me entreat you to rouse in defense of your rights and liberties; those
rights and liberties which heaven gave, and for which your fathers bravely
fought, and gloriously fell, to preserve themselves and their posterity free;
be assured if bleeding America can be reduced to slavery, all the boasted
privileges of Englishmen must fall with her: let me therefore beseech you to
oppose with uplifted hands, and streatched out arms, the cruel, bloody, and
unnatural Tyranny of George the third, and his diabolical Tory minions:
Perdition, destruction, and all the miseries of a tortured death, attend the
wretch, who calls himself an Englishman, and yet can tamely see his brother, or
fellow subject, perish through wanton cruelty, oppression or the sword.

No tyrant was ever more despotic and cruel than the present Sovereign, who
disgraces the seat of royalty in the British empire; no Court ever more corrupt
than his, and yet, O my countrymen, to this merciless and despotic tyrant, and
to his wicked and corrupt ministry, you sacrifice your rights, and yield a
peaceable submission.

Consider the gloomy, the dreadful prospect before you, the plains of America
are running with the blood of the inhabitants, her essence of the English
constitution destroyed, and nothing but the form, the mere shadow of it
remains; all the dear bought liberties, purchased and sealed with the blood of
your forefathers, wrested from you by the polluted hands of an abandoned set of
miscreants, supported and defended by a royal tyrant; and a dark cloud of
slavery, like a rising tempest; overspreads the land, it approaches swiftly,
and at this moment threatens our destruction; it is therefore high time you
should be roused and awakened to a sense of your danger, and by an appeal to
heaven, by a glorious resistance, provide for your common safety.

This is the only way, we have no other, to prevent the ruin that threatens us,
if we are inattentive or inactive at this time, our chains will be fast
rivetted, and liberty must expire; your petitions and remonstrances have been
spurned by the King, and you have now no remedy left but that of entering into
an ASSOCIATION in defense of your common rights, and the rights of America.
They have set you a noble example, an example worthy of Britons, an example
which you are bound by all the principles of justice and self-preservation to
follow: he must be blind that is not convinced of this, and he is an abandoned
wretch, an enemy to mankind, who will not pursue the road.

Upon your virtue and resolution at this juncture, depends the salvation of
England and America; it is now in your power to prevent the farther progress of
despotism, the butchery of your fellowcountrymen, and yourselves from slavery
and ruin.

When the humble supplications of an oppressed people are treated with
contempt, and a deaf ear turned to their complaints, when their rights are
daily invaded, their property unlawfully wrested from them, and their blood
inhumanly shed, it is incumbent on them, it is a duty they owe to God and their
country, to take the field and resist their oppressors, to show themselves
brave, when bravery is required, and dare to be resolute in the hour of danger.
Remember, my fellow countrymen, our predecessors led the way, the Americans
have followed their noble example, and we are bound to follow them. Where would
have been Liberty and Property, if it had not been for the virtue, bravery, and
resolution of our ancestors? They stood forth in the glorious cause, and many
of them secured it to posterity with their blood. Shall we then, tamely submit
to have those privileges for which they fought and fell, ravished from us by a
lawless tribe of men, who call themselves Senators or Ministers, and who taking
advantage of their Prince, are laying waste their country, and spreading
desolation through the land? Shall it be said in after times, that the year One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Seventy Five, was less glorious than that of Sixteen
Hundred and Eighty Eight; and that as the age grew more and more enlightened,
it become more and more pusillanimous. Forbid it Heaven!

Let me entreat you O! Englishmen, to rouse from that state of supineness in
which you have so long lain; open your eyes to the danger that surrounds you,
and stand forth the defenders of American virtue and public liberty. Havoc is
now the cry at St. James's, and the dogs of war are let loose to tear out the
vitals of our brethern; America through the abandoned cruelty of an accursed
administration, and an unrelenting King, is become a field of blood, overspread
with desolation and slaughter. It is in your power to put an end to this
horrid, unnatural civil war, it must owe its extinction or continuance to you,
if you are virtuous, brave, and resolute, the lives, liberties, and properties
of your fellow subjects, may be preserved, and your country saved from
destruction; if on the contrary, you should be irresolute and pusillanimous at
this time, (unworthy the name of Englishmen) thousands, many thousand lives
must be lost; the liberties of England will be no more, and your property taken
from you at the will and pleasure of the King and his ministers.

It can only be from the virtue and united efforts of England and America, that
the constitution of Great Britain, and all our invaluable privileges can be
preserved; should you remain quiet spectators of the present inhuman
Massacrees, and destructive measures, you will deserve the worst of slavery,
and the cruelest punishment ever inflicted on a people.

If you have any honor, if you have any virtue, or any bravery, you will now
stand forth and resist the tyrants, you will demand the heads of those men, who
advised those sanguinary, fatal, and ruinous measures; you will declare to the
world, you will not consent to arbitrary invasions of your liberties, arbitrary
dispensing with the laws, and arbitrary governing by an army; that you owe no
submission to a King, beyond the bounds of law; that your lives, liberties, and
estates, shall not be disposed of at his pleasure, and that you are bound by
the laws of God and man, to resist a tyrant; that you will oppose all unjust
violence, and those who attempt the life of the constitution, as the great
enemies of their country; this has been practiced in all ages, and all nations
determine, that when Kings invade the lives, liberties, or properties of their
subjects, that tear up the foundation of public freedom, and the sacred
constitution of their country, may be resisted, either by calling in and
joining with foreign assistance, or by taking arms in defense of the law and
common liberty; this is what was declared at the Revolution, and this is the
foundation upon which the people took arms in the time of Charles the first.

The axe is now at the root of the tree; the overthrow of the Constitution is
the great design of the King and his ministers, the open and avowed enemies to
the rights of mankind, who have already sufficiently proved to the world, that
they mean the subversion of the universal right of Christians and subjects. Let
those, my countrymen, who plead for tyrants, submit to their power; but let us
esteem liberty, religion, and property, equally with our lives, every man's
birthright by nature; no government ever received a legal authority to abridge
or take it away; nor has God vested any single or confederated power in any
hands to destroy it; and it is in defense of these glorious privileges, these
common rights, I have written this paper, and to preserve them unviolated by
the polluted hands of lawless tyrants, I would lay down my life, for life is a
burden in any other state but that of freedom.

It is notoriously known, notwithstanding all the royal and ministerial
falsehoods which have been, and are daily advanced, to our disgrace, it is known
that we do not enjoy, undiminished, one single privilege purchased by the
blood of our ancestors, and confirmed to us by Magna Charta and the Bill of
Rights. Every man then, who remains passive at this time, is an enemy and a
traitor to his country. I loose all kind of patience when I reflect upon the
melancholy situation of England and America, and the villainous principles of
those men, entrusted by the sovereign with the management of the affairs of
this once great, free, and powerful kingdom, I am fired with a just indignation
against the authors of our misfortunes; and if I appear too warm, I hope it
will be imputed to my zeal in the public cause, and not to any malice or
resentment, against individuals, for I here declare to have none, but I most
sincerely wish to stop the further effusion of human blood, and would willingly
sacrifice my life, could I rescue my country from the hands of particides and
traitors, and from that destruction which now threatens it.

To the PUBLIC.
The necessity, utility, and national advantage of a political paper in defense
of the natural rights of mankind at this important era, must appear greater
than at the last glorious Revolution, We now see, and with infinite concern,
the King and Ministry, the Lords and Commons, all united, and firmly resolved,
on persuing measures, which (without a noble opposition from the people) must
end in the destruction of the laws, rights, and liberties, of the whole British
empire, in England and America. It is therefore only necessary to say, this
paper will be carried on by two gentlemen of literary abilities, alike enemies
to the arbitrary efforts of ONE, or a purchased majority of FIVE HUNDRED and
FIFTY EIGHT TYRANTS, to whom they, and they hope, their fellow subjects, never
will submit.

Potior visa est periculosa libertas quieto servitio.

SALUST. The CRISIS will be continued with spirit, in defiance of every
exertion of lawless power, upon the true principles of the constitution,
against the secret nachinations, and despotic designs, of the present corrupt
court and ministry. The authors being determined, even at the risk of every
thing that is dear to man, to rescue the liberty of the press, the natural
rights of mankind, and the constitution of the British empire, in England and
America, from that ruin, with which they are now threatened. In order with more
ease to accomplish these great ends, they earnestly beg the assistance of
those, who are real friends to the laws, liberties, and constitution of their
country.


