A CANDID EXAMINATION OF THE MUTUAL CLAIMS OF GREAT BRITAIN, AND THE COLONIES:
WITH A PLAN OF ACCOMMODATION, ON CONSTITUTIONAL PRINCIPLES.

NEW YORK: Printed by JAMES RIVINGTON, M,DCC,LXXV.

ERRATA.
Page 12, Line last but one, for rights. read rights;

19, L. 23, for they are, r. it

20, L. 22, for incorroporated, r. incorporatd

23, L. 31, for disgraceful, r. dangerous

25, L. 18, for or my country, r. of my country.

ibid. 23, after legislation, add in their seveveral provincial legislatures,

26, L. 3, after without, dele they must be executed, and the penalties
recovered within the community; and, after police, add must be

31, L. 30, for common, r. crown

34, L. 4, for depend, r. depends

35, L. 23, for wilth, r. with

36, L. 14, for foeudal, r. feudal

39, L. 27, dele part

48, L. 5, for suport, r. support.

ibid. ibid. dele other.

The above Errors the reader is desired to correct, and to pardon any others,
that he may discover in this Pamphlet.

MY DEAR COUNTRYMEN,
WHEN we see the country we live in, where agriculture, elegant and beneficial
improvements, philosophy, and all the liberal arts and sciences have been
nourished and ripened to a degree of perfection, astonishing to mankind; where
wisdom and found policy have even sustained their due authority, kept the
licentious in awe, and rendered them subservient to their own, and the public
welfare; and where freedom, peace and order, have always triumphed over those
enemies to human happiness, oppression and licentiousness; now governed by the
barbarian rule of frantic folly, and lawless ambition: When we see freedom of
speech suppressed, the liberty and secrecy of the press destroyed, the voice of
truth silenced: A lawless power established throughout the colonies, forming
laws for the government of their conduct, depriving men of their natural
rights, and inflicting penalties more severe than death itself, upon a
disobedience to their edicts, to which the constitutional magistracy, in some
places by force, and in others willingly, submit: -- The property of the
subject arbitrarily, and without law, taken from him, in pursuance of those
edicts: -- When, under their influence, America is arming in the east and west,
against the parent state: -- I say, when we see the colonies, needlessly, and
while the path to their safety and happiness is plain, and open before them;
thus pushing on with precipitation and madness, in the high road of sedition
and rebellion, which must ultimately terminate in their misery and ruin: It is
the duty of every man of the least abilities, to try to reclaim them from their
folly, and save them from destruction, before it be too late. -- With this
design I am resolved to review the most important controversy, that ever was
agitated between a state and its members; in hope, that my countrymen, too long
seduced from their true interest, by false though specious arguments, will, at
length, listen to reason and truth, and pursue those measures only, which lead
to their safety and happiness.

In a controversy of so great moment, it is of the first importance to
ascertain the standard by which it ought to be decided. This being unsettled,
the merits can never be determined, nor any just decision formed. Hence it is,
that we have seen all the American writers on the subject, adopting untenable
principles, and thence rearing the most wild and chimerical superstructures.
Some of them have fixed on, as a source from whence to draw American Right, the
laws of God and nature, the common rights of mankind, "and American charters."
Others finding that the claims of the colonies could not be supported upon
those pillars, have racked their inventions to find out distinctions, which
never existed, nor can exist, in reason or common sense: A distinction between
a right in parliament, to legislate for the colonies, and a right to tax them
-- between internal and external (...) -- and between taxes laid for the
regulation of trade, and for the purpose of revenue. And after all of them have
been fully considered, even the authors themselves, finding that they have
conveyed no satisfactory idea to the intelligent mind, either of the extent of
parliamentary authority, or of the rights of America, have exploded them, and
taken new ground, which will be found equally indefensible. I shall not attempt
to account for a conduct which must appear so strange, when it is considered,
that the subject itself naturally, and familiarly, led to the only just and
proper means of deciding it. It is a dispute between the supreme authority of
the state, and a number of its members, respecting its supremacy, and their
constitutional rights. What other source to draw them from, or standard to
decide them by, can reason point out, but the principles of government in
general, and of that constitution in particular, where both are to be found,
defined and established? Whoever searches for them elsewhere, will search for
them in vain, and ever confound the subject, perplex himself, and bewilder the
reader.

In order then to ascertain the constitutional extent of parliamentary
authority; to determine whether the colonies are members of the British state;
and if they are, to mark out their just rights, and to propose a remedy to
reconcile them, upon principles of government and liberty; it is necessary,
first, to delineate those principles, which are essential in the constitution
of all societies, and particularly in that of the British government.

There is no position more firmly established, in the conduct of mankind, Than
that there must be in every state a supreme legislative authority, universal in
its extent, over every member. This truth, the principles upon which all
governments from the earliest ages have been established, uniformly
demonstrate. This truth, the authority of all authors of credit will ever
support. -- This truth, the nature and reason of civil societies will for ever
evince. Tully gives us this definition of government, Multitudo juris consensu
et (...) communione sociata. A multitude of people united together by a
communion of interests, and common laws to which they all submit with one
accord. Mr. Lock tells us, that the first fundamental positive law of all
commonwealths is, the establishing the legislative power. This legislative is
not only the supreme power of the commonwealth; but is sacred and unalterable
in the hands where the community have placed it. And in another place, he says,
there can be but one supreme power, which is the legislative, to which all the
rest, are, and must be, subordinate. The judicious Burlamaqui, in treating of
the essential constitution of states, and of the manner in which they are
formed, declares that in forming a society, it is necessary to unite forever
the wills of all the members in such a manner, that from that time forward they
should never desire but one and the same thing, in whatever relates to the end
and purpose of society. It is afterward necessary, to establish a supreme
power, supported by the strength of the whole body. That it is from this union
of wills and strength, that the body politic, or state, results; and without it
we could never conceive a civil society. That the state is considered as a
body, or moral person, of which the Sovereign is the chief head, and the
subjects are the members. And afterward, in another part he says, The state is
a body, or society, animated by one soul, which directs all its motions, and
makes all its members act after a constant and uniform manner, with a view to
one and the same end, namely the public utility. And in another chapter,
speaking of the characters of sovereignty, its modifications and extent, he
avers, that in every government there should be such a supreme power, is a
point absolutely necessary; the very nature of the thing requires it; otherwise
it is impossible for it to subsist. That this power is that from which all
others flow, it being a supreme and independent power; that is, a power that
judges finally of whatever is susceptible of human direction, and relates to
the welfare and advantage of society. And Acherley, in his treatise on the
Britannic constitution, proves with great strength of argument, That the
supreme power in every government and nation, is the legislative power of
making and altering those laws of it, by which every man is to be bound, and to
which he is to yield obedience.

The evidence of all other authors of credit, even of these the most attached
to republican forms of government, might be adduced, to demonstrate the same
truths; but this must be unnecessary, when we refer to the forms of all
civilized societies, whether monarchical aristocratical, democratical, or
mixed; and there find a sovereign legislature established, to which it is the
duty of every member uniformly to yield obedience. A due attention to this
universal principle, which seems too firmly settled to be shaken by any
sophistical distinctions, would have saved the American writers from all their
numerous absurdities. It would have shown them, that the legislative authority
in every government must of necessity be equally supreme over all its members.
-- That to divide this supremacy, by allowing it to exist in some cases, and
not in all, -- over a part of the members, and not the whole, -- is to weaken
and confound the operations of the system, and to subvert the very end and
purpose for which it was formed; in as much as the vigor and strength of every
machine, whether mechanical or political, must depend upon the consistency of
its parts, and their corresponding obedience to the supreme acting power: And
it would have shown that there can be no alternative; either the colonies must
be considered as complete members of the state, or so many distinct
communities, in a state of nature, as independent of it, as Hanover, France, or
Spain.

That there is such a supreme power established in the British society, which
has from the time of its origin, exercised this universal authority over all
its members, will not be denied. But where it is lodged; what are its
modifications; and what are the powers subordinate to it, is a necessary
enquiry. It will lead us to those principles which must decide many important
questions in this great controversy; and in particular point out the absurdity,
in the colonists, when they acknowledge allegiance to the King, and deny
obedience to the laws of parliament.

The government of Great Britain is of a particular kind. There is none now in
the world like it. It is of a mixed form, composed partly of the principles of
a monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy; and yet cannot with propriety be
described, by the name of either of them. Its supreme legislative head is
lodged in the King, Lords and Commons. To their authority every other power of
the state is subordinate, and every member must yield full and perfect
obedience. These three branches constituting but one supreme politic head,
their power is equal and concurrent; their joint assent being necessary to the
validity of every act of legislation. So that even in this department of the
state, which is the highest and first in order, the King is not supreme; being
only one of three equal in power. It cannot therefore be to the King, as
legislator, that the colonists owe obedience and allegiance; because he has no
such complete, independent capacity; he is not, by the constitution, a
legislator, but only a part of one; and to submit to the power of a part, and
not to the whole, is too great an absurdity for men of sense to adopt.

But as the legislature does not always exist, it could avail little, without
some power to superintend the execution of its regulations. The appointment of
a representative of the whole state, to see that its laws are duly carried into
execution, was absolutely necessary. The King is that representative; and as
such is vested with the executive power of the British government. But this
power is a subordinate one, and perpetually liable to the alterations and
control of the supreme legislative authority; whose will, enacted into laws,
is the sole guide and rule of its actions. Mr. Lock tells us, that the King is
to be considered as the image, phantom, or representative of the common wealth,
and by the will of the society declared in its laws, and thus has no will, no
power, but that of the law.

To him, in this representative capacity, and as supreme executor of the laws,
made by a joint power of him and others, the oaths of allegiance are taken; and
by him, that obedience in the subjects to the laws, which entitle them to
protection in their persons and properties, is received. Is it then to him, as
representative of the state, and executor of its laws, that the Americans
profess their allegiance? This cannot be; because it would be owning an
obedience to the laws of the state which he represents, and is bound to execute
and of which they uniformly deny the force and obligation. Hence these
professions are not made to (...) either in his legislative, or executive
capacities, but yet it seems they are made to the King. And into this
distinction, which is no where to be found, either in the constitution of the
government, in reason or common sense, the ignorant and thoughtless have been
deluded ever since the passing of the stamp act, and they have rested satisfied
with it without the least examination; for we find it in all the resolves and
petitions of the American assemblies, town meetings, provincial committees, and
even in the proceedings of the continental congress. And such have been the
unhappy effects, that we have seen the officers of justice in America, who have
taken the oaths to the British government, resolutely opposing the execution of
those very laws, which they have sworn to obey and execute; and thus
unwittingly sliding into the most palpable perjuries. I do not mean to offend
the inventors of this refined distinction, when I ask them -- Is this
acknowledgment made to the King, in his politic capacity, as King of
Great Britain, or of America? If to him in the first, it includes a promise of
obedience to the British laws, as I shall more fully prove hereafter. If in the
second, as King of America, when did he assume that title, and by whom was it
conferred? When was he crowned? On the contrary has he not invariably denied
the existence of any such capacity in him, by an uniform conduct, in exerting
his authority, to execute the British statutes in America?

In his representative capacity, the King also holds the great seal, or the
seal of the state, and has right to affix it to all acts of the legislature,
and such as he is empowered to do by his prerogative, and no other. He has also
certain prerogatives, which are defined and known. By one of them he has right,
under the great seal, to form any circle of territory, within the realm, and
the subjects on it, into inferior bodies politic, and to vest them with the
power to make municipal laws, for the regulation of its internal police, so far
as it relates to the welfare of that circle only: But by no means to discharge
them from their obedience to the supreme legislative authority. Because this
would be to weaken, dismember, and in the end destroy the state, contrary to
the intent for which the prerogative was vested in him, namely, the public good
and safety.

Having thus established the necessity of a supreme legislative authority in
every government, and shown that it is an essential principle in the English
state, and explained such other parts of the constitution as are necessary to
my purpose; let us next enquire whether the colonies of right are members of
that state, or so many independent communities, in a state of nature, with
respect to it. For seeing a legislative authority competent, in all cases
whatsoever, over every member, is necessary in every government; the colonies
must stand in one or other of these predicaments.

The lands upon which the colonies are established must be considered, as they
truly are, either discovered, or conquered territories. In either case the
right of property is in the state, under the license or authority of which they
were discovered or conquered. This property being vested in the state, no
subject can lawfully enter upon, and appropriate any part of it to his own use,
without a commission or grant from the immediate representative for that
purpose. Hence we find in the histories of all civilized states, from the
earliest ages to this day, the heads, or representatives of all governments,
distributing such lands, by special grants, among their people, who in every
instance which history affords, still retain the duties of subjects: And there
is no position better established by the practice and usage of all societies,
than that where a subject removes from one part of the territory of a
government, to another part of the same, his political rights and duties remain
as before; but where the subject of one state removes to the territory of
another, and settles there, his political rights and duties are changed from
those of the state from whence he removed, to those of the state under which he
settles, and from which he receives protection. No person acquainted with
politic law, or the practice of societies, in these respects, will assert the
contrary. What then are the circumstances of America? Under what authority was
it discovered? What was the intent of the discovery? By whom, and under what
authority, has it been settled? A decision of these questions will lead us to a
very important truth, viz. That the colonies are of Right members of the
British government.

America was discovered in the latter end of the 15th century, by Sebastian
Cabot, authorized for that special purpose, under the great seal of the state,
affixed to his commission, by Henry 7. Representative of the British
governtment. The signature of the great seal fully proves that the King did not
in the granting this commission, consider himself as acting in his private, but
in his politic capacity. In the first he had no right to affix it, in the
second he had. The design in view was to increase the territories, extend the
commerce, and add to the wealth and power of the state. And therefore the
discovery was made to the use of the state, and the territories became
immediately subject to its supreme authority. No man in his sober senses will,
I imagine, affirm that Henry 7. had in view the discovery of a country, into
which his successors might give license to the members of the state to
emigrate, with intent to become independent of its authority. Such a design is
too absurd to be supposed ever to have been admitted into any system of policy;
much less that of a Prince so justly famed for his wisdom.

Every colony in America, as well those under charters, as others, has been
settled under the license and authority of the great seal, affixed by the
representative of the body politic of the British state. The property of the
territory of America being in the state, and its members removing under its
authority from one part of it to another, equally subject to its supreme
jurisdiction; they of consequence, brought over with them all their political
rights and duties, and amongst the rest, that of perfect obedience to its laws;
-- nor could they be lost or changed by an alteration of their local
circumstances. Indeed nothing can be more explicitly confessed than this truth,
in all the American declarations of their rights. I shall cite only those of
the congresses which met at New York in 1765, and at Philadelphia in 1774. By
the first we are told, that his Majesty's subjects in these colonies are
entitled to all the inherent rights and liberties of his natural born subjects
within the kingdom of Great Britain. And in the second, That our ancestors, who
first settled these colonies, were, at the time of their emigration from the
mother country, entitled to all the rights, liberties and immunities of free
and natural born subjects within the realm of England. And that by such
emigration they by no means forfeited, surrendered, or lost any of those
rights. Thus evidently deducing their title to their right, from the relation
they bore, as members of the mother state. Conscious that they could not deduce
them from any other source but the English government, as they no where else
exist, they claim them under its title and authority. But can the wisest among
them inform us, by what law, or upon what principle, they claim rights under
the British government, and yet deny the obligation of those duties which
subjects of that government owe to it? The rights and duties of the members of
all societies are reciprocal. The one is the continuing consideration for the
other. Either of them being destroyed, without the consent of the subjects to
which both of them adhere, the other ceases. Therefore, should a state
arbitrarily deprive its members of their just rights, and refuse to restore
them, after it has been repeatedly, and respectfully required so to do, then
their duties and obedience to the state cease, but not before: It being the
design of every society, when formed, that its existence should be permanent,
not of a temporary duration.

Here we may perceive some of those many inconsistencies and absurdities in
which the advocates of America have weakly involved her cause. We see them
calling the subjects in America, "subjects of his Majesty," in his political
capacity, and as representative of the British state, bound in duty to execute
its laws, in every part of its dominions; and in the same breath denying
obedience to those laws. We see them claiming all the inherent rights and
liberties of natural born subjects of the state, and denying the force of those
duties, which are so inseparably united with those rights and liberties. We
hear them declare that they have not "forfeited, surrendered, or lost" the
rights "they enjoyed at the time of their emigration;" and yet they will not
comply with the duties upon the performance of which those rights depend. Thus
it seems the American subjects have neither "forfeited, surrendered, nor lost,"
but still retain the rights they derive from the government of Great Britain;
but the government has either forfeited, surrendered, or lost its rights over
Them. Indeed they have not told us how, or by what means, this forfeiture,
surrender, or loss of rights in the British state, has happened: This, I
believe, was a task impossible; and therefore carefully avoided. But what shall
we think of the sagacity and foresight of these able politicians, when we find
that the right claimed by parliament, and which they deny, may be established
with equal reason and solidity, upon the same principles and deductions, on
which they have rested the claims of America? May not the advocates for the
parliamentary authority assert, That at the time of the emigration of our
ancestors, the legislative power had a constitutional authority over them, and
every other member of the state; that by such emigration, which was an act of
their own, as well as of the state, it neither forfeited, surrendered, nor lost
that authority? And would not such a declaration be in reason, truth, and on
the principles of the English constitution, as well founded, as that upon which
the defenders of American rights have endeavored to establish them?

But it may be said that America is settled by others, besides British
subjects. Are They also members of the state, and subject to its authority?
They most certainly are. They have by their own act become subjects, and owe
obedience to its laws, as fully as any other members, as I have before shown.
But to confirm what I have already advanced upon this head, I shall add the
opinion of Mr. Lock, because it has been often heretofore relied on by the
American advocates, as worthy of credit. His words are, -- Whoever by
inheritance, purchase, permission, or otherwise, enjoys any part of the land
annexed to, and under the government of a common wealth, must take it with the
condition it is under, that is of submitting to the government of the common
wealth, under whose jurisdiction it is, as far as any subject of it. If the
preceding principles and arguments be well founded, as they appear to be, from
the usage, practice and policy of all societies; it follows, that whatever
British subject, or foreigner, has, either under the sanction of the American
charters, or otherwise, become an occupant of the English territories in the
colonies, he is truly a member of the British state, and subject to the laws of
its supreme authority.

I have thus far drawn my arguments chiefly from the policy of government in
general, and of the English constitution in particular; and, I hope, with
sufficient evidence, to prove the justness and truth of them: But as I mean
fully to investigate, with the strictest candor, the rights of both the
parties, and place them in their true light; it is of importance to consider
whether their conduct, for upwards of a century, affords evidence of a denial,
or confirmation of the principles I have maintained. And here we shall find,
that the prerogatives of this supreme representative of the state, ever since
the first settlement of the colonies, have been uniformly exercised, and
submitted to, in all the colonies. All their political Executive powers have
been derived from, and all their governments established by, it. It is in this
representative capacity that the King has granted all the charters, appointed
the governors, custom-house officers, etc. and granted authority to the
governors to commissionate the inferior officers of justice, as well judicial
as ministerial. From this source only all his legal powers, in respect to the
colonies, can be drawn; there being no other capacity vested in him, from
whence he could derive them. So that every officer in America, appointed by
him, or under his authority, is truly the inferior and subordinate delegate of
the King, Lords and Commons; receiving his authority from the supreme executive
representative of the British state; all their powers being originally derived
from, and limited by, its constitution and laws.

Upon the same principle, the supreme legislature has, upon many occasions, and
at a variety of times, held forth and exercised its authority over the
colonies; and they have yielded obedience to all the British statutes, in which
they have been named; as well those imposing taxes on them, as those for
regulating their internal police. The learned judges in England, and the judges
and other officers concerned in the administration of justice in America, in
conformity to this idea, of their being the inferior delegates of the British
state, and of its authority over the colonies, have ever made those laws of
parliament, where by words they have been extended to them, the test of their
decisions, in all American disputes, without doubt or hesitation, until the
year 1765, when our unhappy controversy commenced.

All the officers of government, every member of assembly, every foreigner
before his naturalization, had always taken the oaths of allegiance, under the
directions of the statutes, that have been made for that purpose. The words of
the oath are the same with that administered to the subject in Britain, on the
like occasions; and consequently must be of the same import, and carry with
them the same obligations in every respect. Both in Britain and America the
oaths are taken to the King, not in his private, but politic capacity; they are
taken to him as representative of the whole state, whose duty it is to
superintend the administration of justice, and to see that a faithful obedience
is paid to the laws. These oaths are no more than renewals of the original
covenant, upon which all governments are formed: For in the constitution of all
societies two covenants are essential; one on the part of the state, that it
will ever consult and promote the public good and safety; and the other on the
part of the subject, that he will bear fidelity and true allegiance to the
sovereign, or supreme authority. "This last covenant," says the judicious
Burlamaqui, includes a submission of the strength and will of each individual
to the will and head of the society, as far as the public good requires; and
thus it is that a regular state, and perfect government is formed. And the
words of Mr. Lock are equally apposite, The oaths of allegiance are taken to
the King, it is not to him as supreme legislator, but as supreme executor of
the law, made by a joint power of him and others; allegiance being nothing but
obedience according to law, which, when he violates, he has no right to
obedience, nor can claim it otherwise than in his public person, vested with
the power of the law. And in another place he says, That all obedience which by
the most solemn ties any one can be obliged to pay, ultimately terminates in
the supreme power of the legislature, and is directed by those laws which it
enacts. This being the nature of the oath of allegiance, and of the obligations
it enforces, no man of any understanding will call for further proof, That all
the officers of government in America, who have taken these oaths, and those
who have submitted to their administration, while they were executing the
British statutes, considered themselves as subjects of the state, owing
obedience to its legislative authority.

In every government, protection and allegiance, or obedience, are reciprocal
duties. They are so inseparably united that one cannot exist without the other.
Protection from the state demands, and entitles it to receive, obedience and
submission to its laws from the subject: And obedience to the will of the
state, communicated in its laws, entitles the subject to its protection. A just
sense of this truth has governed the conduct of the state toward the colonies,
and that of the colonies toward the state, ever since their settlement. The
colonists have not only settled upon the lands of the state, under its license
and authority, granted by its representative; but they have been fostered,
nourished and sheltered under its wings, and protected by its wealth and power.
And as they have ever yielded obedience to its laws, they have, whenever in
danger, called for its protection; and in the last war were saved from all the
misery and slavery, which popish superstition and tyranny could inflict, when
their inability to save themselves was universally known and acknowledged.

Seeing then that the colonies have, ever since their existence, considered
themselves, and acted as perfect members of the British state, obedient to its
laws, until the year 1765: There must, one would imagine, be something lately
discovered, which has convinced them of their mistake, and that they have a
right to cast off their allegiance to the British government. We can look for
this in no place so properly, as in the late declaration of American rights.
Here we find they are drawn from the immutable laws of nature, the principles
of the English constitution, and their several charters, or compacts. Should we
fail in discovering it here, we may safely determine it is not any where to be
found. We shall not find it in the laws of nature; the principles upon which
those laws are founded, are reason and immutable justice, which require a rigid
performance of every lawful contract; -- to suppose therefore, that a right can
thence be derived to violate the most solemn and sacred of all covenants; those
upon which the existence of societies, and the welfare of millions depend; is,
in the highest degree, absurd. And, I believe, we shall be equally unsuccessful
in searching for it in the principles of the English constitution; because that
constitution is formed to bind all the members of the state together, and to
compel an obedience to its laws. -- We must therefore find it in the American
charters or compacts, or no where. And after we have looked there, we can
discover no exemption, or discharge from the authority of parliament in any of
them, save one, and there it is only partial; while other parts of the same
charter declare the contrary, and expressly retain the submission of the
subject to the British laws. But suppose there had been such an exemption in
all of them, as clear as words could express it, it is a question which demands
a solution, whether the King had a right, by the constitution, to grant it.

The original intent of the prerogative, under which the inhabitants of
particular districts of territory have been incorroporated into bodies politic,
was to enable the representative of the state, to form inferior communities,
with municipal rights and privileges. This was necessary to enable the
executive power to carry into execution the operations of government with
regularity and order. And in some instances it has been beneficial in promoting
the trade, arts, and particular pursuits in business of such districts. -- This
prerogative is very ancient, and well defined by usage and prescription. London
held peculiar privileges long before the conquest. William the conqueror
granted to that city two charters soon after. A great number of inferior
societies have been since incorporated, by succeeding Kings, upon these
principles; all of them under the great seal, and by the same authority under
which the American charters were granted. Having so many precedents before us,
we cannot be at a loss to ascertain the extent of this prerogative. The
exercise of it for so many centuries will give satisfaction to every candid
enquirer. Making this the test of decision, we shall find that no King has ever
presumed to grant more than merely municipal powers and privileges, always
leaving the subjects and the territory incorporated, under the supreme
legislative authority. There being no traces of a farther extent of this
prerogative, in the conduct of all the British Kings; the conclusion is, that
no such power does, or ever did exist. Besides, this prerogative, like all
others, is vested in the King, in trust, to promote, not to injure, the public
good. And therefore, to assert that he may, under it, discharge these
incorporated societies from their obedience to the supreme power, is to contend
that, by virtue of the power which he holds in trust to strengthen, he may
weaken, -- and instead of maintaining and defending, he may destroy, the common
wealth; which involves the most palpable contradiction.

Sufficient has been said to convince us, that the Kings of England can have no
authority to discharge inferior bodies politic, from parliamentary authority.
But as upon a satisfactory decision of the question, the claim of independency
must stand or fall, I shall farther corroborate what I have said, with the most
respectable authorities. The learned Pusendorf tells us, With regard to all
lawful bodies, it is to be observed, that whatever right they possess, or
whatever power they hold over their members, is all under the determination of
the supreme authority, which it ought on no account to oppose, or over balance.
For otherways, if there could be a body of men, not subject to the regulation
of the civil government, there would be a state within a state. -- If we look
on these bodies, or systems, in a state already settled, we are then to
consider what was the intent of the supreme Governor, in founding, or
confirming, such a company. For if he has given, or ascertained to them, in
express words, an absolute and independent right, with regard to some
particular affairs which concern the public administration; then he has
plainly ABDICATED part of his authority, and by admitting two heads in the
constitution, has rendered it irregular and monstrous. Mr. Lock says, That
the legislative authority must needs be supreme; and all other powers, in any
members, or parts of society, derived from, and subordinate to it. And speaking
of the King's exceeding his public trust, he affirms, That when he quits his
representative capacity, his public will, and acts by his own private will, be
degrades himself, and is but a single, private person, without power, without
will, that has any right to obedience. And the same author would not scruple to
declare, upon the principles be establishes in the latter part of his treatise:
That a King who should have granted, in the American charters, a license to the
subjects of the state to emigrate, with a discharge from their obedience to the
legislative authority, and should open such a door to a desertion of the
principal territory, and dissolution of its government, would thereby forfeit
his crown; and to prevent the mischief of such grant, the people might resume
their original authority, if the mischief could not otherwise be prevented.

I have said before, whenever a state refuses to give protection to its
subjects, and maintain their rights, their duty ceases. It may with equal truth
be affirmed, that whenever subjects shall refuse to perform those duties, and
yield that obedience which they are bound to perform and yield by the
constitution, or original compact of society, they forfeit not only their right
to the protection of the state, but every other right or claim under it; and
the government may either punish them agreeably to its laws, or cease its
protection over them, and annul the rights and privileges they derive from it.
There is no truth more evident than that where a mutual covenant subsists,
including a consideration perpetually to be performed on both sides, upon which
the validity of the covenant rests, if either party refuse the performance on
his part, the other is discharged of course, and the party refusing loses his
right and claim to the performance of the other. If this assertion be just, and
that it is we shall find, whether we apply to the laws of nature, or civil
societies, -- into what a disgraceful predicament are the Americans thrown by a
denial of obedience to the authority of parliament, which is one of the most
essential duties! That they have not, as the congress affirms, forfeited,
surrendered, or lost their rights, by their emigration, is true. -- But that
this wise body of men have used their best endeavors, and pursued the most
effectual measures to forfeit them, is equally true. Let us suppose that the
late congress had been a regular and legal representative of all America,
vested with authority, by the consent of the colonists, to deny and withdraw
their obedience to the laws of the British state, as they have endeavored to
do; would not Great Britain be justifiable in declaring, by an act of state,
that all the rights and privileges which the colonists derive under her, are
forfeited? Shall the Americans have a right to withdraw from the state the
performance of their duties, and the state be bound to continue them in the
enjoyment of all their rights? Every principle of government and common sense
denies it.

Thus, in whatever light we view the subject; whether we reason from the
principles and policy upon which all governments are established, or those of
the English constitution in particular; -- the right of property in the
territory, -- the authority under which the colonists have been settled, -- the
persons by whom settled, -- their rights under the several charters and
compacts, -- their conduct ever since their settlement, down to the year 1765,
-- or from the conduct of the state down to this day; we find that they are
members of the British state, and owe obedience to its legislative authority.

That America has been wandering in a wrong path, bewildered among the
erroneous principles upon which her advocates have attempted in vain to support
her rights, is apparent from all her conduct; she began by denying the
authority of parliament, to lay internal taxes: -- But finding that ground not
tenable, she next denied its power to lay either internal or external taxes:
And at length has declared, that it can neither lay internal nor external
taxes, nor regulate the internal police of the colonies. And yet such has been
the implicit confidence, -- such the infatuation of the unthinking and deluded
people, that they have believed at the time, that all those principles were so
many solid pillars -- and supports of their rights, and truths as sacred as
those in holy writ.

It would not be unreasonable to think, that the arguments before offered, to
expose the present unhappy measures of the colonies, would be sufficient for
that purpose. But however that may be, as I am convinced they lead to the ruin
or my country, I think it my duty to take a more particular view of them. The
claims made by the last congress, and upon which, it seems, all America now
rests, are, That the colonies are entitled to a free and exclusive right, or
power of legislation, where their right of representation can alone be
preserved, in all cases of taxation and internal polity, subject only to the
negative of their Sovereign, in such manner as has been heretofore used and
accustomed. No words can convey a more perfect claim of independency, on the
British legislature, than those I have just transcribed. Because there is no
act within the power of any legislature to pass, binding on any member of the
state, but what must, in either the regulation or execution of it affect the
internal police. States may make laws for the government of their subjects,
while in foreign countries, or upon the sea; but as those laws can only be
executed within the society, there being no jurisdiction, no officer of justice
without, they must be executed, and the penalties recovered within the
community; its internal police affected by them, according to the nature of the
penalties, and the mode of recovering, or inflicting them, and in the most
sacred things, life, liberty and property; these being the objects upon which
penalties are laid. If this be true, and the colonies have a free and exclusive
legislation, in all cases of internal polity, the legislature of Great Britain
can have no more authority over them, than the parliament of Paris; and the
colonies are as independent of the one as the other. But it seems under this
claim of right, though the legislature of Great Britain, which is supreme in
power, having no superior, as I have shown, shall have no right to make laws
for us, nor even to repeal an act of assembly, of the colonies, however
inconsistent with the laws of England, or destructive to the rights and
interests of the nation; yet the legislation of the colonies is to be subject
to the repeal of the King. Does not this illfounded claim involve the cause of
America in an inextricable absurdity? Is not this acknowledging a power in an
inferior, and denying it in the superior, from whom that inferior draws all its
authority, and by whom all its prerogatives, rights, and powers are governed,
and controuled? The King, by the constitution, has no capacity in which he does
not represent the supreme legislature, or head of the state, as I have proved
before. Nor can he assume any other inconsistent with its rights. The power of
repeal, being a complete legislative act, he can draw it from no other
fountain, but from his representation of the whole legislative body. Because as
legislator, he holds only a third part of the right, and upon no ground of
reason, or propriety, can an entire superior power be derived, from any part of
the same power.

Here we have a full view of the plan of the delegates of North America, which,
when examined, appears to be that of absolute independence on the mother state.
But conscious that a scheme, which has so great a tendency to a forfeiture of
her rights, and so destructive to her safety and happiness, could not meet with
the approbation and support of the colonists in general, unless in some measure
disguised; they have endeavored to throw a veil over it, by graciously
concedeing to the mother-state, a whimsical authority, useless and
impracticable, in its nature. This is a stale device, common to wrong-headed
politicians, who have not reason and truth to support their pretensions. But
the veil is too thin. The herbage is not sufficiently thick to conceal the
covered snake, from the eye of the candid and sensible enquirer. But let us
hear them. But from the necessity of the case, and a regard to the mutual
interest of both countries, not from any constitutional right, for this they
have denied in the preceding part of the resolve, in all cases whatsoever, we
consent; but to what do they consent? to the operations of, not to the right of
making, "such acts of the British Parliament as are," not such as shall be
hereafter, for they are, no doubt, to receive the sanction of this wise and
learned body, before they are valid, bona fide restrained, to the regulation of
of our external commerce, for the purpose of securing the commmercial
advantages of the whole, i.e. of our commerce to the mother country, and the
commercial benefits of its respective members. Here is more art and finesse,
than an honest mind would wish to find in the conduct of any men, much less in
those of character. It is easy to perceive from the import of these words, that
should the British parliament be obliged to accept of their concessions, they
concede nothing. They have taken especial care, that what they have consented
to in one breath, should be blasted by the next. For there is no law of trade,
that I know of, nor can such a law be formed, as shall secure the commercial
advantages of all the external American commerce to the mother country, which
is a part of the realm distinct from the colonies, and yet secure to the
colonies, as members, their commercial benefit. It would not have been any
great deviation from the public duty of these gentlemen, had they dealt less in
mysteries, and explained what laws they were, which answered those excellent
purposes. Surely they could not mean those statutes; which enumerate American
commodities, and compel us to land them in Britain, before they can be exported
to foreign markets; nor those which oblige us to purchase their manufactures,
and forbid us to get them from other countries. -- These are so far from
"securing," that they greatly diminish the commercial benefits of the colonies;
and I know of no other that "secure" the advantages of our commerce "to the
mother country." -- But suppose there are such laws, who are to point them out
in the volumes of the statutes? Who is to say whether a law answers this
description? Is the legislature of Great Britain to do this? No. Who then? --
Why, the assemblies. -- But the assemblies are disunited, and may differ as
they have done, even in matters which concerned their essential safety, and
there is no constitutional union, declaring the voices of a majority, binding
on all: -- Why then, since it can be no otherways, the point must be determined
by an illegal, motley congress; some few of them to be appointed by the
assemblies, if they can be so lost to their own, and the true interest of their
constituents, as ever to appoint another; and the rest by a twentieth part of
the people, the most ignorant and violent to be found among them. A blessed
American constitution!

But should there be any such laws as the congress have described, it seems,
they are to be still further limited, and to exclude every idea of internal and
external taxation, for raising a revenue in America. All the laws of trade,
from whence the least aid arises to the crown for the protection of its
dominions, are invalid, for want of this "consent," and to be abolished: But
those which amount to an absolute prohibition, are agreed to. The statute
imposing a small duty on foreign sugars and molasses, on their importation, and
thereby enabling the colonists to establish new manufactures, and open new
sources of foreign trade, shall not be obeyed; but had the parliament instead
thereof passed an act totally prohibiting this part of our foreign commerce,
under forfeiture of vessel and cargo, it would have met with the approbation
and consent of these great and wise men, at least as to its "operations." Is it
not strange, that when they were about to bring forth this ruinous principle,
they could not perceive, that every greater power includes every inferior,
relative power; and that the power to prohibit a particular trade includes,
from necessity, that of permitting it, on condition of paying an advantageous
duty?

To conclude my remarks upon this famous American bill of rights, this pillar
of American liberties: It seems implicitly agreed, that with the "consent of
America," both internal and external taxes may be laid by Parliament; -- But
they have not informed us in what constitutional, or legal mode, this consent
is to be obtained, or given. They must have known, if they knew any thing, that
there was none; and yet so far were they from meaning to propose any, that they
ordered, in direct violation of their own rules, the only constitutional plan
which was offered for that purpose, to be rescinded from their minutes, after
it had been debated, and refered to further consideration; left the good people
of America should see and approve of it, depriving the member who proposed it,
of that security, against misrepresentation, which he was in justice entitled
to, and contrary to their duty to the colonies. -- Such are the proceedings of
the men, entrusted with the sacred rights and liberties of America! Such the
disappointment of their constituents. -- They thought that all wisdom, justice
and policy were concentred in that learned body. And therefore they expected
that some permanent system of union, between Great Britain and the colonies,
upon principles of government and liberty, would have been proposed to the
mother state, and a path opened to a lasting and happy reconciliation. But
alas! How mistaken! Nothing has been the production of their two months labor,
but the ill-shapen, diminutive brat, INDEPENDENCY. And conscious of its
inability to defend itself, they have exerted every nerve, to prevail on the
people to adopt the spurious infant of a day, and take up arms in its defense;
to rush into the blackest rebellion, and all the horrors of an unnatural civil
war. To effect this wicked and horrid design, they, in all their sham majesty
of illegal power, resolve that if the late acts of parliament shall be
attempted to be carried into execution by force, that in such case, All America
ought to support the inhabitants of the Massachusetts Bay, in their opposition
Who is to superintend the execution of the laws, against which this opposition
is advised? This is the duty of his Majesty, as representative of the state,
who is authorized to do it, by first calling on the aid of the civil power, and
if that is not sufficient, the military? The essential principles of government
justify it. Search for yourselves, my dear countrymen, look into all the
treatises on the common law, and they will tell you, that this opposition is
clear, palpable treason and rebellion, which will incur the forfeiture of your
estates, and your lives. But this is not all the mischief they have done, or
attempted to do -- as if nothing would satisfy them, but your inevitable ruin.
-- They have surrounded you with misery on all sides -- have used their utmost
endeavors, to raise the hostile resentment of one of the most powerful states
upon earth against you, when nothing but her affection, lenity and mercy
toward you, can prevent her from reducing you, in a short time, to the
deplorable condition of a conquered people. But if she should be so blind to
your and her own interest, as to give you independency, which is the great aim
of their conduct, they have prepared the rods and scourges of their own tyranny
to subdue your spirits, and triumph over your invaluable rights and liberties.
Under this tyranny, edicts have been made and published; and so sacred are they
to be held, that none is to presume to meddle with, or determine any dispute
arising on them, but the creatures of this illegal power. The severest of all
penalties are ordained for a disobedience to them. Taxes have been imposed on
your property, and that property arbitrarily taken from you; the liberty of the
press, and even the liberty of speech is destroyed. The unthinking, ignorant
multitude, in the east and west, are arming against the mother state, and the
authority of government, is silenced by the din of war. -- What think you, O my
countrymen, what think you will be your condition, when you shall see the
designs of these men carried a little farther into execution? -- Companies of
armed, but undisciplined men, headed by men unprincipled, traveling over your
estates, entering your houses -- your castiles -- and sacred repositories of
safety for all you hold dear and valuable -- seizing your property, and
carrying havoc and devastation wherever they head -- ravishing your wives and
daughters, and afterward plunging the dagger into their tender bosoms, while
you are obliged to stand the speechless, the helpless spectators. Tell me, oh!
tell me -- whether your hearts are so obdurate as to be prepared for such
shocking scenes of confusion and death. And yet, believe me, this is a real and
not an exaggerated picture of that distress, into which the schemes of those
men, who have assumed the characters of your guardians, and dare to style
themselves his Majesty's most loyal subjects, will inevitably plunge you,
unless you oppose them with all the fortitude which reason and virtue can
inspire.

I have thus thought it my duty, in a case of such infinite importance to my
country, to give the full weight to the arguments in favor of the right of
parliament, and against those rash and violent measures which are hastening the
ruin of America. I do not know, that I have exaggerated any. I mean, with the
most benevolent attachment to her true interest, to lay the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth, before my country, that she may impartially
consider it, and give it that weight which reason and her own preservation
shall dictate; -- but hitherto I have only performed a part of my engagement.
The rights of America remain to be considered and established. A task which the
undertaker must perform with ineffable pleasure, as he is pleading a cause
founded on the immutable principles of reason and justice -- the cause of his
country, and the latest posterity. He is endeavoring to restore an union
between two great countries, whose interest and welfare are inseparable; and to
recover those rights upon the enjoyment whereof the happiness of millions
depend.

That America has rights, and most important rights, which she does not at
present enjoy, I know; and that they are as firmly established, as those of the
parliament, may be easily proved; but what those rights are -- whence derived
-- how the exercise of them has been lost -- and what is the only possible and
safe mode of recovering them, are questions, a candid solution of which will
throw full light upon this unhappy controversy.

After what has been said respecting the rights of parliament, and the duties
of the British state, it cannot be difficult to determine from whence the
rights of America are derived. They can be traced to no other fountain, but
that wherein they were originally established. This was in the constitution of
the British state. Protection from all manner of unjust violence, is the great
object which men have in view, when they surrender up their natural rights, and
enter into society. I have said before, that the right to this protection, and
the duties of allegiance were reciprocal. By protection I do not mean
protection from foreign powers only; but also against the private injustice of
individuals, the arbitrary and lawless power of the state, and of every
subordinate authority. Such being the right, unless the government be so
formed, as to afford the subject a security in the enjoyment of it, the right
itself would be of little estimation. The tenure would be precarious, and its
existence of a short duration. In proportion to the stability of this security,
all governments are more or less free, and the subject happy under them. Much
therefore depends on the particular form, or constitution of the society. In a
monarchy, where the supreme power is lodged in a single person, without any
check or control, the tenure is precarious; because it depends on the
discretion and integrity of the Monarch. But in a free government of the mixed
form, where the people have a right to a share, and compose a part of the
supreme authority, its foundation will be solid, and its continuance permanent;
because the people themselves, who are interested in its preservation, partake
of the power which is necessary to defend it.

There is no society in the world where this right of protection is settled
with so much wisdom and policy, as in the English constitution. The experience
of ages affords numerous instances of its being invaded and impaired, but in a
short time restored by its own energetic power. It is this part of the English
government upon which authors dwell with rapture; as it constitutes its whole
excellence, and forms its freedom.

Power naturally arising from property, it is evident from a view of the
British constitution, in all its different stages, that the English government
derives its power from the landed interest; that being the most permanent and
unchangeable in its nature, of all kinds of property, and therefore most worthy
of protection. And although we cannot trace this truth up to its origin, the
necessary ancient records being buried in the ruins of the monasteries, either
before or after the conquest, yet the fact is sufficiently evident from very
ancient histories and documents, as well as from the plan of government, used
in England from time immemorial. All historians agree that the present form of
government was settled in Britain, by our ancestors, the Anglo-saxons; and so
far as we have any knowledge of their government, in their own country, we know
that the proprietors of the land, gave their personal attendance in the
legislative council, and shared the power of making their laws. After their
conquest of Britain, all those to whom the land was apportioned, held a right
to assist in the Saxon parliaments. And by the foeudal law every landholder,
met in the feudal courts, and gave his assent, or dissent, to the laws there
proposed.

Such continued to be the form of the British government, until the dissolution
of the heptarchy, and union of the seven kingdoms, when, we should not have
thought it strange, had this principle been destroyed, or greatly impaired, in
the convulsions which effected so great a revolution. But, on the contrary,
although the numbers of people, and their remoteness from the place of
convention, were greatly increased by the union which rendered a personal
exercise of the legislative power impracticable; yet in order to preserve in
the government, this important principle, upon which all their rights and
freedom de ended, they adopted the policy of vesting the landed interest in
each tything and borough, with a right to send representatives to their
Wittena-Gemot, or Parliament.

Nor could the rage of conquest, and all the power of arms, abolish this first
principle of English liberty and safety. William the first, at the time he
conquered Britain, found it consistent with his interest and security, to
preserve it inviolate: And when he thought it necessary to lessen the
exorbitant power of the Saxon Earls, which endangered his safety, by
dismembering the baronies from the counties, the Barons were vested with a
right to represent their baronies, in the great national council. This was all
the change which that great man ventured to make in the constitution; a change
which made no essential difference, as to its freedom. For as every spot of
land was before the conquest within some tything, so under this alteration
every part of it was included, in some barony or borough, and all of them were
represented in the legislative power, by the Barons, or Burgesses.

Upon this solid foundation continued the fredom of the English government,
during the reigns of William Rufus, and Henry the first. In the civil war
between Stephen and Maud and Henry the second, each party finding the power and
influence of the Barons over their vassals too great, divided the conquered
baronies into smaller tenancies in chief, and rewarded their friends with them.
By this measure, and the like policy, which was afterward pursued by King
John, tenants in capite, or the lesser Barons, were so multiplied, that a very
unequal representation of the landed interest arose. They held an equal share
in the legislature, with the greater Barons; and being more numerous, and their
interest in many respects different, they overruled, and often deprived the
greater nobility of their rights. This grievance grew intolerable; and
therefore, when King John found himself obliged to do justice to the nation,
and restore the ancient principle of the constitution, two several clauses were
inserted in Magna Charta: By the first the Archbishops, Abbots, Earls and great
Barons of the realm, were to be summoned singly by the King's writs; and by the
second, "all others who held in chief," viz. the lesser Barons, or tenants in
capite, were to be "summoned in general." By this clause the lesser barons were
separated from the greater, and lost their hereditary right of representing
their lands singly, or in person; but being summoned to parliament "in
general," they held the right of electing some of their body to represent them
in the house of commons; and of participating the supreme legislative
authority, by their delegates, who were thence forward styled Knights of the
shire.

Thus this right to protection from the state, stood secured in every
alteration of the constitution, by preserving to the landholders a share in the
authority of the supreme head, who were to regulate that protection, and every
other matter susceptible of human direction, until the reign of Henry VI. when
our ancestors, conceiving that it could not be rendered too secure, nor founded
on a base too broad, they obtained, by act of parliament, a right in every
freeholder of forty shillings per annum, to vote for knights of the shire.

In confirmation of this right, I shall only add that King John, in the great
charter I have before mentioned, granted for the restoration of the rights of
the subject, engages not to impose any taxes without summoning the archbishops,
the bishops, the abbots, the earls, the greater barons, and the tenants in
capite. And by the 17th of Edward III. another charter, granted on the like
occasion, it is expressly declared, that whatever concerns the estate of the
realm, and the people, shall be treated of in parliament by the King, with the
consent of the prelates, earls, barons, and commonalty of the realm.

It would be endless to trace this truth through all the pages of the history
of the English government. I have offered proofs sufficient to demonstrate that
the Lords and Commons, who hold so large a share of the legislative authority,
derive their right from, and represent the lands within the realm. I shall
therefore only add, before I leave this point, That this power of legislation
in the people, derived from the share they held in the lands, was originally,
and yet is, of the essence of the English government; and ever was, and still
continues to be, the only check upon the encroachments of power, the great
security against oppression, and the main support of the freedom and liberty of
the English subjects. And its excellence consists in affording, to every part
part of the realm, an opportunity of representing, by their delegates, at all
times, their true circumstances, their wants, their necessities, and their
danger, to the supreme authority of the nation, without a knowledge of which it
is impossible to form just or adequate laws; and when represented, to consult,
advise and decide upon such provisions, as are proposed for their relief, or
safety; giving their negative to such as are mischievous or improper, and their
assent to those which remove the mischief, or afford a remedy. Here we have a
perfect idea of civil liberty, and free government, such as is enjoyed by the
subject in Great Britain.

But what are the circumstances of the American British subjects? Is there a
part or spot of the lands in America, or are the owners or proprietors thereof
in right of such lands, represented in the British parliament; or do they in
any other manner partake of the supreme power of the state? In this situation
of the colonies, is not the British government as absolute and despotic over
them, as any Monarch whatever, who singly holds the legislative authority? Are
not the persons, lives and estates of the subjects in America at the disposal
of an absolute power, without the least security for the enjoyment of their
rights? Most certain it is, that this is a situation which people accustomed to
liberty cannot fit easy under.

From the preceding remarks it partly appears in what manner the American
subjects have lost the enjoyment of this inestimable right, though not the
right itself, viz. by their emigration to a part of the territory of the state,
for which the constitution had not provided a representation. America not being
known or thought of when the constitution was formed, no such provision was
then made. But the right to a share in the supreme authority was confined to
the territory at that time, intended to be governed by it. And at the time out
ancestors left the mother country, it seems none was established. How this
happened is not material to my subject -- they came over, perhaps, without
thinking of the importance of the right; -- or their poverty, which rendered
the obtaining of it in any form impracticable, prevented their claim of it.
However, it is certain that it was passed over in silence, as well by the
state, as the people who emigrated; but has been neither forfeited,
surrendered, nor lost. And therefore it ought to be restored to them, in such
manner as their circumstances will admit of, whenever it shall be decently and
respectfully asked for. Justice to the Americans, and found policy, in respect
to both countries, manifestly require it.

The emigrants enjoyed in Britain the perfect rights of English subjects. They
left their native country with the consent of the state, to increase her
commerce, to add to her wealth, and extend her dominions. All this they have
effected with infinite labor and expense, and through innumerable difficulties
and dangers. In the infant-state of their societies, they were incapable of
exercising this right of participating the legislative authority in any mode.
The power of parliament was justifiable from necessity at that time over them;
they stood in as much need of its protection, as children in an infant-state
require the aid and protection of a parent, to save them from a foreign enemy,
as well as from those injuries which might arise from their own indiscretions.
But now they are arrived at a degree of opulence, and circumstances so
respectable, as not only to be capable of enjoying this right, but from
necessity, and for the security of both countries to require it.

The subjects of a free state, in every part of its dominions ought, in good
policy, to enjoy the same fundamental rights and privileges. Every distinction
between them must be offensive and odious, and cannot fail to create uneasiness
and jealousies, which will ever weaken the government, and frequently terminate
in insurrections; which, in every society, ought to be particularly guarded
against. If the British state therefore means to retain the colonies in a due
obedience on her government, it will be wisdom in her to restore to her
American subjects, the enjoyment of the right of assenting to, and dissenting
from, such bills as shall be proposed to regulate their conduct. Laws thus made
will ever be obeyed; because by their assent, they become their own acts. -- It
will place them in the same condition with their brethren in Britain, and
remove all cause of complaint; or, if they should conceive any regulations
inconvenient, or unjust, they will petition, not rebel. Without this it is easy
to perceive that the union and harmony, which is peculiarly essential to a free
society, whose members are resident in regions so very remote from each other,
cannot long subsist.

The genius, temper, and circumstances of the Americans should be also duly
attended to. No people in the world have higher notions of liberty. It would be
impossible ever to eradicate them: should an attempt so unjust be ever made:
Their late spirit and conduct fully prove this assertion, and will serve as a
clue to that policy by which they ought to be governed. The distance of America
from Britain, her vast extent of territory her numerous ports and conveniences
of commerce, her various productions, her increasing numbers, and consequently
her growing strength and power, when duly considered -- all point out the
policy of uniting the two countries together, upon principles of English
liberty. Should this be omitted, the colonies will infallibly throw off their
connection with the mother country. -- Their distance will encourage the
attempt, their discontent will give them spirit, and their numbers wealth and
power, at some future day, will enable them to effect it.

If it be the interest of the mother country, to be united with the colonies,
it is still more Their interest that the union should take place. Their future
safety and happiness depend on it. A little attention to their circumstances
will prove it. Each colony, in the present constitution, is capable, by its own
internal legislature, to regulate its own internal police, within its
particular circle of territory. But here it is confined, thus far, and not
farther, can its authority extend, -- one cannot travel into the bounds of the
other, and there make, or execute, its regulations. They are, therefore, in
respect to each other, so many perfect and independent societies, destitute of
any political connection, or supreme authority, to compel them to act in
concert for the common safety. They are difference in their forms of
government, -- productions of soil, and views of commerce, -- They have
different religions, tempers, and private interests, -- They, of course,
entertain high prejudices against, and jealousies of, each other; all which
must from the nature and reason of things always conspire to, create such a
diversity of interests, inclinations, judgments, and conduct, that it will
ever be impossible for them to unite in any general measure whatever, either to
avoid any general mischief, or to promote any general good. A retrospect to the
conduct of the colonies, during the last war, will show that this assertion is
founded in fatal experience. It was owing to this disunited state of the
colonies, and their conducting their policy upon these principles, that a small
number of French subjects in Canada, acting on the reverse, were enabled to
concert their plans with such superior wisdom, and to exert such a superior
degree of strength, as to endanger the safety of all North America, which
contained upwards of two millions of people, and obliged them to implore the
assistance of the British government. In the application to the mother country
for protection, this is fully acknowledged. "It now evidently appears," say the
council and assembly of the Massachusetts Bay, That the French are advanced in
the execution of a plan, projected more than fifty years since, for extending
their possessions from the mouth of the Mississippi on the south, to Hudson's
Bay on the north, for securing the vast-body of Indians in that inland country,
and for subjecting this whole continent to the crown of France. Message from
the Council and House of Representatives of the Massachusetts Bay, in 1754.
And from what cause did it happen that the English colonies, possessed of an
hundred fold more wealth, and twenty times the numbers of people, could not
oppose, with success, the force and schemes of a few? The same gentlemen tell
us, The French have but one interest, and keep but one point in view: The
English governments have different interests, are disunited: some of them have
their frontiers covered by their neighbors; and not being immediately affected
seam unconcerned." The commissioners from the several colonies at Albany,
assign the same cause. "The colonies," they inform the crown, being in a
divided, disunited state, there has never been any joint exertion of their
force, or councils, to repel or defeat the measures of the French, and
particular colonies are unable and unwilling to maintain the cause of the
whole. That it seems absolutely necessary, that speedy and effectual measures
be taken to secure the colonies from the slavery they are threatened with. The
prediction contained in these declarations turned out strictly true. As it was
most just that the colonies should contribute toward their own protection,
while the mother country was lavishing millions in their defense; requisitions
were annually made of them. But what was the conduct of the colonies in this
scene, so very interesting to them? It is enough for me here to assert, what
was known to all at the time, and what there still remains abundant documents
to prove -- That although some of the colonies, which were in immediate danger,
complied cheerfully and in time; yet others, from various causes, complied too
late to be of real service; and some gave nothing toward the general defense,
even at times when the enemy was within their borders, and a considerable part
of the colony was evacuated. What must have been the direful consequences of
those omissions of duty in the colonies toward each other, had not the
mothercountry exerted her military abilities to save them? The danger, and all
the horrors of French slavery, and popish superstition, which then threw us, at
times, into the greatest despondency, are past, and we have forgot them! But
let us not deceive ourselves; the same causes will ever produce the same
effects. -- The ambition of France is still alive and active, her power indeed
is asleep, but only to wake at some future day. America is daily growing a more
assuring object of her ambition. Her fleets, and those of her natural ally, the
King of Spain, are increasing. The practice of conquering and dividing
territories and kingdoms, is become fashionable in Europe. Under this prospect
of things, what can America expect, while she denies the authority of the
mother-state; and by that denial incurs a forfeiture of her protection, and
refuses to be united with her upon such principles as will entitle her to it.
She must in all probability soon become the slave of arbitrary power, -- of
Popish bigotry and superstition.

But the miseries of a foreign yoke are not all the mischiefs which may attend
her scheme of independency. Disputes will ever arise among the colonies. The
seeds of controversy, respecting their several interests and boundaries, are
already sown, and in full vegetation. Ambition and avarice are ever ready to
exert their influence, whenever opportunity offers. America has many men of
abilities and intrigue, who will at all times be ready to rise on the
misfortunes and calamities of others. Disputes between Pennsylvania and
Maryland began, and would have ended in a civil war, had not the authority of
the state interposed. Similar disputes have subsisted between New York and
Connecticut; New York and New Jersey, and still subsist between New York and
New Hampshire, Connecticut and Pennsylvania, and Pennsylvania and Virginia; all
arising from the uncertainty of their boundaries, and right to the soil. In
1606 King James granted two charters, one to the Plymouth company, and the
other to Sir Thomas Gates, and others; including all the colonies. The
resumption of the first of these charters has been publicly avowed and
attempted; and we have great reason to believe, that of the other is in
contemplation. These, with many other causes, will afford plentiful souroes of
dispute between the several colonies; which can only be decided by the sword,
there being no other power to appeal to. The northern colonies, inured to
military discipline and hardships, will, in all probability, be the first to
enter the list of military controversy; and, like the northern Saxons and
Danes, carry devastation and havoc over the southern; who, weak for want of
discipline, and having a dangerous enemy within their own bowels, must, after
suffering all the horrors of a civil war, yield to the superior force, and
submit to the will of the conquerors.

We have now before us, all that we are to gain by this frantic attempt, to
separate the colonies from Great Britain. Should America fail in her military
opposition, which she must infallibly do, they immediately become a conquered
people, subject to such laws as the conquerors shall think proper to impose: --
All our rights and privileges forfeited, -- our loyalty justly distrusted --
our ports secured by men of war, -- our capital cities burdened with British
troops, -- and our wealth exhausted for their port. On the other contrary,
should we by any miraculous event succeed in this mad design, we must soon
either become a prey to a foreign power; our laws, our manners and customs, our
rights both civil and religious, and our inestimable religion itself, will be
changed for the arbitrary customs, the slavery and bloody superstition of Rome:
Or should we by any unforeseen accident, escape this deplorable situation,
another awaits us, almost as shocking and distressing. Ambition and avarice
will soon furnish the fuel, and blow up the flame of civil discord among
ourselves. Some of these calamities must inevitably be the blessed consequences
of this unnatural scheme.

It will now be asked, what then is to be done? Must we submit to parliamentary
regulations, when we are not represented in that body? My answer is -- That I
am a friend to true liberty. I esteem it above all other temporal blessings,
and because I esteem it, I disapprove of the independent measures of the
congress; which, instead of tending to secure, or obtain it, lead to the
destruction of all liberty, and the most dangerous tyranny. I do not differ
from them in opinion, that America has grievances to complain of; but I differ
from them in the mode of obtaining redress. I ever was convinced that
Great Britain was not so despicable in her power as to be hectored out of her
rights by her subjects; or that she was so ignorant of the condition of the
colonies, as to believe our pretensions to independency could be maintained. I
foresaw what has now come to pass, that we must either submit to parliamentary
authority, -- or to be a conquered people, -- or seek for redress in an union
with the mother state. And my duty as a subject, my own interest, and the
safety and happiness of my country, ever prevailed on me to prefer the last.
Had this measure been adopted in the year 1766, in all probability, the rights
of America would have been restored, and the most perfect harmony would have
this day subsisted between the two countries: But unfortunately for America,
such ground was at that time taken, as rendered it inconsistent with the honor
and dignity of parliament to meet us.

Great pains have been taken by the American demagogues, to delude the unhappy
people, whom they have doomed to be the dupes of their ambition, into a belief
that no justice was to be obtained of his Majesty, and his houses of
parliament; and that they had refused to hear our most reasonable petitions.
Hence we have seen the best of Sovereigns treated with the grossest abuse and
insult, the affections of his people alienated, and many of his faithful
subjects, desponding of relief, taking up arms against his authority. It is
high time that this fatal delusion should be exposed, and the good people of
America disabused. It is true, that his Majesty and the two houses of
parliament have treated petitions from the colonies with neglect; but what were
those petitions? Did they rest on a denial of the essential rights of
Parliament, or did they ask for the rights of the subject in America? A
retrospect of all the petitions, ever presented to the throne on this subject,
will show that they conveyed to the royal ear, nothing but the language of
independence. They disowned the power of the supreme legislature, to which, as
subjects, they owe obedience, and denied a capacity in the colonies to be
represented -- and upon this ground they insisted on a repeal of the laws. Here
they ended. -- No prayer, nor the least intimation of a desire to be united
with Britain upon a just restoration of their rights! Such were the petitions
of the colonies, which were treated with neglect by the supreme power of the
nation. And the reasonable and sensible man will now, on reflection, determine,
whether it becomes us to resent a conduct of this kind, in our superiors, or
rather to look back with astonishment at our folly, in permitting ourselves to
be led by designing men, into such acts of disrespect and insult. Let us bring
the case home to ourselves. The relation between the sovereign authority and
its members, bears a true resemblance to that between parent and child. Their
rights and duties are similar. Should a child take umbrage at the conduct of a
parent, tell him that he was not his father, nor would he consider himself, or
act, as his child on any terms; ought the parent to listen to such undutiful
language, or could he be justly censured for treating it with neglect, or even
with contempt?

In order to prevail on the congress to desert their scheme of indepence, and
to pursue those measures for restoring the rights of America, which carried
with them a prospect of success; a member of the congress, as I mentioned
before, proposed a plan of union between the two countries, which would have
restored to the colonists the full enjoyment of their rights. I have often
conversed with him on the subject, and well understand his principles, and what
passed on the occasion. He waited with patience to see whether any rational
scheme of union would be adopted by the congress, -- determined to unite with
them in any measure which might tend to a reconciliation between the two
countries; but he waited in vain: And when he found them bewildered,
perpetually changing their ground, taking up principles one day, and shifting
them the next, he thought it his duty, however little the prospect of success,
to speak his sentiments with firmness, and to endeavor to show them the true
line of their duty. After proving the necessity of a supreme authority over
every member of the state, tracing the rights of the colonies to their origin,
and fixing them on the most solid principles; and thence showing the necessity
of an union with the mother state, for the recovery of them; he introduced the
plan with the resolve which precedes it. But before he delivered it to be read,
he declared, that he was sensible it was not perfect; that knowing the
fundamental principles of every system must be first settled, he had, to avoid
perplexity, contented himself with only laying down the great out-lines of the
union; and should they be approved of, that he had several propositions of
lesser consequence to make, in order to render the system more complete. The
plan read, and warmly seconded by several gentlemen of the first abilities,
after a long debate, was so far approved as to be (...) worthy of further
consideration, and referred under a rule for that purpose, by a majority of the
colonies. Under this promising aspect of things, and an expectation that the
rule would have been regarded, or at least that something rational would take
place to reconcile our unhappy differences, the member proposing it was weakly
led to sign the non-importation agreement, although he had uniformly opposed
it; but in this he was disappointed. -- The measures of independence and
sedition, were soon after preferred to those of harmony and liberty; and no
arguments, however reasonable and just, could prevail on a majority of the
colonies to desert them. The resolve, plan, and rule referring them to further
consideration, so inconsistent with the measures now resolved on, were expunged
from the minutes; with what view let America determine: And while the enemies
to the gentleman who proposed them, are abusing him for offering and publishing
to the world the most infamous falsehood, in representing it as ministerial, and
sent over to him by Lord N -- h; they have copies of it in their pockets,
industriously concealing it from the world. With what view can this be, but
that their malevolent aspersions may take the greater effect? In justice
therefore to the character of this gentleman, and that America may see and
judge for itself, they are here offered to its consideration.

RESOLVED,

That the Congress will apply to his Majesty for a redress of grievances under
which his faithful subjects in America labor; and assure him, that the
Colonies hold in abhorrence the idea of being considered independent
communities on the British government, and most ardently desire the
establishment of a Political Union, not only among themselves, but with the
Mother State, upon those principles of safety and freedom which are essential
in the constitution of all free governments, and particularly that of the
British Legislature; and as the Colonies from their local circumstances, cannot
be represented in the Parliament of GreatBritain, they will humbly propose to
his Majesty and his two Houses of Parliament, the follwoing plan, under which
the strength of the whole Empire may be drawn together on any emergency, the
interest of both countries advanced, and the rights and liberties of America
secured.

A Plan of a proposed Union between Great Britain and the Colonies.
THAT a British and American legislature, for regulating the administration of
the general affairs of America, be proposed and established in America,
including all the said colonies; within, and under which government, each
colony shall retain its present constitution, and powers of regulating and
governing its own internal police, in all cases whatever.

That the said government be administered by a President General, to be
appointed by the King and a grand Council, to be chosen by the Representatives
of the people of the several colonies, in their respective Assemblies, once in
every three years.

That the several Assemblies shall choose members for the grand Council in the
following proportions, viz.

New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York,
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware Counties, Maryland, Virginia,
North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia.


Who shall meet at the city of for the first time, being called by the
President-General, as soon as conveniently may be after his appointment.

That there shall be a new election of members for the Grand Council every
three years; and on the death, removal or resignation of any member, his place
shall be supplied by a new choice, at the next sitting of Assembly of the
Colony he represented.

That the Grand Council shall meet once in every year, if they shall think it
necessary, and oftener, if occasions shall require, at such time and place as
they shall adjourn to, at the last preceding meeting, or as they shall be
called to meet at, by the President-General, on any emergency.

That the grand Council shall have power to choose their Speaker, and shall
hold and exercise all the like rights, liberties and privileges, as are held
and exercised by and in the House of Commons of Great Britain.

That the President-General shall hold his Office during the pleasure of the
King, and his assent shall be requisite to all acts of the Grand Council, and
it shall be his office and duty to cause them to be carried into execution.

That the President-General, by and with the advice and consent of the
Grand-Council, hold and exercise all the legislative rights, powers, and
authorities, necessary for regulating and administering all the general police
and affairs of the colonies, in which Great Britain and the colonies, or any of
them, the colonies in general, or more than one colony, are in any manner
concerned, as well civil and criminal as commercial.

That the said President-General and Grand Council, be an inferior and distinct
branch of the British legislature, united and incorporated with it, for the
aforesaid general purposes; and that any of the said general regulations may
originate and be formed and digested, either in the Parliament of
Great Britain, or in the said Grand Council, and being prepared, transmitted to
the other for their approbation or dissent; and that the assent of both shall
be require to the validity of all such general acts or statutes.

That in time of war, all bills for granting aids to the crown, prepared by the
Grand Council, and approved by the President General, shall be valid and passed
into a law, without the assent of the British Parliament.

I shall not affirm that this plan is formed upon the most perfect principles
of policy and government; but as it is an universally prevailing opinion, that
the colonies cannot be represented in parliament: I know of none other which
comes so near to them; and it is most evident, upon a due consideration of it,
that the rights of America would have been fully restored, and her freedom
effectually secured by it. For under it, no law can be binding on America, to
which the people, by their representatives, have not previously given their
consent: This is the essence of liberty, and what more would her people desire?

The author of this plan seems to have formed it on a comprehensive view, of
the regulations necessary to the interest and safety of the colonies. These he
has divided into two classes: the first contain all such as the colony
legislatures have a right to make, under the several constitutions, and to
which they are adequate; these to remain under their decisions; it being
declared in the plan, that each colony shall retain its present constitution
and powers of regulating and governing its own internal police in all cases
whatever. The others, which are to be the objects of the deliberations and
decisions of the grand council, relate to the general interests and security of
the colonies, and are absolutely necessary for those purposes; such laws for
granting aids to the crown, and levying taxes in just and reasonable
proportions in the colonies -- for regulating a general paper currency, and the
value of foreign coins, which ought in all good policy, to be established on
(...) equally solid, and ascertained at the same value, Laws for regulating and
quartering troops, which may be necessary for their general protection; for
settling disputes between the colonies, respecting their boundaries -- with a
variety of other matters that must naturally arise from the jarring interests
of the colonies, which will continually increase with the increase of their
wealth and commerce. And as to those, it must be owned, that the colony
legislatures are not adequate; but that they must be made either by the
parliament, or by some new establishment for those purposes. The authority of
the first was objected to; and as to the second, or any other system of union,
it being incompatible with the scheme of independence, it was not thought
worthy of attention.

Objections were indeed made to this plan, which it may not be improper here to
mention. It was said, that the delegates did not come with authority to consent
to a political union between the two countries. To which many arguments were
opposed, to show that they had such authority or none; and concluded with
desiring, that if that was, in the opinion of the members, the case, yet that
the congress ought in justice to their country to digest and form one, and
recommend it to their respective assemblies; by whom it would be presented with
more constitutional propriety than by any other body of men. It was further
said, that the members of the grand council would be corrupted, and betray the
interest of the colonies. To this it was answered -- That if American virtue
was not firm enough to maintain American liberty, it could be supported by no
wisdom or policy whatever; but suppose the people to be in so corrupt a state;
-- yet as the election of the members was to be triennial, they might change
them every 3 years, and the sums of money, necessary to bribe the new members,
would be too great to be supplied: That the most sensible writers on the side
of liberty agreed, if the parliament of England was triennial, it would destroy
the system of corruption. Besides, to avoid all risque of the contrary, they
might, by altering one word in the plan, make the election duennial, or annual,
which must certainly remove the objection. A third objection was, That it
deprived the colony legislatures of a part of their rights: To which it was
replied, that a colony legislature is capable of passing laws to regulate its
internal police; but not adequate to any general regulation, not even in the
necessary one of taxation. That there is no proposition more just, than that
every colony, as a member of the state, ought to be obliged to contribute
toward the defense of the whole, in proportion to the property and wealth
which each colony possesses. That this is a primary consideration in every
society; and that no one colony had a constitutional power to obtain the amount
and value of the property of the others, by which to ascertain its proportion.
Nor was there any authority whatever, save the British Parliament, to compel
refractory colonies to do their reasonable duty, in this or any other general
measure: and that this plan was so far from diminishing the rights of any
colony legislature, that it extended them; by giving to each a new
jurisdiction, to decide upon regulations which relate to the general police of
all the colonies.

Such was the plan laid before the congress, the objections against, and the
arguments in favor of it. They are here laid before the public, to enable them
to judge for themselves, whether, as a representation in parliament, is
generally supposed to be impracticable, any thing more consistent with their
safety could have been adopted.

Had this unhappy controversy been of the first impression in the English
government, I should not be surprised to find the advocates of America so much
at a loss for principles upon which to ask for, and obtain her rights. I
confess I know not whether to attribute their strange conduct to a total
ignorance of the merits, or to a design from the beginning to throw off all
political connections with the British government. However this may be,
precedents are not wanting upon which to reason, and to form a remedy. The
principality of Wales, the Bishopric of Durham, and the Palatinate of Chester,
labored under the like grievances; being bound by the laws of parliament for
many years, without holding a share in the supreme authority. Great discontent
arose from the slavish distinction between the subjects of the same state. The
oppressed thought it their duty, as members of the state, to petition the
parliament for a share in their authority. And such was the equity and justice
of their claims, that they became thereupon vested with this important
privilege. When Henry III. conquered Calais, and settled it with English
merchants, with intent to extend his dominions, and increase the commerce of
the nation; it was held so incompatible with English liberty, that the
authority of parliament should extend to members who did not partake of it,
that they were incorporated with the English government, and shared in its
legislature.

What then is to be done? Is it too late to recover from our madness, and to
pursue the dictates of reason and duty? By no means. But it is high time we had
changed our measures, and retreated from the dangers with which we are
threatened. Let us, like men who love order and government, boldly oppose the
illegal edicts of the congress, before it is too late, -- pull down the
licentious tyranny they have established, and dissolve their inferior
committees, -- their instruments to trample on the sacred laws of your country,
and your invaluable rights. This done, and peace and order restored within your
several provinces; apply to your assemblies, who are your constitutional
guardians, and can alone procure a redress of your grievances. Entreat them in
a respectful and dutiful manner, to petition his Majesty and his two houses of
parliament -- and in their petitions to assure them, That you are sensible of
the necessity of a supreme legislature over every member of the state; that you
acknowledge yourselves subjects of the British government; that you have,
through innumerable difficulties and perils, settled and improved a wilderness,
extended the territories, and greatly increased the wealth and power of the
nation: That by such settlement you have lost the enjoyment of, though not the
right to, some of the first and most excellent of the privileges of Englishmen:
That the English government is founded on freedom: That this freedom depends on
its particular constitution, in which it is and ever was essential, that the
landed interest, or the freeholders of every part of its territory, should
participate in the supreme legislative authority, having a right to regulate
their conduct, and a power over their lives, liberties and properties. That
this privilege alone distinguishes British subjects from the slaves of the most
despotic governments: That no part of the lands in America, nor the proportion
thereof in right of such lands, enjoy their ancient right of participating in
the authority of parliament. And yet that laws have been made, by that
authority, for levying taxes upon your property, for restraining and
prohibiting your trade and commerce, for suppressing your manufactures, for
regulating your internal police, and depriving you of many other rights, to
which you are entitled as English subjects. That by such regulations you have
been aggrieved and oppressed, and great discontent has arisen in the breasts of
his Majesty's faithful American subjects, to the destruction of that harmony
which ought to subsist between members of the same community, and great
prejudice of the common wealth. That it is not for want of inclination, but
capacity, arising from the disunited state of the colonies, that you have not
discharged, with justice among yourselves, those duties which appertain to
members of the state: And therefore pray, That you may not only be restored to
this capacity, but to all the rights of Englishmen, upon such principles of
liberty and policy, as shall best suit your local circumstances.

A petition of this kind, so reasonable and just, and so well founded and
established on the principles of their own government, attended with such a
plan of union as may be wisely digested by your several assemblies, there is no
room to doubt, will be graciously received, and duly attended to by his Majesty
and his two houses of parliament, and finally terminate in a full redress of
your grievances, and a permanent system of union and harmony, upon principles
of liberty and safety. But let me entreat you, not to trust these petitions to
your agents alone; but follow the wise examples of the Grecian and Roman
colonists, -- send over with them one or more delegates, to remove the present
prejudices, to create friends, and to solicit your cause. The expense will be
trifling, their utility may be great, -- the importance of your rights is
infinite.

Thus I have, my dear countrymen, with the utmost candor and freedom, and the
most benevolent regard for your true interest and happiness, laid before you
the constitutional extent of parliamentary jurisdiction, and deduced your
rights from the most solid foundation, and explained your duties. I have
pointed out the mode which I am convinced, you ought to pursue for a
restoration of those rights. I have showed you the folly of the scheme now in
agitation for that purpose. My most sincere wish is, that you may avail
yourselves of the information, and retreat from the danger and distress which
threatens you, before it is too late. Permit me, before I conclude, to ask you
a few serious questions. Do you mean to forfeit, by your rash and imprudent
conduct, your right to the protection of the British state, and cut yourselves
and your posterity off for ever from all the privileges of Englishmen? To
relinquish your trade up the Mediterranean, in the British seas, and all the
British ports? and suffer the produce of your soil, and the effects of your
labor and industry to perish on your hands, for want of a market to dispose of
them? Do you mean to desert all your present blessings, and retreat from
superior force into a wilderness inhabited by wild beasts and savages,
destitute of the necessaries of life, and incapable of obtaining them? Or do
you mean to submit to the deplorable condition of a conquered people, subject
to the oppression and tyranny of a military government, with British fleets
directing that pittance of trade, which the conqueror may allow you to enjoy;
and with British forces in all your capital cities, commanding your allegiance
to the British state?

Do you wish to exchange the mild and equal rule of English customs and
manners, and your inestimable religion, for the tyranny of a foreign yoke, and
the bloody superstitions of popery? Or do you design to give up your present
enjoyment of all the blessings of life, for the horrors and distress of a civil
war, and the fatal consequences which must infallibly attend yourselves, and
your latest posterity? Are you still resolved to surrender up your reason to
the miserable sophistry and jargon of designing men, and to hazard all these
direful misfortunes, rather than be united with your brethren and fellow
subjects in Britain? If such be your dreadful resolutions, I, who have all that
I hold dear and valuable among you, must content myself with sharing along with
you the calamitous consequences of your frenzy, and the miserable fate of an
American; with this only consolation, that I have honestly discharged my duty
in warning you of your dangers, and endeavored to pilot you into the haven of
security and happiness.

FINIS.

