AN AUTHENTIC COPY. OF LORD CHATHAM'S PROPOSED BILL, ENTITLED, A PROVISIONAL
ACT, etc.

AN AUTHENTIC COPY OF LORD CHATHAM'S PROPOSED BILL, ENTITLED, A PROVISIONAL
ACT, FOR SETTLING THE TROUBLES IN AMERICA, AND FOR ASSERTING THE SUPREME
LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY AND SUPERINTENDING POWER OF GREAT BRITAIN OVER THE
COLONIES.

ANNAPOLIS: Printed by FREDERICK GREEN. MDCCLXXV.

AN AUTHENTIC COPY OF LORD CHATHAM'S PROPOSED BILL, ENTITLED, A PROVISIONAL
ACT, etc.

WHEREAS by an act 6th Geo. III. it is declared, that Parliament has full power
and authority to make laws and statutes to bind the people of the colonies, in
all cases whatsoever. And whereas reiterated complaints, and most dangerous
disorders have grown, touching the right of taxation claimed and exercised over
America, to the disturbance of peace and good order there, and to the actual
interruption of the due intercourse from Great Britain and Ireland to the
colonies, deeply affecting the navigation, trade, and manufactures of this
kingdom, and of Ireland, and announcing farther an interruption of all exports
from the said colonies to Great Britain, Ireland, and the British islands in
America: Now, for prevention of these ruinous mischiefs, and in order to an
equitable, honorable, and lasting settlement of claims not sufficiently
ascertained and circumscribed, May it please your most excellent majesty that
it may be declared, and be it declared, by the king's most excellent majesty,
by and with the advice and consent of the lords spiritual and temporal and
commons in this present parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same,
that the colonies of America have been, are, and of right ought to be,
dependent upon the imperial crown of Great Britain, and subordinate unto the
British parliament, and that the king's most excellent majesty, by and with the
advice and consent of the lords spiritual and temporal and commons in
parliament assembled, had, has, and of right ought to have, full power and
authority to make laws and statutes of sufficient force and validity to bind
the people of the British colonies in America, in all matters touching the
general weal of the whole dominion of the imperial crown of Great Britain, and
beyond the competency of the local representative of a distinct colony; and
most especially an indubitable and indispensable right to make and ordain laws
for regulating navigation and trade throughout the complicated system of
British commerce; the deep policy of such prudent acts upholding the guardian
navy of the whole British empire; and that all subjects in the colonies are
bound in duty and allegiance duly to recognize and obey (and they are hereby
required so to do) the supreme legislative authority, and superintending power
of the parliament of Great Britain, as aforesaid. And whereas, in a petition
from America to his majesty it has been represented, that the keeping a
standing army within any of the colonies, in time of peace, without consent of
the respective provincial assembly there, is against law: Be it declared by the
king's most excellent majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the lords
spiritual and temporal and commons in this present parliament assembled, that
the declaration of right, at the ever glorious revolution, namely, 'That the
raising and keeping a standing army within the kingdom, in time of peace,
unless it be by consent of parliament, is against law,' having reference only
to the consent of the parliament of Great Britain, the legal, constitutional,
and hitherto unquestioned prerogative of the crown to send any part of such
army, so lawfully kept, to any of the British dominions and possessions,
whether in America or elsewhere, as his majesty, in the due care of his
subjects, may judge necessary for the security and protection of the same,
cannot be rendered dependent upon the consent of a provincial assembly, in the
colonies, without a most dangerous innovation and derogation from the dignity
of the imperial crown of Great Britain. Nevertheless, in order to quiet and
dispel groundless jealousies and fears, be it hereby declared, That no military
force, however raised, and kept according to law, can ever be lawfully employed
to violate and destroy the just rights of the people. Moreover, in order to
remove, for ever, all causes of pernicious discord, and in due contemplation of
the vast increase of possessions and population in the colonies; and having at
heart to render the condition of so great a body of industrious subjects there
more and more happy, by the sacredness of property and of personal liberty, and
of more extensive and lasting utility to the parent kingdom, by indissoluble
ties of mutual affection, confidence, trade, and reciprocal benefits, Be it
declared and enacted, by the king's most excellent majesty, by and with the
advice and consent of the lords spiritual and temporal and commons in this
present parliament assembled, and it is hereby declared and enacted, by the
authority of the same, That no tallage, tax, or other charge for his majesty's
revenue, shall be commanded or levied from British freemen in America, without
common consent, by act of provincial assembly there, duly convened for that
purpose. And it is hereby further declared and enacted, by the king's most
excellent majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the lords spiritual
and temporal and commons in this present parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, That it shall and may be lawful for delegates from the
respective provinces, lately assembled at Philadelphia, to meet in general
congress at the said Philadelphia, on the 9th day of May next ensuing, in order
then and there to take into consideration the making due recognition of the
supreme legislative authority and superintending power of parliament over the
colonies, as aforesaid. -- And moreover, may it please your most excellent
majesty, that the said delegates to be in congress assembled, in manner
aforesaid, may be required, and the same are hereby required, by the king's
majesty sitting in his parliament, to take into consideration (over and above
the usual charge for support of civil government in the respective colonies)
the making a free grant to the king, his heirs and successors, of a certain
perpetual revenue, subject to the disposition of the British parliament, to be
by them appropriated as they in their wisdom shall judge fit to the alleviation
of the national debt: no doubt being had but this just, free aid, will be in
such honorable proportion as may seem meet and becoming from great and
flourishing colonies toward a parent country, laboring under the heaviest
burdens, which, in no inconsiderable part, have been willingly taken upon
ourselves and posterity, for the defense, extension, and prosperity of the
colonies. -- And to this great end be it farther hereby declared and enacted,
that the general congress (to meet at Philadelphia as aforesaid) shall be, and
is, hereby authorized and empowered (the delegates composing the same being
first sufficiently furnished with powers from their respective provinces for
this purpose) to adjust and fix the proportions and quotas of the several
charges to be borne by each province respectively, toward the general
contributory supply; and this, in such fair and equitable measure, as may best
suit the abilities and due convenience of all: Provided always, That the powers
for fixing the said quotas, hereby given to the delegates from the old
provinces composing the congress, shall not extend to the new provinces of East
and West Florida, Georgia, Nova Scotia, St. John's, and Canada; the
circumstances and abilities of the said provinces being reserved for the wisdom
of parliament in their due time: And in order to afford necessary time for
mature deliberation in America, be it hereby declared, That the provisions for
ascertaining and fixing the exercise of the right taxation in the colonies, as
agreed and expressed by this present act, shall not be in force, or have any
operation, until the delegates to be in congress assembled, sufficiently
authorized and empowered, by their respective provinces, to this end, shall, as
an indispensable condition, have duly recognized the supreme legislative
authority, and superintending power of the parliament of Great Britain over the
colonies as aforesaid: Always understood, That the free grant of an aid, as
heretofore required and expected from the colonies, is not to be considered as
a condition of redress, but as a just testimony of their affection: And whereas
diverse acts of parliament have been humbly represented, in a petition to his
majesty from America, to have been found grievous, in whole or in part, to the
subjects of the colonies, be it hereby declared by the king's most excellent
majesty by and with the advice and consent of the lords spiritual and temporal
and commons in this present parliament assembled, and by the authority of the
same, that the powers of admiralty and vice-admiralty courts in America, shall
be restrained within their ancient limits, and the trial by jury, in all civil
cases, where the same may have been abolished, restored: And that no subject in
America shall, in capital cases, be liable to be indicted and tried for the
same, in any place out of the province, wherein such offense shall be alleged
to have been committed, nor be deprived of a trial by his peers of the
vicinage; nor shall it be lawful to send persons indicted for murder, in any
province of America, to another colony, or to Great Britain, for trial: And be
it hereby declared and enacted, by the authority aforesaid, That all and every
the said acts, or so much thereof as are represented to have been found
grievous, namely, the several acts of the 4th Geo. III. chapter 15 and chapter 34. --
5th Geo. III. chapter 25. -- 6th Geo. III. chapter 52. -- 7th Geo. III. chapter 41 and chapter
46. -- 8th Geo. III. chapter 22. -- 12th Geo. III. chapter 24. -- with the three acts
for stopping the port, and blocking up the harbor of Boston; for altering the
charter and government of Massachusett's-Bay; and that entitled, An act for the
better administration of justice, etc. Also the act for regulating the
government of Quebec, and the act passed in the same session relating to the
quarters of soldiers, shall be, and are hereby SUSPENDED, and not to have
effect or execution, from the date of this act: And be it moreover hereby
declared and enacted, by the authority aforesaid, That all and every the before
recited acts, or the parts thereof complained of, shall be, and are, in virtue
of this present act, finally repealed and annulled, from the day that the new
recognition of the supreme legislative authority, and superintending power of
parliament over the colonies, shall have been made on the part of the said
colonies.

And for the better securing due and impartial administration of justice in the
colonies, be it declared and enacted by the king's most excellent majesty, by
and with the advice and consent of the lords spiritual and temporal and commons
in this present parliament assembled, That his majesty's judges in courts of
law in the colonies of America, to be appointed with salaries by the crown,
shall hold their offices and salaries as his majesty's judges in England,
quamdiu se been gesserint. And it is hereby further declared, by the authority
aforesaid, that the colonies in America are justly entitled to the privileges,
franchises, and immunities granted by their several charters or constitutions;
and that the said charters or constitutions ought not to be invaded or resumed,
unless for misuser, or some legal ground of forfeiture. So shall true
reconcilement avert impending calamities, and this most solemn national accord
between Great Britain and her colonies stand an everlasting monument of
clemency and magnanimity in the benignant father of his people, of wisdom and
moderation in this great nation, famed for humanity as for valor; and of
fidelity and grateful affection from brave and loyal colonies to their parent
kingdom, which will ever protect and cherish them."


