A SERMON, DELIVERED AT MIDDLETOWN, JULY 20th, A. D. 1775. THE DAY APPOINTED BY
THE CONTINENTAL CONGRESS, To be observed by the Inhabitants of all the English
COLONIES On this CONTINENT, as a Day of public Humiliation, Fasting and Prayer.

By Enoch Huntington, A. M. And Pastor of the first Church in MIDDLETOWN.

PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE AUDITORS.

HARTFORD: Printed by EBEN. WATSON, near the Great Bridge.

NEHEMIAH, vi. 8, 9. Then I sent unto him, saying, There are no such things
done as thou say, but thou feignest them out of thine own heart. For they
all made us afraid, saying, Their hands shall be weakened from the work, that
it be not done. Now therefore, O God, strengthen my hands.
NEHEMIAH, whose name this book bears, and who was now advanced to the
government of Judah and Jerusalem, was a very religious and most excellent man,
and remarkably raised up by God, and peculiarly qualified for that eminent
station. The temper and conduct of a disinterested patriot, a true lover of his
country, and of a wise, vigilant and upright ruler and magistrate, appears
conspicuous in his example, and through all parts of his public administration.

HE was sent to Jerusalem out of his captivity by Artaxerxes the King, (to whom
he had been cup bearer) in the twentieth year of his reign. The office of
cup bearer was a place of great honor and advantage in the Persian court,
because of the privilege it gave him of being so much in the King's presence,
and the opportunity he had thereby of gaining his favor, for the obtaining any
petition which he should make to him, and the promoting his own interest. The
Artaxerxes here mentioned is but another name for Ahasuerus, who married Esther
a Jewish captive, and made her his queen, after repudiating Vashti. And
probably it was by the favor of queen Esther, as being of the same nation and
people with her, that he obtained so honorable and advantageous a preferment
in that court.

HOWEVER, neither the honor and advantage of the place, nor the long settlement
of his family out of his country, could make him forget his love for it, or lay
aside that zeal which he had for the religion of his forefathers who had
formerly dwelt in it. For though he had been born and bred in a strange land;
yet he had a great love for Zion, and was heartily engaged to exert himself for
the prosperity of it, and was in all things a very religious observer of the
law of God. And therefore, when some came from Jerusalem, and told him of the
ill state of that city, how the wall of it was broken down, and the gates of it
in the same demolished state as when burnt with fire by the Babylonians; and
that by reason hereof the remnant of the captivity that dwelt there lay open,
not only to the incursions and insults of their enemies, but also to the
reproach and contempt of their neighbors, as a weak and despicable people; and
that they were in both these respects in great affliction and grief of heart;
the good man being suitably moved with this representation, applied himself in
fasting and prayer unto the Lord his God, and earnestly made supplication to
him for Israel his people, and for the place which he had chosen for his
worship among them. And having thus implored the divine mercy against this
evil, he resolved next to make his application to the King for the redressing
of it, trusting in God for the inclining of his heart thereto: and therefore
when his turn came next to wait in his office, the King observing his
countenance to be sad, which had not been so before in his presence, says to
him, " Why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou art not sick? this is nothing
else but sorrow of heart." "Then (says Nehemiah) I was sore afraid, and said
unto the King, Let the King live forever. Why should not my countenance be sad,
when the city, the place of my fathers sepulchers, lies waste, and the gates
thereof are consumed with fire?" He took this opportunity to lay before him the
distressed state of his country; and owning this to be a cause of great grief
and sadness to him, he prayed the King to send him thither to remedy it: and by
the favor of Queen Esther (it seems) he had his petition granted him; for it
being particularly remarked in the sacred text, that the Queen was sitting by
the King when Nehemiah obtained the grant, it sufficiently intimates that her
favor was assisting to him herein. And accordingly a royal decree was issued
out for rebuilding the walls and gates of Jerusalem, and Nehemiah was sent
thither with it, as governor of the province of Judea, to put it in execution.
And for his greater honor and security, the King sent a guard of horse, under
the command of some of the captains of his army, to escort him to his
government. And he wrote letters to all the governors on this side the river
Euphrates, to further him in the work on which he was sent; and also gave order
to Asaph the keeper of his forests in those parts, to allow him so much timber
out of them, as should be needed for the finishing of it. However, the
Ammonites, the Moabites and the Samaritans, and other neighboring nations
round, did all they could to obstruct his design and defeat his enterprise. And
to this they were excited, not only by the ancient and bitter enmity which
those people bore to the whole Jewish nation, because of the different manners
and different religions they were of; but most especially at this time, because
of their lands and property: for during the time that the Jews were in
captivity, these nations having seized their lands and the interest they had
left in the country, would be forced to restore and refund them, upon the
re-establishment and prosperity of the Jews there. For which reason they did
all they could to oppose their re-settlement: hoping that if they could be kept
low, or quite depressed, they might retain the prey they were in danger of
loosing, and regain any which they had already lost.

BUT Nehemiah was not at all discouraged hereat, but put his trust in heaven,
and made his prayer to the God of his Salvation. And having on his arrival at
Jerusalem, made known to the people the commission with which he was sent, he
took a view of the ruins of the old walls, and immediately began to repair
them. And the work was carried on with amazing rapidity and success,
notwithstanding all manner of opposition was made against him both from within,
and from without. For from within several false prophets and other treacherous
persons, under the influence of a wicked heart, set agoing by the force of
bribery and corruption, endeavored to create him obstructions; and, from
without, Sanballat, the Horonite, Tobiah the Ammorite, Geshem the Arabian, and
others, gave him all the disturbance they were able, not only by underhand
dealings and treacherous tricks and contrivances, but also by open force; so
that while part of the people labored in carrying on the building, the other
part stood to their arms to defend them against the assaults of such as had
designs against them. And all had their arms at hand even while they worked, to
be ready at a signal given, to draw together at any part where the enemy should
be discovered coming upon them. And by this means, through the divine blessing,
they secured themselves against all the attempts and designs of their enemies,
till the work was nearly brought to a conclusion, to their own great joy, and
the extreme mortification of their adversaries. Then Sanballat, Tobiah and
Geshem, sent to Nehemiah to come along with them into the field, (as it seems
under a pretense) that there they might enter into an alliance together, and
swear inviolable friendship to each other: but Nehemiah perceived that this was
only a stratagem to surprise him, and do him some violence. He therefore sent
word that he was engaged in a great work which required his constant
attendance, and which he could not intermit upon any account. They sent him the
same invitation four times over, and he as often returned the same answer. At
last Sanballat wrote to him in terms of the following purport, There is a
report spread among the people, and Gashmu (which is the same with Geshem, only
differently spelt) confidently affirms it, that you and the Jews intend a
revolt -- that your design in rebuilding the walls of Jerusalem, is to declare
yourself King of the Jews -- that with this view have suborned prophets to
suggest to the people that you ought to be the King of the whole country. Now
as all these things are to be represented to the King, it will be convenient
for you to give us a meeting, that we may confer together about them. But
instead of going to them himself, he sends this short and cutting answer to all
his insidious insinuations and lying slanders, " There are no such things done
as thou say, but thou feignest them out of thine own heart," they are all of
your own invention, and have nothing of truth in them. And while he represents
their enemies as endeavoring to intimidate them, and plotting obstructions to
the work, he piously betakes himself to God, in prayer, for persevering and
increasing fortitude; -- while their enemies endeavor to weaken their hands
from the work, he dutifully looks to God to strengthen them. " For (says he)
they all made us afraid, (i. e. did all they could to intimidate us) saying
their hands shall be weakened from the work that it be not done. Now,
therefore, O God, strengthen my hands.

THE words thus introduced and explained in their connection with the context,
afford these two doctrinal observations, viz.

I. THAT wicked and intriguing men sometimes make use of the fictions and
falsehoods of their own hearts to hinder the lawful and laudable enterprises of
a people, and obstruct their prosperity. And, II. THAT it is the duty of a
people who are thus falsely and wickedly dealt with by their enemies, for their
intimidation and hurt, to look to God by prayer to strengthen their hands -- to
grant them the fortitude and wisdom they need to counteract and baffle the
insidious and malicious designs of their enemies. We observe then,
I. THAT wicked and intriguing men sometimes make use of the fictions and
falsehoods of their own hearts to hinder the lawful and laudable enterprises of
a people, and obstruct their prosperity.

THE corrupt hearts of fallen mankind, when not restrained or sanctified by the
grace of God, are capable of being influenced to any measures or means, however
wicked and guilty, and how much soever they finally tend to the real infamy and
wretchedness of themselves, or the hurt and injury of others. Pride is
naturally a predominant sinful lust in them, and therefore preeminence and
superiority a very ruling passion: and to gratify their guilty pride and
ambition, they stick at no measures, lawful or unlawful in themselves; but rush
through, right or wrong, and make use of truth or falsehood, just as their vain
minds imagine will make most for their purposes. To these sinful lusts and
propensities are owing all the wars and fightings that have ever been known
among mankind, and all the blood unjustly shed from the death of righteous
Abel, to the last sufferer, murdered by the hand of cruelty and violence. To
oppress others and exalt themselves, to accomplish the designs of despotic
sway, all their invention is put to the stretch, all their efforts used to
frame and execute plans and schemes of deceit, plots of slavish subjection to
their caprice; and all the arts of lying intrigue, and force of lawless power
are called to their aid, and every scene of violence, rapine, and murder is
acted over.

SANBALLAT the chief or governor of the Hittites or Samaritans was always a
great enemy to the Jews. He was a native of Horon, or Horonius, a city beyond
Jordon, in the country of the Moabites When Nehemiah first came and began to
build the walls of Jerusalem, Sanballat, Tobiah, and Geshem made themselves
sport with him, and affected to treat the matter with ridicule and contempt,
and sent to him and the Jews who were with him to know upon what authority he
undertook this enterprise, and whether this was not a revolt or rebellion
against the King. But Nehemiah answered " it is the God of Heaven that assists
us, we are his servants, but ye have no portion, nor right nor memorial in
Jerusalem." And such was their envy and malice, that notwithstanding all their
pretended ridicule and scorn! The sacred history informs us " it grieved them
exceedingly that there was come a man to seek the welfare of the children of
Israel." But as Nehemiah proceeded with vigor in his undertaking, and as
Sanballat heard (says the sacred historian) " that we builded the wall, he was
wroth and took great indignation and mocked the Jews. And he spoke before his
brethren and the army of Smaria, and said, what do these feeble Jews? will they
fortify themselves? will they sacrifice? will they make an end in a day? will
they revive the stones out of the heaps of the rubbish which are burned? Now
Tobiah the Amonite was by him, and he said, even that which they build, if a
fox go up, he shall even break down their stone wall." But this method of
scornful treatment and reproach not answering the design in discouraging the
Jews, and they proceeding with engagedness and perseverance in their
undertaking, and having nearly completed the work, " it came to pass that when
Samballat and Tobiah, and the Arabians, Ammonites, and the Ashdodites heard
that the walls of Jerusalem were made up and that the breaches began to be
stopped, then they were very wroth, and conspired all of them together to come
and to fight against Jerusalem, and to hinder it." But their attempts to injure
and oppress the people, and put an end to their enterprise, by open violence
and force, proving abortive, they then recur to the most wicked, deceitful, and
malicious fictions and stratagems, to accomplish their designs.

IN the first place they endeavor to decoy Nehemiah, into their power, under
feigned pretensions of real concern and friendship for him; and for this end
repeat their invitation to him four times, thinking to do him mischief; but he
being apprized of their mischevious plot as often excused himself from meeting
them, on account of the greatness and importance of the work he was engaged in.

THEN Sanballat sent his servant to him the fifth time with an open letter in
his hand; the letter was sent open, doubtless on purpose to let any see or hear
it, discretionarily, whom it might probably influence into their evil measures;
or in order to unhinge and terrify the minds of the people, and, by tampering
with them, weaken the hands of Nehemiah. The purport of the letter was that he
and the people designed to rebel, and make him king; and that to pave the way
for this, he had appointed prophets to preach of himself at Jerusalem, saying,
there is a king in Judah; and now shall it be reported to the king according to
these words. Come now therefore let us take council together! He intended, and
no doubt expected that this letter, if it had no other effect, yet should bring
on an interview between them, in which he might do him a mischief. The notice
which Nehemiah took and the improvement he made of it we have in the text. "
Then I sent unto him, saying, there are no such things done as thou say, but
thou feignest them out of thine own heart For they all made us afraid, saying,
their hands shall be weakened from the work, that it be not done. New
therefore, O God, strengthen my hands." He was next attacked by a certain false
prophet named Shemaiah, whom Sanballat and Tobiah had gained over to their
interest and hired for the purpose, and who would have intimidated him,
advising him to shut himself up in the temple, to prevent any attempt upon his
life; but Nehemiah by his great prudence avoided falling into the snare; and in
his treatment of this insidious false prophet he discovers the most delicate
sense of true honor, and gives the most signal proof of true courage and
bravery. Hear his own account of the matter. " Afterward I came unto the house
of Shemaiah the son of Delaiah, the son of Mahetabell who was shut up; and he
said let us meet together in the house of God, within the temple, and let us
shut the doors of the temple; for they will come to slay thee; yea, in the
night will they come to slay thee. And I said should such a man as I flee? And
who is there that being as I am, would go into the temple to save his life? I
will not go in. And lo I perceived that God had not sent him; but that he
pronounced this prophecy against me; for Tobiah and Sanballat had hired him.
Therefore was he hired, that I should be afraid, and do so and sin, and that
they might have matter for an evil report, that they might reproach me. My GOD
think thou of Tobiah and Sanballat according to these their works, and on the
prophetess Noadiah, and the rest of the prophets, that would have put me in
fear.

IT is very common, as in the account now read, for wicked and intriguing men,
out of pure malice and fiction to charge those crimes and faults upon others,
which they themselves only are guilty of. Thus these same men who had accused
Nehemiah of suborning prophets to preach him up for a king, without foundation,
had themselves roundly bribed others to prophecy falsely against him and use
all their influence to intimidate him and hinder the good work in which he was
engaged. But the work was of God, and was therefore soon completed
notwithstanding all their malicious opposition. " And it came to pass (says the
sacred historian) that when all our enemies heard thereof, and all the heathen
that were about us saw these things they were much cast down in their own eyes!
for they perceived that this work was wrought of our God." And thus always
shall the enemies of God and his people sooner or later find all their wicked
and hurtful schemes and efforts against them defeated to their own entire shame
and debasement.

ONE method of intriguing against and opposing the rebuilding Jerusalem under
the administration of Nehemiah, and keeping the body of the Jews in a state of
slavish subjection and oppression is yet to be mentioned according to the
account we have of it in the end of the chapter containing the text; and that
is, abusive and injurious letter-writing. The sacred historian mentions it in
the following words: " Moreover in those days the nobles of Judah sent many
letters unto Tobiah, and the letters of Tobiah came unto them. For there were
many in Judah sworn unto him, because he was the son-in law of Sheckaniah the
son of Arah; and his son Johanan had taken the daughter of Meshullam the son of
Berekiah. Also they reported his good deeds before me, and uttered my words to
him. And Tobiah sent letters to put me in fear." This Tobiah was an Ammonite,
and an inveterate enemy to the Jews; and was of great consideration in the law
of the Samaritans, of which he was governor with Sanballat. He married the
daughter of Shechaniah one of the principal Jews of Jerusalem, and by his own
and his son's marriage and family connections there, had a powerful party in
Jerusalem itself, which were opposite to that of Nehemiah, and to the true
interest of the Jewish nation. But this prudent governor by his wisdom,
moderation and perseverance, defeated all their machinations, though they
carried on a most crafty and intriguing correspondence by letters, with their
own party, in which the good deeds of Tobiah were extolled and reported to
Nehemiah; and by the same party the words of Nehemiah were sent back to him,
and all in order to gain him over to the interest of their party; and Tobiah
himself wrote letters directly to him to put him in fear, and intimidate him
into their measures; but to his immortal honor he was proof against all their
practices of intrigue and corruption, and his name remains forever embalmed in
the providence of God, as a most renowned patriot, and deliverer of his country.

A COPY of a letter wrote to the king by the crafty intriguing enemies of the
Jews we have at large in the fourth chapter of Ezra beginning at the eleventh
verse. This is the copy of the letter that they sent unto him, even unto
Artaxerxes the king, Thy servants the men on this side the river, and at such a
time. Be it known unto the king, that the Jews which came up from thee to us,
are come unto Jerusalem, building the rebellious and the bad city, and have set
up the walls there of, and joined the foundations. Be it known now unto the
king, that if this city be builded, and the walls set up again, then will they
not pay toll, tribute, and custom, and so thou shall endamage the revenue of
the kings. Now because we have maintenance from the kings palace, and it was
not meet for us to see the kings dishonor: therefore have we sent and
certified the king, That search may be made in the book of the records of thy
fathers: so shall thou find in the book of the records, and know that this city
is a rebellious city, and hurtful unto kings and provinces, and that they have
moved sedition within the fame of old time: for which cause was this city
destroyed. We certify the king, that if this city be builded again, and the
walls thereof set up, by this means thou shall have no portion on this side the
river. This letter contains the genuine spirit of self interested placemen and
designing courtiers, and is full of servile adulation and flattery to the king,
and pretended zeal for the honor, interest, and pre^^^^^ of the crown; and of
vile insinuations, aspersions (...) accusations respecting the Jews, and some
truth (...) mingled with falsehood as they thought would best answer the end.

AND it had such an effect, through the permission of divine providence, as to
induce the king to send his express command that the purpose of the letter
should be carried into execution: and the letter-writers themselves and their
companions had orders to see this done, which doubtless they undertook with a
malicious kind of pleasure: and the sacred text says, " they went up in haste
to Jerusalem unto the Jews, and made them to cease by force and power. Then
ceased the work of the house of GOD which is at Jerusalem. So it ceased unto
the second year of Darius king of Persia." They were permitted to put a stop to
the Jews for a season; but it was only for a season: for the work was of God,
and after a short time it was revived, and under the administration of Nehemiah
completed. The work the Jews were engaged in was a lawful and laudable work,
for the religious and civil interest of their nation and country; and those who
opposed them were guilty of great wickedness; and though God's professing
people of Israel highly deserved, on account of their own sins, much more than
they met with, as coming from the hand of a righteous God, yet they deserved
not such treatment from their fellowmen. Neither are the ill deserts of the
Jews at the hand of God, any justification of their enemies in their evil
designs against them, nor do they make them ever the less guilty in the sight
of heaven.

THE infinitely wise and good God, makes use of wicked men as he pleases, to
answer his divine purposes, and often takes the wise ones of this world in
their own craftiness; and over rules all their designs and conduct for his own
glory, and the good of his people (...) upon all the impenitents, for all the
designs and efforts of their malice and wickedness, whether carried on in a
more secret, confidential, and underhand intriguing manner, or managed by more
open force and violence.

AND thus there have been and still are wicked and intriguing men in the world,
that make use of the fictions and falsehoods of their own hearts to hinder the
lawful and laudable enterprises of a people, and obstruct their prosperity.

And we go on to observe,

II. THAT it is the duty of a people who are thus falsely and wickedly dealt
with by their enemies, for their intimidation and hurt, to look to God by
prayers to strengthen their hands, to grant them the fortitude and wisdom they
need to counteract and baffle the insidious and malicious designs of their
enemies.

To this duty good Nehemiah the people under his government, when thus attacked
by their perfidious enemies: " Now therefore, O God, strengthen my hands."
Every good and perfect gift comes from God; strength of body and soundness of
mind, the possession of one's own soul, courage, bravery, and fortitude, all
manly and useful efforts and enterprises, all exertions and all success
entirely depend upon, and are derived from him in whom we live and move and
have our being. His favor is life, and his loving kindness is better than
life; and blessed and happy is that people whose God is the Lord." And it is
the peculiar privilege of the visible covenant and professing people of God,
when their enemies rise up against them and plot and seek their hurt, in any
way whatever, that they have such direction and encouragement, humbly to look
to God by prayer for all the help and salvation they need, for deliverance
from, or victory over their enemies. And he who is infinite in wisdom, and has
(...) designs of their enemies against them, when they dutifully acknowledge
their dependence upon him, and by repentance and prayer seek his face and
favor. Their enemies are often very crafty and powerful, their intrigues
secret, their plots deep laid and full of serpentine subtlety, and such (as far
as creatures are concerned) as promise and insure success: but Almighty God
with infinite ease can turn all their counsels into foolishness, cause all
their devices to issue in their own confusion, and the evil they meant against
others to recoil upon their own heads. They may use all the arts of
intimidation, but all shall be in vain, if God encourages the hearts and
strengthens the hands of his people; and it is equally the duty and security of
his people to look to him and depend upon him to encourage their hearts and
strengthen their hands. At his sovereign pleasure, "five shall chase an
hundred, and an hundred put ten thousand to flight." The hearts of all men are
in his hand, and he inspires them with fortitude and courage; or fills them
with terror or dismay; and succeeds or blasts their designs as he pleases; and
he can "save with few as well as with many." And a people who seek to him, and
put their trust and confidence in him, are always safe and secure under his
Almighty protection, and shall have their hearts encouraged and their hands
strengthened, and their enemies shall be made to flee or fall before them. And
these are the directions of the word of God, Offer unto God thanksgiving, and
pay thy vows unto the Most High; and call upon me in the day of trouble. I will
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me." "Wait on the Lord: be of good courage
and he shall strengthen thine heart: wait, I say on the Lord." And such were
the many remarkable interpositions of divine providence in favor of his
ancient people, and such their safety under the Almighty protection, that Moses
but a little before his death thus (...) who rides upon the heavens in thy
help, and in his excellency on the sky. The eternal God is thy refuge, and
underneath are the everlasting arms. Happy art thou, O Israel! Who is like unto
thee, O people, saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword
of thy excellency! And the psalmist in his day piously observes in behalf of
his people, If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, now may Israel
say, if it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against
us; then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against
us: then the waters had over whelmed us, the stream had gone ever our soul:
then the proud waters had gone over our soul. Blessed be the Lord who has not
given us a prey to their teeth. Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare
of the fowlers: the snare is broken, and we are escaped. Our help is in the
name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

APPLICATION.
WE proceed now to apply and improve our subject. The sacred passage which is
the theme of our present discourse, and the history connected with it, contains
something very applicable to our state as a people, and affords matter for our
very serious and profitable improvement.

THAT designs to enslave and oppress us, and bring us into absolute subjection
to arbitrary power, with our lives and properties entirely at the will and
mercy of despotism, have been formed, and the most unjustifiable methods, of
secret intrigue and open violence, taken to carry them into execution, is at
length a truth so notorious, that nothing but weakness and stupidity can help
observing, and nothing but downright villainy and wickedness can help
acknowledging.

WE see, for a course of years, a long series of plans and schemes of subtle
statesmen, and parliamentary debates, and acts, and resolutions, under
ministerial instance, all evidently calculated to subjugate this country. And
if there has been a change of ministers yet there has been no essential
change of measures; the conduct of administration has continually tended to
this point. And it is a task not easily performed, even to mention all the
wicked arts and measures that have been employed to accomplish it. The British
constitution, heretofore, so much the glory and happiness of our own nation,
and the envy and terror of foreigners, has from time to time been undermined,
till at length, under the hands of bribery and corruption, it seems rotten to
the very core. Royal chatters, and the most valuable and essential rights of
Englishmen, have been unjustly and cruelly wrested away, or most wantonly
violated or sported with.

WHAT have not crafty, ambitious and designing men done to ensnare us,
decertfully to cajole and intrigue us; or sencibly to intimidate us into
measures, to answer their own aspiring purposes, by meanly subjecting ourselves
and posterity to their service, and consenting to hold our lives and properties
at their arbitrary pleasure? to this end what letters have not been written on
both sides of the water, secret and confidential, or whatever peculiar title
they best deserve, full of the vilest aspersions, and designed to effect
measures destructive of the liberties and privileges of the people; and written
avowedly, some of them, at least upon principles of Machiavillian or diabolical
policy, principles that have no regard to justice or integrity, or the best
good of the people, but avowedly calculated to support the designs of the
governing party, by any means whatever? What pains have been taken to hinder
truth from coming to light, or to prevent loyal and dutiful petitions for
redress of grievances from reaching the throne, or to shut the King's ear and
harden his heart against them? Is it not known, is it not acknowledged, (nay so
barefaced and impudent is the iniquity, that themselves take no pains to
conceal it) that a venal corrupt majority in the British parliament, voting
altogether at the nod of the minister, govern all the public acts and conduct
of that body, once so upright, respectable and august, and heretofore as
remarkable for defending the liberties of the nation, and humbling tyrants, and
opposing popery, as it is now for being complaisant and yieldable to all the
contrary purposes. And is not this corrupt and venal body, sometimes with equal
pomp and impiety held up to our view by themselves and others, as omnipotent?
Do they not affect too much to act as being such, not fearing God above, nor
regarding man below, as the duties of their station require? And is not every
rational and just and necessary method of pointing out their errors, and
opposing their hurtful and tyrannical measures, discouraged and frowned upon?
Is not that opposition to the most enormous and unwarrantable strides of
arbitrary power, which after very remarkable long suffering and patience, was
at length arous'd to vigorous exertions by absolute necessity, and which is
warranted and called forth by the clearest sense of duty, and all the tenderest
ties and obligations of life and godliness; -- Is not this manly and laudable
opposition styled rebellion? Are not patriots of distinction, friends of their
country and patrons of liberty, proscribed for slaughter, and whole fleets and
armies, the ultima ratio, instead of sound reason, and the principles of the
British constitution, and of right and religion, made use of to convert us as a
people, to a state of the most abject slavery to the crown, court-parasites,
minions and placemen of Great Britain? And how language is tortured, reason
abused, and our holy religion impiously forced into the service of our, and the
nations enemies, appears in many things, particularly in a late proclamation
set forth by him who has the infamy of being the chief ministerial tool of
vengeance in this distressed country. To please administration, and be what
those who are seeking our hurt affect to style friends of government, neither
our reason, or religion, our voices or hands must ever be used, but in perfect
conformity to the pernicious popish doctrines of implicit faith, passive
obedience and non-resistance. Any thing may be said, or written, or done, in
their favor, and praises; and pensions, and promotions, be the reward of their
sycophants and tools; while any thing to the contrary, however supported by
reason and the christian religion, is misrepresented, falsified and punished by
every means in their power. And while the Dignitaries of the English Church in
their places as members of parliament, are known, with one or two exceptions
only, to be under the influence of a corrupt administration, and particularly
to have passed the Quebec Bill, and been in all the secret acts against the
colonies; and while those who conform to them on this, or the other side of the
water, and affect, contrary to the simplicity of the gospel of Christ, to style
them their superiors, exert themselves to support every tyrannical and
arbitrary measure, they are caressed as friends of government; while clergymen
of different principles and conduct, of whatever church or particular christian
profession they be, who converse upon and preach up as occasion requires, the
duties, the privileges, and liberty of the gospel, and the friendly aspect it
has upon the civil rights and happiness of mankind, and dare not attempt to
press the religion taught by the PRINCE OF PEACE AND MOST BENEVOLENT SAVIOR OF
MEN, into the service of tyranny and oppression, and who show to the people the
privileges and rights which they enjoy by divine revelation; and how they ought
to improve them, so as to answer their duty and find their happiness, are
called fanatical courting preachers, incendiaries, independents, enemies to
government and order, and what not, and are marked out as objects deserving the
severest chastisement. This temper and conduct is not new. It is as old as the
time of Nehemiah. It was very apparent and operative then, and those that
pretended to be friends of government, and to support the prerogatives of the
crown, were guilty of the vilest aspersions toward the patriots of their
country and friends of the people, and hired and bribed some priests and
prophets to preach and prophecy in support of their measures, and against the
true interest of the people, and were themselves grossly guilty of the like
crimes which they wilfully and wickedly charged against Nehemiah, and of which
he was altogether innocent. He exhorted and encouraged and commanded his
priests to do their duty faithfully according to the law of God, and thus doing
is offense enough against tyrannical and wicked men. Shall a whole bench of
protestant bishops, by profession and oath, peculiarly bound to support and
defend the protestant religion, and guard against the encroachments of popery,
usher into the world a bantling under their patronage and authority, which so
strongly bears the features of the scarlet whore and mother of harlots? And are
we not pardonable, nay are we not in duty bound, to hold up the mis shapen brat
to view, and warn the people against such advances toward popery, that
superstitious and bloody religion and yoke of slavery which neither we nor our
fathers were able to bear; and against which their own order and predecessors,
being some of them the brightest ornaments and luminaries of the christian
church, have heretofore born a noble testimony, and made a most memorable
stand, and resisted even unto death, not counting their own lives dear, if they
might but be found faithful unto death, and finish their course with joy!

WE envy them not their worldly dignities and emoluments. We claim nothing at
their hands but the free and peaceable enjoyment of the rights and privileges
which the providence of God has mercifully favored us with, and which have
been guaranteed and secured to us, and left us unmolested by former British
kings and parliaments; and which, in this country, were first purchased, and
have since been maintained, at the hazard and expense of the best blood and
treasure of our ancestors the first settlers, and their posterity after them.

IT is now a day of peculiar trial, and every good man and lover of his
country, under the present aspects of divine providence, and the political and
martial movements that have taken place, must feel a very sensible degree of
affecting apprehension and concern, and the man ought to be pitied for his
weakness, or shunned for his wickedness, at the present day, " whose bosom
beats not in his country's cause."

WE have no other new world on earth to explore, or flee to, for an asylum,
from the hand of tyranny and oppression. Here we must stand or fall. Matters
have grown to the most alarming crisis. We have no other alternative left us,
but to submit without conditions, to all the demands of unjustly usurped and
exorbitant power; or passively be knocked on the head and sacrificed in death;
or make a noble, united and vigorous and virtuous opposition. That the last is
so universally the resolution of the country, is matter of joy and thankfulness
and an omen for good. How willingly do men offer themselves in the service, and
what bravery and engagedness have our countrymen shown in the good cause? And
though the desolations of a civil war have commenced, and the blood of the
slain, once and again, ran in our streets; and fire and sword been permitted to
make their ravages and devastations; yet is not the providence of God most
thankfully to be acknowledged, that so little destruction has been made
amongst the proper inhabitants of the land, and noble defenders of the country,
in comparison to what our enemies have suffered?

A HUMAN and christian mind will be inclined to drop a tear over our
slaughtered enemies, especially the poor soldiery, forced on by superior
command to the infamous and bloody work, in which success would be equally
disgraceful to them as a defeat. For officers, considered as men of sense and
reading, acquainted with the British history, and constitution, though they are
deservedly the objects of pity, yet their conduct admits of no shadow of
excuse. While our brave countrymen in all their dutiful exertions and lawful
enterprises for the salvation of their country, while they live, will live
honored, and when they die, die lamented, their graves watered with their
country's tears! and their names be had in everlasting remembrance; but the
memory of the wicked shall rot. O! that as a people from the highest to the
lowest amongst us, we might have the humble heart, joined with the spirit of
prayer, confidence and fortitude, which Nehemiah, and we trust others, in his
day had; and that we might unite through this wide extended continent in this
critical and alarming day, when every art is used to intimidate, oppress and
break us to servile purposes; and under a due sense of our dependence upon God,
and the need we have of his favor and blessing, have our hearts and language
thoroughly conformed to the prayer in the text, Now, therefore, O God,
strengthen our hands. And we shall do well to attend to the direction he gave
the people then, as very applicable to ourselves now, Be not ye afraid of them:
remember the Lord which is great and terrible, and fight for your brethren,
your sons and your daughters, your wives and your houses.

GOD in his merciful providence is waiting to be gracious to us. HE has
already many a time, done great things for us, whereof we are glad. He is
infinitely ready, and able to save us out of all our troubles, and nothing
prevents needed salvation but our sins and iniquities; -- these alone separate
between us and our God and hide his face from us. It becomes us deeply to
humble ourselves under his mighty hand, and ascribe righteousness to our Maker.
He is infinitely just and holy, and there is a wonderful mixture of goodness
and mercy in all his judgments which are upon us. He punishes us far less than
we deserve, and many tokens for good are very observable in his providential
dealings and dispensations toward us. Oh! that we might be enabled suitably to
regard the operation of his hand, and repent and reform, and learn the things
of our peace before they are hid from our eyes. And while we endeavor to take
the best human measures to oppose the unjustifiable and cruel designs of our
enemies against us, let us be careful to maintain a constant caution against a
spirit of self-sufficiency and self-confidence, and be guarded against trusting
to an arm of flesh: and let us be exhorted to have our prayer continually unto
the God of our life, and the Author of all our salvation. Let us forsake every
wicked and false way, and fear and serve HIM: and if we are possessed of, and
governed by the true fear of the omnipotent Jehovah, we shall have no reason to
fear what a pretended omnipotent parliament, or any man or body of men can do
against us. HE whose throne is in the heavens, and whose kingdom rules over
all, has infinite wisdom and power to extricate us out of all our
difficulties, and if we wait upon him in a way of duty in due time we shall see
his salvation. May the cries of his people throughout this whole continent, be
sincere, fervent and persevering -- may we all deeply lament our national
degeneracy and corruption, and our land-defiling abominations and sinful
departures from the God of our fathers -- may we sincerely repent of our
personal sins, and obtain the like precious faith of God's elect -- may God
Almighty change the hearts and measures of men which are inimical to the true
interest of his people -- Heaven interpose and save the nation from impending
ruin! -- and may we in this land be ever the saved of the Lord; and may he
enable us to please him in ways of holy obedience, and make all (...) enemies
to be at peace with us! And may we all (...) day of distress, unite and say
from the heart (...) pious psalmist, Help us, O God of our salvation, for the
glory of thy name, and deliver us and purge away our sins for thy name's sake.
Let us with deep repentance joined with humble hope and confidence prostrate
ourselves at the feet of sovereign mercy, and almighty power and goodness; and
then we need never fear being brought, by the hand of violence and arbitrary
power, to lie prostrate at the feet of any British minister or British
parliament. Let us in ways of well-doing commit our cause to him that judges
righteously, and the Lord do what seems him good. And while as a people we
are using all the wisdom and power God has given us, for our deliverance and
protection, and under every omen for good, and all instances of success, and
kind interpositions of providence in our favor, let the divine hand be
dutifully acknowledged, and the glory of all be thankfully ascribed to the God
of all our salvation. And let me repeat the caution to guard against a
self-sufficient and self-confident spirit; and against trusting to our own
goodness, strength or power. And Oh! that we might be enabled, like God's
ancient people, under the conduct of good Nehemiah, to keep this Fast, and like
them obtain favor of God. Let us attend to, and improve their humble and
devout language in the day of their distress and fasting, which appears very
applicable to our state at the present day, and which is recorded in the ninth
chapter of this book, and with some part of which I now conclude. Stand up and
bless the Lord your God forever and ever; and blessed be thy glorious name,
which is exalted above all blessing and praise. Thou, even thou art Lord alone;
thou have made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their have, the earth
and all things that are therein, the seas, and all that is therein, and thou
preservest them all, and the host of heaven worshippeth thee. Now therefore,
our God, the great, the mighty and the (...) God, who keep covenant and
mercy, for thou art a gracious and merciful God, let not all the trouble seem
little before thee, that has come upon us. Howbeit thou art just in all that
is brought upon us; for thou have done right, but we have done wickedly.

FINIS.

