GENERAL LEE's LETTER TO GENERAL BURGOYNE, UPON HIS ARRIVAL IN BOSTON.

NEW YORK: Printed by J. ANDERSON, at Beckman-Slip. MDCCLXXV.

A LETTER, etc.
Philadelphia, June, 7, 1775. MY DEAR SIR,
WE have had twenty different accounts of your arrival at Boston, which have
been regularly contradicted the next morning; but as I now find it certain that
you are arrived, I shall not delay a single instant addressing myself to you.
It is a duty I owe to the friendship I have long and sincerely professed for
you; a friendship to which you have the strongest claims from the first moments
of our acquaintance. There is no man from whom I have received so many
testimonies of esteem and affection, there is no man whose esteem and
affection, could, in my opinion have done me greater honor. I entreat and
conjure you therefore, my dear Sir, to impute these lines not to a petulant
itch of scribbling, but to the most unfeigned solicitude for the future
tranquillity of your mind, and for your reputation. I sincerely lament the
infatuation of the times, when men of such a stamp as Mr. Burgoyne and Mr. How
can be seduced into so impious and nefarious a service by the artifice of a
wicked and insiduous court and cabinet. You, Sir, must be sensible that these
epithets are not unjustly severe. You have yourself experienced the wickedness
and treachery of this court and cabinet. You cannot but recollect their
maneuvers in your own select committee, and the treatment yourself as
President received from these abandoned men. You cannot but recollect the black
business of St. Vincents, by an opposition to which you acquired the highest
and most deserved honor. I shall not trouble you with my opinion of the right
of taxing America without her own consent, as I am afraid, from what I have
seen of your speeches, that you have already formed your creed upon this
article; but I will boldly affirm, had this right been established by a
thousand statutes, had America admitted it from time immemorial, it would be
the duty of every good Englishman to exert his utmost to divest Parliament of
this right, as it must inevitably work the subversion of the whole empire. The
malady under which the state labors is indisputably derived from the
inadequate representation of the subject, and the vast pecuniary influence of
the crown. To add to this pecuniary influence and incompetency of
representation, is to insure and precipitate our destruction. To wish any
addition can scarcely enter the heart of a citizen who has the least spark of
public virtue, and who is at the same time capable of seeing consequences the
most immediate. I appeal, Sir, to your own conscience, to your experience and
knowledge of our court and parliament; and I request you to lay your hand upon
your heart, and then answer with your usual integrity and frankness, whether,
on the supposition America should be abject enough to submit to the terms
imposed, you think a single Guinea raised upon her would be applied to the
purpose (as it is ostentatiously held out to deceive the people at home) of
easing the mother country? Or whether you are not convinced that the whole they
could extract would be applied solely to heap up still further the enormous
fund for corruption which the crown already possesses, and of which a most
diabolical use is made. On these principles I say, Sir, every good Englishman,
abstracted of all regard for America, must oppose her being taxed by the
British parliament; for my own part I am convinced that no argument (not
totally abhorrent from the spirit of liberty and the British constitution) can
be produced in support of this right. But it would be impertinent to trouble
you upon a subject which has been so amply, and in my opinion so fully
discussed. I find by a speech given as yours in the public papers, that it was
by the King's positive command you embarked in this service. I am somewhat
pleased that it is not an office of your own seeking, though, at the same time, I
must confess that it is very a^^rming to every virtuous citizen, when he sees
men of sense and integrity, (because of a certain profession) lay it down as a
rule implicitly to obey the mandates of a court be they ever so flagitious. It
furnishes, in my opinion, the best arguments for the total reduction of the
army. But I am running into a tedious essay, whereas I ought to confine myself
to the main design and purpose of this letter, which is to guard you and your
colleagues from those prejudices which the same miscreants, who have infatuated
General Gage, and still surround him, will labor to instill into you against a
brave, loyal, and most deserving people. The avenues of truth will be shut up
to you. I assert, Sir, that even General Gage will deceive you as he has
deceived himself; I do not say he will do it designedly. I do not think him
capable; but his mind is so totally poisoned, and his understanding so totally
blinded by the society of fools and knaves, that he no longer is capable of
discerning facts as manifest as the noon day sun. I assert Sir, that he is
ignorant, that he has from the beginning been consumately ignorant of the
principles, temper disposition, and force of the colonies. I assert, Sir* that
his letters to the ministry, at least such as the public have seen, are one
continued tissue of misrepresentation, injustice, and tortured inferences from
misstated facts. I affirm, Sir, that he has taken no pains to inform himself of
the truth; that he has never conversed with a man who has had the courage or
honesty to tell him the truth.

I am apprehensive that you and your colleagues may fall into the same trap,
and it is the apprehension that you may be inconsiderately hurried by the
vigor and activity you possess, into measures which may be fatal to many
innocent individuals, may hereafter wound your own feelings, and which cannot
possibly serve the cause of those who sent you, that has prompted me to address
these lines to you. I most devoutly wish, that your industry, valor and
military talents, may be reseved for a more honorable and virtuous service
against the natural enemies of your country, (to whom our Court are so basely
complacent) and not be wasted in ineffectual attempts to reduce to the
wretchedest state of servitude, the most meritorious part of your
fellow subjects. I say Sir, that any attempts to accomplish this purpose must
be ineffectual. You cannot possibly succeed. No man is better acquainted with
the state of this continent than myself. I have ran through almost the whole
Colonies, from the North to the South, and from the South to the North. I have
conversed with all orders of men, from the first estated gentlemen to the
lowest planters and farmers, and can assure you, that the same spirit animates
the whole. Not less than an hundred and fifty thousand gentlemen, yeomen, and
farmers, are now in arms, determined to preserve their liberties or perish As
to the idea that the Americans are deficient in courage, it is too ridiculous
and glaringly false to deserve a serious refutation. I never could conceive
upon what this notion was founded. I served several campaigns in America last
war, and cannot recollect a single instance of ill behavior in the
Provincials, where the Regulars acquitted themselves well. Indeed we well
remember some instances of the reverse, particularly where the late Colonel
Grant, (he who lately pledged himself for the general cowardice of America) ran
away with a large body of his own regiment, and was saved from destruction by
the valor of a few Virginians. Such preposterous arguments are only proper for
the Rigby's and Sandwich's, from whose mouths never issued, and to whose
breasts truth and decency are utter strangers. You will much oblige me in
communicating this letter to General How, to whom I could wish it should in
some measure addressed, as well as to yourself. Mr. How is a man for whom I
have ever had the higest love and reverence. I have honored him for his own
connections, but above all for his admirable talents and good qualities. I have
courted his acquaintance and friendship, not only as a pleasure, but as an
ornament; I flattered myself that I had obtained it Gracious God! is it
possible that Mr. How should be prevailed upon to accept of such an office!
The brother of him, to whose memory the much injured people of Boston erected a
monument, should be employed as one of the instruments of their destruction!
But the fashion of the times it seems is such, as renders it impossible that he
should avoid it. The commands of our most gracious Sovereign, are to cancel all
moral obligations, to sanctify every action, even those that the Satrap of an
Eastern Despot would start at. I shall now beg leave to say a few words with
respect to myself and the part I act. I was bred up from my infancy in the
highest veneration for the liberties of mankind in general. What I have seen of
Courts and Princes convinces me, that power cannot be lodged in worse hands
than in theirs; and of all Courts I am persuaded that ours is the most corrupt
and hostile to the rights of humanity. I am convinced that a regular plan has
been laid (indeed every act since the present accession, evinces it) to abolish
even the shadow of liberty from amongst us. It was not the demolition of the
tea, it was not any other particular act of the Bostonians, or of the other
provinces which constituted their crimes. But it is the noble spirit of liberty
manifestly pervading the whole continent, which has rendered them the objects
of ministerial and royal vengeance. Had they been notoriously of another
disposition, had they been homines ad servitudinem paratos, they might have
made as free with the property of the East India company as the felonious North
himself with impunity. But the Lords of St. James's and their mercenaries of
St. Stephen's well know, that as long as the free spirit of this great
continent remains unsubdued, the progress they can make in their scheme of
universal despotism, will be but trifling. Hence it is that they wage
inexpiable war against America. In short, this is the last asylum of persecuted
liberty. Here should the machinations and fury of her enemies prevail, that
bright Goddess must fly off from the face of the earth, and leave not a trace
behind. These, Sir, are my principles; this is my persuasion, and
consequentially I am determined to act. I have now, Sir, only to entreat that
whatever measures you pursue, whether those which your real friends (myself
amongst them) would wish, or unfortunately those which our accursed misrulers
shall dictate, you will still believe me to be personally, with the greatest
sincerity and affection,

Yours, etc. C. LEE.


