Massachusettensis.

LETTER I.
To the Inhabitants of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay.
WHEN a people, by what means soever, are reduced to such a situation, that
every thing they hold dear, as men and citizens, is at stake, it is not only
excuseable, but even praiseworthy for an individual to offer to the public any
thing that he may think has a tendency to ward off the impending danger; nor
should he be restrained from an apprehension that what he may offer will be
unpopular, any more than a physician should be restrained from prescribing a
salutary medicine through fear it might be unpalatable to his patient.

The press, when open to all parties and influenced by none, is a salutary
engine in a free state, perhaps a necessary one to preserve the freedom of that
state; but, when a party has gained the ascendency so far as to become the
licensers of the press, either by an act of government, or by playing off the
resentment of the populace against printers and authors, the press itself
becomes an engine of oppression or licentiousness, and is as pernicious to
society as otherwise it would be beneficial. It is too true to be denied that
ever since the origin of our controversy with Great Britain, the press, in this
town has been much devoted to the partisans of liberty; they have been indulged
in publishing what they pleased, fas vel nefas, while little has been published
on the part of government; the effect this must have had upon the minds of the
people in general is obvious; they must have formed their opinion upon a
partial view of the subject, and of course it must have been in some degree
erroneous: In short, the changes have been rung so often upon oppression,
tyrannny and slavery, that, whether sleeping or waking, they are continually
vibrating in our ears; and it is now high time to ask ourselves whether we have
not been deluded by sound only.

My dear countrymen, let us divest ourselves of prejudice, take a view of our
present wretched situation, contrast it with our former happy one, carefully
investigate the cause, and industriously seek some means to escape the evils we
now feel, and prevent those that we have reason to expect

We have been so long advancing to our present state, and by such gradations,
that perhaps many of us are insensible of our true state and real danger.
Should you be told that acts of high treason are flagrant through the country,
that a great part of the province is in actual rebellion, would you believe it
true? Should you not deem the person asserting it an enemy to the province?
Nay, should you not spurn him from you with indignation? Be calm, my friends,
it is necessary to know the worst of a disease, to enable us to provide an
effectual remedy. Are not the bands of society cut asunder, and the sanctions
that hold man to man, trampled upon? Can any of us recover a debt, or obtain
compensation for an injury, by law? Are not many persons, whom once we
respected and revered, driven from their homes and families, and forced to fly
to the army for protection, for no other reason but their having accepted
commissions under our King? Is not civil government dissolved? Some have been
made to believe that nothing short of attempting the life of the King, or
fighting his troops, can amount to high treason or rebellion. If, reader, you
are one of those, apply to an honest lawyer (if such an one can be found) and
enquire what kind of offense it is for a number of men to assemble, armed and
forceably to obstruct the course of justice, even to prevent the King's courts
from being held at their stated terms; for a body of people to seize upon the
King's provincial revenue; I mean the moneys collected by virtue of grants made
by the general court to his Majesty for the support of his government within
this province; for a body of men to assemble without being called by authority,
and to pass governmental acts, or for a number of people to take the militia
out of the hands of the King's representative, or to form a new militia, or to
raise men and appoint officers for a public purpose, without the order or
permission of the King or his representative; or for a number of men to take to
their arms, and march with a professed design of opposing the King's troops;
ask, reader, of such a lawyer, what is the crime, and what the punishment; and
if per chance thou art one that have been active in these things, and art not
insensibility itself, his answer will harrow up thy soul.

I assure you, my friends, I would not that this conduct should be told beyond
the borders of this province; I wish it were consigned to perpetual oblivion;
but alas, it is too notorious to be concealed, our newspapers have already
published it to the world, we can neither prevent nor conceal it The shaft is
already sped, and the utmost exertion is necessary to prevent the blow. We
already feel the effects of anarchy; mutual confidence, affection and
tranquillity, those sweetners of human life, are succeeded by distrust, hatred
and wild uproar; the useful arts of agriculture and commerce are neglected for
caballing, mobbing this or the other man, because he acts, speaks or is
suspected of thinking different from the prevailing sentiment of the times, in
purchasing arms and forming a militia; O height of madness! with a professed
design of opposing GreatBritain. I suspect many of us have been induced to join
in these measures, or but faintly to oppose them, from an apprehension that
Great Britain would not, or could not exert herself sufficiently to subdue
America. Let us consider this matter: However closely we may hug ourselves in
the opinion that the parliament has no right to tax or legislate for us, the
people of England hold the contrary opinion as firmly; they tell us we are a
part of the British empire; that every state from the nature of government must
have a supreme uncontrolable power coextensive with the empire itself; and
that, that power is vested in parliament. It is as unpopular to deny this
doctrine in Great Britain as it is to assert it in the colonies; so there is
but little probability of serving ourselves at this day by our ingenious
distinctions between a right of legislation for one purpose and not for
another. We have bid them defiance, and the longest sword must carry it, unless
we change our measures. Mankind are the same in all parts of the world; the
same fondness for dominion that presides in the breast of an American, actuates
the breast of an European. If the colonies are not a part of the British empire
already, and subject to the supreme authority of the state, Great Britain will
make them so. Had we been prudent enough to confine our opposition within
certain limits, we might have stood some chance of succeeding once more, but
alas we have passed the Rubicon. It is now universally said and believed, in
England, that if this opportunity of reclaiming the colonies, and reducing them
to a sense of their duty is lost, they in truth will be dismembered from the
empire, and become as distinct a state from Great Britain as Hanover; that is,
although they may continue their allegiance to the person of the King, they
will own none to the imperial crown of Great Britain, nor yield obedience to
any of her laws but such as they shall think proper to adopt. Can you indulge
the thought one moment, that Great Britain will consent to this? For what has
she protected and defended the colonies against the maritime powers of Europe
from their first British settlement to this day? For what did she purchase
NewYork of the Dutch? For what was she so lavish of her best blood and treasure
in the conquest of Canada and other territories in America? Was it to raise up
a rival state, or to enlarge her own empire? Or if the consideration of empire
was out of the question, what security can she have of our trade, when once she
has lost our obedience? I mention these things, my friends, that you may know
how people reason upon the subject in England; and to convince you that you are
much deceived if you imagine that Great Britain will accede to the claims of
the colonies, she will as soon conquer New England as Ireland or Canada, if
either of them revolted, and by arms, if the milder influences of government
prove ineffectual. Perhaps you are as fatally mistaken in another respect, I
mean as to the power of Great Britain to conquer; but can any of you, that
think soberly upon the matter, be so deluded as to believe that Great Britain,
who so lately carried her arms with success to every part of the globe,
triumphed over the united powers of France and Spain, and whose fleets give law
to the ocean, is unable to conquer us. Should the colonies unite in a war
against Great Britain (which by the way is not a supposeable case) the colonies
south of Pennsylvania would be unable to furnish any men; they have not more
than is necessary to govern their numerous slaves, and to defend themselves
against the Indians. I will suppose that the northern colonies can furnish as
many, and indeed more men than can be used to advantage, but have you arms fit
for a campaign? If you have arms, have you military stores, or can you procure
them? When this war is proclaimed, all supplies from foreign parts will be cut
off. Have you money to maintain the war? Or had you all those things, some
others are still wanting, which are absolutely necessary to encounter regular
troops, that is discipline, and that subordination whereby each can command all
below him from a general officer to the lowest subaltern; these you neither
have nor can have in such a war. It is well known that the provincials in the
late war were never brought to a proper discipline, though they had the example
of the regular troops to encourage, and the martial law to enforce it. We all
know, notwithstanding the province law for regulating the militia, it was under
little more command than what the officers could obtain from treating and
humouring the common soldiers; what then can be expected from such an army as
you will bring into the field, if you bring any, each one a politician, puffed
up with his own opinion, and feeling himself second to none? Can any of you
command ten thousand such men? Can you punish the disobedient? Can all your
wisdom direct their strength, courage or activity to any given point? Would not
the least disappointment or unfavourable aspect cause a general dereliction of
the service? Your newfangled militia have already given us a specimen of their
future conduct. In some of their companies, they have already chosen two, in
others three sets of officers, and are as dissatisfied with the last choice as
the first. I do not doubt the natural bravery of my countrymen, all men would
act the same part in the same situation. Such is the army with which you are to
oppose the most powerful nation upon the globe. An experienced officer would
rather take his chance with five thousand British troops, than with fifty
thousand such militia. I have hitherto confined my observations to the war
within the interior parts of the colonies, let us now turn our eyes to our
extensive sea coasts, and that we find wholly at the mercy of Great Britain;
our trade, fishery, navigation and maritime towns taken from us the very day
that war is proclaimed. Inconceiveably shocking the scene; if we turn our views
to the wilderness, our back settlements a prey to our ancient enemy, the
Canadians, whose wounds received from us in the late war will bleed a-fresh at
the prospect of revenge, and to the numerous tribes of savages, whose tender
mercies are cruelties; thus with the British navy in the front, Canadians and
savages in the rear, a regular army in the midst, we must be certain that when
ever the sword of civil war is unsheathed, devastation will pass through our
land like a whirlwind, our houses be burnt to ashes, our fair possessions laid
waste, and he that falls by the sword will be happy in escaping a more
ignominious death.

I have hitherto gone upon a supposition that all the colonies from Nova Scotia
to Georgia would unite in the war against Great Britain, but I believe if we
consider coolly upon the matter, we shall find no reason to expect any
assistance out of New England; if so, there will be no arm stretched out to
save us, New England, or perhaps this self-devoted province will fall alone the
unpitied victim of its own folly, and furnish the world with one more instance
of the fatal consequences of rebellion.

I have as yet said nothing of the difference in sentiment among ourselves;
upon a superficial view we might imagine that this province was nearly
unanimous, but the case is far different; a very considerable part of the men
of property in this province, are at this day firmly attached to the cause of
government; bodies of men compelling persons to disavow their sentiments to
resign commissions, or to subscribe leagues and covenants, has wrought no
change in their sentiments, it has only attached them more closely to
government, and caused them to wish more fervently, and to pray more devoutly
for its restoration; these and thousands beside, if they fight at all, will
fight under the banners of loyalty. I can assure you that associations are now
forming in several parts of this province for the support of his Majesty's
government and mutual defense; and let me tell you, when ever the royal
standard shall be set up, there will be such a flocking to it, as will astonish
the most obdurate. And now, in God's name, what is it that has brought us to
this brink of destruction? Has not the government of Great Britain been as mild
and equitable in the colonies as in any part of her extensive dominions? Has
not she been a nursing mother to us from the days of our infancy to this time?
Has she not been indulgent almost to a fault? Might not each one of us at this
day have sat quietly under his own vine and fig tree, and there have been none
to make us afraid, were it not for our own folly? Will not posterity be amazed,
when they are told that the present distraction took its rise from a three
penny duty on tea, and call it a more unaccountable frenzy, and more
disgraceful to the annals of America than that of the witchcraft?

I will attempt in the next paper to retrace the steps and mark the
progressions that led us to this state. I promise to do it with fidelity, and
if any thing should look like reflecting on individuals or bodies of men, it
must be set down to my impartiality, and not to a fondness for censuring.

MASSACHUSETTENSIS. December 12, 1774.
LETTER II.
To the Inhabitants of the Province of Massachusetts Bay.
MY DEAR COUNTRYMEN,
I ENDEAVORED last week to convince you of our real danger, not to render you
desperate, but to induce you to seek immediately some effectual remedy. Our
case is not yet remediless, as we have to deal with a nation not less generous
and humane than powerful and brave (...) just indeed, but not vindictive.

I shall, in this and successive papers, trace this yet growing distemper
through its several stages, from its first rise to the present hour, point out
the causes, mark the effects, show the madness of persevering in our present
line of conduct, and recommend what, I have been long convinced, is our only
remedy. I confess myself to be one of those that think our present calamity is
in a great measure to be attributed to the bad policy of a popular party in
this province; and that their measures for several years past, whatever may
have been their intention, have been diametrically opposite to their
profession, -- the public good; and cannot, at present, but compare their
leaders to a false guide that having led a benighted traveller through many
mazes and windings in a thick wood, finds himself at length on the brink of a
horrid precipice, and, to save himself, seizes fast hold of his follower, to
the utmost hazard of plunging both headlong down the steep, and being dashed in
pieces together against the rocks below.

In ordinary cases we may talk in the measured language of a courtier; but when
such a weight of vengeance is suspended over our heads, by a single thread, as
threatens every moment to crush us to atoms, delicacy itself would be
ill-timed; I will declare the plain truth wherever I find it, and claim it as a
right to canvass popular measures and expose their errors and pernicious
tendency, as freely as governmental measures are canvassed, so long as I
confine myself within the limits of the law.

At the conclusion of the late war, Great Britain found that though she had
humbled her enemies, and greatly enlarged (...) own empire, that the national
debt amounted to almost one hundred and fifty millions and that the annual
expense of keeping her extended dominions in a state of defense, which good
policy (...) no less in a time of peace than war, was increased in proportion
to the new acquisitions. Heavy taxes and duties were already laid, not only
upon the, luxuries and conveniences, but even the necessaries of life in
Great Britain and Ireland. She knew that the colonies were as much benefited by
the conquests in the late war, as any part of the empire, and indeed more so,
as their continental foes were subdued, and they might now extend their
settlements not only to Canada, but even to the western ocean -- The greatest
opening was given to agriculture, the natural livelihood of the country, that
ever was known in the history of the world, and their trade was protected by
the British navy. The revenue to the crown, from America, amounted to but
little more than the charges of collecting it. -- She thought it as reasonable
that the colonies should beara part of the national burden, as that they should
share in the national benefit. For this purpose the stamp act was passed. The
colonies soon found that the duties imposed by the stamp act would be grievous,
as they were laid upon custom-house papers, law proceedings, conveyancing, and
indeed extended to almost all their internal trade and dealings. It was
generally believed through the colonies, that this was a tax not only exceeding
our proportion, but beyond our utmost ability to-pay. This idea, united the
colonies generally in opposing it. At first we did not dream of denying the
authority of parliament to tax us, much less to legislate for us. We had always
considered ourselves, as a part of the British empire, and the parliament, as
the supreme legislature of the whole. Acts of parliament for regulating our
internal polity were familiar. We had paid postage agreeable to act of
parliament, for establishing a post office, duties imposed for regulating
trade, and even for raising a revenue to the crown without questioning the
right, though we closely adverted to the rate or quantum. We knew that in all
those acts of government, the good of the whole had been consulted, and
whenever through want of information any thing grievous had been ordained, we
were sure of obtaining redress by a proper representation of it. We were happy
in our subordination; but in an evil hour, under the influence of some
malignant planet, the design was formed of opposing the stamp act, by a denial
of the right of parliament to make it. The love of empire is so predominant in
the human breast that we rarely find an individual content with relinquishing a
power that he is able to retain; never a body of men. Some few months after it
was known that the stamp act was passed, some resolves of the house of
burgesses in Virginia, denying the right of parliament to tax the colonies,
made their appearance. We read them with wonder -- they favored of
independance -- they flattered the human passions -- the reasoning was specious
-- we wished it conclusive. The transition, to believing it so, was easy -- and
we, and almost all America, followed their example, in resolving that the
parliament had no such right. It now became unpopular to suggest the contrary;
his life would be in danger that asserted it. The newspapers were open to but
one side of the question, and the inflammatory pieces that issued weekly from
the press, worked up the populace to a fit temper to commit the outrages that
insued. A non-importation was agreed upon, which alarmed the merchants and
manufacturers in England. It was novel, and the people in England then supposed
that the love of liberty was so powerful in an American merchant, as to stifle
his love of gain, and that the agreement would be religiously adhered to. It
has been said, that several thousands were expended in England, to foment the
disturbances there. However that may be, opposition to the ministry was then
gaining ground, from circumstances, foreign to this. -- The ministry was
changed, and the stamp act repealed. -- The repealing statute passed, with
difficulty however, through the house of peers, near forty noble lords
protested against giving way to such an opposition, and foretold what has since
literally come to pass in consequence of it. When the statute was made,
imposing duties upon glass, paper, India teas, etc. imported into the colonies,
it was said, that this was another instance of taxation, for some of the dutied
commodities were necessaries, we had them not within ourselves, were prohibited
from importing them from any place except Great Britain, were therefore obliged
to import them from Great Britain, and consequently, were obliged to pay the
duties. Accordingly news-paper publications, pamphlets, resolves,
nonimportation agreements, and the whole system of American opposition was
again put in motion. We obtained a partial repeal of this statute, which took
off the duties from all the articles except teas. This was the lucky moment
when to have closed the dispute. We might have made a safe and honorable
retreat. We had gained much, perhaps more than we expected. If the parliament
had passed an act declaratory of their right to tax us, our assemblies had
resolved, ten times, that they had no such right. We could not complain of the
three-penny duty on tea as burdensome, for a shilling which had been laid upon
it, for the purpose of regulating trade, and therefore was allowed to be
constitutional, was taken off; so that we were in fact gainers nine-pence in a
pound by the new regulation. If the appropriation of the revenue, arising from
this statute was disrelished, it was only our striking off one article of
luxury from our manner of living, an article too, which if we may believe the
resolves of most of the towns in this province, or rely on its collected wisdom
in a resolve of the house of representatives, was to the last degree ruinous to
health. It was futile to urge its being a precedent, as a reason for keeping up
the ball of contention; for, allowing the supreme legislature ever to want a
precedent, they had many for laying duties on commodities imported into the
colonies. And beside we had great reason to believe that the remaining part of
the statute would be repealed, as soon as the parliament should suppose it
could be done with honor to themselves, as the incidental revenue arising from
the former regulation, was four fold to the revenue arising from the latter. A
claim of the right, could work no injury, so long as there was no grievous
exercise of it, especially as we had protested against it, through the whole,
and could not be said to have departed from our claims in the least. We might
now upon good terms have dropped the dispute, and been happy in the affections
of our mother country; but that is yet to come. Party is inseparable from a
free state. The several distributions of power, as they are limited by, so they
create perpetual dissentions between each other, about their respective
boundaries; but the greatest source is the competition of individuals for
preferment in the state. Popularity is the ladder by which the partisans
usually climb. -- Accordingly the struggle is, who shall have the greatest
share of it. Each party professes disinterested patriotism, though some cynical
writers have ventured to assert, that self-love is the ruling passion of the
whole. There were two parties in this province of pretty long standing, known
by the name of whig and tory, which at this time were not a little imbittered
against each other. -- Men of abilities and acknowledged probity were on both
sides. If the tories were suspected of pursuing their private interest through
the medium of court favor, there was equal reason to suspect the whigs of
pursuing their private interest by the means of popularity. Indeed some of them
owed all their importance to it, and must in a little time have sunk into
obscurity, had these turbulent commotions then subsided.

The tories and whigs took different routs, as usual. The tories were for
closing the controversy with Great Britain, the whigs for continuing it; the
tories were for restoring government in the province, which had become greatly
relaxed by these convulsions, to its former tone; the whigs were averse to it;
they even refused to revive a temporary riot act, which expired about this
time. Perhaps they thought that mobs were a necessary ingredient in their
system of opposition: However, the whigs had great advantages in the unequal
combat, their scheme flattered the people with the idea of independance; the
tories plan supposed a degree of subordination, which is rather an humiliating
idea; besides there is a propensity in men to believe themselves injured and
oppressed whenever they are told so. The ferment raised in their minds in the
time of the stamp act was not yet allayed, and the leaders of the whigs had
gained the confidence of the people by their successes in their former
struggles, so that they had nothing to do but to keep up the spirit among the
people, and they were sure of commanding in this province. It required some
pains to prevent their minds settling into that calm which is ordinarily the
effect of a mild government; the whigs were sensible that there was no
oppression that could be either seen or felt; if any thing was in reality amiss
in government, it was its being too lax: So far was it from the innocent being
in danger of suffering, that the most attrocious offenders escaped with
impunity. They accordingly applied themselves to work upon the imagination, and
to inflame the passion; for this work they possessed great talents; I will do
justice to their ingenuity; they were intimately acquainted with the feelings
of man, and knew all the avenues to the human heart: -- Effigies, paintings,
and other imagery were exhibited; the fourteenth of August was celebrated
annually as a festival in commemoration of a mob's destroying a building, owned
by the late Lieutenant Governor, which was supposed to have been erected for a
stamp-office, and compelling him to resign his office of stamp-master under
liberty-tree; annual orations were delivered in the old-south meeting house, on
the fifth of March, the day when some persons were unfortunately killed by a
party of the twenty-ninth regiment; lists of imaginary grievances were
continually published; the people were told weekly that the ministry had formed
a plan to inslave them; that the duty upon tea was only a prelude to a window
tax, hearth-tax, land tax, and poll-tax; and these were only paving the way for
reducing the country to lordships; this last bait was the more easily
swallowed, as there seems to be an apprehension of that kind hereditary to the
people of New England; and were conjured by the duty they owed themselves, their
country, and their GOD, by the reverence due to the sacred memory of their
ancestors, and all their toils and sufferings in this once inhospitable
wilderness, and by their affections for unborn millions, to rouse and exert
themselves in the common cause. This perpetual incantation kept the people in
continual alarm. We were farther stimulated by being told that the people of
England were depraved, the parliament venal, and the ministry corrupt; nor were
attempts wanting to traduce Majesty itself. The kingdom of Great Britain was
depicted as an ancient structure, once the admiration of the world, now sliding
from its base, and rushing to its fall. At the same time we were called upon to
mark our own rapid growth, and behold the certain evidence that America was
upon the eve of Independent empire.

When we consider what effect a well wrote tragedy or novel has on the human
passions, though we know it to be all fictitious, what effect must all this be
supposed to have had upon those that believed these high wrought images to be
realities?

The tories have been censured for remissness in not having exerted themselves
sufficiently at this period: The truth of the case is this, they saw and
shuddered at the gathering storm, but durst not attempt to dispel it, lest it
should burst on their own heads. Printers were threatened with the loss of
their bread, for publishing freely on the tory side. One Mr. Mein was forced to
fly the country for persisting in it.

All our dissenting ministers were not inactive on this occasion. When the
clergy engage in a political warfare, religion becomes a most powerful engine,
either to support or overthrow the state. What effect must it have had upon the
audience to hear the same sentiments and principles which they had before read
in a newspaper, delivered on Sundays from the sacred desk, with a religious
awe, and the most solemn appeals to heaven, from lips which they had been
taught, from their cradles, to believe could utter nothing but eternal truths?
What was it natural to expect from a people bred under a free constitution,
jealous of their liberty, credulous even to a proverb when told their
privileges were in danger, thus wrought upon in the extreme? I answer: --
Outrages disgraceful to humanity itself. What mischief was not an artful man
who had obtained the confidence and guidance of such an enraged multitude
capable of doing? He had only to point out this or the other man as an enemy of
his country, and no character, station, age or merit could protect the
proscribed from their fury. Happy was it for him if he could secret his
person, and subject his property only to their lawless ravages. By such means,
many people naturally brave and humane, have been wrought upon to commit such
acts of private mischief and public violence, as will blacken many a page in
the history of our country.

I shall next trace the effects of this spirit which the whigs had thus infused
into the body of the people, through the courts of common law, and the
generalassembly, and mark the ways and means whereby they availed themselves of
it to the subversion of our charter constitution, antecedent to the late act of
parliament.

MASSACHUSETTENSIS. December 19, 1774.
LETTER III.
To the Inhabitants of the Province of Massachusetts Bay.
TO undertake to convince a person of his error, is the indispensable duty, the
certain, though dangerous test of friendship. He that could see his friend
persevering in a fatal error without reminding him of it, and striving to
reclaim him, through fear that he might thereby incur his displeasure, would
little deserve the sacred name himself. Such delicacy is not only false, but
criminal. Were I not fully convinced, upon the most mature deliberation that I
am capable of, that the temporal salvation of this province depends upon an
entire and speedy change of measures, which must depend upon a change of
sentiment, respecting our own conduct, and the justice of the British nation, I
never should have obtruded myself on the public. -- I repeat my promise, to
avoid personal reflection as much as the nature of the task will admit of; but
will continue faithfully to expose the wretched policy of the whigs, though I
may be obliged to penetrate the arcana, and discover such things as, were there
not a necessity for it, I should be infinitely happier in drawing a veil over,
or covering with a (...). Should I be so unfortunate as to incur your
displeasure, I shall nevertheless think myself happy if I can but snatch one of
my fellow subjects as a brand out of the burning.

Perhaps some may imagine that I have represented too many of my countrymen, as
well as the leading whigs, in an unjust point of light, by supposing these so
wicked as to mislead, or those so little circumspect as to be misled, in
matters of the last importance. Whoever has been conversant with the history of
man, must know that it abounds with such instances. The same game, and with the
same success, has been played in all ages and all countries.

The bulk of the people are generally but little versed in matters of state.
Want of inclination or opportunity to figure in public life, makes them content
to rest the affairs of government in the hands where accident or merit has
placed them. Their views and employments are confined to the humbler walks of
business or retirement. There is a latent spark however in their breasts
capable of being kindled into a flame; to do this has always been the
employment of the disaffected. They begin by reminding the people of the
elevated rank they hold in the universe, as men; that all men by nature are
equal; that Kings are but the ministers of the people; that their authority is
delegated to them by the people for their good, and they have a right to resume
it, and place it in other hands, or keep it themselves, whenever it is made use
of to oppress them. Doubtless there have been instances where these principles
have been inculcated to obtain a redress of real grievances, but they have been
much oftener perverted to the worst of purposes. -- No government, however
perfect in theory, is administered in perfection; the frailty of man does not
admit of it. A small mistake, in point of policy, often furnishes a pretense to
libel government, and persuade the people that their rulers are tyrants, and
the whole government a system of oppression. Thus the seeds of sedition are
usually sown, and the people are led to sacrifice real liberty to
licentiousness, which gradually ripens into-rebellion and civil war. And what
is still more to be lamented, the generality of the people, who are thus made
the dupes of artifice, and the mere stilts of ambition, are sure to be losers
in the end. The best they can expect, is to be thrown neglected by, when they
are no longer wanted; but they are seldom so happy; if they are subdued,
confiscation of estate and ignominious death are their portion; if they
conquer, their own army is often turned upon them, to subjugate them to a more
tyrannical government than that they rebelled against. History is replete with
instances of this kind; we can trace them in remote antiquity, we find them in
modern times, and have a remarkable one in the very country from which we are
derived. It is an universal truth, that he that would excite a rebellion,
whatever professions of philanthropy he may make, when he is insinuating and
worming himself into the good graces of the people, is at heart as great a
tyrant as ever weilded the iron rod of oppression. I shall have occasion
hereafter to consider this matter more fully, when I shall endeavor to
convince you how little we can gain, and how much we may lose, by this unequal,
unnatural, and desperate contest. My present business is, to trace the spirit
of opposition to Great Britain through the general court, and the courts of
common law. In moderate times, a representative that votes for an unpopular
measure, or opposes a popular one, is in danger of losing his election the next
year; when party runs high, he is sure to do it. It was the policy of the whigs
to have their questions, upon high matters, determined by yea and nay votes,
which were published with the representatives names in the next gazette. This
was commonly followed by severe strictures and the most illiberal invectives
upon the dissentients, sometimes they were held up as objects of resentment, of
contempt at others; the abuse was in proportion to the extravagance of the
measure they opposed. This may seem not worth notice, but its consequences were
important. The scurrility made its way into the dissentient's town, it
furnished his competitor with means to supplant him, and he took care to shun
the rock his predecessor had split upon. In this temper of the times, it was
enough to know who voted with Cassius and who with Lucius, to determine who was
a friend and who an enemy to the country, without once adverting to the
question before the house. The loss of a seat in the house was not of so much
consequence, but when once he became stigmatized as an enemy to his country, he
was exposed to insult, and if his profession or business was such, that his
livelihood depended much on the good graces of his fellow citizens, he was in
danger of losing his bread, and involving his whole family in ruin.

One particular set of members, in committee, always prepared the resolves and
other spirited measures: At first they were canvassed freely, at length would
slide through the house without meeting an obstacle: The lips of the
dissentients were sealed up; they sat in silence, and beheld with infinite
regret the measures they durst not oppose. Many were borne down against their
wills by the violence of the current; upon no other principle can we reconcile
their ostensible conduct in the house to their declarations in private circles.
The apparent unanimity in the house encouraged the opposition out of doors, and
that in its turn strengthened the party in the house. Thus they went on
mutually supporting and up-lifting each other. Assemblies and towns resolved
alternately; some of them only omitted resolving to snatch the scepter out of
the hands of our Sovereign, and to strike the imperial crown from his sacred
head.

A master stroke in politics respecting the agent ought not to be neglected.
Each colony has usually an agent residing at the court of Great Britain: These
agents are appointed by the three branches of their several assemblies, and
indeed there cannot be a provincial agent without such appointment. The whigs
soon found that they could not have such services rendered them from a
provincial agent as would answer their purposes. The house therefore refused to
join with the other two branches of the general court in the appointment. The
house chose an agent for themselves, and the council appointed another. Thus we
had two agents for private purposes, and the expense of agency doubled; and
with equal reason a third might have been added, as agent for the Governor, and
the charges been trebled.

The additional expense was of little consideration, compared with another
inconvenience that attended this new mode of agency. The person appointed by
the house was the ostensible agent of the province, though in fact he was only
the agent of a few individuals that had got the art of managing the house at
their pleasure. He knew his continuing in office depended upon them. An office
that yielded several hundred pounds sterling annually; the business of which
consisted in little more than attending the levees of the great, and writing
letters to America, was worth preserving. Thus he was under a strong temptation
to sacrifice the province to a party; and echoed back the sentiments of his
patrons.

The advices continually received from one of the persons that was thus
appointed agent, had great influence upon the members of the house of more
moderate principles. He had pushed his researches deep into nature, and made
important discoveries; they thought he had done the same in politics, and did
not admire him less as a politician than as a philosopher. His intelligence as
to the disposition of his Majesty, the ministry, the parliament and the nation
in general, was deemed the most authentic. He advised us to keep up our
opposition, to resolve and re-resolve, to cherish a military spirit, uniformly
holding up this idea, that if we continued firm, we had nothing to fear from
the government in England. He even proposed some modes of opposition himself.
The spirited measures were always ushered into the house with a letter from
him. I have been sometimes almost ready to suspect him of being the primum
mobile, and, that like the man behind the curtain at a puppet-shew, he was
playing off the figures here with his own secret wires. If he advised to these
measures contrary to his better knowledge, from sinister views, and to serve a
private purpose, he has wilfully done the province irreparable injury. However,
I will do him justice, he enjoined it upon us to refrain from violence, as that
would unite the nation against us; and I am rather inclined to think that he
was deceived himself with respect to the measures he recommended, as he has
already felt the resentment of that very government which he told us there was
nothing to fear from. This disposition of the house could not have produced
such fatal effects, had the other two branches of the legislature retained
their constitutional freedom and influence. They might have been a sufficient
check.

The counselors depended upon the general assembly for their political
existance; the whigs reminded the council of their mortality. If a councellor
opposed the violent measures of the whigs with any spirit, he lost his election
the next May. The council consisted of twenty-eight. From this principle near
half that number, mostly men of the first families, note and abilities, with
every possible attachment to their native country, and as far from temptation
as wealth and independance could remove them, were tumbled from their seats in
disgrace. Thus the board which was intended to moderate between the two
extremes of prerogative and privilege, lost its weight in the scale, and the
political balance of the province was destroyed.

Had the chair been able to retain its own constitutional influence, the loss
of the board would have been less felt; but no longer supported by the board,
that fell likewise. The Governor by the charter could do little or nothing
without the council. If he called upon a military officer to raise the militia,
he was answered, they were there already. If he called upon his council for
their assistance, they must first enquire into the cause. If he wrote to
government at home to strengthen his hands, some officious person procured and
sent back his letters.

It was not the person of a Bernard or Hutchinson that made them obnoxious, any
other governors would have met with the same fate, had they discharged their
duty with equal fidelity; that is, had they strenuously opposed the principles
and practices of the whigs; and when they found that the government here could
not support itself, wrote home for aid sufficient to do it. And let me tell
you, had the intimations in those letters, which you are taught to execrate,
been timely attended to, we had now been as happy a people as good government
could make us. Governor Bernard came here recommended by the affections of the
province over which he had presided. His abilities are acknowledged. True
British honesty and punctuality are traits in his character too strongly marked
to escape the eye of prejudice itself. We know Governor Hutchinson to be
amiable and exemplary in private life; his great abilities, integrity and
humanity, were conspicuous in the several important departments that he filled,
before his appointment to the chair, and reflect honor on his native country.
But his abilities and integrity, added to his thorough knowledge of the
province, in all its interests and connections, were insufficient in this case.
The constitution itself was gone, though the ancient form remained; the spirit
was truly republican. He endeavored to reclaim us by gentle means. He strove
to convince us by arguments, drawn from the first principles of government, our
several charters, and the express acknowledgments of our ancestors, that our
claims were inconsistent with the subordination due to Great Britain; and if
persisted in, might work the destruction of those that we were entitled to. For
this he was called an enemy to his country, and set up as a mark for the
envenomed arrows of malice and party rage. Had I entertained a doubt about its
being the governor, and not the man that was aimed at, the admirable facility
with which the news-paper abuse was transferred from Governor Hutchinson to his
humane and benevolent successor, General Gage, almost as soon as he set foot on
our shore, would have removed it.

Thus, disaffection to Great Britain being infused into the body of the people,
the subtle poison stole through all the veins and arteries, contaminated the
blood, and destroyed the very stamina of the constitution. Had not the courts
of justice been tainted in the early stages, our government might have expelled
the virus, purged off the peccant humors and recovered its former vigor by its
own strength. The judges of the superior court were dependant upon the annual
grants of the general court for their support. Their salaries were small in
proportion to the salaries of other officers in the government of less
importance.

They had often petitioned the assembly to enlarge them, without success. They
were at this time reminded of their dependence. However, it is but justice to
say, that the judges remained unshaken, amid the raging tempests, which is to
be attributed rather to their firmness than situation. But the spirit of the
times was very apparent in the juries. The grand jurors were elective, and in
such places where libels, riots and insurrections were the most frequent, the
high whigs took care to get themselves chosen. The judges pointed out to them
the seditious libels on governors, magistrates and the whole government, to no
effect. They were enjoined to present riots and insurrections, of which there
was ample evidence, with as little success.

It is difficult to account for so many of the first rate whigs being returned
to serve on the petit jury at the term next after extraordinary insurrections,
without supposing some legerdemain in drawing their names out of the box. It is
certain that notwithstanding swarms of the most virulent libels infested the
province, and there were so many riots and insurrections, scarce one offender
was indicted, and I think not one convicted and punished. Causes of meum et
tuum were not always exempt from party influence. The mere circumstance of the
whigs gaining the ascendency over the tories is trifling. Had the whigs divided
the province between them, as they once flattered themselves they should be
able to do, it would have been of little consequence to the community, had they
not cut a-sunder the very sinews of government, and broke in pieces the
ligaments of social life in the attempt. I will mention two instances which I
have selected out of many, of the weakness of our government, as they are
recent and unconnected with acts of parliament. One Malcom, a loyal subject,
and as such, entitled to protection, the evening before the last winter
sessions of the generalcourt, was dragged out of his house, stripped, tarred and
feathered, and carted several hours in the severest frost of that winter, to
the utmost hazard of his life. He was carried to the gallows with an halter
about his neck, and in his passage to and from the gallows, was beaten with as
cruel stripes as ever were administered by the hands of a savage. The whipping,
however, kept up the circulation of his blood, and saved the poor man's life.
When they had satiated their malice, they dispersed in good order. This was
transacted in the presence of thousands of spectators, some of whom were
members of the general-court. Malcom's life was despaired of several days, but
he survived and presented a memorial to the general-assembly, praying their
interposition. The petition was read, and all he obtained was leave to withdraw
it. So that he was destitute of protection every hour until he left the
country, as were thousands beside, until the arrival of the King's troops. This
originated from a small fracas in the street, wherein Malcom struck or
threatened to strike a person that insulted him, with a cutlass, and had no
connection with the quarrel of the times, unless his sustaining a small post in
the customs made it.

The other instance is much stronger than this, as it was totally detached from
politics. It had been suspected that infection had been communicated from an
hospital, lately erected at Marblehead, for the purpose of innoculating the
smallpox, to the town's people. This caused a great insurrection, the
insurgents burnt the hospital; not content with that, threatened the
proprietors and many others, some of the first fortunes and characters in the
town, with burning their houses over their heads, and continued parading the
streets, to the utmost terror of the inhabitants several days. A massacre and
general devastation was apprehended. The persons threatened, armed themselves,
and petitioned the general-assembly, which was then sitting, for assistance, as
there was little or no civil authority in the place. A committee was ordered to
repair to Marblehead, report the facts, and enquire into the cause: The
committee reported the facts nearly as stated in the petition; the report was
accepted, and nothing farther done by the assembly. Such demonstrations of the
weakness of government, induced many persons to join the whigs, to seek from
them that protection which the constitutional authority of the province was
unable to afford.

Government at home, early in the day, made an effort to check us in our
career, and to enable us to recover from anarchy without her being driven to
the necessity of altering our provincial constitution, knowing the prediliction
that people always have for an ancient form of government. The judges of the
superior court had not been staggered, though their feet stood in slippery
places, they depended upon the leading whigs for their support. To keep them
steady, they were made independent of the grants of the general-assembly: But
it was not a remedy any way adequate to the disease: The whigs now turned their
artillery against them, and it played briskly. -- The chief justice, for
accepting the crown grant, was accused of receiving a royal bribe.

Thus, my friends, those very persons that had made you believe that every
attempt to strengthen government and save our charter, was an infringement of
your privileges, by little and little, destroyed your real liberty, subverted
your charter constitution, abridged the freedom of the house, annihilated the
freedom of the board, and rendered the governor a mere doge of Venice. They
engrossed all the power of the province into their own hands: A democracy or
republic it has been called, but it does not deserve the name of either; it
was, however, a despotism cruelly carried into execution by mobs and riots, and
more incompatible with the rights of mankind, than the enormous monarchies of
the East. The absolute necessity of the interposition of parliament is
apparent. The good policy of the act for regulating the government in this
province, will be the subject of some future paper. A particular enquiry into
the despotism of the whigs will be deferred for a chapter on congresses. I
shall next ask your attention to a transaction, as important in its
consequences, and perhaps more so, than any I have yet mentioned, I mean the
destruction of the tea, belonging to the East India company. I am sensible of
the difficulty of the task, in combating generally received opinions. It is
hard work to eradicate deep rooted prejudice. But I will persevere. There are
hundreds, if not thousands, in the province that will feel the truth of what I
have wrote, line by line as they read it, and as to those who obstinately shut
their eyes against it now, happily the fever of the times may intermit, there may
be some lucid interval when their minds shall be open to truth before it is too
late to serve them, otherwise it will be revealed to them in bitter moments,
attended with keen remorse and unutterable anguish. Magna est veritas et
prevalebit.

MASSACHUSETTENSIS. December 26, 1774.
LETTER III.
To the Inhabitants of the Province of Massachusetts Bay.
PERHAPS by this time some of you may enquire who it is, that suffers his pen
to run so freely? I will tell you; it is a native of this province, that knew
it before many that are now basking in the rays of political sunshine, had a
being. He was favored not by whigs or tories, but the people, with such a stand
in the community, as that he could distinctly see all the political maneuvers
of the province. He saw some with pleasure, others with pain. If he condemns
the conduct of the whigs, he does not always approve of the conduct of the
tories. He dwells upon the misconduct of the former, because we are indebted to
that for bringing us into this wretched state, 'unless the supineness of the
latter at some periods, and some impolitic efforts to check the whigs in their
career, at others, that served like adding fuel to the fire, ought to be added
to the account. He is now repaying your favors, if he knows his own heart,
from the purest gratitude and the most undissembled patriotism, which will one
day be acknowledged. I saw the small seed of sedition, when it was implanted,
it was, as a grain of mustard. I have watched the plant until it has become a
great tree, the vilest reptiles that crawl upon the earth, are concealed at the
root, the foulest birds of the air rest upon its branches. I now would induce
you to go to work immediately with axes and hatchets, and cut it down; for a
twofold reason, because it is a pest to society, and lest it be felled
suddenly by a stronger arm and crush its thousands in the fall.

An apprehension of injustice in the conduct of GreatBritain toward us, I have
already told you was one source of our misery. Last week I endeavored to
convince you of the necessity of her regulating, or rather establishing some
government amongst us. I am now to point out the principles and motives upon
which the blockade act was made. The violent attack upon the property of the
East India company, in the destruction of their tea was the cause of it. In
order to form a right judgment of that transaction, it is necessary to go back
and view the cause of its being sent here. As the government of England is
mixed, so the spirit or genius of the nation is at once monarchial,
aristocratical, democratical, martial and commercial. It is difficult to
determine which is the most predominant principle, but it is worthy of remark,
that, to injure the British nation upon either of these points, is like
injuring a Frenchman in the point of honor. Commerce is the great source of
national wealth, for this reason it is cherished by all orders of men from the
palace to the cottage. In some countries, a merchant is held in contempt by the
nobles, in England they respect him. He rises to high honors in the state,
often contracts alliances with the first families in the kingdom, and noble
blood flows in the veins of his posterity. Trade is founded upon persons or
countries mutually supplying each other with their redundances. Thus none are
impoverished, all enriched, the asperities of human life worn away, and
mankind made happier by it. Husbandry, manufacture and merchandise are its
triple support, deprived of either of these, it would cease.

Agriculture is the natural livelihood of a country but thinly inhabited, as
arts and manufactures are of a populous one. The high price of labor prevents
manufactures being carried on to advantage in the first, scarcity of soil
obliges the inhabitants to pursue them in the latter. Upon these, and
considerations arising from the fertility and produce of different climates,
and such like principles, the grand system of the British trade is founded. The
collected wisdom of the nation has always been attentive to this great point of
policy, that the national trade might be so balanced and poised, as that each
part of her extended dominions, might be benefited, and the whole concentre to
the good of the empire. This evinces the necessity of acts for regulating trade.

To prevent one part of the empire being enriched at the expense and to the
impoverishing of another, checks, restrictions and sometimes absolute
prohibitions are necessary. These are imposed or taken off as circumstances
vary. To carry the acts of trade into execution many officers are necessary.
Thus, we see a number of custom-house officers so constituted as to be checks
and controuls upon each other, and prevent their swerving from their duty,
should they be tempted, and a board of commissioners appointed to superintend
the whole, like the commissioners of the customs in England. Hence also arises
the necessity of courts of admiralty.

The laws and regulations of trade are esteemed in England as sacred. An estate
made by smuggling or pursuing an illicit trade is there looked upon as filthy
lucre, as moneys amassed by gaming, and upon the same principle, because it is
obtained at the expense and often ruin of others. The smuggler not only injures
the public, but often ruins the fair trader.

The great extent of seacoast, many harbors, the variety of islands, the
numerous creeks and navigable rivers, afford the greatest opportunity to drive
an illicit trade in these colonies without detection. This advantage has not
been overlooked by the avaricious, and many persons seem to have set the laws
of trade at defiance. This accounts for so many new regulations being made, new
officers appointed, and ships of war from time to time stationed along the
continent. The way to Holland and back again is well known, and by much the
greatest part of the tea that has been drank in America for several years, has
been imported from thence and other places, in direct violation of law. By this
the smugglers have amassed great estates, to the prejudice of the fair trader.
It was sensibly felt by the East India company; they were prohibited from
exporting their teas to America, and were obliged to fell it at auction in
London; the London merchant purchased it, and put a profit upon it when he
shipped it for America; the American merchant, in his turn, put a profit upon it,
and after him the shopkeeper; so that it came to the consumers hands, at a very
advanced price. Such quantities of tea were annually smuggled that it was
scarcely worth while for the American merchant to import tea from England at
all. Some of the principal trading towns in America were wholly supplied with
this commodity by smuggling; Boston however continued to import it, until
advice was received that the parliament had it in contemplation to permit the
East India company to send their teas directly to America: The Boston merchants
then sent their orders conditionally to their correspondents in England, to
have tea shipped for them in case the East India company's tea did not come out;
one merchant, a great whig, had such an order lying in England for sixty
chests, on his own account, when the company's tea was sent. An act of
parliament was made to enable the East India company to send their tea directly
to America, and sell it at auction there, not with a view of raising a revenue
from the three-penny duty, but to put it out of the power of the smugglers to
injure them by their infamous trade. We have it from good authority, that the
revenue was not the consideration before parliament, and it is reasonable to
suppose it, for had that been the point in view, it was only to restore the
former regulation, which was then allowed to be constitutional, and the revenue
would have been respectable. Had this new regulation taken effect, the people
in America would have been great gainers. The wholesale merchant might have
been deprived of some of his gains; but the retailer would have supplied
himself with this article, directly from the auction, and the consumer reap the
benefit, as tea would have been sold under the price that had been usual, by
near one half. Thus the country in general would have been great gainers, the
East India company secured in supplying the American market with this article,
which they are entitled to by the laws of trade, and smuggling suppressed, at
least as to tea. A smuggler and a whig are cousin Germans, the offspring of two
sisters, avarice and ambition. They had been playing into each others hands a
long time. The smuggler received protection from the whig, and he in his turn
received support from the smuggler. The illicit trader now demanded protection
from his kinsman, and it would have been unnatural in him to have refused it,
and beside, an opportunity presented of strengthening his own interest. The
consignees were connected with the tories, and that was a further stimulus. --
Accordingly the press was again set to work, and the old story repeated with
addition about monopolies, and many infatuated persons once more wrought up to
a proper pitch to carry into execution any violent measures that their leaders
should propose. A bold stroke was resolved upon. The whigs, though they had got
the art of managing the people, had too much sense to be ignorant that it was
all a mere finesse, not only without, but directly repugnant to law,
constitution and government, and could not last always. They determined to put
all at hazard, and to be aut Caesar aut nullus. The approaching storm was
foreseen, and the first ship that arrived with the tea detained below
Castle-William. A body meeting was assembled at the old-south meeting house,
which has great advantage over a town-meeting, as no law has yet ascertained
the qualification of the voters; each person present, of whatever age, estate
or country, may take the liberty to speak or vote at such an assembly; and that
might serve as a skreen to the town where it originated, in case of any
disastrous consequence. The body meeting consisting of several thousands, being
thus assembled, with the leading whigs at its head, in the first place sent for
the owner of the tea ship, and required him to bring her to the wharf, upon
pain of their displeasure; the ship was accordingly brought up, and the master
was obliged to enter at the custom-house: He reported the tea, after which
twenty days are allowed for landing it and paying the duty.

The next step was to resolve. -- They resolved that the tea should not be
landed nor the duty paid, that it should go home in the same bottom that it
came in, etc. etc. This was the same as resolving to destroy it, for as the
ship had been compelled to come to the wharf, and was entered at the
custom-house, it could not, by law, be cleared out, without the duties being
first paid, nor could the Governor grant a permit for the vessel to pass
Castle-William, without a certificate from the customhouse of such clearance,
consistent with his duty. The body accordingly, ordered a military guard to
watch the ship every night until further orders. The consignees had been
applied to, by the selectmen, to send the tea to England, they answered that
they could not, for if they did, it would be forfeited by the acts of trade,
and they should be liable to make good the loss to the East India company. Some
of the consignees were mobbed, and all were obliged to fly to the castle, and
there immure themselves. They petitioned the Governor and Council to take the
property of the East India company under their protection. The council declined
being concerned in it. The consignees then offered the body to store the tea
under the care of the selectmen or a committee of the town of Boston, and to
have no further concern in the matter until they could send to England, and
receive further instructions from their principals. This was refused with
disdain. The military guard was regularly kept in rotation till the eve of the
the twentieth day, when the duties must have been paid, the tea landed, or be
liable to seizure; then the military guard was withdrawn, or rather omitted
being posted, and a number of persons in disguise, forceably entered the ships
(three being by this time arrived) split open the chests, and emptied all the
tea, being of ten thousand pounds sterling value, into the dock, and perfumed
the town with its fragrance. Another circumstance ought not to be omitted, the
afternoon before the destruction of the tea, the body sent the owner of one of
the ships to the Governor, to demand a pass, he answered, that he would as soon
give a pass for that as any other vessel, if he had the proper certificate from
the custom-house, without which he could not give a pass for any, consistent
with his duty. It was known that this would be the answer, when the message was
sent, and it was with the utmost difficulty that the body were kept together
till the messenger returned. When the report was made, a shout was set up in
the galleries and at the door, and the meeting immediately dispersed. The
Governor had, previous to this, sent a proclamation by the sheriff, commanding
the body to disperse, they permitted it to be read, and answered it with a
general hiss. These are the facts as truly and fairly stated, as I am able to
state them. The ostensible reason for this conduct, was the tea's being subject
to the three-penny duty. Let us take the advocates for this transaction upon
their own principle, and admit the duty to be unconstitutional, and see how the
argument stands. Here is a cargo of tea subject upon its being entered and
landed, to a duty of threepence per pound, which is paid by the East India
company or by their factors, which amounts to the same thing. Unless we
purchase the tea, we shall never pay the duty, if we purchase it, we pay the
threepence included in the price; therefore, lest we should purchase it, we
have a right to destroy it. A flimsy pretext! and either supposes the people
destitute of virtue, or that their purchasing the tea was a matter of no
importance to the community; but even this gauze covering is stripped off, when
we consider that the Boston merchants, and some who were active at the body
meeting, were every day importing from England, large quantities of tea subject
to the same duty and vending it unmolested; and at this time had orders lying
in their correspondent's hands, to send them considerable quantities of tea, in
case the East India company should not send it themselves.

When the news of this transaction arrived in England, and it was considered in
what manner almost every other regulation of trade had been evaded by artifice,
and when artifice could no longer serve, recourse was had to violence, the
British lion was roused. The crown lawyers were called upon for the law, they
answered high treason. Had a Cromwell, whom some amongst us deify and imitate
in all his imitable perfections, had the guidance of the national ire, unless
compensation had been made to the sufferers immediately upon its being
demanded, your proud capital had been levelled with the dust, not content with
that, rivers of blood would have been shed to make atonement for the injured
honor of the nation. It was debated whether to attaint the principals of
treason. We have a gracious King upon the throne, he felt the resentment of a
man, softened by the relentings of a parent. The bowels of our mother country
yearned toward her refractory, obstinate child.

It was determined to consider the offense in a milder light, and to compel an
indemnification for the sufferers and prevent the like for the future, by such
means as would be mild, compared with the insult to the nations or severe as
our future conduct should be; that was to depend upon us. Accordingly the
blockade act was passed, and had an act of justice been done in indemnifying
the sufferers, and an act of loyalty in putting a stop to seditious practices,
our port had long since been opened. This act has been called unjust, because
it involves the innocent in the same predicament with the guilty, but it ought
to be considered, that our newspapers had announced to the world, that several
thousands attended those body meetings, and it did not appear that there was
one dissentient, or any protest entered. I do not know how a person could
expect distinction, in such a case, if he neglected to distinguish himself.
When the noble Lord proposed it in the house of commons, he called upon all the
members present, to mention a better method of obtaining justice in this case,
scarce one denied the necessity of doing something, but none could mention a
more eligible way. Even ministerial opposition was abashed. If any parts of the
act strike us, like the severity of a master, let us coolly advert to the
aggravated insult, and perhaps we shall wonder at the lenity of a parent. After
this transaction all parties seem to have laid upon their oars, waiting to see
what parliament would do. When the blockade act arrived, many and many were
desirous of paying for the tea immediately, and some who were guiltless of the
crime, offered to contribute to the compensation; but our leading whigs must
still rule the roast, and that inauspicious influence that had brought us
hitherto, plunged us still deeper in misery. The whigs saw their ruin connected
with a compliance with the terms of opening the port, as it would furnish a
convincing proof of the wretchedness of their policy in the destruction of the
tea, and they might justly have been expected to pay the money demanded
themselves, and set themselves industriously to work to prevent it, and engage
the other colonies to espouse their cause.

This was a crisis too important and alarming to the province to be neglected
by its friends. A number of as respectable persons as any in this province,
belonging to Boston, Cambridge, Salem and Marblehead, now came forward,
publicly to disavow the proceedings of the whigs, to do justice to the much
injured character of Mr. Hutchinson, and to strengthen his influence at the
court of Great Britain, where he was going to receive the well deserved plaudit
of his Sovereign, that he might be able to obtain a repeal or some mitigation
of that act, the terms of which they foresaw, the perverseness of the whigs
would prevent a compliance with. This was done by several addresses, which were
subscribed by upwards of two hundred persons, and would have been by many more,
had not the sudden embarkation of Mr. Hutchinson prevented it. The justices of
the court of common pleas and general sessions of the peace for the county of
Plymouth, sent their address to him in England. There were some of almost all
orders of men among these addressers, but they consisted principally of men of
property, large family connections, and several were independent in their
circumstances, and lived wholly upon the income of their estates. Some indeed
might be called partisans, but a very considerable proportion were persons that
had of choice kept themselves at a distance from the political vortex, had
beheld the competition of the whigs and tories without any emotion, while the
community remained safe, had looked down on the political dance in its various
mazes and intricacies, and saw one falling, another rising, rather as a matter
of amusement; but when they saw the capital of the province upon the point of
being sacrificed by political cunning, it called up all their feelings.

Their motives were truly patriotic. Let us now attend to the ways and means by
which the whigs prevented these exertions producing such effects. Previous to
this, a new and till lately, unheard of, mode of opposition had been devised,
said to be the invention of the fertile brain of one of our party agents,
called a committee of correspondence. This is the foulest, subtlest and most
venomous serpent that ever issued from the eggs of sedition. These committees
generally consist of the highest whigs, or at least there is some high whig
upon them, that is the ruling spirit of the whole. They are commonly appointed
at thin town-meetings, or if the meetings happen to be full, the moderate men
seldom speak or act at all when this sort of business comes on: They have been
by much too modest. Thus the meeting is often prefaced with "At a full
townmeeting," and the several resolves headed with nem. con. with strict truth,
when in fact, but a small proportion of the town have had a hand in the matter.
It is said that the committee for the town of Boston was appointed for a
special purpose, and that their commission long since expired. However that may
be, these committees when once established think themselves amenable to none,
they assume a dictatorial style, and have an opportunity under the apparent
sanction of their several towns, of clandestinely wreaking private revenge on
individuals, by traducing their characters, and holding them up as enemies to
their country wherever they go, as also of misrepresenting facts and
propagating sedition through the country. Thus, a man of principle and property
in traveling through the country, would be insulted by persons whose faces he
had never before seen, he would often feel the smart without suspecting the
hand that administered the blow. These committees, as they are not known in law,
and can derive no authority from thence, left they should not get their share
of power, sometimes engross it all; they frequently erect themselves into a
tribunal, where the same persons are at once legislator, accusers, witnesses,
judges and jurors, and the mob the executioners. The accused has no day in
court, and the execution of the sentence is the first notice he receives. This
is the channel through which liberty matters have been chiefly conducted the
summer and fall past. This accounts for the same distempers breaking out in
different parts of the province at one and the same time, which might be
attributed to something supernatural, by those that were unacquainted with the
secret conductor of the infection. It is chiefly owing to these committees,
that so many respectable persons have been abused, and forced to sign
recantations and resignations: That so many persons, to avoid such reiterated
insults, as are more to be deprecated by a man of sentiment than death itself,
have been obliged to quit their houses, families and business, and fly to the
army for protection, that husband has been separated from wife, father from
son, brother from brother, the sweet intercourse of conjugal and natural
affection interrupted, and the unfortunate refugee forced to abandon all the
comforts of domestic life. My countrymen, I beg you to pause and reflect on
this conduct, have not these people, that are thus insulted, as good a right to
think and act for themselves in matters of the last importance as the whigs?
Are they not as closely connected with the interest of their country as the
whigs? Do not their former lives and conversations appear to have been
regulated by principle, as much as those of the whigs? You must answer, yes.
Why then do you suffer them to be cruelly treated for differing in sentiment
from you? Is it consistent with that liberty you profess? Let us wave the
consideration of right and liberty, and see if this conduct can be reconciled
to good policy. Do you expect to make converts by it? Persecution has the same
effect in politics that it has in religion, it confirms the sectary. Do you
wish to silence them that the inhabitants of the province may appear unanimous?
The mal-treatment they receive for differing from you is undeniable evidence
that we are not unanimous. It may not be amiss to consider, that this is a
changeable world, and time's rolling wheel may ere long bring them uppermost;
in that case I am sure you would not wish to have them fraught with resentment.
It is astonishing, my friends, that those who are in pursuit of liberty, should
ever suffer arbitrary power in such an hideous form, and squalid hue, to get a
footing among them. I appeal to your good sense, I know you have it, and hope
to penetrate to it, before I have finished my publications, notwithstanding the
thick atmosphere that now invelopes it. But, to return from my digression, the
committee of correspondence represented the destruction of the tea in their own
way: They represented those that addressed Governor Hutchinson, as persons of
no note or property, as mean, base wretches, and seekers that had been
sacrificing their country in adulation of him. Whole nations have worshipped
the rising, but if this be an instance, it is the only one of people's
worshipping the setting sun. By this means the humane and benevolent in various
parts of the continent, were induced to advise us not to comply with the terms
for opening our port, and engage to relieve us with their charities, from the
distress that must otherwise fall upon the poor. Their charitable intentions
ascend to heaven, like incense from the altar, in sweet memorial before the
throne of God; but their donations came near proving fatal to the province: It
encouraged the whigs to persevere in injustice, and has been the means of
seducing many an honest man into the commission of a crime that he did not
suspect himself capable of being guilty of. What I have told you, is not the
mere suggestions of a speculatist; there are some mistakes as to numbers, and
there may be some as to time and place, partly owing to miscopying, and partly
to my not always having had the books and papers necessary to greater accuracy,
at hand; but the relation of facts is in substance true, I had almost said, as
holy writ. -- I do not ask you to take the truths of them from an anonymous
writer: The evidence of most of them is within your reach, examine for
yourselves: -- I promise that the benefit you will reap therefrom will
abundantly pay you for the trouble of the research, you will find I have
faithfully unriddled the whole mystery of our political iniquity. I do not
address myself to whigs or tories, but to the whole people. I know you well.
You are loyal at heart, friends to good order, and do violence to yourselves in
harboring one moment, disrespectful sentiments toward Great Britain, the land
of our forefathers nativity, and sacred repository of their bones; but you have
been most insidiously induced to believe that Great Britain is rapacious, cruel
and vindictive, and envies us the inheritance purchased by the sweat and blood
of our ancestors. Could that thick mist that hovers over the land and involves
in it more than Egyptian darkness be but once dispelled, that you might see our
Sovereign, the provident father of all his people, and Great Britain a nursing
mother to these colonies, as they really are, long live our gracious King, and
happiness to Britain, would resound from one end of the province to the other.

MASSACHUSETTENSIS. January 2, 1775.
LETTER IV.
To the Inhabitants of the Province of Massachusetts Bay.
MY DEAR COUNTRYMEN,
SOME of you may perhaps suspect that I have been wantonly scattering
firebrands, arrows and death, to gratify a malicious and revengeful
disposition: The truth is this; I had seen many excellent detached pieces, but
could see no pen at work to trace our calamity to its source, and point out the
many adventitious aids, that conspired to raise it to its present height,
though I impatiently expected it, being fully convinced that you wait only to
know the true state of facts, to rectify whatever is amiss in the province,
without any foreign assistance. Others may be induced to think that I grudge
the industrious poor of Boston their scantlings of charity. I will issue a
brief in their favor. The opulent, be their political sentiments what they
may, ought to relieve them from their sufferings, and those who by former
donations, have been the innocent cause of protracting their sufferings, are
under a tenfold obligation to assist them now; and at the same time to make the
most explicit declarations, that they did not intend to promote nor ever will
join in rebellion. Great allowances are to be made for the crossings, windings
and tergiversations of a politician; he is a cunning animal, and as government
is said to be founded in opinion, his tricks may be a part of the arcana
imperii. Had our politicians confined themselves within any reasonable bounds,
I never should have molested them; but when I became satisfied, that many
innocent, unsuspecting persons were in danger of being seduced to their utter
ruin, and the province of Massachusetts Bay in danger of being drenched with
blood and carnage, I could restrain my emotions no longer; and having once
broke the bands of natural reserve, was determined to probe the sore to the
bottom, though I was sure to touch the quick. It is very foreign from my
intentions to draw down the vengeance of Great Britain upon the whigs; they are
too valuable a part of the community to lose, if they will permit themselves to
be saved; I wish nothing worse to the highest of them, than that they may be
deprived of their influence, till such time as they shall have changed their
sentiments, principles and measures.

Sedition has already been marked through its zigzag path to the present times.
When the statute for regulating the government arrived, a match was put to the
train, and the mine that had been long forming, sprung, and threw the whole
province into confusion and anarchy. The occurrencies of the summer and autumn
past are so recent and notorious, that a particular detail of them is
unnecessary. Suffice it to say, that every barrier that civil government had
erected for the security of property, liberty and life was broken down, and
law, constitution and government trampled under foot by the rudest invaders. I
shall not dwell upon these harsh notes much longer. I shall yet become an
advocate for the leading whigs; much must be allowed to men in their situation,
forcibly actuated by the chagrin of disappointment, the fear of punishment, and
the fascination of hope at the same time.

Perhaps the whole story of empire does not furnish another instance of a
forcible opposition to government with so much apparent and little real cause,
with such apparent probability without any possibility of success. The
stamp act gave the alarm. The instability of the public councils from the
Greenvillian administration to the appointment of the Earl of Hillsborough to
the American department, afforded as great a prospect of success, as the heavy
duties imposed by the stamp act, did a color for the opposition. It was
necessary to give the history of this matter in its course, offend who it
would, because those acts of government that are called the greatest
grievances, became proper and necessary, through the misconduct of our
politicians, and the justice of Great Britain toward us, could not be made
apparent without first pointing out that. I intend to consider the acts of the
British government, which are held up as the principal grievances, and enquire
whether Great Britain is chargeable with injustice in any one of them; but must
first ask your attention to the authority of parliament. I suspect many of our
politicians are wrong in their first principle, in denying that the
constitutional authority of parliament extends to the colonies, if so, it must
not be wondered at, that their whole fabric is so ruinous: I shall not travel
through all the arguments that have been adduced, for and against this
question, but attempt to reduce the substance of them to a narrow compass,
after having taken a cursory view of the British constitution.

The security of the people from internal rapacity and violence, and from
foreign invasion is the end and design of government. The simple forms of
government are monarchy, aristocracy and democracy, that is, where the
authority of the state is vested in one, a few, or the many. Each of these
species of government has advantages peculiar to itself, and would answer the
ends of government, were the persons entrusted with the authority of the state
always guided themselves by unerring wisdom and public virtue; but rulers are
not always exempt from the weakness and depravity which make government
necessary to society. Thus monarchy is apt to rush headlong into tyranny,
aristocracy to beget faction and multiplied usurpation, and democracy, to
degenerate into tumult, violence and anarchy. A government formed upon these
three principles in due proportion, is the best calculated to answer the ends
of government, and to endure. Such a government is the British constitution,
consisting of King, Lords and Commons, which at once includes the principal
excellencies, and excludes the principal defects of the other kinds of
government. It is allowed, both by Englishmen and foreigners, to be the most
perfect system that the wisdom of ages has produced. The distributions of power
are so just, and the proportions so exact, as at once to support and control
each other. An Englishman glories in being subject to and protected by such a
government. The colonies are a part of the British empire. The best writers
upon the law of nations, tell us, that when a nation takes possession of a
distant country, and settles there, that country though separated from the
principal establishment or mothercountry, naturally becomes a part of the
state, equal with its ancient possessions. Two supreme or independent
authorities cannot exist in the same state. It would be what is called imperium
in imperio, the height of political absurdity. The analogy between the
political and human body is great. Two independent authorities in a state would
be like two distinct principles of volition and action in the human body,
dissenting, opposing and destroying each other. If then we are a part of the
British empire, we must be subject to the supreme power of the state, which is
vested in the estates of parliament, notwithstanding each of the colonies have
legislative and executive powers of their own, delegated or granted to them for
the purposes of regulating their own internal police, which are subordinate to,
and must necessarily be subject to the checks, control and regulation of the
supreme authority.

This doctrine is not new, but the denial of it is. It is beyond a doubt that
it was the sense both of the parent country and our ancestors that they were to
remain subject to parliament; it is evident from the charter itself, and this
authority has been exercised by parliament, from time to time, almost ever
since the first settlement of the country, and has been expressly acknowledged
by our provincial legislatures. It is not less our interest than our duty to
continue subject to the authority of parliament, which will be more fully
considered hereafter. The principal argument against the authority of
parliament, is this, the Americans are entitled to all the privileges of an
Englishman, it is the privilege of an Englishman to be exempt from all laws
that he does not consent to in person, or by representative; the Americans are
not represented in parliament, and therefore are exempt from acts of
parliament, or in other words, not subject to its authority. This appears
specious; but leads to such absurdities as demonstrate its fallacy. If the
colonies are not subject to the authority of parliament, Great Britain and the
colonies must be distinct states, as completely so as England and Scotland were
before the union, or as Great Britain and Hanover are now: The colonies in that
case will owe no allegiance to the imperial crown, and perhaps not to the
person of the King, as the title to the crown is derived from an act of
parliament, made since the settlement of this province, which act respects the
imperial crown only. Let us wave this difficulty, and suppose allegiance due
from the colonies to the person of the King of Great Britain; he then appears
in a new capacity, of King of America, or rather in several new capacities, of
King of Massachusetts, King of Rhode Island, King of Connecticut, etc. etc. For
if our connection with GreatBritain by the parliament be dissolved, we shall
have none among ourselves, but each colony become as distinct from the others
as England was from Scotland before the union. Some have supposed that each
state having one and the same person for its King is a sufficient connection;
were he an absolute Monarch it might be, but in a mixed government, it is no
union at all: For as the King must govern each state by its parliament, those
several parliaments would pursue the particular interest of its own state, and
however well disposed the King might be to pursue a line of interest that was
common to all, the checks and control that he would meet with, would render it
impossible. If the King of Great Britain has really these new capacities, they
ought to be added to his titles; and another difficulty will arise, the
prerogatives of these new crowns have never been defined or limited. Is the
monarchical part of the several provincial constitutions to be nearer or more
remote from absolute monarchy, in an inverted ratio to each one's approaching
to, or receding from a republic. But let us suppose the same prerogatives
inherent in the several American crowns, as are in the imperial crown of
Great Britain, where shall we find the British constitution that we all agree
we are entitled to. We shall seek for it in vain in our provincial assemblies.
They are but faint sketches of the estates of parliament. The houses of
representatives or Burgesses have not all the powers of the house of commons,
in the charter governments they have no more than what is expressly granted by
their several charters. The first charters granted to this province did not
empower the assembly to tax the people at all. Our council-boards are as
destitute of the constitutional authority of the house of lords, as their
several members are of the noble independance and splendid appendages of
peerage. The house of peers is the bulwark of the British constitution, and
through successive ages, has withstood the shocks of monarchy, and the sappings
of democracy, and the constitution gained strength by the conflict. Thus the
supposition of our being independent states, or exempt from the authority of
parliament, destroys the very idea of our having a British constitution. The
provincial constitutions, considered as subordinate, are generally well adapted
to those purposes of government, for which they were intended, that is, to
regulate the internal police of the several colonies; but have no principle of
stability within themselves, they may support themselves in moderate times, but
would be merged by the violence of turbulent ones, and the several colonies
become wholly monarchial or wholly republican, were it not for the cheeks,
controuls, regulations and supports of the supreme authority of the empire.
Thus the argument that is drawn from their first principle of our being
entitled to English liberties, destroys the principle itself, it deprives us of
the bill of rights, and all the benefits resulting from the revolution, of
English laws and of the British constitution.

Our patriots have been so intent upon building up American rights, that they
have overlooked the rights of Great Britain, and our own interest. Instead of
proving that we were entitled to privileges that our fathers knew our situation
would not admit us to enjoy, they have been arguing away our most essential
rights. If there be any grievance it does not consist in our being subject to
the authority of parliament, but in our not having an actual representation in
it. Were it possible for the colonies to have an equal representation in
parliament, and were refused it upon proper application, I confess I should
think it a grievance; but at present it seems to be allowed, by all parties, to
be impracticable, considering the colonies are distant from Great Britain a
thousand transmarine leagues. If that be the case, the right or privilege that
we complain of being deprived of, is not withheld by Britain, but the first
principles of government and the immutable laws of nature, render it impossible
for us to enjoy it. This is apparently the meaning of that celebrated passage
in Governor Hutchinson's letter, that rang through the continent, viz. There
must be an abridgment of what is called English liberties. He subjoins, that he
had never yet seen the projection, whereby a colony three thousand miles
distant from the parent state, might enjoy all the privileges of the parent
state and remain subject to it, or in words to that effect. The obnoxious
sentence, taken detached from the letter, appears very unfriendly to the
colonies; but considered in connection with the other parts of the letter, is
but a necessary result from our situation. Allegiance and protection are
reciprocal. It is our highest interest to continue a part of the British
empire, and equally our duty to remain subject to the authority of parliament.
Our own internal police may generally be regulated by our provincial
legislatures, but in national concerns, or where our own assemblies do not
answer the ends of government with respect to ourselves, the ordinances or
interposition of the great council of the nation is necessary. In this case the
major must rule the minor. After many more centuries shall have rolled away,
long after we who are now bustling upon the stage of life, shall have been
received to the bosom of mother earth, and our names are forgotten, the
colonies may be so far increased as to have the balance of wealth, numbers and
power in their favor, the good of the empire make it necessary to fix the seat
of government here; and some future GEORGE, equally the friend of mankind with
him that now sways the British scepter, may cross the atlantic, and rule
Great Britain by an American parliament.

MASSACHUSETTENSIS. January 9, 1775.
LETTER VI.
To the Inhabitants of the Province of Massachusetts Bay.
HAD a person, some fifteen years ago, undertaken to prove that the colonies
were a part of the British empire or dominion, and as such subject to the
authority of the British parliament, he would have acted as ridiculous a part,
as to have undertaken to prove a self-evident proposition: Had any person
denied it, he would have been called a fool or madman. At this wise period,
individuals and bodies of men deny it, notwithstanding in doing it they subvert
the fundamentals of government, deprive us of British liberties, and build up
absolute monarchy in the colonies; for our charters suppose regal authority in
the grantor, if that authority be derived from the British crown, it
presupposes this territory to have been a part of the British dominion, and as
such subject to the imperial Sovereign; if that authority was vested in the
person of the King, in a different capacity, the British constitution and laws
are out of the question, and the King must be absolute as to us, as his
prerogatives have never been circumscribed. Such must have been the sovereign
authority of the several Kings, who have granted American charters, previous to
the several grants, there is nothing to detract from it, at this time in those
colonies that are destitute of charters, and the charter governments must
severally revert to absolute monarchy as their charters may happen to be
forfeited by the grantees not fulfilling the conditions of them, as every
charter contains an express or implied condition.

It is curious indeed to trace the denial and oppugnation to the supreme
authority of the state. When the stamp act was made, the authority of
parliament to impose internal taxes was denied, but their right to impose
external ones; or in other words, to lay duties upon goods and merchandise was
admitted. When the act was made imposing duties upon tea, etc. a new
distinction was set up, that the parliament had a right to lay duties upon
merchandise for the purpose of regulating trade, but not for the purpose of
raising a revenue: That is, the parliament had good right and lawful authority
to lay the former duty of a shilling on the pound, but had none to lay the
present duty of three pence. Having got thus far safe, it was only taking one
step more to extricate ourselves entirely from their fangs, and become
independent states; that our patriots most heroically resolved upon, and flatly
denied that parliament had a right to make any laws whatever, that should be
binding upon the colonies. There is no possible medium between absolute
independance and subjection to the authority of parliament. He must be blind
indeed that cannot see our dearest interest in the latter, notwithstanding many
pant after the former; misguided men! could they once overtake their wish, they
would be convinced of the madness of the pursuit.

My dear countrymen, it is of the last importance that we settle this point
clearly in our minds; it will serve as a sure test, certain criterion and
invariable standard to distinguish the friends from the enemies of our country,
patriotism from sedition, loyalty from rebellion. To deny the supreme authority
of the state is a high misdemeanor, to say no worse of it; to oppose it by
force is an overt act of treason, punishable by confiscation of estate and most
ignominious death. The realm of England is an appropriate term for the ancient
realm of England, in contradistinction to Wales and other territories that have
been annexed to it. These as they have been severally annexed to the crown,
whether by conquest or otherwise, became a part of the empire, and subject to
the authority of parliament, whether they send members to parliament or not,
and whether they have legislative powers of their own or not.

Thus Ireland, who has perhaps the greatest possible subordinate legislature,
and sends no members to the British parliament, is bound by its acts, when
expressly named. Guernsey and Jersey are no part of the realm of England, nor
are they represented in parliament, but are subject to its authority: And, in
the same predicament are the American colonies, and all the other dispersions
of the empire. Permit me to request your attention to this subject a little
longer; I assure you it is as interesting and important as it is dry and
unentertaining.

Let us now recur to the first charter of this province, and we shall find
irresistible evidence, that our being part of the empire, subject to the
supreme authority of the state, bound by its laws and entitled to its
protection, were the very terms and conditions by which our ancestors held
their lands and settled the province. Our charter, like all other American
charters, are under the great seal of England; the grants are made by the King,
for his heirs and successors, the several tenures to be of the King, his heirs
and successors, in like manner are the reservations. It is apparent the King
acted in his royal capacity, as King of England, which necessarily supposes the
territory granted, to be a part of the English dominions, holden of the crown
of England.

The charter, after reciting several grants of the territory to Sir Henry
Roswell and others, proceeds to incorporation in these words: And for as much
as the good and prosperous success of the plantations of the said parts of
New England aforesaid intended by the said Sir Henry Roswell and others, to be
speedily set upon, cannot but chiefly depend, next under the blessing of
almighty God and the support of our royal authority, upon the good government
of the same, to the end that the affairs of business, which from time to time
shall happen and arise concerning the said lands and the plantations of the
same may be the better managed and ordered, we have further hereby, of our
especial grace, certain knowledge and mere motion given, granted and confirmed,
and for us, our heirs and successors, do give, grant and confirm unto our said
trusty and well beloved subjects, Sir Henry Roswell, etc. and all such others
as shall hereafter be admitted and made free of the company and society
hereafter mentioned, shall from time to time and at all times, forever
hereafter, be by virtue of these presents, one body corporate, politic in fact
and name by the name of the Governor and company of the Massachusetts Bay, in
New England; and them by the name of the Governor and company of the
Massachusetts Bay, in New England, one body politic and corporate in deed, fact
and name. We do for us our heirs and successors make, ordain, constitute and
confirm by these presents, and that by that name they shall have perpetual
succession, and that by that name they and their successors shall be capable
and enabled as well to implead and to be impleaded, and to prosecute, demand
and answer and be answered unto all and singular suits, causes, quarrels and
actions of what kind or nature soever; and also to have, take, possess, acquire
and purchase, any lands, tenements and hereditaments, or any goods or chattles,
the same to lease, grant, demise, aleine, bargain, sell and dispose of as our
liege people of this our realm of England, or any other corporation or body
politic of the same may do. I would beg leave to ask one simple question,
whether this looks like a distinct state or independent empire? Provision is
then made for electing a governor, deputy governor and eighteen assistants.
After which is this clause: We do for us, our heirs and successors, give and
grant to the said governor and company and their successors, that the governor
or in his absence the deputy governor, of the said company for the time being,
and such of the assistants or freemen of the said company as shall be present,
or the greater number of them so assembled, whereof the governor or
deputy governor and six of the assistants, at the least to be seven, shall have
full power and authority to choose, nominate and appoint such and so many
others as they shall think fit, and shall be willing to accept the same to be
free of the said company and body, and them into the same to admit and to elect
and constitute such officers as they shall think fit and requisite for the
ordering, managing and dispatching of the affairs of the said governor and
company and their successors, and to make laws and ordinances for the good and
welfare of the said company, and for the government and ordering of the said
lands and plantations and the people inhabiting and to inhabit the same, as to
them from time to time shall be thought meet: So as such laws and ordinances be
not contrary or repugnant to the laws and statutes of this our realm of England.

Another clause is this, And for their further encouragement, of our especial
grace and favor, we do by these presents, for us, our heirs, and successors,
yield and grant to the said governor and company and their successors, and
every of them, their factors and assigns, that they and every of them shall be
free and quit from all taxes, subsidies and customs in New England for the
space of seven years, and from all taxes and impositions for the space of
twenty-one years, upon all goods and merchandise, at any time or times
hereafter, either upon importation thither, or exportation from thence into our
realm of England, or into other of our dominions, by the said governor and
company and their successors, their deputies, factors and assigns, etc.

The exemption from taxes for seven years in one case, and twenty one years in
the other, plainly indicates that after their expiration, this province would
be liable to taxation. Now I would ask by what authority those taxes were to be
imposed. It could not be by the governor and company, for no such power was
delegated or granted to them; and besides it would have been absurd and
nugatory to exempt them from their own taxation, supposing them to have had the
power, for they might have exempted themselves. -- It must therefore be by the
King or parliament; it could not be by the King alone, for as King of England,
the political capacity in which he granted the charter, he had no such power,
exclusive of the lords and commons, consequently it must have been by the
parliament. This clause in the charter is as evident a recognition of the
authority of the parliament over this province, as if the words, "acts of
parliament," had been inserted, as they were in the Pennsylvania charter. There
was no session of parliament after the grant of our charter until the year
1640. -- In 1642 the house of commons passed a resolve, that for the better
advancement of the plantations in New England, and the encouragement of the
planters to proceed in their undertaking, their exports and imports should be
freed and discharged from all customs, subsidies, taxations and duties until
the further order of the house. Which was gratefully received and recorded in
the archives of our predecessors. -- This transaction shows very clearly in
what sense our connection with England was then understood. It is true that in
some arbitrary reigns, attempts were made by the servants of the crown to
exclude the two houses of parliament, from any share of the authority over the
colonies, they also attempted to render the King absolute in England, but the
parliament always rescued the colonies, as well as England from such attempts.

I shall recite but one more clause of this charter, which is this, And further
our will and pleasure is, and we do hereby for us, our heirs and successors,
ordain, declare and grant to the said governor and company, and their
successors, that all and every of the subjects of us, our heirs and successors
which shall go to and inhabit within the said land and premises hereby
mentioned to be granted, and every of their children which shall happen to be
born there, or on the seas in going thither, or returning from thence, shall
have and enjoy all liberties and immunities of free and natural subjects,
within any of the dominions of us, our heirs or successors, to all intents,
constructions and purposes whatsoever, as if they and every of them were born
within the realm of England. It is upon this, or a similar clause in the
charter of William and Mary that our patriots have built up the stupendous
fabric of American independance. They argue from it a total exemption from
parliamentary authority, because we are not represented in parliament.

I have already shown that the supposition of our being exempt from the
authority of parliament, is pregnant with the grossest absurdities. Let us now
consider this clause in connection with the other parts of the charter. It is a
rule of law, founded in reason and common sense, to construe each part of an
instrument, so as the whole may hang together, and be consistent with itself.
If we suppose this clause to exempt us from the authority of parliament, we
must throw away all the rest of the charter, for every other part indicates the
contrary, as plainly as words can do it; and what is still worse, this clause
becomes felo de se, and destroys itself, for if we are not annexed to the crown
we are aliens, and no charter, grant or other act of the crown can naturalize
us or entitle us to the liberties and immunities of Englishmen. It can be done
only by act of parliament. An alien is one born in a strange country out of the
allegiance of the King, and is under many disabilities though residing in the
realm; as Wales, Jersey, Guernsey, Ireland, the foreign plantations, etc. were
severally annexed to the crown, they became parts of one and the same empire,
the natives of which are equally free as though they had been born in that
territory which was the ancient realm. As our patriots depend upon this clause,
detached from the charter, let us view it in that light. If a person born in
England removes to Ireland and settles there, he is then no longer represented
in the British parliament, but he and his posterity are and will ever be
subject to the authority of the British parliament: If he removes to Jersey,
Guernsey, or any other parts of the British dominions that send no members to
parliament, he will still be in the same predicament. So that the inhabitants
of the American colonies do in fact enjoy all the liberties and immunities of
natural-born subjects. We are entitled to no greater privileges than those that
are born within the realm, and they can enjoy no other than we do, when they
reside out of it. Thus, it is evident that this clause amounts to no more than
the royal assurance, that we are a part of the British empire are not aliens
but natural-born subjects; and as such bound to obey the supreme power of the
state, and entitled to protection from it. To avoid prolixity I shall not
remark particularly upon other parts of this charter, but observe in general,
that whoever reads it with attention will meet with irresistible evidence in
every part of it, that our being a part of the English dominions, subject to
the English crown, and within the jurisdiction of parliament, were the terms
upon which our ancestors settled this colony, and the very tenures by which
they held their estates.

No lands within the British dominions are perfectly allodial; they are held
mediately or immediately of the King, and upon forfeiture, revert to the crown.
My dear countrymen, you have many of you, been most falsely and wickedly told,
by our patriots, that GreatBritain was meditating a land tax, and seeking to
deprive us of our inheritance; but had all the malice and subtilty of men and
devils been united, a readier method to effect it could not have been devised,
than the late denials of the authority of parliament, and forcible oppositions
to its acts: Yet, this has been planned and executed chiefly by persons of
desperate fortunes.

MASSACHUSETTENSIS. January 16, 1775.
LETTER VII.
To the Inhabitants of the Province of Massachusetts Bay.
IF we carry our researches further back than the emigration of our ancestors,
we shall find many things that reflect light upon the object we are in quest
of. It is immaterial when America was first discovered or taken possession of
by the English. In 1602 one Gosnold landed upon one of the islands, called
Elizabeth-islands, which where so named in honor of Queen Elizabeth, built a
fort and projected a settlement, his men were discouraged, and the project
failed. In 1606 King James granted all the continent from 34 to 45 degrees,
which he divided into two colonies, viz. the southern or Virginia, to certain
merchants at London, the northern or New England to certain merchants at
Plymouth in England. In 1607 some of the patentees of the northern colony began
a settlement at Sogadahoc, but the emigrants were disheartened after the trial
of one winter, and that attempt failed of success. Thus this territory had not
only been granted by the crown for purposes of colonization, which are to
enlarge the empire or dominion of the parent state, and to open new sources of
national wealth, but actual possession had been taken by the grantees, previous
to the emigration of our ancestors, or any grant to them. In 1620 a patent was
granted to the adventurers for the northern colony, incorporating them by the
name of the council for the affairs of New-Plymouth. From this company of
merchants in England, our ancestors derived their title to this territory. The
tract of land called Massachusetts was purchased of this company, by Sir Henry
Roswell and associates, their deed bears date, March 19th, 1627. In 1628 they
obtained a charter of incorporation which I have already remarked upon. The
liberties, privileges and franchises, granted by this charter, do not perhaps
exceed those granted to the city of London and other corporations within the
realm. The legislative power was very confined; it did not even extend to
levying taxes of any kind, that power was however assumed under this charter,
which by law worked a forfeiture, and for this among other things, in the reign
of Charles the Second, the charter was adjudged forfeited. and the franchises
seized into the King's hands. This judgment did not affect our ancestors title
to their lands that were not derived originally from the charter, though
confirmed by it, but by purchase from the council at Plymouth, who held
immediately under the crown. Besides our ancestors had now reduced what before
was a naked right to possession and by persevering through unequalled toils,
hardships and dangers, at the approach of which other emigrants had fainted,
rendered New England a very valuable acquisition both to the crown and nation.
This was highly meritorious, and ought not to be overlooked in adjusting the
present unhappy dispute, but our patriots would deprive us of all the merit,
both to the crown and nation, by severing us from both. After the revolution,
our ancestors petitioned the parliament to restore the charter. A bill for that
purpose passed the house of commons, but went no further. In consequence of
another petition, King William and Queen Mary granted our present charter, for
uniting and incorporating the Massachusetts, New-Plymouth, and several other
territories into one province. More extensive powers of legislation than those
contained in the first charter were become necessary, and were granted. And the
form of the legislature made to approach nearer to the form of the supreme
legislature. The powers of legislation are confined to local or provincial
purposes and further restricted by these words, viz. So as the same he not
repugnant or contrary to the laws of this our realm of England. Our patriots
have made many nice distinctions and curious refinements, to evade the force of
these words, but after all, it is impossible to reconcile them to the idea of
an independent state as it is to reconcile disability to omnipotence. The
provincial power of taxation is also restricted to provincial purposes, and
allowed to be exercised over such only as are inhabitants or proprietors within
the province. I would observe here, that the granting subordinate powers of
legislation, does not abridge or diminish the powers of the higher
legislatures; thus we see corporations in England and the several towns in this
province vested with greater or lesser powers of legislation, without the
parliament, in one case, or the general court in the other, being restrained,
from enacting those very laws, that fall within the jurisdiction of the several
corporations. Had our present charter been conceived in such equivocal terms as
that it might be construed as restraining the authority of parliament, the
uniform usage ever since it passed the seal, would satisfy us that its intent
was different. The parliament in the reign when it was granted, long before and
in every reign since, has been making statutes to extend to the colonies, and
those statutes have been as uniformly submitted to as authoritative, by the
colonies, till within ten or a dozen years. Sometimes acts of parliament have
been made, and sometimes have been repealed in consequence of petitions from
the colonies. The provincial assemblies often refer to acts of parliament in
their own, and have sometimes made acts to aid their execution. It is evident
that it was the intention of their Majesty's, to grant subordinate powers of
legislation, without impairing or diminishing the authority of the supreme
legislature. Had there been any words in the charter, that precluded that
construction, or did the whole taken together contradict it, lawyers would tell
us, that the King was deceived in his grant, and the patentees took no estate
by it, because the crown can neither alienate a part of the British dominions,
nor impair the supreme power of the empire. I have dwelt longer on this subject
than I at first intended, and not by any means done it justice, as to avoid
prolix narratives and tedious deduction, I have omitted perhaps more than I
have adduced, that evinces the truth of the position, that we are a part of the
British dominions, and subject to the authority of parliament. The novelty of
the contrary tenets, will appear by extracting a part of a pamphlet, published
in 1764, by a Boston gentleman, who was then the oracle of the whigs, and whose
profound knowledge in the law and constitution is equalled but by few.

I also lay it down as one of the first principles from whence I intend to
deduce the civil rights of the British colonies, that all of them are subject
to, and dependant on Great Britain; and that therefore as over subordinate
governments, the parliament of GreatBritain has an undoubted power and lawful
authority to make acts for the general good, that by naming them, shall and
ought to be equally binding, as upon the subjects of Great Britain within the
realm. Is there the least difference, as to the consent of the colonists,
whether taxes and impositions are laid on their trade, and other property by
the crown alone, or by the parliament. As it is agreed on all hands, the crown
alone cannot impose them, we should be justifiable in refusing to pay them, but
must and ought to yield obedience to an act of parliament, though erroneous,
till repealed.

It is a maxim, that the King can do no wrong; and every good subject is bound
to believe his King is not inclined to do any. We are blessed with a Prince who
has given abundant demonstrations, that in all his actions, he studies the good
of his people, and the true glory of his crown, which are inseparable. It would
therefore be the highest degree of impudence and disloyalty, to imagine that
the King, at the head of his parliament, could have any but the most pure and
perfect intentions of justice, goodness and truth, that human nature is capable
of. All this I say and believe of the King and parliament, in all their acts;
even in that which so nearly affects the interests of the colonists; and that a
most perfect and ready obedience is to be yielded to it while it remains in
force. The power of parliament is uncontrolable but by themselves, and we must
obey. They only can repeal their own acts. There would be an end of all
government, if one or a number of subjects, or subordinate provinces should
take upon them so far to judge of the justice of an act of parliament, as to
refuse obedience to it. If there was nothing else to restrain such a step,
prudence ought to do it, for forceably resisting the parliament and the King's
laws is high treason. Therefore let the parliament lay what burdens they please
on us, we must, it is our duty to submit and patiently bear them, till they
will be pleased to relieve us.

The Pennsylvania Farmer, who took the lead in explaining away the right of
parliament to raise a revenue in America, speaking of regulating trade, tells
us, that He who considers these provinces as states distinct from the British
empire has very slender notions of justice or of their interest; we are but
parts of a whole, and therefore there must exist a power somewhere to preside
and preserve the connection in due order. This power is lodged in parliament,
and we are as much dependant on Great Britain as a perfectly free people can be
on another. He supposes that we are dependant in some considerable degree upon
Great Britain; and that, that dependence is nevertheless consistent with
perfect freedom.

Having settled this point, let us reflect upon the resolves and proceedings of
our patriots. We often read resolves denying the authority of parliament, which
is the imperial sovereign, gilded over with professions of loyalty to the King,
but the golden leaf is too thin to conceal the treason: It either argues
profound ignorance or hypocritical cunning.

We find many unsuspecting persons prevailed on openly to oppose the execution
of acts of parliament with force and arms. My friends! some of the persons that
beguiled you, could have turned to the chapter, page and section, where such
insurrections are pronounced rebellion, by the law of the land; and had not
their hearts been dead to a sense of justice, and steeled against every feeling
of humanity, they would have timely warned you of your danger. Our patriots
have sent us in pursuit of a mere ignis fatuus, a fascinating glare devoid of
substance; and now when we find ourselves bewildered, with scarce one ray of
hope to raise our sinking spirits, or stay our fainting souls, they conjure up
phantoms more delusive and fleeting, if possible, than that which first led us
astray. They tell us, we are a match for Great Britain. -- The twentieth part
of the strength that Great Britain could exert, were it necessary, is more than
sufficient to crush this defenseless province to atoms, notwithstanding all the
vapouring of the disaffected here and elsewhere. They tell us the army is
disaffected to the service: What pains have our wretched politicians not taken
to attach them to it? The officers conceive no very favorable opinion of the
cause of the whigs, from the obloquy with which their General has been
treated, in return for his humanity, nor from the infamous attempts to seduce
the soldiers from his Majesty's service. The policy of some of our patriots has
been as weak and contemptible as their motives are sordid and malevolent, for
when they found their success, in corrupting the soldiery, did not answer their
expectations, they took pains to attach them firmer to the cause they adhered
to, by preventing the erecting of barracks for their winter quarters, by which
means many contracted diseases, and some lives were lost, from the unwholesome
buildings they were obliged to occupy; and, as though some stimulus was still
wanting, some provocation to prevent human nature revolting in the hour of
battle, they deprived the soldiers of a gratification never denied to the brute
creation, -- straw to ly on. I do not mention this conduct to raise the
resentment of the troops, it has had its effect already, and it is proper you
should know it; nor should I have blotted paper in relating facts so mortifying
to the pride of man, had it not been basely suggested that there would be a
defection should the army take the field. Those are matters of small moment
compared to another, which is the cause they are engaged in. It is no longer a
struggle between whigs and tories, whether these or those shall occupy posts of
honor, or enjoy the emoluments of office, nor is it now whether this or the
other act of parliament shall be repealed. The army is sent here to decide a
question, intimately connected with the honor and interest of the nation, no
less than whether the colonies shall continue a part of, or be for ever
dismembered from the British empire. It is a cause in which no honest American,
can wish our politicians success, though it is devoutly to be wished, that
their discomfiture may be effected without recourse being had to the ultima
ratio, -- the sword. This our wretched situation is but the natural consequence
of denying the authority of parliament and forcibly opposing its acts.

Sometimes we are amused with intimations that Holland, France or Spain will
make a diversion in our savor. -- These, equally with the others, are
suggestions of despair. These powers have colonies of their own, and might not
choose to set a bad example, by encouraging the colonies of any other state to
revolt. The Dutch have too much money in the English funds, and are too much
attached to their money to espouse our quarrel. The French and Spaniards have
not yet forgot the drubbing they received from Great Britain last war; and all
three fear to offend that power which our politicians would persuade us to
despise.

Lastly, they tell us that the people in England will take our part, and
prevent matters from coming to extremity This is their fort, where when driven
from every other post, they fly for refuge.

Alas! my friends, our congresses have stopped up every avenue that leads to
that sanctuary. We hear, by every arrival from England, that it is no longer a
ministerial (if it ever was) but a national cause. My dear countrymen, I deal
plainly with you; I never should forgive myself if I did not. Are there not
eleven regiments in Boston? A respectable fleet in the harbor? Men of war
stationed at every considerable port along the continent? Are there not three
ships of the line sent here, notwithstanding the danger of the winter coast,
with more than the usual compliment of marines? Have not our congresses,
county, provincial and continental, instead of making advances for an
accommodation, bid defiance to Great Britain: -- He that runs may read.

If our politicians will not be persuaded from running against the thick bosses
of the buckler, it is time for us to leave them to their fate, and provide for
the safety of ourselves, our wives, our children, our friends and our country.

I have many things to add, but must now take my leave, for this week, by
submitting to your judgment whether there be not an absolute necessity of
immediately protesting against all traitorous resolves, leagues and
associations, of bodies of men that appear to have acted in a representative
capacity. Had our congresses been accidental or spontaneous meetings, the whole
blame might have rested upon the individuals that composed them, but as they
appear in the character of the peoples delegates, is there not the utmost
danger of the innocent being confounded with the guilty, unless they take care
timely to distinguish themselves?

MASSACHUSETTENSIS. January 23, 1775.
LETTER VIII.
To the Inhabitants of the Province of Massachusetts Bay.
AS the oppugnation to the King in parliament tends manifestly to independance,
and the colonies would soon arrive at that point, did not Great Britain check
them in their career; let us indulge the idea, however extravagant and
romantic, and suppose ourselves for ever separated from the parent state. Let
us suppose Great Britain sinking under the violence of the shock, and
overwhelmed by her ancient hereditary enemies; or what is more probable,
opening new sources of national wealth, to supply the deficiency of that which
used to flow to her through American channels, and perhaps planting more loyal
colonies in the new discovered regions of the south, still retaining her
pre-eminence among the nations, though regardless of (...)

Let us now advert to our own situation: Destitue of British protection, that
impervious barrier, behind which, in perfect security, we have increased to a
degree almost exceeding the bounds of probability, what other Britain could we
look to when in distress? -- What succedaneum does the world afford to make
good the loss? Would not our trade, navigation and fishery, which no nation
dares violate or invade, when distinguished by British colors, become the
sport and prey of the (...) powers of Europe? Would not our maritime towns be
exposed to the pillaging of every piratical enterprise? Are the colonies able
to maintain a fleet, sufficient to afford one idea of security to such (...)
extensive seacoast? Before they can defend themselves against foreign
invasions, they must unite into one empire, otherwise the jarring interests and
opposite propensities, would render the many headed monster in politics
unweildy and inactive. Neither the form or seat of government would be readily
agreed upon; more difficult still would it be to fix upon the person or
persons, to be invested with the imperial authority. There is perhaps as great
a diversity between the tempers and habits of the inhabitants of this province,
and the tempers and habits of the Carolinians, as there subsist between some
different nations; nor need we travel so far, the Rhode-Islanders are as
diverse from the people of Connecticut, as those mentioned before. Most of the
colonies are rivals to each other in trade. Between others there subsist deep
animosities, respecting their boundaries, which have heretofore produced
violent altercations, and the sword of civil war has been more than once
unsheathed, without bringing these disputes to a decision. It is apparent that
so many discordant heterogenous particles could not suddenly unite and
consolidate into one body: It is most probable, that if they were ever united,
the union would be effected by some aspiring genius, putting himself at the
head of the colonists army (for we must suppose a very respectable one indeed
before we are severed from Britain) and taking advantage of the enfeebled,
bleeding and distracted state of the colonies, subjugate the whole to the yoke
of despotism. Human nature is every where the same, and this has often been the
issue of those rebellions that the rightful Prince was unable to subdue. We
need not travel through the states of ancient Greece and Rome, or the more
modern ones in Europe, to pick up the instances, with which the way is strewed;
we have a notable one in our own. So odious and arbitrary was the protectorate
of Cromwell, that when death had delivered them from the dread of the tyrant,
all parties conspired to restore monarchy, and each one strove to be the
foremost in inviting home and placing upon the imperial throne, their exiled
Prince, the son of the same Charles, who, not many years before, had been
murdered on a scaffold: The republicans themselves now rushed to the opposite
extreme, and had Charles the second been as ambitious, as some of his
predecessors were, he might have established in England a power more arbitrary
than the first Charles ever had in contemplation.

Let us now suppose the colonies united and molded into some form of
government. Think one moment of the revenue necessary to support this
government, and to provide for even the appearance of defense. Conceive
yourselves in a manner exhausted by the conflict with Great Britain, now
staggering and sinking under the load of your own taxes, and the weight of your
own government. Consider further, that to render government operative and
salutary, subordination is necessary. This our patriots need not be told of,
and when once they had mounted the steed, and found themselves so well seated
as to run no risk of being thrown from the saddle, the severity of their
discipline to restore subordination, would be in proportion to their former
treachery in destroying it. We have already seen specimens of their tyranny, in
their inhuman treatment of persons guilty of no crime, except that of differing
in sentiment from the whigs. What then must we expect from such scourges of
mankind, when supported by imperial power?

To elude the difficulty resulting from our defenseless situation, we are told
that the colonies would open a free trade with all the world, and all nations
would join in protecting their common mart. A very little reflection will
convince us that this is chimerical. American trade however beneficial to
Great Britain, while she can command it, would be but as a drop of the bucket
or the light dust of the balance, to all the commercial states of Europe:
Besides, were British fleets and armies no longer destined to our protection,
in a very short time France and Spain would recover possession of those
territories, that were torn, reluctant and bleeding from them, in the last war,
by the superior strength of Britain. Our enemies would again extend their line
of fortification, from the northern to the southern shore, and by means of our
late settlements stretching themselves to the confines of Canada, and the
communication opened from one country to the other, we should be exposed to
perpetual incursions from Canadians and savages; but our distress would not end
here, for when once these incursions should be supported by the formidable
armaments of France and Spain, the whole continent would become their easy
prey, and would be parcelled out, Poland like. Recollect the consternation we
were thrown into last war, when Fort-William Henry was taken by the French: It
was apprehended that all New England would be overrun by their conquering
arms: It was even proposed, for our own people to burn and lay waste all the
country west of Connecticut river, to impede the enemies march and prevent
their ravaging the country east of it. This proposal came from no
inconsiderable man. Consider what must really have been our fate, unaided by
Britain last war.

Great Britain aside, what earthly power could stretch out the compassionate
arm to shield us from those powers, that have long beheld us with the sharp,
peircing eyes of avidity, and have heretofore bled freely and expended their
millions to obtain us? Do you suppose their lust of empire is satiated? Or do
you suppose they would scorn to obtain so glorious a prize by an easy conquest?
Or can any be so visionary or impious as to believe that the Father of the
universe will work miracles in favor of rebellion? And after having, by some
unseen arm and mighty power destroyed GreatBritain for us, will in the same
mysterious way defend us against other European powers? Sometimes we are told,
that the colonies may put themselves under the protection of some one foreign
state, but it ought to be considered that to do that, we must throw ourselves
into their power. We can make them no return for protection but by trade, and
of that they can have no assurance, unless we become subject to their laws;
this is evident by our contention with Britain.

Which state would you prefer being annexed to, France, Spain or Holland? I
suppose the latter, as it is a republic; but are you sure that the other powers
of Europe would be idle spectators, content to suffer the Dutch to ingross the
American colonies or their trade? And what figure would the Dutch probably make
in the unequal contest? Their sword has been long since sheathed in commerce.
Those of you that have visited Surinam and seen a Dutch governor dispensing at
discretion his own opinions for law, would not suddenly exchange the English
for Dutch government.

I will subjoin some observations from the Farmer's letters: When the appeal is
made to the sword, highly probable it is, that the punishment will exceed the
offense, and the calamities attending on war outweigh those preceding it. These
considerations of justice and prudence, will always have great influence with
good and wise men. To these reflections it remains to be added, and ought for
ever to be remembered, that resistance in the case of the colonies against
their mother country, is extremely different from the resistance of a people
against their Prince: A nation may change their King or race of Kings, and
retaining their ancient form of government be gainers by changing. Thus
Great Britain, under the illustrious house of Brunswick, a house that seems to
flourish for the happiness of mankind, has found a felicity unknown in the
reigns of the Stewarts. But if once we are separated from our mother country,
what new form of government shall we adopt, or where shall we find another
Britain to supply our loss? Torn from the body to which we are united by
religion, laws, affection, relation, language and commerce, we must bleed at
every vein. In truth, the prosperity of these provinces is founded in their
dependence on Great Britain.

MASSACHUSETTENSIS. January 30, 1775.
LETTER IX.
To the Inhabitants of the Province of Massachusetts Bay.
WHEN we reflect upon the constitutional connection between Great Britain and
the colonies, view the reciprocation of interest, consider that the welfare of
Britain in some measure, and the prosperity of America wholly depends upon that
connection, it is astonishing, indeed almost incredible, that one person should
be found on either side of the atlantic, so base and destitute of every
sentiment of justice, as to attempt to destroy or weaken it. If there are none
such, in the name of Almighty God, let me ask, wherefore is rebellion, that
implacable fiend to society, suffered to rear its ghastly front among us,
blasting with haggard look, each social joy, and embittering every hour?

Rebellion is the most atrocious offense that can be perpetrated by man, save
those which are committed more immediately against the supreme Governor of the
universe, who is the avenger of his own cause. It dissolves the social band,
annihilates the security resulting from law and government; introduces fraud,
violence, rapine, murder, sacrilege, and the long train of evils that riot
uncontrouled in a state of nature. Allegiance and protection are reciprocal.
The subject is bound by the compact to yield obedience to government, and in
return is entitled to protection from it; thus the poor are protected against
the rich, the weak against the strong, the individual against the many, and
this protection is guaranteed to each member, by the whole community; but when
government is laid prostrate, a state of war of all against all commences;
might overcomes right; innocence itself has no security, unless the individual
sequesters himself from his fellowmen, inhabits his own cave, and seeks his own
prey. This is what is called a state of nature. I once thought it chimerical.

The punishment inflicted upon rebels and traitors in all states, bears some
proportion to the aggravated crime. By our law the punishment is, That the
offender be drawn to the gallows, and not be carried or walk; that he be hanged
by the neck, and then cut down alive that his entrails be taken out and burned
while he is yet alive, that his head be cut off, that his body be divided into
four parts, that his head and quarters be at the King's disposal. The
consequences of attainder are forfeiture and corruption of blood.

Forfeiture is twofold, of real and personal estate; by attainder in high
treason a man forfeits to the King all his lands and tenements of inheritance,
whether fee simple or fee tail, and all his rights of entry on lands and
tenements which he had at the time of the offense committed, or at any time
afterward to be for ever vested in the crown. The forfeiture relates back to
the time of the treason being committed, so as to avoid all intermediate sales
and incumberances, even the dower of the wife is forfeited. The natural justice
of forfeiture or confiscation of property, for treason, is founded in this
consideration, that he who has thus violated the fundamental principles of
government, and broken his part of the original contract between King and
people, has abandoned his connections with society, has no longer any right
to those advantages which before belonged to him, purely as a member of the
community, among which social advantages the right of transferring or
transmitting property to others, is one of the chief: Such forfeitures
moreover, whereby his posterity must suffer as well as himself, will help to
restrain a man not only by the sense of his duty and dread of personal
punishment, but also by his passions and natural affections; and will influence
every dependant and relation he has to keep him from offending. 4 Black. 374.
375.

It is remarkable however, that this offense, notwithstanding it is of a
crimson color, and the deepest dye, and its just punishment is not confined to
the person of the offender, but beggars all his family, is sometimes committed
by persons who are not conscious of guilt: Sometimes they are ignorant of the
law, and do not foresee the evils they bring upon society; at others, they are
induced to think that their cause is founded in the eternal principles of
justice and truth, that they are only making an appeal to heaven, and may
justly expect its decree in their favor. Doubtless many of the rebels in the
year 1745 were buoyed up with such sentiments, nevertheless they were cut down
like grass before the scythe of the mower; the gibbet and scaffold received
those that the sword, wearied with destroying, had spared; and what loyalist
shed one pitying tear over their graves? They were incorrigible rebels, and
deserved their fate. The community is in less danger when the disaffected
attempt to excite a rebellion against the person of the Prince, than when
government itself is the object, because in the former case the questions are
few, simple, and their solutions obvious, the fatal consequences more apparent,
and the loyal people more alert to suppress it in embryo; whereas, in the
latter, a hundred rights of the people, inconsistent with government, and as
many grievances, destitute of foundation, the mere creatures of distempered
brains, are portrayed in the liveliest colors, and serve as bugbears to
affright from their duty, or as decoys to allure the ignorant, the credulous
and the unwary to their destruction. Their suspicions are drowned in the
perpetual roar for liberty and country; and even the professions of allegiance
to the person of the King, are improved as means to subvert his government.

In mentioning high treason in the course of these papers, I may not always
have expressed myself with the precision of a lawyer; they have a language
peculiar to themselves: I have examined their books, and beg leave to lay
before you some further extracts which deserve your attention: 'To levy war
against the King, was high treason by the common law, 3 inst. 9. This is also
declared to be high treason by the stat. of 25 Ed. 3. c. 2. and by the law of
this province. 8 W. 3. c. 5. -- Assembling in warlike array, against a statute,
is levying war against the King, 1 Hale 133. So to destroy any trade generally,
146. Riding with banners displayed, or forming into companies -- or being
furnished with military officers -- or armed with military weapons, as swords,
guns, etc. any of these circumstances carries the speciem belli, and will
support an indictment for high treason in levying war, 150. -- An insurrection
to raise the price of servants wages was held to be an overt act of this
species of treason, because this was done in defiance of the statute of
laborers, it was done in defiance of the King's authority, 5 Bac. 117 cites 3
inst. 10. -- Every assembling of a number of men in a warlike manner, with a
design to redress any public grievance, is likewise an overt act of this
species of treason, because this being an attempt to do that by private
authority, which only ought to be done by the King's authority, is an invasion
of the prerogative, 5 Bac. 117. cites 3 inst. 9. Ha. p. c. 14. Kel. 71. Sid.
358. 1. Hawk. 37. -- Every assembling of a number of men in a warlike manner,
with an intention to reform the government, or the law, is an overt act of this
species of treason, 5 Bac. 117. cites 3 inst. 9. 10. Poph. 122 Kel. 76. 7. 1
Hawk. 37. -- Levying war may be by taking arms, not only to dethrone the King,
but under pretense to reform religion, or the laws, or to remove evil
counselors, or other grievances, whether real or pretended. 4 Black. 81.
Foster 211. -- If any levy war to expulse strangers -- to deliver men out of
prison, -- to remove counselors, -- or against any statute -- or to any other
end, pretending reformation of their own heads, without warrant, this is
levying war against the King, because they take upon them royal authority which
is against the King, 3 inst. 9. -- If three, four or more, rise to pull down an
enclosure, this is a riot; but if they had risen of purpose to alter religion
established within the realm, or laws, or to go from town to town generally,
and cast down enclosures, this is a levying of war (though there be no great
number of conspirators) within the purview of this statute; because the
pretense is public and general, and not private in particular, 3 inst. 9.
Foster 211. -- If any with strength and weapons, invasive and defensive, do
hold and defend a castle or fort against the King and his power, this is
levying of war against the King, 3 inst. 10. Foster 219. 1 Hale 146. 296. -- It
was resolved by all the judges of England in the reign of Henry the 8th, that
an insurrection against the statute of laborers, for the inhancing of salaries
and wages, was a levying of war against the King, because it was generally
against the King's law, and the offenders took upon them the reformation
thereof, which subjects by gathering of power, ought not to do, 3 inst. 10. --
All risings in order to effect innovations of a public and general concern, by
an armed force, are, in construction of law, high treason within the clause of
levying war. -- For though they are not levelled at the person of the King,
they are against his royal Majesty. And besides, they have a direct tendency to
dissolve all the bonds of society, and to destroy all property, and all
government too, by numbers and an armed force, Foster 211. In Bensteads case,
Cro. car. 593. At a conference of all the justices and barons, it was resolved,
that going to Lambeth house, in warlike manner, to surprise the Archbishop, who
was a privy-counsellor (it being with drums and a multitude) to the number of
three hundred persons, was treason; upon which Foster (page 212) observes, that
if it did appear by the libel (which he says was previously posted up at the
exchange, exhorting the apprentices to rise and sack the Bishop's house, upon
the Monday following) or by the cry of the rabbie, at Lambeth house, that the
attempt was made on account of measures the King had taken, or was then taking
at the instigation, as they imagined, of the Archbishop, and that the rabble
had deliberately and upon a public invitation, attempted by numbers and open
force, to take a severe revenge upon the privy councellor for the measures the
Sovereign had taken or was pursuing, the grounds and reasons of the resolutions
would be sufficiently explained, without taking that little circumstance of the
drum into the case: -- And he delivers as his opinion (page 208) that no great
stress can be laid on that distinction taken by Ld. C. J. Hale, between an
insurrection with, and one without the appearance of an army formed under
leaders and provided with military weapons, and with drums, colors, etc. and
says, the want of these circumstances weighed nothing with the court in the
cases of Damaree and Purchase, but that it was supplied by the number of the
insurgents: That they were provided with axes, crows and such like tools, furor
arma ministrat; and adds (page 208) the true criterion in all these cases, is,
quo animo, did the parties assemble, whether on account of some private quarrel
or (page 211) to effect innovations of a public and general concern, by an
armed force. Upon the case of Damaree and Purchase (reported 8 stat. in. 218.
to 285) Judge Foster observes (page 215) that since the meeting houses of
protestant dissenters are, by the toleration act taken under protection of the
law, the insurrection in the present case (being to pull down all dissenting
protestant meeting houses) was to be considered as a public declaration of the
rabble against that act. and an attempt to render it ineffectual by numbers and
open force.

If there be a conspiracy to levy war, and afterward war is levied, the
conspiracy is, in every one of the conspirators, an overt act of this species
of treason, for there can be no accessory in high treason, 5 Bac. 115. cites 3
inst. 9. 10. 138 Hales P. C. 14. Kel 19. 1 Hawk. 38. -- A compassing or
conspiracy to levy war is no treason, for there must be a levying of war in
facto. But if many conspire to levy war, and some of them do levy the same
according to the conspiracy, this is high treason in all, for in treason all
are principals, and war is levied, 3 inst. 9. Foster 213.

The painful task of applying the above rules of law to the several
transactions that we have been eye witnesses to, will never be mine. Let me
however entreat you, to make the application in your own minds; and those of
you that have continued hitherto faithful among the faithless, Abdiel like, to
persevere in your integrity, and those of you that have been already ensnared
by the accursed wiles of designing men, to cast yourselves immediately upon
that mercy, so conspicuous through the British constitution, and which is the
brightest jewel in the imperial diadem.

MASSACHUSETTENSIS. February 6, 1775.
LETTER X.
To the Inhabitants of the Province of Massachusetts Bay.
I Offered to your consideration, last week, a few extracts from the law books,
to enable those that have been but little conversant with the law of the land,
to form a judgment, and determine for themselves, whether any have been so far
beguiled and seduced from their allegiance, as to commit the most aggravated
offense against society, -- high treason. The whigs reply, riots and
insurrections are frequent in England, the land from which we sprang; we are
bone of their bone, and flesh of their flesh: -- Granted; but at the same time
be it remembered, that in England the executive is commonly able and willing to
suppress insurrections, the judiciary to distribute impartial justice, and the
legislative power to aid and strengthen the two former if necessary; and
whenever these have proved ineffectual to allay intestine commotions, war, with
its concomitant horrors, have passed through the land, marking their rout with
blood: The bigger part of Britain has at some period or other, within the reach
of history, been forfeited to the crown, by the rebellion of its proprietors.

Let us now take a view of American grievances, and try, by the sure touchstone
of reason and the constitution, whether there be any act or acts, on the part
of the King or parliament, that will justify the whigs even in foro
conscientioe, in thus forcibly opposing their government. Will the alteration
of the mode of appointing one branch of our provincial legislature furnish so
much as an excuse for it, considering that our politicians, by their intrigues
and machinations, had rendered the assembly incapable of answering the purpose
of government, which is protection, and our charter was become as inefficacious
as an old ballad; or can a plea of justification be founded on the parliament's
giving us an exact transcript of English laws for returning jurors, when our
own were insufficient to afford compensation to the injured, to suppress
seditions, or even to restrain rebellion? It has been heretofore observed, that
each member of the community is entitled to protection; for this he pays taxes,
for this he relinquishes his natural right of revenging injuries and redressing
wrongs, and for this the sword of justice is placed in the hands of the
magistrate. It is notorious that the whigs had usurped the power of the
province in a great measure, and exercised it by revenging themselves on their
opponents, or in compelling them to inlist under their banners. Recollect the
frequency of mobs and riots, the invasions and demolitions of dwelling-houses
and other property, the personal abuse, and frequent necessity of persons
abandoning their habitations, the taking sanctuary on board men of war, or at
the castle, previous to the regulating bill. Consider that these sufferers were
loyal subjects, violators of no law, that many of them were crown officers, and
were thus persecuted for no other offense than that of executing the King's
law. Consider, further, that if any of the sufferers sought redress in a court
of law, he had the whole whig interest to combat, they gathered like a cloud
and hovered like harpies round the seat of justice, until the suitor was either
condemned to pay cost to his antagonist, or recovered so small damages, as that
they were swallowed up in his own. Consider further, that these riots were not
the accidental or spontaneous risings of the populace, but the result of the
deliberations and mature councils of the whigs, and were sometimes headed and
led to action by their principals. Consider further, that the general assembly
lent no aid to the executive power. Weigh these things, my friends, and doubt
if you can, whether the act for regulating our government did not flow from the
parental tenderness of the British councils, to enable us to recover from
anarchy, without Britain being driven to the necessity of inflicting
punishment, which is her strange work. Having taken this cursory view of the
convulsed state of the province, let us advert to our charter form of
government, and we shall find its distributions of power to have been so
preposterous as to render it next to impossible for the province to recover by
its own strength. The council was elective annually by the house, liable to the
negative of the chair, and the chair restrained from acting even in the
executive department, without the concurrence of the board. The political
struggle is often between the governor and the house, and it is a maxim with
politicians, that he that is not for us is against us: Accordingly when party
run high, if a counselor adhered to the governor, the house refused to elect
him the next year; if he adhered to the house the governor negatived him; if he
trimmed his bark so as to steer a middle course between Scylla and Charybdis,
he was in danger of suffering more by the neglect of both parties, than of
being wrecked but on one.

In moderate times this province has been happy under our charter form of
government, but when the political storm arose, its original defect became
apparent: We have sometimes seen half a dozen sail of tory navigation unable,
on an election day, to pass the bar formed by the flux and reflux of the tides
at the entrance of the harbor, and as many whiggish ones stranded the next
morning on Governor's Island. The whigs took the lead in this game, and
therefore I think the blame ought to rest upon them, though the tables were
turned upon them in the sequel. A slender acquaintance with human nature will
inform, experience has evinced, that a body of men thus constituted, are not to
be depended upon to act that vigorous, intrepid and decisive part, which the
emergency of the late times required, and which might have proved the salvation
of the province. In short, the board which was intended to moderate between the
governor and the house, or perhaps rather to support the former, was incapable
of doing either by its original constitution. By the regulating act the members
of the board are appointed by the King in the council, and are not liable even
to the suspension of the governor; their commissions are durante been placito,
and they are therefore far from independance. The infant state of the colonies
does not admit of a peerage, nor perhaps of any third branch of legislature
wholly independent. In most of the colonies the council is appointed by
mandamus, and the members are moreover liable to be suspended by the governor,
by which means they are more dependant than those appointed according to the
regulating act, but no inconvenience arises from that mode of appointment. Long
experience has evinced its utility. By this statute extraordinary powers are
devolved upon the chair, to enable the governor to maintain his authority, and
to oppose with vigor the daring spirit of independance, so manifest in the
whigs. Townmeetings are restrained to prevent their passing traitorous
resolves. Had these and many other innovations contained in this act, been made
in moderate times, when due reverence was yielded to the magistrate, and
obedience to the law, they might have been called grievances; but we have no
reason to think, that had the situation of the province been such that this
statute would ever have had an existence -- nor have we any reason to doubt,
but that it will be repealed, in whole or part, should our present form of
government be found by experience to be productive of rapine or oppression. It
is impossible that the King, lords or commons could have any sinister views in
regulating the government of this province. Sometimes we are told that charters
are sacred: However sacred, they are forfeited through negligence or abuse of
their franchises, in which cases the law judges that the body politic has
broken the condition upon which it was incorporated.

There are many instances of the negligence and abuse that work the forfeiture
of charters delineated in law books. They also tell us that all charters may be
vacated by act of parliament. Had the form of our provincial legislature been
established by act of parliament, that act might have been constitutionally and
equitably repealed, when it was found to be incapable of answering the end of
its institution. Stronger still is the present case, where the form of
government was established by one branch of the legislature only, viz. the
King, and all three join in the revocation. This act was however a fatal stroke
to the ambitious views of our republican patriots. The monarchial part of the
constitution was so guarded by it as to be no longer vulnerable by their
shafts, and all their fancied greatness vanished like the baseless fabric of a
vision. Many that had been long striving to attain a seat at the board, with
their faces thitherward, beheld, with infinite regret, their competitors
advanced to the honors they aspired to themselves. These disappointed,
ambitious and envious men instill the poison of disaffection into the minds of
the lower classes, and as soon as they are properly impregnated, exclaim, the
people never will submit to it. They now would urge them into certain ruin, to
prevent the execution of an act of parliament, designed and calculated to
restore peace and harmony to the province, and to recall that happy state, when
year rolled round on year, in a continual increase of our felicity.

The Quebec bill is another capital grievance, because the Canadians are
tolerated in the enjoyment of their religion, which they were entitled to, by
an article of capitulation, when they submitted to the British arms. This
toleration is not an exclusion of the protestant religion, which is established
in every part of the empire, as firmly as civil polity can establish it. It is
a strange kind of reasoning to argue, from the French inhabitants of the
conquered province of Quebec, being tolerated in the enjoyment of the Roman
Catholic religion in which they were educated, and in which alone they repose
their hope of eternal salvation that therefore government intends to deprive us
of the enjoyment of the protestant religion in which alone we believe,
especially as the political interests of Britain depend upon protestant
connexions, and the King's being a protestant himself is an indispensable
condition of his wearing the crown. This circumstance however served admirably
for a fresh stimulus, and was eagerly grasped by the disaffected of all orders.
It added pathos to pulpit oratory. We often see resolves and seditious letters
interspersed with popery here and there in Italics. If any of the clergy have
endeavored, from this circumstance, to alarm their too credulous audiences,
with an apprehension that their religious privileges were in danger, thereby to
excite them to take up arms, we must lament the depravity of the best of men;
but human nature stands apalled when we reflect upon the aggravated guilt of
prostituting our holy religion to the accursed purposes of treason and
rebellion. As to our lay politicians, I have long since ceased to wonder at any
thing in them; but it may be observed that there is no surer mark of a bad
cause than for its advocates to recur to such pitiful shifts to support it.
This instance plainly indicates that their sole dependence is in preventing the
passions subsiding, and cool reason resuming its seat. It is a mark of their
shrewdness however, for whenever reason shall resume its seat, the political
cheat will be detected, stand confessed in its native turpitude, and the
political knave be branded with marks of infamy adequate, if possible, to the
enormity of his crimes.

MASSACHUSETTENSIS. February 13, 1775.
LETTER XI.
To the Inhabitants of the Province of Massachusetts Bay.
IT would be an endless task to remark minutely upon each of the fancied
grievances, that swarm and cluster, fill and deform the American chronicles. An
adeptness at discovering grievances, has lately been one of the principal
recommendations to public notice and popular applause. We have had genuises
selected for that purpose, called committees upon grievances; a sagacious set
they were, and discovered a multitude before it was known that they themselves
were the greatest grievances that the country was infested with. The case is
shortly this, the whigs suppose the colonies to be separate or distinct states;
having fixed this opinion in their minds they are at no loss for grievances.
Could I agree with them in their first principle, I should acquiesce in many of
their deductions; for in that case every act of parliament extending to the
colonies, and every movement of the crown to carry them into execution, would
be really grievances, however wise and salutary they might be in themselves, as
they would be exertions of a power that we were not constitutionally subject
to, and would deserve the name of usurpation and tyranny; but deprived of this
their corner stone, the terrible fabric of grievances vanishes like castles
raised by enchantment, and leaves the wondering spectator amazed and confounded
at the deception. He suspects himself to have but just awoke from sleep, or
recovered from a trance, and that the formidable spectre that had froze him
with horror, was no more than the creature of a vision, or the delusion of a
dream.

Upon this point, whether the colonies are distinct states or not, our patriots
have rashly tendered GreatBritain an issue, against every principle of law and
constitution, against reason and common prudence. There is no arbiter between
us but the sword, and that the decision of that tribunal will be against us,
reason foresees, as plainly as it can discover any event that lies in the womb
of futurity. No person, unless actuated by ambition, pride, malice, envy, or a
malignant combination of the whole that verges toward madness, and hurries the
man away from himself, would wage war upon such unequal terms. No honest man
would engage himself, much less plunge his country into the calamities of a war
upon equal terms, without first settling with his conscience, in the retired
moments of reflection, the important question respecting the justice of his
cause. To do this, we must hear and weigh everything that is fairly adduced, on
either side of the question, with equal attention and care; a disposition to
drink in with avidity, what favors our hypothesis, and to reject with disgust
whatever contravenes it, is an infallible mark of a narrow, selfish mind: In
matters of small moment such obstinacy is weakness and folly, in important
ones, fatal madness. There are many among us that have devoted themselves to
the slavish dominion of prejudice, indeed the more liberal have seldom had an
opportunity of bringing the question to a fair examen. The eloquence of the
bar, the desk and the senate, the charms of poetry, the expressions of
painting, sculpture and statuary have conspired to fix and rivet ideas of
independance upon the mind of the colonists. The overwhelming torrent supplied
from so many fountains rolled on with increasing rapidity and violence, till it
became superior to all restraint. It was the reign of passion; the small, still
voice of reason was refused audience. I have observed that the press was
heretofore open to but one side of the question, which has given offense to a
writer in Edes and Gill's paper, under the signature of Novanglus, to whom I
have many things to say. I would at present ask him, if the convention of
committees for the county of Worcester in recommending to the inhabitants of
that county not to take news papers published by two of the printers in this
town, and two at New York, have not affected to be licensers of the press? And
whether, by proscribing these printers, and endeavoring to deprive them of a
livelihood, they have not manifested an illiberal, bigoted, arbitrary,
malevolent disposition? And whether, by thus attempting to destroy the liberty
of the press, they have not betrayed a consciousness of the badness of their
cause?

Our warriors tell us, that the parliament shall be permitted to legislate for
the purposes of regulating trade, but the parliament has most unrighteously
asserted, that it had, has, and of right ought to have, full power and
authority to make laws and statutes of sufficient force and validity to bind
the colonies in all cases whatever, that this claim is without any
qualification or restriction, is an innovation, and inconsistent with liberty.
Let us heartily enquire into these three observations, upon the statute
declaratory of the authority of parliament. As to its universality, it is true
there are no exceptions expressed, but their is no general rule without
exceptions, expressed or implied.

The implied ones in this case are obvious. It is evident that the intent and
meaning of this act, was to assert the supremacy of parliament in the colonies,
that is, that its constitutional authority to make laws and statutes binding
upon the colonies, is, and ever had been as ample, as it is to make laws
binding upon the realm. No one that reads the declaratory statute, not even
prejudice itself, can suppose that the parliament meant to assert thereby a
right or power to deprive the colonists of their lives, to enslave them, or to
make any law respecting the colonies, that would not be constitutional, were it
made respecting Great Britain. By an act of parliament passed in the year 1650,
it was declared concerning the colonies and plantations in America, that they
had ever since the planting thereof been and ought to be subject to such laws,
orders and regulations, as are or shall be made by the parliament of England.
This declaration though differing in expression, is the same in substance with
the other. Our House of representatives, in their dispute with Governor
Hutchinson, concerning the supremacy of parliament, say, It is difficult, if
possible, to draw a line of distinction between the universal authority of
parliament over the colonies and no authority at all.

The declaratory statute was intended more especially to assert the right of
parliament, to make laws and statutes for raising a revenue in America, lest
the repeal of the stamp act might be urged as a disclaimer of the right. Let us
now enquire whether a power to raise a revenue be not the inherent, unalienable
right of the supreme legislative of every well-regulated state, where the
hereditary revenue of the crown, or established revenues of the state are
insufficient of themselves; and whether that power be not necessarily
coextensive with the power of legislation, or rather necessarily implied in it.

The end or design of government, as has been already observed, is the security
of the people from internal violence and rapacity, and from foreign invasion.
The supreme power of a state must necessarily be so extensive and ample as to
answer those purposes, otherwise it is constituted in vain, and degenerates
into empty parade and mere ostentatious pageantry. These purposes cannot be
answered without a power to raise a revenue, for without it neither the laws
can be executed nor the state defended. This revenue ought in national concerns
to be apportioned throughout the whole empire according to the abilities of the
several parts, as the claim of each to protection, is equal; a refusal to yield
the former is as unjust as the withholding of the latter. Were any part of an
empire exempt from contributing their proportionable part of the revenue
necessary for the whole, such exemption would be manifest injustice to the rest
of the empire, as it must of course bear more than its proportion of the public
burden, and it would amount to an additional tax. If the proportion of each
part was to be determined only by itself in a separate legislature, it would
not only involve in it the absurdity of imperium in imperio, but the perpetual
contention arising from the predominant principle of self-interest in each,
without having any common arbiter between them, would render the disjointed,
discordant, torn and dismembered state incapable of collecting or conducting
its force and energy for the preservation of the whole, as emergencies might
require. A government thus constituted would contain the seeds of dissolution
in its first principles, and must soon destroy itself.

I have already shown that by your first charter, his province was to be
subject to taxation after the lapse of twenty-one years, and that the authority
of parliament to impose such taxes was claimed so early as the year 1642.

In the patent for Pennsylvania, which is now in force, there is this clause,
And further our pleasure is, and by these presents, for us etc. we do covenant
and grant to and with the said William Penn, etc. that we, etc. shall at no
time hereafter set or make, or cause to be set, any imposition, custom or other
taxation, or rate or contribution whatsoever in and upon the dwellers and
inhabitants of the aforesaid province, for their lands, tenements, goods or
chattels within the said province, or in and upon any goods or merchandise
within the said province, to be laden or unladen within the ports or harbors
of the said province, unless the same be with the consent of the proprietors,
chief governor or assembly, or by act of parliament.

These are stubborn facts, they are incapable of being winked out of existence,
how much soever we may be disposed to shut our eyes upon them. They prove that
the claim of a right to raise a revenue in the colonies, exclusive of the
grants of their own assemblies, is coeval with the colonies themselves. I shall
next show thas there has been an actual, uninterrupted exercise of that right
by the parliament time immemorial.

MASSACHUSETTENSIS. February 20, 1775.
LETTER XII.
To the Inhabitants of the Province of Massachusetts Bay.
BY an act of parliament made in the twenty-fifth year of the reign of Charles
the second, duties are laid upon goods and merchandise of various kinds,
exported from the colonies to foreign countries, or carried from one colony to
another, payable on exportation: I will recite a part of it, viz. For so much
of the said commodities as shall be laden and put on board such ship or vessel,
that is to say, for sugar white the hundred weight, five shillings; and brown
and Muscovados the hundred weight, one shilling and six pence; tobacco the
pound, one penny; cotton wool the pound, one halfpenny; for indigo two pence;
ginger the hundred weight, one shilling; logwood the hundred weight, five
pounds; fustic and all other dying wood the hundred weight, six pence; cocoa
the pound, one penny, to be levied, collected and paid at such places and to
such collectors and other officers as shall be appointed in the respective
plantations, to collect, levy and receive the same before the landing thereof,
and under such penalties both to the officers and upon the goods, as for
non-payment of, or defrauding his Majesty of his customs in England. And for
the better collecting of the several rates and duties imposed by this act, be
it enacted that this whole business shall be ordered and managed, and the
several duties hereby imposed shall be caused to be levied by the commissioners
of the customs in England, by and under the authority of the lord treasurer of
England, or commissioners of the treasury.

It is apparent from the reasoning of this statute that these duties were
imposed for the sole purpose of revenue. There has lately been a most ingenious
play upon the words and expressions, tax, revenue, purpose of raising a
revenue, sole purpose of raising a revenue express purpose of raising a
revenue, as though their being inserted in, or left out of a statute, would
make any essential difference in the statute. This is mere playing with words;
for if, from the whole tenor of the act, it is evident that the intent of the
legislature was to tax, rather than to regulate the trade, by imposing duties
on goods and merchandise, it is to all intents and purposes an instance of
taxation, be the form of words, in which the statute is conceived, what it
will. That such was the intent of the legislature, in this instance, any one
that will take the pains to read it will be convinced. There have been diverse
alterations made in this by subsequent statutes, but some of the above taxes
remain, and are collected and paid in the colonies to this day. By an act of
the 7th and 8th of William and Mary it is enacted, that every seaman whatsoever
that shall serve his Majesty, or any other person whatever in any of his
Majesty's ships or vessels whatsoever, belonging or to belong to any subjects
of England, or any other his Majesty's dominions, shall allow, and there shall
be paid out of the wages of every such seaman, to grow due for such his
service, six pence per annum for the better support of the said hospital, and
to augment the revenue thereof. This tax was imposed in the reign of King
William the third, of blessed memory, and is still levied in the colonies. It
would require a volume to recite or minutely to remark upon all the revenue
acts that relate to America. We find them in many reigns, imposing new duties,
taking of, or reducing, old ones, and making provision for their collection, or
new appropriations of them. By an act of the 7th and 8th of William and Mary,
entitled an act for preventing frauds and regulating abuses in the plantations.
all former acts respecting the plantations are renewed, and all ships and
vessels coming into any port here, are liable to the same regulations and
restrictions as ships in the ports in England are liable to; and enacts That
the officers for collecting and managing his Majesty's revenue, and inspecting
the plantation trade in many of the said plantations, shall have the same
powers and authority for visiting and searching of ships and taking their
entries, and for seizing, or securing or bringing on shore any of the goods
prohibited to be imported or exported into or out of any of the said colonies
and plantations, or for which any duties are payable or ought to be paid by any
of the before mentioned acts as are provided for the officers of the customs in
England.

The act of the 9th of Queen Ann, for establishing a post office, gives this
reason for its establishment, and for laying taxes thereby imposed on the
carriage of letters in Great Britain and Ireland, the colonies and plantations
in North America and the West Indies, and all other his Majesty's dominions and
territories, that the business may be done in such manner as may be most
beneficial to the people of these kingdoms, and her Majesty may be supplied,
and the revenue arising by the said office, better improved, settled and
secured to her Majesty, her heirs and successors. The celebrated patriot, Dr.
Franklin, was till lately one of the principal collectors of it. The merit in
putting the post office in America upon such a footing as to yield a large
revenue to the crown, is principally ascribed to him by the whigs. I would not
wish to detract from the real merit of that gentleman, but had a tory been half
to assiduous in increasing the American revenue, Novanglus would have wrote
parricide at the end of his name. By an act of the sixth of George the second,
a duty is laid on all foreign rum, melasses, syrups, sugars and paneles, to be
raised, levied, collected and paid unto and for the use of his Majesty, his
heirs and successors. The preamble of an act of the fourth of his present
Majesty declares, that ' it is just and necessary that a revenue in America for
defraying the expenses of defending, protecting and securing the same, etc.' by
which act duties are laid upon foreign sugars, coffee, Madeira wine; upon
Portugal, Spanish and all other wine (except French wine) imported from
Great Britain; upon silks, bengals, stuffs, calico, linen cloth, cambrick and
lawn imported from particular places.

Thus, my friends, it is evident, that the parliament has been in the actual,
uninterrupted use and exercise of the right claimed by them, to raise a revenue
in America from a period more remote than the grant of the present charter, to
this day. These revenue acts have never been called unconstitutional till very
lately, Both whigs and tories acknowledged them to be constitutional. In 1764
Governor Bernard wrote and transmitted to his friends, his polity alluded to,
and in part recited by Novanglus, wherein he asserts the right or authority of
the parliament to tax the colonies. Mr. Otis, whose patriotism, sound policy,
profound learning, integrity and honor, is mentioned in strong terms by
Novanglus in the self-same year, in a pamphlet which he published to the whole
world, asserts the right or authority of parliament to tax the colonies as
roundly as ever Governor Bernard did, which I shall have occasion to take an
extract from hereafter. Mr. Otis was at that time the most popular man in the
province, and continued his popularity many years afterward.

Is it not a most astonishing instance of caprice, or infatuation, that a
province, torn from its (...), should be precipitating itself into a (...) with
GreatBritain because the British parliament asserts its right of raising a
revenue in America, (...) as the claim of that right is as ancient as the
colonies themselves, and there is at present no grievous exercise of it? The
parliament's refusing to repeal the tea act is the ostensible foundation of our
quarrel. If we ask the whigs whether the pitiful three penny duty upon a
luxurious unwholesome, foreign commodity gives just occasion for the
opposition. They tell us it is the precedent they are contending about,
insinuating that it is an innovation. But this ground is not tenable, for a
total repeal of the tea-act would not serve us upon the score of precedents.
They are numerous without this. The whigs have been extremely partial
respecting tea. Poor tea has been made the shibboleth of party, while melasses,
wine, coffee, indigo, etc. etc. have been unmolested. A person that drinks
New England rum distilled from melasses subject to a like duty, is equally
deserving of a coat of tar and feathers with him that drinks tea. A coffee
drinker is as culpable as either, viewed in a political light. But I say our
patriots, if the British parliament may take a penny from us without our
consent they may a pound, and so on, till they have filched away all our
property. This incessant incantation operates like a spell or charm, and checks
the efforts of loyalty in many an honest breast. Let us give it its full
weight: Do they mean that if the parliament has a right to raise a revenue of
one penny on the colonies, that they must therefore have a right to wrest from
us all our property? If this be their meaning, I deny their deduction; for the
supreme legislature can have no right to tax any part of the empire to a
greater amount than its just and equitable proportion of the necessary,
national expense. This is a line drawn by the constitution itself. Do they
mean, that if we admit that the parliament may constitutionally raise one penny
upon us for the purposes of revenue, they will probably proceed from light to
heavy taxes, till their impositions become grievous and intolerable? This
amounts to no more than a denial of the right lest it should be abused. But an
argument drawn from the actual abuse of a power, will not conclude to the
illegality of such power, much less will an argument drawn from a capability of
its being abused. If it would, we might readily argue away all power that man
is entrusted with. I will admit that a power of taxation is more liable to
abuse than legislation seperately considered; and it would give me pleasure to
see some other line drawn, some other barrier erected than what the
constitution has already done, if it be possible, whereby the constitutional
authority of the supreme legislature might be preserved entire, and America be
guaranteed in every right and exemption, consistent with her subordination and
dependence. But this can only be done by parliament. I repeat I am no advocate
for a land tax or any other kind of internal tax, nor do I think we were in any
danger of them; I have not been able to discover one symptom of any (...)
intention in the parliament since the repeal of the stamp act. Indeed the
principal speakers of the majority that repealed the stamp act drew the line
for us, between internal and external taxation, and I think we ought, in honor,
justice and good policy to have acquiesced therein, at least until there was
some burdensome exercise of taxation. For there is but little danger from the
latter, that is from duties laid upon trade, as any grievous restriction or
imposition on American trade would be sensibly felt by the British; and I think
with Dr. Franklin, that they (the British nation) have a natural and equitable
right to some toll or duty upon merchandises carried through that part of their
dominions, viz. the American seas, toward defraying the expense they are at in
ships to maintain the safety of that carriage. These were his words in his
examination at the bar of the house, in 1765. Sed tempora mutantur et nos
mutamur in illis. Before we appeal to heaven for the justice of our cause, we
ought to determine with ourselves, some other questions, whether America is not
obliged in equity to contribute something toward the national defense: Whether
that the present American revenue, amounts to our proportion: And whether we
can with any tolerable grace, accuse Great Britain of injustice in imposing the
late duties, when our Assemblies were previously called upon, and refused to
make any provision for themselves. These, with several imaginary grievances,
not yet particularly remarked upon, I shall consider in reviewing the
publications of Novanglus; a performance which, though not destitute of
ingenuity, I read with a mixture of grief and indignation, as it seems to be
calculated to blow up every spark of animosity, and to kindle such a flame, as
must inevitably consume a great part of this once happy province, before it can
be extinguished.

MASSACHUSETTENSIS. February 27, 1775.
LETTER XIII.
To the Inhabitants of the Province of Massachusetts Bay.
NOVANGLUS and all others have an indisputable right to publish their
sentiments and opinions to the world, provided they conform to truth, decenry
and the municipal laws of the society of which they are members. He has wrote
with a professed design of exposing the errors and sophistry which he supposes
are frequent in my publications: His design is so far laudable, and I intend to
correct them wherever he convinces me there is an instance of either. I have no
objection to the minutest disquisition; contradiction and disputation, like the
collision of (...) and steel, often strike out new light; the bare opinions of
either of us, unaccompanied by the grounds and reasons upon which they were
formed, must be considered only as propositions made to the reader for him to
adopt or reject as his own reason may judge, or feelings dictate. A large
proportion of the labors of Novanglus consist in denials of my allegations in
matters of such public notoriety, as that no reply is necessary: He has
alleged many things destitute of foundation; those that affect the main object
of our pursuit but remotely, if at all, I shall pass by without particular
remark; others, of a more interesting nature, I shall review minutely. After
some general observations upon Massachusettensis, he slides into a most
virulent attack upon particular persons, by names, with such incomparable ease,
that shows him to be a great proficient in the modern art of detraction and
calumny. He accuses the late Governor Shirley, Governor Hutchinson, the late
Lieutenant Governor Oliver, the late Judge Russell, Mr. Paxton, and Brigadier
Ruggles, of a conspiracy to enslave their country. The charge is high colored;
if it be just, they merit the epithets dealt about so indiscriminately, of
enemies to their country; if it be groundless, Novanglus has acted the part of
an assassin, in thus attempting to destroy the reputation of the living, and of
something worse than an assassin, in entering those hallowed mansions, where
the wicked commonly cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest, to disturb
the repose of the dead. That the charge is groundless respecting Governor
Bernard, Governor Hutchinson, and the late Lieutenant Governor, I dare assert,
because they have been acquitted of it in such a manner as every good citizen
must acquiesce in. Our house of representatives, acting as the grand inquest of
the province, presented them before the King in council, and after a full
hearing they were acquitted with honor, and the several impeachments dismissed,
as groundless, vexatious and scandalous. The accusation of the house was
similar to this of Novanglus; the court they chose to institute their suit in,
was of competent and high jurisdiction, and its decision final. This is a
sufficient answer to the state charges made by this writer, so far as they
respect the Governors Bernard, Hutchinson and Oliver, whom he accuses as
principals; and it is a general rule, that if the principal be innocent, the
accessory cannot be guilty. A determination of a constitutional arbiter ought
to seal up the lips of even prejudice itself in silence, otherwise litigation
must be endless. This calumniator nevertheless has the effrontery to renew the
charge in a public news paper, although thereby he arraigns our most gracious
Sovereign and the lords of the privy council, as well as the gentlemen he has
named. Not content with wounding the honor of judges, counselors and
governors, with missile weapons, darted from an obscure corner, he now aims a
blow at Majesty itself. Any one may accuse, but accusation unsupported by proof
recoils upon the head of the accuser. It is entertaining enough to consider the
crimes and misdemeanors alleged, and then examine the evidence he adduces,
stripped of the false glare he has thrown upon it.

The crimes are these; the persons named by him conspired together to enslave
their country, in consequence of a plan, the outlines of which have been drawn
by Sir Edmund Andross and others, and handed down by tradition to the present
times. He tells us that Governor Shirley, in 1754, communicated the profound
secret, the great design of taxing the colonies by act of parliament, to the
sagacious gentlemen, eminent philosopher, and distinguished patriot, Dr
Franklin. The profound secret is this, after the commencement of hostilities
between the English and French colonies in the last war, a convention of
committees from several provinces were called by the King, to agree upon some
general plan of defense: The principal difficulty they met with was in devising
means whereby each colony might be obliged to contribute its proportionable
part. General Shirley proposed that application should be made to parliament to
empower the committees of the several colonies to tax the whole according to
their several proportions. This plan was adopted by the convention, and
approved of by the assembly in New York, who passed a resolve in these words:
That the scheme proposed by Governor Shirley for the defense of the British
colonies in North America, is well concerted, and that this colony joins
therein. This however did not succeed, and he proposed another, viz for the
parliament to assess each ones proportion, and in case of failure to raise it
on their part, that it should be done by parliament. This is the profound
secret. His assiduity in endeavoring to have some effectual plan of general
defense established, is, by the false coloring of this writer, represented as
an attempt to aggrandize himself, family and friends; and that gentleman under
whose administration the several parties in the province were as much united
and the whole province rendered as happy as it ever was, for so long a time
together, is called a crafty, busy ambitious, intriguing, enterprizing man.
This attempt of Governor Shirley for a parliamentary taxation, is however a
circumstance strongly militating with this writer's hypothesis, for the
approbation shown to the Governor's proposal by the convention, which consisted
of persons from the several colonies, not inferior in point of discernment,
integrity, knowledge or patriotism to the members of our late grand Congress,
and the vote of the NewYork assembly furnishes pretty strong evidence that the
authority of parliament, even in point of taxation, was not doubted in that
day. -- Even Dr. Franklin, in the letter alluded to, does not deny the right.
-- His objections go to the inexpediency of the measure. -- He supposes it
would create uneasiness in the minds of the colonists should they be thus
taxed, unless they were previously allowed to send representatives to
parliament. If Dr. Franklin really supposes that the parliament has no
constitutional right to raise a revenue in America, I must confess myself at a
loss to reconcile his conduct in accepting the office of postmaster, and his
assiduity in increasing the revenue in that department, to the patriotism
predicated of him by Novanglus, especially as this unfortunately happens to be
an internal tax. This writer then tells us, that the plan was interrupted by
the war, and afterward by Governor Pownal's administration. That Messieurs
Hutchinson and Oliver, stung with envy at Governor Pownal's favorites,
propagated slanders respecting him to render him uneasy in his seat. My answer
is this, that he that publishes such falsehoods as these in a public newspaper,
with an air of seriousness, insults the understanding of the public, more than
he injures the individuals he defames. In the next place we are told, that
Governor Bernard was the proper man for this purpose, and he was employed by
the junto to suggest to the ministry the project of taxing the colonies by act
of parliament. Sometimes Governor Bernard is the arch enemy of America, the
source of all our troubles, now only a tool in the hands of others. I wish
Novanglus's memory had served him better, his tale might have been consistent
with itself, however variant from truth. After making these assertions with
equal gravity and assurance, he tells us, he does not advance this without
evidence. I had been looking out for evidence a long time, and was all
attention when it was promised, but my disappointment was equal to the
expectation he had raised when I found the evidence amounted to nothing more
than Governor Bernard's letters and principles of law and polity, wherein he
asserts the supremacy of parliament over the colonies both as to legislation
and taxation. Where this writer got his logic, I do not know. Reduced to a
syllogism, his argument stands thus, Governor Bernard, in 1764, wrote and
transmitted to England certain letters and principles of law and polity,
wherein he asserts the right of parliament to tax the colonies. Messieurs
Hutchinson and Oliver were in unison with him in all his measures, therefore
Messieurs Hutchinson and Oliver employed Governor Bernard to suggest to the
ministry the project of taxing the colonies by act of parliament. The letters
and principles are the whole of the evidence, and this is all the appearance of
argument contained in his publication. Let us examine the premises. That
Governor Bernard asserted the right of parliament to tax the colonies in 1764,
is true. So did Mr. Otis, in a pamphlet he published the selfsame year, from
which I have already taken an extract. In a pamphlet published in 1765, Mr.
Otis tells us, it is certain that the parliament of Great Britain has a just,
clear, equitable and constitutional right, power and authority to bind the
colonies by all acts wherein they are named. Every lawyer, nay every Tyro,
knows this; no less certain is it that the parliament of Great Britain has a
just and equitable right, power and authority to impose taxes on the colonies
internal and external, on lands as well as on trade. But does it follow from
Governor Bernard's transmitting his principles of polity to four persons in
England, or from Mr. Otis's publishing to the whole world similar principles,
that either the one or the other suggested to the ministry the project of
taxing the colonies by act of parliament? Hardly, supposing the transmission
and publication had been prior to the resolution of parliament to that purpose;
but very unfortunately for our reasoner, they were both subsequent to it, and
were the effect and not the cause.

The history of the stamp act is this: At the close of the last war, which was
a native of America, and increased the national debt upwards of sixty millions,
it was thought by parliament to be but equitable, that all additional revenue
should be raised in America, toward defraying the necessary charges of keeping
it in a state of defense: A resolve of this nature was passed, and the colonies
made acquainted with it through their agents, in 1764, that their assemblies
might make the necessary provision if they would. The assemblies neglected
doing any thing, and the parliament passed the stamp act. There is not so much
as a colorable pretense that any American had a hand in the matter. Had
Governor Bernard, Governor Hutchinson, or the (...) Lieutenant Governor been
any way instrumental in obtaining the stamp act, it is very strange that not a
glimpse of evidence should ever have appeared, especially when we consider that
their private correspondence has been published, letters which were written in
the full confidence of unsuspecting friendship. The evidence, as Novanglus
calls it, is wretchedly deficient as to fixing the charge upon Governor
Bernard; but, (...) admitting that Governor Bernard suggested to the ministry
the design of taxing, there is no kind of evidence to prove that the junto, as
this elegant writer calls the others, approved of it, much less that they
employed him to do it. But, says he, no one can doubt but that Messieurs
Hutchinson and Oliver were in unison with Governor Bernard, in all his
measures: This is not a fact, Mr. Hutchinson dissented from him respecting the
alteration of our charter, and wrote to his friends in England to prevent it.
Whether Governor Bernard wrote in favor of the stamp act being repealed or not
I cannot say, but I know that Governor Hutchinson did, and have reason to think
his letters had great weight in turning the scale, which hung doubtful a long
time, in favor of the repeal. These facts are known to many in the province,
whigs as well as tories, yet such was the infatuation that prevailed, that the
mob destroyed his house upon supposition that he was the patron of the
stamp act? Even in the letters wrote to the late Mr. Whately, we find him
advising to (...) total repeal of the tea-act. It cannot be fairly inferred
from persons intimacy or mutual confidence, that they always approve of each
others plans. Messieurs Otis, Cushing, Hancock and Adams were as confidential
friends, and made common cause equally with the other (...). -- May we thence
infer, that the three latter hold that the parliament has a just and equitable
right to impose taxes on the colonies? Or, that 'the time may come, when the
real interest of the whole may require an act of parliament to annihilate all
our charters?' For these also are Mr. Otis's words: Or may we lay it down as a
principle to reason from, that these gentlemen never disagree respecting
measures? We know they do often, very materially. This writer is unlucky both
in his principles and inferences: But where is the evidence respecting
Brigadier Ruggles, Mr. Paxton, and the late Judge Russel? He does not produce
even the shadow of a shade. He does not even pretend that they were in unison
with Governor Bernard in all his measures. In matters of small moment a man may
be allowed to amuse with ingenious fiction, but in personal accusation, in
matters so interesting both to the individual and to the public, reason and
candor require something more than assertion, without proof, declamation
without argument, and censure without dignity or moderation: This, however, is
characteristic of Novanglus. It is the stale trick of the whig writers
feloniously to stab the reputation, when their antagonists are invulnerable in
their public conduct.

These gentlemen were all of them, and the survivors still continue to be,
friends of the English constitution, equally tenacious of the privileges of the
people, and of the prerogative of the crown, zealous advocates for the colonies
continuing their constitutional dependence upon Great Britain, as they think it
no less the interest than the duty of the colonists; averse to tyranny and
oppression in all their forms, and always ready to exert themselves for the
relief of the oppressed, though they differ materially from the whigs in the
mode of obtaining it; they discharged the duties of the several important
departments they were called to fill, with equal faithfulness and ability;
their public services gained them the confidence of the people, real merit drew
after it popularity; their principles, firmness and popularity rendered them
obnoxious to certain persons amongst us, who have long been indulging
themselves, in hopes of rearing up an American commonwealth, upon the ruin of
the British constitution. This republican party is of long standing, they lay
however, in a great measure, dormant for several years. The distrust, jealousy
and ferment raised by the stamp act, afforded scope for action: At first they
wore the garb of hypocrisy, they professed to be friends to the British
constitution in general, but claimed some exemptions from their local
circumstances; at length threw off their disguise, and now stand confessed to
the world in their true characters, American republicans. -- These republicans
knew, that it would be impossible for them to succeed in their darling
projects, without first destroying the influence of these adherents to the
constitution: Their only method to accomplish it, was by publications charged
with falsehood and scurrility. Notwithstanding the favorable opportunity the
stamp act gave of imposing upon the ignorant and credulous, I have sometimes
been amazed, to see with how little hesitation, some slovenly baits were
swallowed. Sometimes the adherents to the constitution were called ministerial
tools, at others, King, Lords and Commons, were the tools of them; for almost
every act of parliament that has been made respecting America, in the present
reign, we were told was draughted in Boston, or its environs, and only sent to
England to run through the forms of parliament. Such stories, however
improbable, gained credit; even the fictitious bill for restraining marriages
and murdering bastard children, met with some simple enough to think it real.
He that readily imbibes such absurdities, may claim affinity with the person
mentioned by Mr. Addison, that made it his practice to swallow a chimera every
morning for breakfast. To be more serious, I pity the weakness of those that
are capable of being thus duped, almost as much as I despise the wretch that
would avail himself of it, to destroy private characters and the public
tranquillity. By such infamous methods many of the ancient, trusty and (...)
pilots, who had steered the community safely in the most perilous times, were
driven from the helm, and their places occupied by different persons, some of
whom, bankrupts in fortune, business and same, are now striving to run the ship
on the rocks, that they may have an opportunity of plundering the wreck. The
gentlemen named by Novanglus, have nevertheless persevered with unshaken
constancy and firmness, in their patriotic principles and conduct, through a
variety of fortune; and have at present, the mournful consolation of
reflecting, that had their admonitions and councils been timely attended to,
their country would never have been involved in its present calamity.

MASSACHUSETTENSIS. March 6, 1775.
LETTER XIV.
To the Inhabitants of the Province of Massachusetts Bay.
OUR patriotic writers, as they call each other, estimate the services rendered
by, and the advantages resulting from the colonies to Britain, at a high rate,
but allow but little, if any, merit in her toward the colonies. Novanglus
would persuade us that exclusive of her assistance in the last war, we have had
but little of her protection, unless it was such as her name alone afforded.
Dr. Franklin when before the house of commons, in 1765, denied that the late
war was entered into for the defense of the people in America. The Pennsylvania
Farmer tells us in his letters that the war was undertaken solely for the
benefit of Great Britain, and that however advantageous the subduing or keeping
any of these countries, viz. Canada, Nova Scotia and the Floridas may be to
Great Britain, the acquisition is greatly injurious to these colonies -- And
that the colonies, as constantly as streams tend to the ocean, have been
pouring the fruits of all their labors into their mother's lap. Thus, they
would induce us to believe, that we derive little or no advantage from
Great Britain, and thence they infer the injustice, rapacity and cruelty of her
conduct toward us. I fully agree with them, that the services rendered by the
colonies are great and meritorious: The plantations are additions to the empire
of inestimable value: The American market for British manufactures, the great
nursery for seamen formed by our shipping, the cultivation of deserts, and our
rapid population, are increasing and inexhaustible sources of national wealth
and strength: I commend these patriots for their estimations of the national
advantages accruing from the colonies, as much as I think them deserving of
censure for depreciating the advantages and benefits that we derive from
Britain. A particular enquiry into the protection afforded us, and the
commercial advantages resulting to us from the parent state, will go a great
way toward conciliating the affections of those whose minds are at present
unduly impressed with different sentiments toward Great Britain. The intestine
commotions with which England was convulsed and torn soon after the emigration
of our ancestors, probably prevented that attention being given to them in the
earliest stages of this colony, that otherwise would have been given. The
principal difficulties that the adventurers met with after the struggle of a
few of the first years were over, were the incursions of the French and savages
conjointly, or of the latter instigated and supported by the former: Upon a
representation of this to England, in the time of the interregnum, Acadia,
which was then the principal source of our disquitude, was reduced by an
English armament: At the request of this colony, in Queen Ann's reign, a fleet
of fifteen men of war, besides transports, troops, etc. were sent to assist us
in an expedition against Canada; the fleet suffered shipwreck, and the attempt
proved abortive. It ought not to be forgot that the siege of Louisbourg, in
1745, by our own forces, was covered by a British fleet of ten ships, four of
60 guns, one of fifty, and five of 40 guns, besides the Vigilant of sixty-four,
which was taken during the siege, as she was attempting to throw supplies into
the garrison. It is not probable that the expedition would have been undertaken
without an expectation of some naval assistance, or that the reduction could
have been effected without it. In January, 1754, our assembly, in a message to
Governor Shirley, prayed him to represent to the King, 'that the French had
made such extraordinary encroachments, and taken such measures, since the
conclusion of the preceding war, as threatened great danger, and perhaps, in
time, even the entire destruction of this province, without the interposition
of his Majesty, notwithstanding any provision we could make to prevent it:' --
'That the French had erected a fort on the isthmus of the peninsula near Bay
Vert, in Nova Scotia, by means of which they maintained a communication by sea
with Canada, St. John's Island and Louisbourg:' -- 'That near the mouth of St.
John's river the French had possessed themselves of two forts formerly built by
them, one of which was garrisoned by regular troops, and had erected another
strong fort at twenty leagues up the river, and that these encroachments might
prove fatal not only to the eastern parts of his Majesty's territories within
this province, but also in time to the whole of this province, and the rest of
his Majesty's territories on this continent:' -- 'That whilst the French held
Acadia under the treaty of St. Germain, they so cut off the trade of this
province, and galled the inhabitants with incursions into their territories,
that OLIVER CROMWELL found it necessary for the safety of New England to make a
descent by sea into the river of St. John, and dispossess them of that and all
the forts in Acadia. -- That Acadia was restored to the French by the treaty of
Breda in 1667:' -- That this colony felt again the same mischievous effects
from their possessing it, insomuch, that after forming several expeditions
against it, the inhabitants were obliged in the latter end of the war in Queen
Ann's reign to represent to her Majesty how destructive the possession of the
Bay of Fundy and Nova Scotia, by the French, was to this province and the
British trade; whereupon the British ministry thought it necessary to fit out a
formal expedition against that province with English troops, and a considerable
armament of our own, under General Nicholson, by which it was again reduced to
the subjection of the crown of Great Britain: -- 'That we were then, viz. in
1754, liable to feel more mischievous effects than we had ever yet done, unless
his Majesty should be graciously pleased to cause them to be removed.' They
also remonstrated our danger from the encroachments of the French at Crown
Point. -- In April, 1754, the Council and House represented, 'That it evidently
appeared, that the French were so far advanced in the execution of a plan
projected more than fifty years since, for the extending their possessions from
the mouth of the Missisippi on the south, to Hudson's Bay on the north, for
securing the vast body of Indians in that inland country, and for subjecting
the whole continent to the crown of France:' -- 'That many circumstances gave
them great advantages over us, which if not attended to, would soon overbalance
our superiority of numbers; and that these disadvantages could not be removed
without his Majesty's gracious interposition.'

The Assembly of Virginia, in an address to the King, represented 'that the
endeavors of the French to establish a settlement upon the frontiers, was a
high insult offered to his Majesty, and if not timely opposed, with vigor and
resolution, must be attended with the most fatal consequences,' and prayed his
Majesty to extend his royal beneficence toward them.

The commissioners who met at Albany the same year, represented, 'that it was
the evident design of the French to surround the British colonies; to fortify
themselves on the back thereof; to take and keep possession of the heads of all
the important rivers; to draw over the Indians to their interest, and with the
help of such Indians, added to such forces as were then arrived, and might
afterward arrive, or be sent from Europe, to be in a capacity of making a
general attack on the several governments; and if at the same time a strong
naval force should be sent from France, there was the utmost danger that the
whole continent would be subjected to the crown: 'That it seemed absolutely
necessary that speedy and effectual measures should be taken to secure the
colonies from the slavery they were threatened with.'

We did not pray in vain; Great Britain, ever attentive to the real grievances
of her colonies, hastened to our relief with maternal speed. She covered our
seas with her ships, and sent forth the bravest of her sons to fight our
battles. They fought, they bled and conquered with us. Canada, Nova Scotia, the
Floridas, and all our American foes were laid at our feet. It was a dear bought
victory; the wilds of America were enriched with the blood of the noble and the
brave.

The war, which at our request, was thus kindled in America spread through the
four quarters of the globe, and obliged Great Britain to exert her whole force
and energy to stop the rapid progress of its devouring flames.

To these instances of actual exertions for our immediate protection and
defense, ought to be added, the fleets stationed on our coast and the convoys
and security afforded to our trade and fishery, in times of war; and her
maintaining in times of peace such a navy and army, as to be always in
readiness to give protection as exigencies may require; and her ambassadors
residing at foreign courts to watch and give the earliest intelligence of their
motions. By such precautions every part of her wide extended empire enjoys as
ample security as human power and policy can afford. Those necessary
precautions are supported at an immense expense, and the colonies reap the
benefit of them equally with the rest of the empire. To these considerations it
should likewise be added, that whenever the colonies have exerted themselves in
war, though in their own defense, to a greater degree than their proportion
with the rest of the empire, they have been reimbursed by parliamentary grants:
This was the case in the last war, with this province.

From this view, which I think is an impartial one, it is evident that
Great Britain is not less attentive to our interest than her own; and that her
sons that have settled on new and distant plantations are equally dear to her
with those that cultivate the ancient domain, and inhabit the mansion house.

MASSACHUSETTENSIS. March 13, 1775.
LETTER XV.
To the Inhabitants of the Province of Massachusetts Bay.
THE outlines of British commerce have been heretofore sketched; and the
interest of each part in particular, and of the whole empire conjointly have
been shown to be the principles by which the grand system is poized and
balanced. Whoever will take upon himself the trouble of reading and comparing
the several acts of trade which respect the colonies, will be convinced, that
the cherishing their trade and promoting their interest have been the objects
of parliamentary attention equally with those of Britain. He will will see that
the great council of the empire has ever esteemed our prosperity as inseparable
from the British; and if in some instances the colonies have been restricted to
the emolument of other parts of the empire, they in their turn, not excepting
England itself, have been also restricted sufficiently to restore the balance,
if not to cause a preponderation in our favor.

Permit me to transcribe a page or two from a pamphlet written in England, and
lately republished here, wherein this matter is, stated with great justice and
accuracy.

'The people of England and the American adventurers being so differently
circumstanced, it required no great sagacity to discover that, as there were
many commodities which America could supply on better terms than they could be
raised in England, so must it be much more for the colonies advantage to take
others from England, than attempt to make them themselves. The American lands
were cheap, covered with woods, and abounded with native commodities. The first
attention of the settlers was necessarily engaged in cutting down the timber,
and clearing the ground for culture; for before they had supplied themselves
with provisions, and had hands to spare from agriculture, it was impossible
they could set about manufacturing. England, therefore undertook to supply them
with manufactures, and either purchased herself or found markets for the timber
the colonists cut down upon their lands, or the fish they caught upon their
coasts. It was soon discovered that the tobacco plant was a native of and
flourished in Virginia. It had been also planted in England, and was found to
delight in the soil. The legislature, however, wisely and equitably considering
that England had variety of products, and Virginia had no other to buy her
necessaries with, passed an act prohibiting the people of England from planting
tobacco, and thereby giving the monopoly of that plant to the colonies. As the
inhabitants increased, and the lands became more cultivated, further and new
advantages were thrown in the way of the American colonies. All foreign
markets, as well as Great Britain, were open for their timber and provisions,
and the British West India islands were prohibited from purchasing those
commodities from any other than them. And since England has found itself in
danger of wanting a supply of timber, and it has been judged necessary to
confine the export from America to Great Britain and Ireland, full and ample
indemnity has been given to the colonies for the loss of a choice of markets in
Europe, by very large bounties paid out of the revenue of Great Britain, upon
the importation of American timber. And as a further encouragement and reward
to them for clearing their lands, bounties are given upon tar and pitch, which
are made from their decayed and useless trees; and the very ashes of their lops
and branches are made of value by the late bounty on American potashes. The
soil and climate of the northern colonies having been found well adapted to the
culture of flax and hemp, bounties, equal to half the first cost of those
commodities, have been granted by parliament, payable out of the British
revenue, upon their importation into Great Britain. The growth of rice in the
southern colonies has been greatly encouraged, by prohibiting the importation
of that grain into the British dominions from other parts, and allowing it to
be transported from the colonies to the foreign territories in America, and
even to the southern parts of Europe. Indigo has been nurtured in those
colonies by great parliamentary bounties, which have been long paid upon the
importation into Great Britain; and of late are allowed to remain, even when it
is carried out again to foreign markets. Silk and wine have also been objects
of parliamentary munificence; and will one day probably become considerable
American products under that encouragement. In which of these instances, it may
be demanded, has the legislature shown itself partial to the people of England
and unjust to the colonies? Or wherein have the colonies been injured? We hear
much of the restraints under which the trade of the colonies is laid by acts of
parliament for the advantage of Great Britain, but the restraints under which
the people of Great Britain are laid by acts of parliament for the advantage of
the colonies, are carefully kept out of sight; -- and yet, upon a comparison,
the one will be found full as grievous as the other. -- For is it a greater
hardship on the colonies, to be confined in some instances to the markets of
Great Britain for the sale of their commodities, than it is on the people of
Great Britain to be obliged to buy the commodities from them only? If the
island colonies are obliged to give the people of Great Britain the pre-emption
of their sugar and coffee, is it not a greater hardship on the people of
Great Britain to be restrained from purchasing sugar and coffee from other
countries, where they could get those commodities much cheaper than the
colonies make them pay for them? Could not our manufacturers have indigo much
better and cheaper from France and Spain than from Carolina? And yet is there
not a duty imposed by acts of parliament on French and Spanish indigo, that it
may come to our manufacturers at a dearer rate than Carolina indigo, though a
bounty is also given out of the money of the people of England to the Carolina
planter, to enable him to sell his indigo upon a par with the French and
Spanish? But the instance which has already been taken notice of, the act which
prohibits the culture of the tobacco plant in Great Britain or Ireland, is
still more in point, and a more striking proof of the justice and impartiality
of the supreme legislature; for what restraints, let me ask, are the colonies
laid under, which bear so strong marks of hardship, as the prohibiting the
farmers in Great Britain and Ireland from raising upon their own lands, a
product which is become almost a necessary of life to them and their families?
And this most extraordinary restraint is laid upon them, for the avowed and
sole purpose of giving Virginia and Maryland a monopoly of that commodity, and
obliging the people of Great Britain and Ireland to buy all the tobacco they
consume, from them, at the prices they think sit to sell it for. The annals of
no country that ever planted colonies can produce such an instance as this of
regard and kindness to their colonies, and of restraint upon the inhabitants of
the mother country for their advantage. Nor is there any restraint laid upon
the inhabitants of the colonies in return, which carries with it so great
appearance of hardships, although the people of Great Britain and Ireland have,
from their regard and affection to the colonies, submitted to it without a
murmur for near a century.' For a more particular enquiry let me recommend the
perusal of the pamphlet itself, also another pamphlet lately published,
entitled, 'the advantages which America derives from her commerce, connection
and dependence on Great Britain.'

A calculation has lately been made both of the amount of the revenue arising
from the duties with which our trade is at present charged, and of the bounties
and encouragement paid out of the British revenue upon articles of American
produce imported into England, and the latter is found to exceed the former
more than four fold. This does not look like a partiality to our disadvantage:
-- However there is no surer method of determining whether the colonies have
been oppressed by the laws of trade and revenue, than by observing their
effects.

From what source has the wealth of the colonies flowed? Whence is it derived?
Not from agriculture only: Exclusive of commerce the colonists would this day
have been a poor people, possessed of little more than the necessaries for
supporting life; of course their numbers would be few; for population always
keeps pace with the ability of maintaining a family; there would have been but
little or no resort of strangers here; the arts and sciences would have made
but small progress; the inhabitants would rather have degenerated into a state
of ignorance and barbarity. Or had Great Britain laid such restrictions upon
our trade, as our patriots would induce us to believe, that is, had we been
pouring the fruits of all our labor into the lap of our parent and been
enriching her by the sweat of our brow, without receiving an equivalent, the
patrimony derived from our ancestors must have dwindled from little to less,
until their posterity should have suffered a general bankruptcy.

But how different are the effects of our connection with, and subordination to
Britain? They are too strongly marked to escape the most careless observer: Our
merchants are opulent, and our yeomanry in easier circumstances than the
noblesse of some states: Population is so rapid as to double the number of
inhabitants in the short period of twenty-five years: Cities are springing up
in the depths of the wilderness: Schools, colleges, and even universities are
interspersed through the continent: Our country abounds with foreign
refinements, and flows with exotic luxuries. These are infallible marks not
only of opulence but of freedom. The recluse may speculate -- the envious
repine -- the disaffected calumniate, -- all these may combine to excite fears
and jealousies in the minds of the multitude, and keep them in alarm from the
beginning to the end of the year; but such evidence as this must for ever carry
conviction with it to the minds of the dispassionate and judicious.

Where are the traces of the slavery that our patriots wloud terrify us with?
The effects of slavery are as glaring and obvious in those countries that are
cursed with its abode, as the effects of war, pestilence or famine. Our land is
not disgraced by the wooden shoes of France, or the uncombed hair of Poland: We
have neither racks nor inquisitions, tortures or assassinations: The mildness
of our criminal jurisprudence is proverbial, 'a man must have many friends to
get hanged in New England' Who has been arbitrarily imprisoned, disseized of
his freehold, or despoiled of his goods? Each peasant that is industrious may
acquire an estate, enjoy it his life time, and at his death transmit a fair
inheritance to his posterity. The protestant religion is established as far as
human laws can establish it. My dear friends, let me ask each one whether he
has not enjoyed every blessing that is in the power of civil government to
bestow? And yet the parliament has from the earliest days of the colonies
claimed the lately controverted right both of legislation and taxation, and for
more than a century has been in the actual exercise of it. There is no grievous
exercise of that right at this day, unless the measures taken to prevent our
revolting may be called grievances: Are we then to rebel lest there should be
grievances? Are we to take up arms and make war against our parent, lest that
parent, contrary to the experience of a century and a half, contrary to her own
genius, inclination, affection and interest, should treat us or our posterity
as bastards and not as sons, and instead of protecting should enslave us? The
annals of the world have not yet been deformed with a single instance of so
unnatural, so causless, so wanton, so wicked a rebellion.

There is but a step between you and ruin, and should our patriots succeed in
their endeavors to urge you on to take that step, and hostilities actually
commence, New England will stand recorded a singular monument of human folly
and wickedness. I beg leave to transcribe a little from the Farmer's letters --
'Good Heaven! Shall a total oblivion of former tendernesses and blessings be
spread over the minds of a good and wise people by the sordid arts of
intriguing men, who covering their selfish projects under pretenses of public
good, first enrage their countrymen into a frenzy of passion, and then advance
their own influence and interest by gratifying the passion which they
themselves have excited.' When cool dispassionate posterity shall consider the
affectionate intercourse, the reciprocal benefits, and the unsuspecting
confidence that have subsisted between these colonies and their parent state
for such a length of time, they will execrate, with the bitterest curses, the
infamous memory of those men whose ambition unnecessarily, wantonly, cruelly
first opened the sources of civil discord.

MASSACHUSETTENSIS. March 20, 1775.
LETTER XVI.
To the Inhabitants of the Province of Massachusetts Bay.
OUR patriots exclaim, That humble and reasonable petitions from the
representatives of the people have been frequently treated with contempt. This
is as virulent a libel upon his Majesty's government, as falsehood and ingenuity
combined could fabricate. Our humble and reasonable petitions have not only
been ever graciously received, when the established mode of exhibiting them has
been observed, but generally granted. Applications of a different kind, have
been treated with neglect, though not always with the contempt they deserved.
These either originated in illegal assemblies, and could not be received
without implicitly countenancing such enormities, or contained such matter, and
were conceived in such terms, as to be at once an insult to his Majesty and a
libel on his government. Instead of being decent remonstrances against real
grievances, or prayers for their removal, they were insidious attempts to wrest
from the crown or the supreme legislature, their inherent, unalienable
prerogatives or rights.

We have a recent instance of this kind of petition, in the application of the
continental congress to the King, which starts with these words: 'A standing
army has been kept in these colonies ever since the conclusion of the late war,
without the consent of our assemblies.' This is a denial of the King's
authority to station his military forces in such parts of the empire as his
Majesty may judge expedient for the common safety. They might with equal
propriety have advanced one step further, and denied its being a prerogative of
the crown to declare war, or conclude a peace by which the colonies should be
affected, without the consent of our assemblies. Such petitions carry the marks
of death in their faces, as they cannot be granted but by surrendering some
constitutional right at the same time; and therefore afford grounds for
suspicion at least, that they were never intended to be granted, but to
irritate and provoke the power petitioned to. It is one thing to remonstrate
the inexpediency or inconveniency of a particular act of the prerogative, and
another to deny the existence of the prerogative. It is one thing to complain
of the inutility or hardship of a particular act of parliament, and quite
another to deny the authority of parliament to make any act. Had our patriots
confined themselves to the former, they would have acted a part conformable to
the character they assumed, and merited the encomiums they arrogate.

There is not one act of parliament that respects us, but would have been
repealed upon the legislators being convinced that it was oppressive; and
scarcely one, but would have shared the same fate, upon a representation of its
being generally disgustful to America. But, by adhering to the latter, our
politicians have ignorantly or wilfully betrayed their country. Even when
Great Britain has relaxed in her measures, or appeared to recede from her
claims, instead of manifestations of gratitude, our politicians have risen in
their demands, and sometimes to such a degree of insolence, as to lay the
British government under a necessity of persevering in its measures to preserve
its honor.

It was my intention, when I began these papers, to have minutely examined the
proceedings of the continental congress, as the delegates appear to me to have
given their country a deeper wound, than any of their predecessors had
inflicted, and I pray God it may not prove an incurable one; but am in some
measure anticipated by Grotius, Phileareine, and the many pamphlets that have
been published, and shall therefore confine my observations to some of its most
striking and characteristic features.

A congress or convention of committees from the several colonies
constitutionally appointed by the supreme authority of the state, or by the
several provincial legislatures, amenable to and controlable by the power that
convened them, would be salutary in many supposeable cases: Such was the
convention of 1754; but a congress otherwise appointed, must be an unlawful
assembly, wholly incompatible with the constitution, and dangerous in the
extreme, more especially as such assemblies will ever chiefly consist of the
most violent partisans. The Prince or Sovereign, as some writers call the
supreme authority of a state, is sufficiently ample and extensive to provide a
remedy for every wrong in all possible emergencies and contingencies;
consequently a power that is not derived from such authority, springing up in a
state, must incroach upon it, and in proportion as the usurpation inlarges
itself, the rightful Prince must be diminished; indeed they cannot long subsist
together, but must continually militate till one or the other be destroyed. Had
the continental congress consisted of committees from the several houses of
assembly, although destitute of the consent of the several governors, they
would have had some appearance of authority; but many of them were appointed by
other committees, as illegally constituted as themselves. However, at so
critical and delicate a juncture, Great Britain being alarmed with an
apprehension that the colonies were aiming at independance on the one hand, and
the colonies apprehensive of grievous impositions and exactions from
Great Britain, on the other; many real patriots imagined that a congress might
be eminently serviceable, as they might prevail on the Bostonians to make
restitution to the East India company, might still the commotions in this
province, remove any ill-founded apprehensions respecting the colonies, and
propose some plan for a cordial and permanent reconciliation, which might be
adopted by the several assemblies, and make its way through them to the supreme
legislature. Placed in this point of light, many good men viewed it with an
indulgent eye, and tories as well as whigs, bade the delegates God speed.

The path of duty was too plain to be overlooked, but unfortunately some of the
most influential of the members were the very persons that had been the wilful
cause of the evils they were expected to remedy. Fishing in troubled waters had
long been their business and delight, and they deprecated nothing more than
that the storm they had blown up, should subside. They were old in intrigue,
and would have figured in a conclave. The subtilty, hypocrisy, cunning and
chicanery, habitual to such men, were practiced with as much success in this as
they had been before in other popular assemblies.

Some of the members, of the first rate abilities, and characters endeavored
to confine the deliberations and resolves of the congress to the design of its
institution, which was 'to restore peace, harmony and mutual confidence,' but
were obliged to succumb to the intemperate zeal of some, and at length were so
circumvented and wrought upon by the artifice and duplicity of others, as to
lend the sanction of their names to such measures as they condemned in their
hearts. Vide a pamphlet published by one of the delegates entitled, A candid
examination, etc.

The Congress could not be ignorant of what every body else knew, that their
appointment was repugnant to, and inconsistant with, every idea of government
and therefore wisely determined to destroy it. Their first essay that
transpired, and which was matter of no less grief to the friends of our country
than of triumph to its enemies, was the ever memorable resolve approbating and
adopting the Suffolk resolves, thereby undertaking to give a continental
sanction to a forcible opposition to acts of parliament, shutting up the courts
of justice, and thereby abrogating all human laws, seizing the King's
provincial revenue, raising forces in opposition to the King's, and all the
tumultuary violence with which this unhappy province had been rent asunder.

This fixed the complexion and marked the character of the congress. We were
therefore but little surprised when it was announced, that as far as was in
their power, they had dismembered the colonies from the parent country. This
they did by resolving that 'the colonists are entitled to an exclusive power of
legislation in their several provincial legislatures.' This stands in its full
force, and is an absolute denial of the authority of parliament respecting the
colonies.

Their subjoining that 'from necessity they consent to the operation (not the
authority) of such acts of the British parliament as are (not shall be) bona
fide restrained to external commerce,' is so far from weakening their first
principle that it strengthens it, and is an adoption of the acts of trade. This
resolve is a manifest revolt from the British empire. -- Consistent with it, is
their overlooking the supreme legislature, and addressing the inhabitants of
Great Britain, in the style of a manifesto in which they flatter, complain,
coax, and threaten alternately: Their prohibiting all commercial intercourse
between the two countries; with equal propriety and justice the congress might
have declared war against Great Britain, and they intimate that they might
justly (...), and actually shall, if the measures already taken prove
ineffectual; for in the address to the colonies, after attempting to enrage
their countrymen, by every coloring and heightning in the power of language,
to the utmost (...) of frenzy, they say, 'the state of these colonies would
certainly justify other measures than we have advised; we were inclined to
offer once more to his Majesty the petition of his faithful and oppressed
subjects in America,' and admonish the colonists to 'extend their views to
mournful events, and to be in all respects prepared for every contingency.'

This is treating Great Britain as an alien enemy, and if Great Britain be
such, it is justifiable by the law of nations: But their attempt to alienate
the affections of the inhabitants of the new conquered province of Quebec from
his Majesty's government, is altogether unjustifiable, even upon that
principle. In the truly jesuitical address to the Canadians, the congress
endeavor to seduce them from their allegiance, and prevail on them to join the
confederacy. After insinuating that they had been tricked, duped, oppressed and
enslaved by the Quebec bill, the congress exclaim, why this degrading
distinction? 'Have not Canadians sense enough to attend to any other public
affairs than gathering stones from one place and piling them up in another?
Unhappy people! who are not only injured but insulted.' 'Such a treacherous
ingenuity has been exerted in drawing up the code lately offered you, that
every sentence beginning with a benevolent pretention, concludes with a
destructive power; and the substance of the whole divested of its smooth words,
is that the crown and its ministers shall be as absolute throughout your
extended province as the despots of Asia or Africa. We defy you; casting your
view upon every side, to discover a single circumstance promising from any
quarter, the faintest hope of liberty to you or your posterity, but from an
entire adoption into the union of these colonies.' The treachery of the
congress in this address is the more fragrant, by the Quebec bill's having been
adapted to the genius and manners of the Canadians, formed upon their own
petition, and received with every testimonial of gratitude. The public
tranquillity has been often disturbed by treasonable plots and conspiracies.
Great Britain has been repeatedly deluged by the blood of its slaughtered
citizens, and shaken to its center by rebellion. -- To offer such aggravated
infuse to British government was reserved for the grand continental congress.
None but idiots or madmen, could suppose such measures had a tendency to
restore 'union and harmony between Great Britain and the colonies:' Nay! The
very demands of the congress evince, that that was not in their intention. --
Instead of confining themselves to those acts, which occasioned the
misunderstanding, they demand a repeal of fourteen, and bind the colonies by a
law not to trade with Great Britain until that shall be done: Then and not
before, the colonists are to treat Great Britain as an alien friend, and in no
other light is the parent country ever after to be viewed; for the parliament
is to surcease enacting laws to respect us for ever. These demands are such as
cannot be complied with, consistent with either the honor or interest of the
empire, and are therefore insuperable obstacles to a union via congress.

The delegates erecting themselves into the StatesGeneral or supreme
legislature of all the colonies, from Nova Scotia to Georgia, does not leave a
doubt respecting their aiming, in good earnest, at independency: This they did
by enacting laws. -- Although they recognize the authority of the several
provincial legislatures, yet they consider their own authority as paramount or
supreme, otherwise they would not have acted decisively, but submitted their
plans to the final determination of the assemblies. Sometimes indeed they use
the terms request and recommend, at others they speak in the style of
authority. -- Such is the resolve of the 27th of September. 'Resolved from and
after the first day of December next, there be no importation into British
America from Great Britain or Ireland of any goods, wares or merchandise
whatsoever, or from any other place of any such goods, wares or merchandise as
shall have been exported from Great Britain or Ireland, and that no such goods,
wares or merchandise imported after the said first day of December next, be
used or purchased: October 15, the congress resumed the consideration of the
plan for carrying into effect, the non-importation, etc. October 20, the plan
is completed, determined upon, and ordered to be subscribed by all the
members: They call it an association, but it has all the constituent parts of a
law. They begin. -- We his Majesty's most loyal subjects the delegates of the
several colonies of, etc. deputed to represent them in a continental congress,'
and agree for themselves and the inhabitants of the several colonies whom they
represent, not to import, export or consume, etc. as also to observe several
sumptuary regulations under certain penalties and forfeitures, and that a
committee be chosen in every county city and town, by those who are qualified
to vote for representatives in the legislature to see that the association be
observed and kept, and to punish the violators of it; and afterward,
'recommend it to the provincial conventions, and to the committees in the
respective colonies to establish such further regulations as they may think
proper, for carrying into execution the association.' Here we find the congress
enacting laws, -- that is, establishing, as the representatives of the people,
certain rules of conduct to be observed and kept by all the inhabitants of
these colonies, under certain pains and penalties, -- such as masters of
vessels being dismissed from their employment; -- goods to be seized and fold
at auction, and the first cost only returned to the proprietor, a different
appropriation made of the overplus; -- persons being stigmatized in the
gazette, as enemies to their country, and excluded the benefits of society, etc.

The congress seem to have been apprehensive that some squeamish people might
be startled at their assuming the powers of legislation, and therefore, in the
former part of their association say, they bind themselves and constituents
under the sacred ties of virtue, honor, and love to their country, afterward
establish penalties and forfeitures, and conclude by solemnly binding
themselves and constituents under the ties aforesaid, which include them all.
-- This looks like artifice: -- But they might have spared themselves that
trouble, for every law is or ought to be made under the sacred ties of virtue,
honor and a love to the country, expressed or implied, though the penal
sanction be also necessary. In short, were the colonies distinct states, and
the powers of legislation vested in delegates thus appointed, their association
would be as good a form of enacting laws as could be devised.

By their assuming the powers of legislation, the congress have not only
superseded our provincial legislatures, but have excluded every idea of
monarchy; and not content with the havoc already made in our constitution, in
the plenitude of their power, have appointed another congress to be held in May.

Those that have attempted to establish new systems have generally taken care
to be consistent with themselves. Let us compare the several parts of the
continental proceedings with each other.

The delegates call themselves and constituents 'his Majesty's most loyal
subjects,' his Majesty's most faithful subjects affirm, that the colonists are
entitled 'to all the immunities and privileges granted and confirmed to them
by royal charters,' declare that they 'wish not a diminution of the
prerogative, nor solicit the grant of any new right or favor,' and they 'shall
always carefully and zealously endeavor to support his royal authority and our
connection with Great Britain;' -- yet deny the King's prerogative to station
troops in the colonies, disown him in the capacity in which he granted the
provincial charters; -- disclaim the authority of the King in parliament; and
undertake to enact and execute laws without any authority derived from the
crown. This is dissolving all connection between the colonies and the crown,
and giving us a new King, altogether incomprehensible, not indeed from the
infinity of his attributes, but from a privation of every royal prerogative,
and not leaving even a semblance of a connection with Great Britain.

They declare, that the colonists 'are entitled to all the rights liberties and
immunities of free and natural born subjects within the realm of England,' and
'all the benefits secured to the subject by the English constitution,' but
disclaim all obedience to British government; -- in other words, they claim the
protection, and disclaim the allegiance. They remonstrate as a grievance that
'both houses of parliament have resolved that the colonists may be tried in
England for offenses alleged to have been committed in America by virtue of a
statute passed in the thirty-fifth year of Henry the eighth; -- and yet resolve
that they are entitled to the benefit of such English statutes as existed at
the time of their colonization, and are applicable to their several local and
other circumstances. They resolve that the colonists are entitled to a free and
exclusive power of legislation in their several provincial assemblies; -- yet
undertake to legislate in congress.

The immutable laws of nature, the principles of the English constitution, and
our several charters, are the (...) upon which they pretend to found
themselves, and complain more especially of being deprived of trials by juries;
-- but establish ordinances incompatible with either the laws of nature, the
English constitution, or our charter; -- and appoint committees to punish the
violators of them, not only without a jury, but even without a form of trial.

They repeatedly complain of the Roman Catholic religion being established in
Canada, and in their address to the Canadians, ask, 'if liberty of conscience
be offered them in their religion by the (...) and answer, no; God gave it to
you and the temporal powers with which you have been and are connected, firmly
(...) for your enjoyment of it. If laws divine and human could secure it
against the despotic caprices of wicked men, it was secured before.

They say, to the people of Great Britain, 'place us in the same situation that
we were in at the close of the last war, and our harmony will be restored.' Yet
some of the principal grievances which are to be redressed existed long before
that era, viz. The King's keeping a standing army in the colonies; -- judges
of admiralty receiving their fees, etc. from the effects condemned by
themselves; -- counselors holding commissions during pleasure, exercising
legislative authority; -- and the capital grievance of all, the parliament
claiming and exercising over the colonies a right both of legislation and
taxation. However, the wisdom of the grand continental congress may reconcile
these seeming inconsistances.

Had the delegates been appointed to devise means to irritate and enrage the
inhabitants of the two countries, against each other, beyond a possibility of
reconciliation, to abolish our equal system of jurisprudence, and establish a
judicatory as arbitrary as the Romish inquisition, to perpetuate animosities
among ourselves, to reduce thousands from affluence to poverty and indigence --
to injure Great Britain, Ireland, the West Indies and these colonies -- to
attempt a revolt from the authority of the empire -- and finally to draw down
upon the colonies the whole vengeance of Great Britain, -- more promising means
to effect the whole could not have been devised than those the congress
adopted. -- Any deviation from their plan, would have been treachery to their
constituents, and an abuse of the trust and confidence reposed in them. Some
idolaters have attributed to the congress the collected wisdom of the
continent. It is as near the truth to say, that every particle of disaffection,
petulance, ingratitude and disloyalty that for ten years past have been
scattered through the continent, were united and consolidated in them. Are
these thy Gods, O Israel!

MASSACHUSETTENSIS. March 27, 1775.
LETTER XVII.
To the Inhabitants of the Province of Massachusetts Bay.
THE advocates for the opposition to parliament often remind us of the rights
of the people, repeat the Latin adage vox populi vox Dei, and tell us that
government in the dernier resort is in the people; -- they chime away
melodiously, and to render their music more ravishing tells us, that these are
revolution principles. I hold the rights of the people as sacred, and revere
the principles that have established the succession to the imperial crown of
Great Britain in the line of the illustrious house of Brunswick; but that the
difficulty lies in applying them to the causes of the whigs, hic labor (...);
for admitting that the collective body of the people, that are subject to the
British empire, have an inherent right to change their form of government, or
race of Kings, it does not follow, that the inhabitants of a single province or
of a number of provinces, or any given part under a majority of the whole
empire, have such a right. By admitting that the less may rule or sequester
themselves from the greater, we unhinge all government. Novanglus has accused
me of traducing the people of this province: I deny the charge. Popular
demagogues always call themselves the people, and when their own measures are
censured, cry out, the people, the people are abused and insulted. He says that
I once entertained different sentiments from those now advanced: I did not
write to exculpate myself: If, through ignorance, inadvertence or design, I
have heretofore contributed in any degree, to the forming that destructive
system of politics that is now in vogue, I was under the greater obligation
thus publicly to expose its errors and point out its pernicious tendency. He
suggests that I write from sordid motives: I despise the imputation. I have
written my real sentiments not to serve a party (for as he justly observes, I
have sometimes quarreled with my friends) but to serve the public, nor would I
injure my country to inherit all the treasures that avarise and ambition sigh
for. Fully convinced that our calamities were chiefly created by the leading
whigs, and that a persevering in the same measures that gave rise to our
troubles, would complete our ruin, I have written freely. It is painful to me
to give offense to an individual, but I have not spared the ruinous policy of
my brother or my friend, -- they are both far advanced. -- Truth from its own
energy will finally prevail, but to have a speedy effect it must sometimes be
accompanied with severity. The terms whig and tory have been adopted according
to the arbitrary use of them in this province, but they rather ought to be
reversed; an American tory is a supporter of our excellent constitution, and an
American whig a subverter of it.

Novanglus abuses me, for saying, that the whigs aim at independance. The
writer from Hampshire county is my advocate: He frankly asserts the
independency of the colonies without any reserve, and is the only consistent
writer I have met with on that side of the question; for by seperating us from
the King as well as the parliament, he is under no necessity of contradicting
himself. Novanglus strives to hide the inconsistencies of his hypothesis, under
a huge pile of learning. Surely he is not to learn that arguments drawn from
obsolete maxims, raked out of the ruins of the feudal system, or from
principles of absolute monarchy, will not conclude to the present constitution
of government: When he has finished his essays, he may expect some particular
remarks upon them. I should not have taken the trouble of writing these letters
had I not been satisfied that real and permanent good would accrue to this
province, and indeed to all the colonies, from a speedy change of measures.
Public justice and generosity are no less characteristic of the English, than
their private honesty and hospitality. The total repeal of the stamp act, and
the partial repeal of the act imposing duties on paper, etc. may convince us
that the nation has no disposition to injure us. We are blessed with a King
that reflects honor upon a crown: He is so far from being avaricious, that he
has relinquished a part of his revenue; and so far from being tyrannical, that
he has generously surrendered part of his prerogative for the sake of freedom:
His court is so far from being tinctured with dissipation, that the palace is
rather an academy of the literati, and the royal pair are as exemplary in every
private virtue, as they are exalted in their stations. We have only to cease
contending with the supreme legislature, respecting its authority, with the
King respecting his prerogatives, and with Great Britain respecting our
subordination; to dismiss our illegal committees, disband our forces, desspise
the thraldom of arrogant congresses, and submit to constitutional government,
to be happy.

Many appear to consider themselves as procul a Jove a fulmine procul, and
because we never have experienced any severity from Great Britain, think it
impossible that we should. The English nation will bear much from its friends,
but whoever has read its history must know that there is a line that cannot be
passed with impunity: It is not the fault of our patriots if that line be not
already passed: They have demanded of GreatBritain more than she can grant
consistent with honor, her interest, or our own, and are now brandishing the
sword of defiance.

Do you expect to conquer in war? War is no longer a simple but an intricate
science, not to be learned from books or two or three campaigns, but from long
experience. You need not be told that his Majesty's Generals, Gage and
Haldimand, are possessed of every talent requisite to great commanders, matured
by long experience in many parts of the world, and stand high in military fame:
That many of the officers have been bred to arms from their infancy, and a
large proportion of the army now here, have already reaped immortal honors in
the iron harvest of the field. -- Alas! My friends, you have nothing to oppose
to this force, but a militia unused to service, impatient of command, and
destitute of resources. Can your officers depend upon the privates, or the
privates upon the officers? Your war can be but little more than mere
tumultuary rage: And besides, there is an awful disparity between troops that
fight the battles of their Sovereign, and those that follow the standard of
rebellion. These reflections may arrest you in an hour that you think not of,
and come too late to serve you. Nothing short of a miracle could gain you one
battle, but could you destroy all the British troops that are now here, and
burn the men of war that command our coast, it would be but the beginning of
sorrow; and yet without a decisive battle, one campaign would ruin you. This
province does not produce its necessary provision, when the husbandman can
pursue his calling without molestation: What then must be your condition, when
the demand shall be increased and the resource in a manner cut off? -- Figure
to yourselves what must be your distress should your wives and children be
driven from such places as the King's troops shall occupy, into the interior
parts of the province, and they as well as you, be destitute of support. I take
no pleasure in painting these scenes of distress. The whigs affect to divert
you from them by ridicule; -- but should war commence, you can expect nothing
but its severities. Might I hazard an opinion, but few of your leaders ever
intended to engage in hostilities, but they may have rendered inevitable what
they intended for intimidation. Those that unsheath the sword of rebellion may
throw away the scabbard, they cannot be treated with while in arms; and if they
lay them down they are in no other predicament than conquered rebels. The
conquered in other wars do not forfeit the rights of men, nor all the rights of
citizens, even their bravery is rewarded by a generous victor; far different is
the case of a routed rebel host. My dear countrymen, you have before you, at
your election, peace or war, happiness or misery. May the God of our
forefathers direct you in the way that leads to peace and happiness, before
your feet stumble on the dark mountains, -- before the evil days come wherein
you shall say, we have no pleasure in them.

MASSACHUSETTENSIS April 3, 1775.
FINIS.

