THE POLITICAL FAMILY: OR A DISCOURSE, POINTING OUT THE RECIPROCAL ADVANTAGES,
Which flow from an uninterrupted Union between GREAT BRITAIN and her AMERICAN
COLONIES.

BY ISAAC HUNT, ESQUIRE.

NUMB. I.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED, BY JAMES HUMPHREYS, JUNIOR.

M DCC LXXV.

TO THE WORTHY MERCHANTS, FARMERS, AND MECHANICS OF THE PROVINCE OF
PENNSYLVANIA, IN TESTIMONY OF ESTEEM AND FRIENDSHIP, THIS DISCOURSE IS
INSCRIBED;

BY THEIR MOST HUMBLE SERVANT, THE AUTHOR.

A DISCOURSE, etc.
THE jealousies which at present unhappily subsist between Great Britain and
her colonies, render a discourse on this subject as delicate and hazardous, as
the fatal consequences of a rupture between them make it weighty and important.
But though the die be doubtful, yet in so interesting a cause I will venture a
cast.

In this discourse I shall consider the mother country and her colonies as a
body politic.

By union in a body politic I understand (with Baron Montesquieu) such a
harmony as makes all the particular parts, as opposite as they may seem, concur
to the general welfare of the whole, as discords in music contribute to the
melody of sounds.

Protection requires dependence in return. But to preserve that dependence,
agreeable to the principles of an English constitution, it is necessary there
should be a union of laws and government. And this union is necessary for the
security of liberty, and the well conducting of commerce, on which the
happiness of our political society is founded.

As in the natural body all the inferior springs of life depend upon the motion
of the heart, so in the body politic all inferior jurisdictions should flow
from one superior fountain. Two distinct independent powers in one civil state
are as inconsistent as two hearts in the same natural body. Because if such a
thing can be imagined, they must constantly interfere in their operations, so
as to reduce the WHOLE to anarchy and confusion, and bring on a dissolution in
the event. A due subordination of the less parts to the greater is therefore
necessary to the existence of BOTH.

According to the great Mr. Lock -- that which constitutes a political society
is nothing but the consent of any number of freemen, capable of a majority, to
incorporate into such a society. This consent is either expressed or implied:
expressed, when men in a state of nature for their mutual defense, agree upon
certain rules for their government: Implied, when they come into and continue
in a country where there is a civil state already settled, and receive the
benefit and protection of the laws of that state.

The common law of England declares the original consent of the people, and may
be styled the constitution of their civil state. But as the affairs of all
nations are in a continual fluctuation, by the common law, any part of it then
declared may from time to time be altered by acts of parliament. Sage and
reverend judges, ever since the emigration of the American colonists, have
often solemnly determined that as they settled a part of the British empire,
they tacitly agreed to be governed according to the common law of their parent
country.

These colonies are of two kinds: Such as have been newly found out by the
subjects of Great Britain, and purchased from the natives by the authority of
the crown, as Pennsylvania, etc. or such as have been conquered in open and
just war, as Jamaica, Quebec, etc. In the first, the laws of England were in
force immediately upon their discovery and settlement. In the other, the laws
of England did not take place till declared so by the conqueror. But in both,
acts of the British parliament bind the colonists where they are specially
named according to the adjudications of able lawyers and judges throughout
English America.

His Majesty's predecessors have granted to many of the colonies certain
privileges by charters. The laws of England in force at the time of the
settlement of new discovered colonies; -- Acts of parliament made since, in
which they are expressly named; -- And laws enacted by themselves in pursuance
of their charters, and approved and confirmed in England, seem then to be the
constitutions of such colonies. This also is similar to the constitution of the
Roman colonies. They received their laws from the people of Rome, or they
enacted them by their inferior senates, or by the consent of the people of the
colonies. Though every particular colony had laws distinct from the general
laws of Rome, yet they were either dictated to them, or confirmed by the
Triumviri. They are of that sort of colonies which Baron Pussendorss mentions
as united to the mother country by a kind of unequal confederacy. Omnis
coloniarum respublica in legibus et legum curatoribus fuit posita. Leges vel a
populo Romano acceperunt, vel ipse sibi per senatum aut populum condiderunt.
Leges autem suas quaeque colonia habuit praecipuas, a Romany quidem legibus
seperatas; sed tamen a Romany Triumviris datas. -- In coloniis concilium erat
et Senatus. Sigonius de antiq. jure civ. Romans L. 2, 185. Veliternos et
circeienses colonos repitisse captivos suos a Romany, ut in eos legibus suis
animadverterent. Live. De quibus territoriis, si quando quaestio movetur,
respiciuntur leges civibus datae; id est, coloniis. etc. -- Leges datae
coloniis tuendae erant. -- Flaccus. The Romans (who are followed now by the
nations of Europe) when they sent out a colony, continued it under the
jurisdiction of the Mother-Commonwealth. Puffendorff.


The fires kindled by the late act of parliament imposing a duty of threepence
in the pound on tea, have led me into this consideration of the nature of the
governments of the British colonies. Far be it from me to determine the
legality of imposing such duties. The subject has been so amply discussed by
abler pens, both in England and America, as to make it unnecessary. But thus
much I would observe, no government can be supported without great charge: And
every one who enjoys a share of protection should pay his proportion for the
maintenance of it in one way or other.

Much has been said about external and internal taxes. I know but little
difference between them. Struggle and contrive as you will, says Mr. Lock; lay
your taxes as you please, the traders will shift them off for their own gain;
the merchant will bear the least part of them and grow poor last; things of
necessity must still be had, and things of fashion will be had as long as men
have money or credit. If the merchant pays a quarter more for his commodities
he will fell them at a price proportionably raised. But though the duty may be
legal, many things are lawful which are not expedient. A strenuous execution of
the strict letter of the law is often the greatest injustice. It was a saying
of the Emperor Tiberius, in relation to taxes, sheep should be fleeced not
flead. The Grand Seignior, according to the constitution of the Ottoman empire,
may ordain a taxation; but the universal murmurs of his subjects make him
sensible of the necessity of restricting this power. All mankind are liable to
be deceived, and to err by misinformation and false appearances: And it is the
glory of a man to acknowledge and correct an error when it is discovered: We
find the British Senate, upon decent and legal applications, in the case of the
stamp act, did not think it unbecoming their dignity, to reconsider that act.
The result of their deliberations was such as fully convinced us, justice and
moderation were the noble principles which actuated that august body. They
showed us we may safely confide in them, not only as our protectors from
foreign enemies, but as the grand conservators of liberty, throughout the wide
extent of the British dominions. Let us then, on our part, convince them by our
conduct, we are a sober, loyal, and grateful people, worthy of their highest
favors.

Had the colonists on that occasion, or on occasion of the late acts of
parliament concerning trade, been mad enough to have thrown off their
dependence on Great Britain, she must have looked upon it as a breach of the
original compact, and that thereby the constitutional union in legislation and
government was dissolved; the reciprocal advantages of which union will appear,
if we consider the bad consequences of it is dissolution.

It is easy to believe, Great Britain will not tamely give up her right of
regulating the trade of colonies, which she has planted, raised, supported and
protected at a vast expense of blood and treasure: Nor will she suffer the
profits of that trade to fall into the hands of rival nations. And though she
is able to crush them as a moth, yet her expenses in sending fleets and armies
to conquer her own subjects and maintain her sovereignty must be immense;
besides the loss of the profits of their trade in the mean time; the advantages
of which I shall mention hereafter. On the other hand, I will admit, for
argument's sake, the colonists are able to protect themselves by land; yet this
cannot be done without a union among themselves.

How difficult a thorough union is to be effected in the colonies will appear,
besides other instances, from the disputes about the quotas which the
continental colonies should furnish for their own defense, when the common
enemy were butchering and scalping many hundreds of the inhabitants, and laying
waste their frontiers. The animosities which have long subsisted between some
of them about settling their boundaries have not yet subsided. By their
charters they have been used to different forms of internal government and
laws. Different modes of worship have been established in many of them. It is,
therefore, scarcely probable they ever can or will be united without being
under the sovereignty of some superior state, whose interest it is to continue
them so, and protect them. But admitting they may be united, and, as I said,
they can protect themselves on the land side: Yet who would protect their many
thousands of unarmed ships, their cities, and their long extended, and, at
present, defenseless sea coasts, from the depredations of pirates and rovers,
or the greater power of ambitious and aspiring states, who are watching for
such an opportunity like vultures hovering over their prey? To whom, then, but
Great Britain, can they go for succor? Or, if they would withdraw their
dependence, who can deliver them out of her hands? Not France or Spain. The
British navy is superior to both united. If it were not, those powers would not
consent to defend and protect them for nothing. They would divide them among
themselves, and require not only dependence, but absolute subjection. There is
no need of arguments to prove, it is more eligible to submit to laws made by a
protestant British Sovereign, an august Assembly of right honorable and right
reverend Nobles, the representatives of a free people, connected with them by
the ties of blood, similarity of manners, and common interests, and by a
President General appointed by the crown, at the head of delegates chosen by
the colonies to sit in grand council See a plan of a propsed Union, said to be
laid before the congress by a very respectable and judicious gentleman.
, than by the arbitrary edicts of a French monarch, which his parliament is
only to register; and it is better for a man to be at liberty to worship God in
the manner he believes is most agreeable to him, by the toleration of a British
government, than be forced to conform to the superstitious rites and ceremonies
of the Romish church by the racks and tortures of a Spanish inquisition. It
seems, therefore, as much the interest of the colonies to avoid throwing off
their dependence on Great Britain, as it is here is to protect them from their
enemies, support them in their liberties, and encourage them in their commerce;
-- the reciprocal advantages of which I am next to consider.

The British American dominions extend through such various climates that they
can produce most of the commodities war or peace require. They can supply most
of the delicacies as well as conveniences and necessaries of life. Yet nature
has poured forth her blessings, in a different manner, upon the different
regions of the world, for the mutual intercourse and traffic of mankind, that
thereby they may have a dependence upon one another, and be united by their
common interest Hic Segetes illic veniunt, felicius Uvae. Virg.
.

Every inhabitable country has a superfluity of some kind of natural product,
and no country can produce all the necessaries and conveniences of life. Hence
arise the reciprocal advantages of commerce in general, as it carries out of a
country what is superfluous, and returns what is wanting.

The power of a state consists in the multitude of it is subjects well employed,
and the riches of it is treasury. Trade encourages the labourer to industry.
Industry procures him property, by which he is encouraged to undertake the
charge of a family, and to propagate his species. If he cannot be industriously
employed, he will scarcely venture to make himself, and a woman whom he loves,
miserable, by seeing the tender pledges of their affection, whom they might be
the means of bringing into the world, starving for want of bread. It is
reckoned a million of the inhabitants of Great Britain are daily employed in
manufactures for the American colonists, most of whom cannot get other
employment. Consequently many thousands are thereby induced to marry. Hence it
is the number of her inhabitants is not decreased, notwithstanding many
thousands have formerly come over to her colonies, or have been destroyed in
her wars. The trade and population of the colonies have, therefore, a
considerable tendency to increase the number of subjects in Great Britain.

The enlargement of commerce increases the riches of a state. The riches of a
nation are the sinews of war, and the establishment of peace. Power and
strength are principally acquired by money. Money will procure arms and
friends. Nothing else is wanting to obtain dominion, but wisdom and the
permission of divine Providence. The ordinary customs upon merchandise in
England which go into the treasury are now above forty times more than they
were at the death of Queen Elizabeth, when the American colonies began to be
considerable. And Mr. Anderson observes the trade of Great Britain with her
colonies is equal in quantity, and more in profit than all the other commerce
she has with the rest of the world. One half, therefore, of these additional
riches of the treasury, arises from the colony trade. Hence it is the British
navy is now double in number, of larger size, and carries heavier metal than at
the revolution. Many thousand ships are constantly employed in this trade,
which is a perpetual nursery of seamen to fit out the King's ships. Besides the
advantages Great Britain receives from the trade of her colonies, in the
increase of her subjects, the employment of her industrious poor in
manufactures, the support of government by duties on merchandise, and the
increase of her naval power, her landed interest is also greatly increased.
This plainly appears from the country gentlemen and farmers having better
household furniture, greater stocks of cattle, and lands better improved since
she had colonies. The demand for, and consumption of what the farmer produces
must be in proportion to the number of people employed in manufactures and
navigation. Great Britain, it is thought, may support sixteen millions of
inhabitants See Mr. Anderson's introduction to his Commercial History p. 14.
The ingenious Dr. Franklin computes she can support a much greater number. See
his Interest of Great Britain with respect to the colonies.
more than she does at present, and the greater part of these will find
employment in manufactures, which it will be the interest of the colonies to
take off her hands, if they increase, as they are likely to do from their great
extent of territory. The continental colonies abound in timber and iron ore.
There are numberless symptoms of other valuable ore, which, doubtless, in the
course of time, ingenious men, if encouraged, will discover. The land, in
general, is very fit for tillage. Pennsylvania and New York in particular may
be justly termed the granary of the West India islands, which daily increase in
the number of inhabitants. Besides, without mentioning the wheat which they
send to Portugal and Spain, and their dominions, they ship great quantities up
the Straits; and some few years ago they relieved Italy from famine; by which
means they were enabled to make considerable remittances to Great Britain they
could not otherwise have done, on account of the late restriction on their
commerce. While therefore the inhabitants can be advantageously employed in
these branches of business, and in the fisheries along their coasts, it is not
their interest to engage in manufactures which they can import from
Great Britain at a much cheaper rate than they can make them themselves. Woolen
and linen they must have. Fine linen can not be made up, if the flax be not
pulled before the seed is ripe. Flax seed brings in more to the farmer, if we
consider the price of labor We can import a hank of three dozen yarn from
Ireland for two pence halfpenny. A spinster in Pennsylvania receives
sixpence, currency, and her diet for such a hank; and in the summer season can
earn from 16 to 23 currency per diem in hoeing corn or tobacco, in reaping or
making hay. The daughters of the industrious Germans do not disdain to thresh
corn, and plow; and the usual price of such labor is 16 a day. A laboring man
fit to break flax or comb wool can earn from fifteen to twenty pounds sterling
a year; and his diet, in driving a team for an iron master, or a miller, or in
grubbing, malling rails, plowing and clearing meadow, reaping and mowing. And
it is found to be the interest of landed men to give them such wages. They
would employ more at the same rates could they get them. But such wages soon
enable the industrious among them to settle a family on land of their own.
, than the flax itself. The flax-seed which New York and Pennsylvania ship to
Ireland, I am well informed, overpays the fine linen which they import from
thence. It is also idle to attempt to raise so many sheep as will produce wool
enough for clothing while they import woolens at the price they now do from
Great Britain. On the frontiers the wolves and foxes destroy the sheep and
lambs in such a manner, that few of the farmers attempt to raise them. In the
interior parts the profits of the lands in tillage, and the fodder which the
sheep require in the long winters, are such, that the farmers do not raise more
than is sufficient to produce wool to employ their children and servants when
they can be spared from agriculture, which is but seldom. Indeed, when a
farmer's children are growing up and he must employ servants in the fields and
meadows in the summer, it is better they should be employed in such
manufactures than be idle in the winter. During the fishing season, most, if
not all the tradesmen near the sea coasts in the northern colonies find their
account in leaving off their trades and pursuing the fisheries. Manufactories
in populous cities like Philadelphia for setting poor vagrants to work are very
proper. Sturdy beggars, however, might be better employed in mending the
highways, in clearing the rivers of the rocks, and thereby improving the
communication between different parts of the country. But for the colonists to
enter into manufactures in general, in the circumstances I have mentioned, must
be greatly to their loss, as well as a prejudice to the trade, and of
consequence to the wealth and power of Great Britain. For manufactures are
founded in poverty. Wherever there is a vast extent of territory to be settled
and cultivated, and lands can be taken up, at an easy rate, especially in this
province, under landlords so generous and indulgent to their tenants, as our
honorable Proprietaries, people find it more beneficial to apply themselves to
agriculture.

The West India islands find the advantages so great which they receive from
raising and making sugar, molasses, rum, ginger, pimento, coffee and drugs,
that they make them the principal objects of their industry, and import
provisions from the continental colonies, and their clothing from
Great Britain: In return for which, they export their own products, which
greatly augment his Majesty's customs, and employ many thousands of the
manufacturers and seamen of Great Britain, and, at the same time, have procured
to the planters immense estates. A union, therefore, in commerce, is attended
with these reciprocal advantages, that the mother country and the colonies are
both more usefully employed in the products they exchange, than by raising or
manufacturing all they stand in need of.

The importance of the colonies to Great Britain will ever be greater, as they
increase, which they will still do while they have such a vast extent of
country to settle, and can so easily earn bread for the maintenance of a
family. Ship timber, house timber, copper, hemp, iron, pitch, tar, turpentine,
potash, fish, etc. which she imports from Norway, Sweden, and Russia, can all
be supplied by her North American colonies. Virginia, Carolina, and the
southern continental colonies produce not only tobacco, rice and indigo, but
silk, as good in quality and, very probably, will in time, as much in quantity,
as she imports from Italy, Turkey, or the East Indies. The colonies abound in
fruits and drugs equal to Spain, Italy, or any other country. To receive all
these articles from her own subjects, a great part of which she receives from
foreign nations (who in a case of necessity may refuse to supply her, as Sweden
did in the article of iron in this century) will enrich them, while, at the
same time, it will increase her naval power, furnish her industrious people at
home with employment, enable her to protect the trade of her colonies, continue
their immunities, and procure others in the Mediterranean, and other foreign
ports, which the powers to whom they belong cannot procure from one another,
and render her the Arbitress of Europe. Besides, a time may come, when
Great Britain shall find it her interest to employ a much greater number of her
people in manufactures, and upon the loss of a crop in an unfruitful season,
may stand in need of bread, with which she can be abundantly supplied by her
American subjects. On the other hand, as America will constantly increase in
the number of inhabitants, and improvement of land, her trade in the
manufactures of her mother country must increase in proportion, and,
consequently, require a more extensive protection from the British flag. This
British naval power will also prevent the inveterate enemies of both the mother
country and her colonies from possessing hereafter any considerable tract of
territory on the continent of North America, and thereby having an opportunity
of stirring up the Indian natives to massacre, and butcher the colonists: And
while the emissaries of France and Spain are kept from amongst them, they will
find their account in carrying on the fur and peltry trade with our people; the
advantages of which to Great Britain and the colonies are immense.

But, waving the protection of the mother country, with what state can the
colonists carry on a trade to advantage equal to that with her. Most of the
branches, before enumerated, are the leading articles of their commerce, which
GreatBritain wants, and other parts of Europe produce in common with the
colonies, and of which she would take from her colonies only, if they could, as
they will in time, be able to furnish her with a sufficient quantity, duties
will be imposed upon commodities of foreign growth or production, and, very
probably, bounties given for the same produced in the colonies, as was lately
proposed in the article of iron. These reciprocal advantages of a union must,
therefore, be as long as Great Britain continues mistress of the ocean; her
industrious manufacturers multiply by being enabled to marry, and maintain
their children, and the American seas abound in fish, the mines with ore, or
the hills covered with timber, and the many millions of acres yet unplanted can
produce any of the commodities before enumerated.

Let us now consider Great Britain and her American colonies as a family, the
establishment of which depends upon unity, friendship, and a continued series
of mutual good offices.

Colonies, my Lord Bacon observes, are the children of more ancient nations.
Children receive nourishment from the milk of their mothers, till they are
capable of digesting other food! And they receive from the hands of their
parents, protection from the insults and injuries, to which their feeble,
infant state is exposed. They ought, therefore, when they have attained the
state of youth, or manhood, to evidence their gratitude, by a pious love and
filial obedience. But though, obedience be due to parents, parents ought not to
provoke their children to wrath. The state of minority is temporary. When that
state ceases, the right of chastisement and absolute command ceases also. But
honor, reverence, esteem and support, when wanted, in return for nourishment,
education, and protection are perpetually due to the parent.

Great Britain has been a nurseing mother to her colonies. Her first
embarkations to America, and her first conquests there, were attended with
great expense, without any immediate return of profit; and, at the same time,
drained her of many people useful at home. Her floating castles have protected
and daily do protect their trade. Royal licenses have been granted to collect
money for the promotion of learning and virtue in the colonies; and the money
was generously given by their brethren in Great Britain. The inhabitants of
Great Britain have, above sixty years ago, nobly and generously established and
supported, and still do support a venerable society, who send over gentlemen of
piety, learning, and virtue, to publish the glad tidings of salvation in the
colonies, which before were the haunts of wild beasts, and idolatrous savages:
And she has lately, at a great expense of blood, and millions of treasure,
saved them from the butchering knife of savage, and the unjust encroachments of
ambitious enemies.

On the other hand, the advantages which (as I mentioned before) she receives
in the encouragement of her manufactures, the extension of her commerce, and
the increase of power, by sea and land, from the trade of her industrious
colonists, have already rendered her the Queen of nations; and in a short time,
Great Britain and her American colonies, if they continue united, must
inevitably be the most powerful Empire in the world. The advantages of which
are not only reciprocal to them, but to all the protestant and christian states
of Europe. Because the love of virtue and liberty, which is predominant and
peculiar in Englishmen, will diffuse itself wherever it can have INFLUENCE.


