Mr. GORDON's SERMON PREACHED before the House of REPRESENTATIVES, JULY 19th,
1775.

A SERMON Preached before the HONORABLE HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES, On the Day
intended for the Choice of COUNSELORS, Agreeable to the ADVICE of the
CONTINENTAL CONGRESS.

By WILLIAM GORDON, Pastor of the Third Church in ROXBURY.

WATERTOWN: Printed and Sold by BENJAMIN EDES.

M^^^LXXV

In the House of REPRESENTATIVES, July 19, 1775.
ORDERED, That Mr. Wheeler, Dr. Church, Mr. Hopkins, Col. Otis, and Col.
Palmer, be a Committee to return the Thanks of the House to the Rev. Mr.
GORDON, for the Sermon delivered by him in the Forenoon, and to desire a Copy
of it for the Press.

Attest. Samuel Freeman, Clerk.

AN ELECTION-SERMON.
I HAVE no other apology to offer, for my venturing to appear here upon the
present occasion, nor do I desire a better, than what arises from the concern
which the late honorable Provincial Congress had in promoting it. I am
conscious they could not choose me to this service, in preference to my reverend
fathers and brethren in the ministry, from an apprehension of superior
abilities; but that it was owing to a special connection with them, and their
persuasion that I had a zeal, for the cause of liberty, the Continent in
general, and the welfare of this Colony in particular, answerable to their own
most ardent wishes. I shall endeavor to support the justness of that
persuasion, by exercising a faithfulness that would have suited the earliest
days of the Country's settlement; and shall flatter myself with the most candid
allowances from so respectable an audience, as often as my knowledge is surpassed
by zeal, considering that the last should predominate, now that the times call
for vigorous unabating exertions.

The text, upon which I shall ground what I have Further to say, you have in
these words of the prophet Jeremiah, recorded in the 30th chap. 20, 21. ver.
Their children also shall be as aforetime, and their congregation shall be
established before me, and I will punish all that oppress them; and their
nobles shall be of themselves -- the sentence is not perfected without the
addition of -- and their governor shall proceed from the midst of them -- but
the wisdom of the Continental Congress, in which we cheerfully confide, has
restrained me from making it a part of the text. In an abler hand, and some
^itter time, it may of itself, single and alone, suffice for a complete text,
Amen. So let it be.

SIN having entered the world, depraved mankind, and given a pernicious bias to
every human heart, the best constitutions, whether civil or sacred, do after a
while degenerate, the spirit of them departs, they retain only their outward
forms, and by degrees lose even those. That millenian state, in which many
believe, could not continue vigorous and flourishing, through the period of a
thousand years, without the constant miraculous interposition of divine power,
in restraining and keeping down the corrupt disposition of mortal men.

The Jewish establishment, both in church and state, was the ordinance of
heaven given in an uncommon manner, and, at the time, the best in the whole
world; but it was soon corrupted, and at length so enormously, that the
patience of God would not spare the people. The Jews were exercised with heavy
divine judgments for their various transgressions in civil and sacred matters,
and at last carried away captive to a distant country. However, it was not
their destruction, but reformation that the Lord Jehovah intended; and
therefore, to encourage their repentance, by letting them see that their case
was not desperate, and keep them from fainting under their sore trials, the
prophet Jeremiah is commissioned to deliver to them the following gracious
soul-reviving message, viz. "Thus says the Lord, behold, I will bring again
the captivity of Jacob's tents, and have mercy on his dwelling places: and the
city shall be builded upon her own heap -- her former foundation -- and the
palace shall remain after the manner thereof. And out of them shall proceed
thanksgiving, and the voice of them that make merry: and I will multiply them,
and they shall not be few: I will also glorify them, and they shall not be
small. Their children also shall be as aforetime, and their congregation or
assembly (for they are synonimous terms) shall be established before me, and I
will punish all that oppress them: and their nobles -- leading men of rank, the
intermediate persons between the assembly and first magistrate in the land --
shall be of themselves; and their governor shall proceed from the midst of
them, and I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto me: for who
is this that engaged his heart to approach unto me, says the Lord? And ye
shall be my people, and I will be your God." Here it is promised the Jews, by
Him, whose veracity might be relied on and whose power could accomplish the
even^, tha^ their affairs should be brou^ht back to their original state, that
they should possess their old form of government, and that they should have the
satisfaction of seeing those punished, who had instrumentally occasioned their
calamities, for that the Lord himself would punish them.

A people, when under national judgments or the iron rod of oppression, cannot
help looking back to those times, when the constitution was in a prosperous and
healthy condition -- nor having an attachment to those modes of government, to
which they had been long habituated, and which they had experienced to be
peculiarly favorable to the common rights of human nature, and to have secured
them a greater share of the same, than is enjoyed by mankind in general. And
when they are encouraged by a divine promise, to look back to them as what they
shall be re-possessed of, they must feel the most pleasing emotions, next to
those arising from actual enjoyment.

The Jews are told in our text, that their children should be as aforetime. The
word children does not necessarily refer to minors, being frequently used in a
much larger sense: Thus the children of Benjamin means the tribe of Benjamin --
the children of Israel and the children of Judah, the people of Israel and the
people of Judah. Their children may therefore intend the body of the Jewish
nation; and their being as aforetime. their enjoying that former freedom and
prosperity with which they were acquainted in the best days of their political
existence.

The best times that the Jewish people ever knew were, I apprehend, those of
the judges; before their taste for grandeur, and foolish fondness for being
like neighboring states, made them weary of their plain, simple modes and
manners, and put them upon choosing a royal government. During the period of the
judges, they were once and again, for their iniquities, given into the hand of
oppressors: but when their vices did not bring them under the divine judgments,
they were in the full enjoyment of liberty. Every man's house was his castle --
every man's property was his own -- he exercised a supreme authority under, and
over his own vine, and his own fig tree; and, wherein he trespassed not upon
the rights of his fellow creatures, nor interfered with the Mosaic
establishment, did that which was right in his own eyes, without being subject
to the control even of a crowned head, much less of crown officers; for in
those days there was no king in Israel. He could plant or pluck up; could build
or destroy; could go here and there; could exercise dominion over the fishes of
the sea, no less than over the beasts of the field; and could trade where and
in what he would.

The period of the Judges was not only a time of freedom, but a time of
prosperity, viewed both in a civil and sacred light. Where fancy, the lusts of
the flesh and of the eye, together with the pride of life, captivate the
judgment, the Jews may be thought to have been in the greatest prosperity under
the reign of Solomon; when the king made silver to be in Jerusalem as stones,
and cedars as s^comore trees that are in the vale for abundance; when the
Jewish court shone with a superior and dazzling luster; and when their public
and private buildings were executed in the highest taste, and with the most
costly magnificenc^* so as to be the wonder of mankind. But had it been really
the case, would the people of Israel have united as one, in the commencement of
the next reign, and have complained, to his son and successor Rehoboam, of his
grievous service and heavy yoke? Would they have been so enraged with
Rehoboam's answering them roughly, as to forget their fondness for his
grandfather, and to revolt from him, crying out, "What portion have we in
David? neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse: to your tents, O
Israel; now see to thine house, David"? Would all the tribes have revolted
except Judah and Benjamin, where the seat of government was established, court
influence was the greatest, and the inhabitants monopolized the advantage of
those taxes and imposts that were collected through the kingdom? There is a
national prosperity consisting in superfluities that catches the imagination of
the vulgar, whether in high or low life, but that weakens the internal strength
of a people, and breeds many public disorders. And there is a national
prosperity formed out of the temperance, valor, firmness and virtue of a
people, in easy though not affluent circumstances* having enough to make
themselves safe and happy, though ^ot to entice others into the attempt of
making them a prey. Of this last kind was the civil prosperity of the Jews in
the days of the judges. The nearer a state approaches to, and the more its
confirmed in, this kind of civil prosperity, the safer and longer, in all
probability, will be the enjoyment of its liberties. But besides a civil, the
Jews were acquainted with a sacred prosperity in the days of the judges.
Allowing for numbers, it is probable that religion in the powers of it, never
flourished more among them, than in the beginning of that period. It is certain
that Moses was not only a lawgiver to, but a judge in Israel. Joshua succeeded
him in the exercise of all his power, subject to the observance of that law
which Moses had given, by which even Moses himself was bound, having received
it from God. The people said to Joshua, all that thou command us we will do,
and whithersoever thou sendest us we will go. According as we hearkened unto
Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto the* And we further read, that
they served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders
that out lived Joshua, who had seen all the great works of the Lord that he did
for Israel. But we are told, that after all that generation was gathered unto
their fathers, there arose another generation after them, which knew not the
Lord, nor yet the works which he had done for Israel, so that the children of
Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and served Baalim, and forsook the
Lord God of their fathers, which brought them out of the land of Egypt, and
followed other gods. The earliest days of a s^ate are generally the most pure
and religious. The prevailing principles of individuals at such a season, the
providencial interpositions that they are eye witnesses to, and are strongly
affected with from the peculiarity of their situation, and the modes they are
under a necessity of adopting, lead to it.

Having considered the first sentence in our text, let us attend to the next,
in which the Lord says, and their congregation (or assembly) shall be
established before me. The Jews having a fixed code of laws, and a provision for
consulting and knowing the mind of the Lord upon special occasions, they needed
not as other free governments, an house of representatives or assembly. But
they had three grand festivals annually, when all the males, whose age and
health admitted, repaired to Jerusalem. The enjoyment of these stated seasons,
calculated, to keep up the remembrance of what great things God had done for
them, at the commencement of their national existence, to promote mutual
affection by bringing individuals from the most distant part of the land into
an acquaintance with each other, and to afford them an opportunity for
promoting any schemes for public utility, was considered as a blessing and not
as a burden by the wise and prudent. The restoration and confirmation of these
seasons, after they had been interrupted by the captivity, is therefore
enumerated in the catalogue of mercies with which the Jews were to be favored.
The congregation or assembly of the people, before the Lord in the capital of
the country should be fixed and confirmed; be made certain and perpetual. The
Jewish festivals should be again observed with the voice of joy and the voice
of gladness, without the hazard of a suspension; and should be even heightened
by the exemplary punishment, that the Lord would inflict upon those that
oppressed the Jews.

Thus says the Lord, I will punish all that oppress them Was it absolutely
unlawful for a people to wish for the punishment of those, who have been the
instrumental occasion of their calamities, or to have a pleasing satisfaction
in finding that they are punished, we cannot imagine that the same would be
promised* in order to sooth the sufferings of the oppressed. Some may indulge a
private revengeful malicious spirit against their oppressors, which neither
scripture nor reason will justify: but an attachment to one's country, the
cause of truth and equity, and the rights of mankind -- the love of justice --
a desire of benefiting the earth by public examples -- and the expectation that
the providential government of God will be thereby glorified, may lead us to
hope that punishment will be inflicted, though not upon all, yet upon the chief
promoters of our oppression, and that they will not be suffered to escape God's
righteous judgments in this world; while in the spirit of true christianity we
pray, that they may be brought to that unseigned repentance and genuine faith,
which by interesting them in the righteousness of the blessed Jesus, shall
procure them an escape from the punishments of hell, and raise them to the joys
of heaven. While the Lord promises the Jews to punish all that oppressed them,
He gives them no intimation of the manner in which he would do it. They might
be apt to wish that he would punish in some certain particular way, preferable
to all others: but in this they might be disappointed Infinite wisdom often
varies the mode of punishment. Providence shall see that the law of retaliation
is executed upon one oppressor as in the case of Adoni-^e^ek -- shall appoint a
second to die by the established laws of the country, wherein the oppression
has been committed -- shall cut off a third in attempting ^o establish and
perpetuate those cruel plans he has projected and promoted -- shall catch a
fourth by that pit and in that snare which he has contrived and prepared for
the innocent -- and shall torture a fifth for the remainder of his days, though
life is spared, by oversetting all his designs; by causing his contrivances to
produce those very effects he meant to prevent; by taking away the mask and
cloak under which he concealed himself, and so rendering him odious to former
friends and acquaintance; by leading mankind to slight and shun him as the pest
of society; by making him a byword and a proverb; and, in direct opposition to
the strongest desires of his soul, filling him with a just apprehension that
his name will be infamous to the latest posterity.

The last article in our text, which remains to be considered, is, and their
nobles shall be of themselves. The persons, occupying the first posts of honor,
trust, profit and importance, should be of themselves, either as they should be
natives, instead of foreigners and strangers, appointed and set over them* by
those that oppressed and kept them in subjection: Or, as they should be of
their own choosing and approving, and not forced upon them. In some few rare
instances strangers may be equally useful, friendly and acceptable with
natives; but in general, the latter are more likely to possess the confidence,
to understand the prevailing temper and to accommodate themselves to it, to
study the interests, and to promote the happiness, of the people among whom
they reside. It Is also desirable that the choice, appointment and continuance
of their own nobles should rest in and remain with a people, that there may be
the firmer reliance upon them, and the fatal influences that they might be
otherwise under may be the more effectually guarded against. Evils may ensue at
times, from a nation's having and exercising this right; but these evils, in
the present state of human nature, will not, in all probability, be so many,
great and permanent, as where it is not enjoyed. Applicable to the present case
is that trite observation, that absolute monarchy would be the best government
in the world, were monarchs and their successors perfect and infallible; but
being imperfect and fallible, they are not to be trusted with an unlimitted
power; and the best form of government is that, which provide^ best against the
abuse of power in rulers, while it entrusts them with a sufficiency thereof for
the good of the public.

We have gone over the promise made in our text to the Jews; we cannot view it
as a divine promise made to ourselves, but it may lead us, to conjecture how it
was with this people in the earliest days of their existence -- to search into
their degeneracies, for which we may conclude that they are now under the
correction of heaven -- and to remark that a reformation in principles and
practices, will be likely to procure the approbation of the supreme ruler, so
far as to warrant our expecting, that, through the orderings of his providence,
the children of this colony shall be as aforetime, and their congregation or
assembly shall be established before him; that he will punish all that oppress
them; and that their nobles shall be of themselves.

Suffer me, ye worthy Representatives of the People, and this respectable
audience, to spend a few minutes in conjecturing how it was with the colony in
the earliest days of its existence. The love of liberty, but chiefly of
religion, induced the first settlers to venture across the atlantic, and to
take up their abode in this then inhospitable wilderness. They were under the
strong influence of the most noble principles; though not perfect, and
tinctured with the prevailing notion of the age, that religious errors were to
be opposed by the sword of the magistrate as well as of the Spirit, which
produced those baneful effects, that have stained their annals, and that their
posterity pretend not to justify: But may I not say, that those who with
rancour condemn them in the lump, without allowing for their misconduct, from
the temper and ignorance of the times as to the rights of conscience, know not
of what spirit they themselves are, and would be in danger, under the like
temptations, of falling into the same mistakes. The most valuable diamond is
not without it is flaw. And a change of circumstances may prevail upon different
religious sects, to give up what they once viewed as leading and essential
tenets in their profession; so that even those who are the most peaceably
disposed, may at length think with Solomon, that there is a time of war, as
well as a time of peace; and that every thing is beautiful in its time.

The first settlers being under the strong influence of the most noble
principles, we may suppose that, in their private capacity, they exercised a
benevolent disposition, and assisted, instead of preying upon, and taking an
advantage of each other under their respective difficulties, being mindful of
the apostolic direction, bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfill the law
of Christ. Gal. 6. 2 -- that they treated religion as a matter of importance,
and were not indifferent to it -- that they had their families under a proper
regulation, and discouraged all intemperance, impiety and uncleanness -- and
that they were strict in their morals. We may suppose, that in transacting
public affairs, they were disinterested, were not actuated in the choice of
Representatives or Counselors by low selfish motives, a view to their own
particular advantage, or the aggrandizing their own relations; that, when they
sought to the Lord by prayer for his guidance in their elections, they were not
absolutely and unalterably determined, right or wrong, for whom they would
vote, though they might have thought the matter over before, and talked upon it
among themselves, in order to their being the better prepared for proceeding in
the business with proper expedition and regularity; that they considered the
qualities requisite for the persons designed to fill the several departments in
the state, and whether such individuals were so qualified; that they had a
regard not only to abilities, but integrity and morals, having an eye to
Jethro's advice, whereby Moses was counseled to provide out of all the people,
such as feared God* men of truth, (true men) hating covetousness, whom (...)
place over them for rulers and judges. We may suppose, that they did not
needlessly entertain jealousies of each other, and suspect those of being
traitors, who did not think exactly with themselves, as to the methods to be
adopted for the service of the public; that they were not bent upon having
their own way, but in their debates and consultations were in search of light
to direct them in the ^^st; that there was the least degree possible of all
kinds of bribery and corruption; that the strictest care was taken that the
commonwealth should not suffer damage; that they willingly submitted to all
necessary expenses to provide for its safety; that they did not, through either
a ti^^d or penurious narrow contracted disposition, hazard either its existence
or liberties: in a word that next to the glory of God and the interests of
religion, they labored to serve the public, and not themselves of it.

I shall not go on with my suppositions, lest I should trespass upon your
patience; but shall proceed to enquire into those degeneracies, that have got
footing in the community since the earliest days of it is existence. However
some, mistaking the sense of Solomon, may object; Say not thou what is the
cause that the former days were bette^ than these? for thou do not inquire
wisely concerning this: Yet I have the best authority, that of the late
Provincial Congress, for asserting that as a people we are chargeable with
sinful declensions, and a great abuse of those inestimable blessings which God
has bestowed upon us. What those sinful dec^ensions are, the Congress did not
mention; but, I humbly conceive, the general voice will justify me in
remarking, that a strange degree of ^^^^i^hness has crept in among us, leading
us aside from that golden rule, whereby we are directed to do unto others, as
we would that others should do unto us -- that the importance of religion has
been most sadly overlooked -- that the very form of it has been neglected by
multitudes, while the generality have given themselves no concern about the
powers of it -- that ordinances have been slighted. Sabbaths profaned, and the
name of ^he Lord blasphemed -- that families have not been properly taken care
of; the heads of them have not called them together to worship from day to day;
due restraints have not been laid upon children and others, who have been left
much to their own guidance, in e^d of receiving line upon line, precept upon
precept, here a little, and there a little, through the help of which they
might learn to flee youthful lusts, to mortify the deeds of the body, and to
approve themselves unto their heavenly Father. Were cursing, swearing,
drunkenness and debauchery of various sorts proportionably prevalent in former
times? Were there the like immoralities among the first settlers? They that are
acquainted with the history of this country will not venture to ass^rt it* I
may also remark that it has been complained of, that there has been great
faultiness in the management of public affairs -- that improper men, from
sinister designs, because of family connexions, and to serve a turn, have been
chose, put into, or continued in places of trust or power -- that proper ones
have been opposed and kept out, through an unwarantable prejudice, and because
they would not be so the slaves of a party, as to be led, or commanded, or act
without being convinced or seeing, their own selves, good reason for what they
did -- that modes of corrupting have been adopted with success -- that
representatives, instead of being in their place, attending the service of the
public, agreeable to the expectations of their electors, have been spending the
time in transacting their own business -- that it has been evident, that many,
in their votes and elections, have not been directed by judgment and
conscience, but by other motives, and that by praying to God for his guidance,
they have been only increasing their criminality, by the addition of the most
daring hypocrisy. These things have been complained of, and reported from one
and another. It is well known, that I have not been long enough in the country,
and cannot be sufficiently acquainted with the characters of individuals, and
the secrets of government, as to venture upon asserting that these complaints
are in general, or in diverse instances just. They may have sprang chiefly from
disappointment, vexation, malice and envy; though I cannot but fear, that the
complainants have had, in past years, some foundation to go upon.

Our degeneracies, we must conclude from the light of nature and revelation*
have contributed to bring us under the present calamities. God, the infinitely
wise Governor of the universe, may (and I trust, almost to a degree of
assurance, does) design, by the contest now existing between Britain and the
Continent, to establish us in the enjoyment of our liberties, besides favoring
the several Colonies with an enlargement of them. But the divine wisdom could
have contrived to have secured us these blessings, without making us acquainted
with the horrors of war; and it becomes us to impute it to our transgressions,
that we must pass through a scene of difficulties, ere we can be brought to the
enjoyment of them. That same all-perfect Being, who, as Creator, has so
wonderfully made mankind, that vicious courses should produce, and be punished
by bodily disorders; has, as moral Governor of the world, so constituted
nations, that the like courses should occasion public diseases and convulsions,
for their correction, and, if not reformed, their destruction. Do we desire,
that our contest would finish in the manner just now hinted at, and that we may
soon come to the end of our troubles, and not be destroyed, we should certainly
repent and reform.

You have had it already remarked to you, that a reformation in principles and
practices will be likely to procure the approbation of the supreme ruler, so
far as to warrant our expecting, that, through the orderings of his providence,
the children of this Colony shall be as aforetime, and their congregation, or
assembly, shall be established before him; that He will punish all that oppress
them; and that their nobles shall be of themselves. This remark remains to be
insisted upon. I have not mentioned in it the word repentance, but a
reformation in principles and practices necessarily includes the thing itself.
There can be no such reformation without a change of mind, and our entertaining
different thoughts of past conduct, which will of course lead us to repent of
it; and no repentance is genuine and godly, that does not produce a reformation
in principles and practices. We are now in an unusual way called upon to wash
ourselves, to make ourselves clean, to put away the evil of our doings from
before our eyes, to cease to do evil, to learn to do well, and to seek every
kind of judgment. But considering that the fast recommended, much to the
satisfaction of the religious of all denominations, by the Continental
Congress, is at hand, when these matters will of course be fully discoursed of,
I only touch upon them; at the same time observing, that an alteration of
practice must flow from a change in principles, or our relief will most likely
prove no better than a temporary expedient. The sovereign of the universe may
so far honor, in the sight of the world, an outward reformation of manners, as
to grant deliverance upon the account of it; but where there is nothing beyond
such outward reformation the deliverance will probably be neither complete nor
permanent. Indeed should we make thorough work of it, and reform in principles
as well as practices, we have sufficient warrant to expect, that God will
gratify all our wishes, wherein they are just and proper, he having once and
again declared in his holy oracles what is tantamount hereto, though I shall
quote the following passage only, out of the 18 of Jer. 7, 8. ver. At what
instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck
up and to pull down and to destroy it; if that nation against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to
do unto them. On the morrow there is, in some respects, to be a new thing under
the sun, that has not been already of old time, the several united British
American colonies are to humble themselves under the mighty hand of God. May
the spirit of the Lord prepare and carry us all through the right discharge of
so reasonable a service, then may we hope, on the most national grounds, that
the children of this colony will be as aforetime; that their assembly will be
established before the Lord; that he will punish all that oppress them; and
that their nobles shall be of themselves.

A man of a timid make, of little faith, no way^ conversant with or forgetful
of historical facts, may be apprehensive, that, though our assembly is
gathered, and we are about to have our Nobles of ourselves, this mode of
government will not be established, and that the present appearances are only
like those sudden revivals that frequently proceed the total extinction of
life. He may tremble at the thoughts of that power with whom we are to contend.
He may be terrified with the notion, that sooner or later we must fall before
it* and he may therefore be willing to compound for life and the precarious
tenure of a little property, with the ^ame surrender of his liberties. Was the
cause of the Ministry the cause of Great Britain, supported by the united
endeavors of the nation, instead of being execrated by persons of the first
character, for wisdom, courage, experience, nobility and piety, and opposed by
multitudes waiting for advantages against administration. Was there not
animmense debt of more than 130,000 millions sterling, hanging like a millstone
round the neck of the public -- an exhausted treasury -- a decaying trade --
and the most alarming prospects to the merchant, trader and manufacturer. Were
not the internal distresses of the state, through a multiplicity of poor, the
dearness of provisions and a load of taxes, exceeding great. Did the interest
and policy of France and Spain require their remaining in peace with Britain,
during a civil war between her and the colonies, instead of the contrary. Had
not the wide Atlantic set us at so great a distance from Europe, and the
American winds and seasons promised us their assistance in their respective
months. Had the colonies been less united or zealous. Had not officers of
courage and conduct, conversant with the arts of war, and warm for the
liberties of mankind, offered their assistance, and readily undertook our
defense. And had not the individuals of the Continental Congress, regardless of
threats and wrath like the roaring of lions, boldly ventured to engage in
maintaining our common rights, upon forming and supporting a Continental army,
and in appointing able Generals to command it, in whom we can confide and do
rejoice, but whom we cannot compliment to any advantage, by reason of their
being so superior to every thing we can offer of that kind. Had they not
adopted those measures, which will expose them to suffer as rebels, unless
success prevents -- Then we might have had a fearful looking for of fiery
trials for a long continuance; and might have felt great discouragements: But,
when besides the favorable circumstances already hinted at, we reflect, upon
the military spirit that the Lord of hosts has providentially diss^^sed
through the Continent, so as in some to overcome the most powerful prejudices
of education and denomination: that the British ministry have not succeeded in
any one part of their plan, but have been involved in greater difficulties
every step that they taken: that God has wonderfully appeared for us, crowning
our military operations with unusual success, and disconcerting those of the
enemy: that the British troops, instead of ranging at large without opposition;
or driving the country before them and being at liberty to riot upon the fat of
the land, and to gratify their brutal lusts upon our wives, daughters or more
distant relations, are confined within narrow limits, and cut off from the
enjoyment of diverse comforts, by those they have been taught to consider as
infamous cowards: that our people, who have suffered the most, lost very
considerably, and been reduced to many difficulties and hardships before
unknown, have been strangely preserved from dejection and fainting, as though
by the special interposition of heaven, and, so far from murmuring and
complaining wherever they have gone, have been in common cheerful and pleasant
-- though strangers before to the desolations and cruelties of war, they have
born them as if they had been familiarized to them. When we further reflect,
upon the importance and goodness of our cause; how the number of our enemies
has been wonderfully kept down from time to time* notwithstanding the
reinforcements they have been frequently receiving; how they on the one hand
appear to be greatly dispirited, while on the other our forces are animated;
that on the side of administration have been all manner of lies, deceit, wicked
cunning, corruption, profaneness and blasphemy; but that multitudes are
continually supplicating the divine favor and blessing for us. I say when all
these particulars are considered, we are justified in hoping, that the
proceedings of this day, instead of being the last of the kind will prove the
renewal of our constitutional privileges, and that this mode of government will
be established before the Lord. We should certainly rebel against the Sovereign
of the universe in his providential dispensations, and reject the divine
council communicated to us by that medium, did we not resolve to persist in our
present opposition to the wicked designs of an arbitrary ministry. And let but
the several members of this honorable house of Representatives exert
themselves in their public legislative and private capacities, to bring back
the manners of the people to what they were originally, so that our children
may be as aforetime, virtuous, disinterested, patriotic and pious; and to
extirpate those vices that have crept in unawares among us. Let them approve
themselves the genuine descendants and successors of those that composed the
most early assemblies* keeping out from among them all those evils, that have
been complained of in past years: and we may be almost certain, not only that
our assemblies will be established and our nobles continue to be from among
ourselves; but that the Lord will punish those that oppress us, in some way or
other, as to him shall seem best, and lead the world to cry out, Verily there
is a reward for the righteous: verily He is a God that judges in the earth:
Yea, we may probably live to see our governor proceed from the midst of us.

I shall detain this venerable audience no longer than just to mention the few
following observations.

No member can consistently take his place, or be admitted to sit in the house
of Assembly, who hesitates about setting up government, seeing, that the
Continental Congress advised to the latter, no less than the choice of
Representatives in order to it; and that there is the like original authority
for the one as the other.

He that does not mean to bear a part in the public burdens of the day, but to
escape wholly unhurt in person and property is no patriot; while he that,
instead of serving, designs only to serve himself of the public, to acquire
riches and raise a fortune out of the general calamity, must be really one of
the worst of men, cannot deserve the protection of the state, and when
discovered must be detested by every true son and daughter of liberty, as being
a most odious character.

There is not an individual but may be aiding and assisting to the common cause
one way or other. The wicked and unrighteous may help it materially, the one by
forsaking his wickedness, and the other his unrighteousness. The godly by their
inwrought fervent pra^ers, which avail much with their heavenly Father; thus
may pious women contribute to the success of those arms, which the feebleness
of their sex will not admit of their bearing. Infants may be helpful by moving
their parents to exert every nerve, and strain every sinew, rather than train
them up to be bondmen and bond-maids to haughty tyrants and merciless
oppressors. The aged and expiring, by enconraging all about them not to
surrender the best part of that fair patrimony which they are now leaving
behind them. The martial and courageous by their personal bravery. The timid by
concealing their fears, withdrawing themselves whenever their fears would be
apt to appear and produce a baneful influence, and when they discourse upon
public affairs, by insisting upon the divine interpositions with which we have
been favored, and the goodness of the cause wherein we are engaged. The poor
may assist by determining, that though poor they will be free; and that if they
cannot have riches, they will not wear chains. And the rich by the loan of
their money, that so the necessary expenses may be supplied, and the defense of
the country may not fall through, for want of the requisites for carrying it
on. Nothing can be more faulty than for the rich to decline hazarding their
cash, while exempted from hazarding their persons; nor more simple, than for
them, through fear of losing some of their riches, to endanger the losing them
all, together with their liberties. Could the state be secured, a person would
be provoked by such preposterous conduct to say to each of them, confining the
words to the body only, Thy money perish with thee. May heaven influence every
one of us to contribute our best abilities, according to our several stations
and relations, to the defense and support of the commonweal! Amen.


