LIBERTY DESCRIBED AND RECOMMENDED.

Liberty described and recommended; IN A SERMON, PREACHED TO THE CORPORATION OF
FREEMEN IN FARMINGTON, At their Meeting on Tuesday, September 20, 1774, And
published at their Desire.

By LEVI HEART, A. M. Pastor of a Church in PRESTON.

The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because he has anointed me -- to
proclaim Liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the Prison to them who are
bound.

ISAIAH lxi. 1. HARTFORD: Printed by EBEN. WATSON, near the Great Bridge.
M,DCC,LXXV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THOUGH the author of the following discourse might avail himself of the common
apology for publishing Sermons, viz. The importunity of friends; yet he should
have been averse to this publication had it not been that the subject and
occasion gave him opportunity to cast in his mite for the relief of the
oppressed and injured Africans, whose cause he thought himself bound to plead,
and to bear his testimony against the cruel and barbarous Slave Trade. He is
sensible the arguments on that subject might be treated, more at large, and to
better advantage; he designed to treat the subject only in a moral and
religious view, and he could only hint a few thoughts on that branch of the
argument, in a short discourse in which several other things were considered.

The author pretends not to pronounce on the impropriety of the Slave Trade in
a political view -- this would be out of his province: but he would submit to
the gentlemen of the law, whether the admission of slavery in a government so
democratical as that of the colony of Connecticut, does not tend to the
subversion of its happy constitution. Be this as it may, if the Slave Trade is
contrary to the law of nature, which is the law of God, it is more than time it
was effectually prohibited, and until that is done we, are accountable to God
for all the sufferings which we bring upon the unhappy Negroes; for whatever
difficulties there may be in the way of freeing the slaves already among us (as
there are confessedly some) these cannot be reasonably advanced, against
prohibiting the importation of more. Should it be objected that preaching and
printing against the slave trade will tend to encourage servants in
disobedience to their masters and support them in disorder and rebellion, the
author need only reply, that though he is fully convinced that there is no more
reason or justice in our enslaving the Africans than there would be in their
enslaving us, yet he thinks the Negro slaves among us are bound by motives of
duty and interest to "be obedient to their own masters," and to "show all good
fidelity" in their service, agreeable to apostolic direction, and as the most
probable method to make their yoke easy, and pave the way for obtaining their
freedom, or, if not their own, that of their posterity.

He would be sorry to be, even the innocent, occasion of disorders in families,
but should this be the case it is no sufficient objection against asserting the
truth on this subject: there is, perhaps, scarce any doctrine of christianity
but what has been made the occasion of sin, through the perverseness of wicked
men; especially has this been true of the doctrines of grace -- Must the
doctrines of grace therefore not be preached?

In fine, it is ardently wished that the divine blessing may attend the address
to the slaves of sin and satan -- that they may escape from their bondage, and
be made partakers of the glorious liberty of the sons of God.

Liberty discribed and recommended.
II. PETER ii, 19. While they promise them Liberty, they themselves are the
servants of corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he
brought into Bondage.


TO assert and maintain the cause of Liberty, is far from being peculiar to the
British colonies in North America, at the present day; our venerable Ancestors
sought and found it in this western world, and at no small expense of their
treasure and blood, purchased it for, and conveyed it down to us. The most
distinguished and worthy characters in Great Britain have patronized, spoke and
written, and some of them even died, in defense of the sacred rights of
Liberty! Those ancient, renowned States of Greece and Rome, in their most
flourishing condition, received their greatest lusture from a set of pubilc
spirited, patriotic men, whose hearts glowed with the love of liberty, who were
her defenders and supporters, and whose names and writings are venerable to
distant ages and nations of men, even long after those once mighty empires are
gone to decay, and perished through neglecting to follow the maxims of those
wise men, those patrons of liberty, who pointed out the path to lasting empire
and glory.

INDEED, the sacred cause of liberty ever has been, and ever will be venerable
in every part of the world where knowledge and learning flourish, and men are
suffered to think and speak for themselves. Yea, it must be added, that Heaven
has appeared in the cause of liberty, and that in the most open and decisive
manner: For this, the Son of God was manifest in the flesh, that he might
destroy the tyranny of sin and satan, assert and maintain the equal government
of his Father, redeem the guilty slaves from their more than Egyptian bondage,
and cause the oppressed to go free.

THE whole plan of Redemption, which is by far the greatest and most noble of
all the works of God made known to us, to which they all tend, and in which
they center, is comprised in procuring, preaching and bestowing liberty to the
captives, and the opening of the prison to the bound: And the gospel of our
salvation is principally taken up in describing that glorious liberty which is
purchased for sinners by the Son of God -- the bondage from which he redeem us
-- the ransom which he paid for our redemption -- the way to obtain and enjoy
this Liberty, and in stating and urging the most cogent and endearing
arguments, and motives, to persuade us to come out of our bondage, and accept
of the Liberty wherewith Christ makes his people free. It is on this account
denominated Gospel, or Good News; and is to the sinner, like the jubilee
trumpet to the enslaved Israelite.

BUT it must be remembered, that in proportion as Liberty is excellent, and to
be desired on the one hand, so slavery or bondage is terrible and to be avoided
on the other. These are justly esteemed the two extremes of happiness and
misery in Society. It will not therefore be thought foreign to our subject, or
an unsuitable attempt upon the present occasion, to enquire into the various
significations of these two opposite terms, as they are used in the several
kinds of society with which we are concerned, especially as they are introduced
in our text as opposed to each other, and it is intimated, that the most fond
assertors of liberty, may after all, be themselves in a state of the most
abject slavery and bondage.

LIBERTY may be defined in general, a power of action, or a certain
suitableness or prep aredness for exertion, and a freedom from force, or
hindrance from any external cause; Liberty when predicated of man as a moral
agent, and accountable creature, is that suitableness or preparedness to be the
subject of volitions, or exercises of will, with reference to moral objects; by
the influence of motives, which we find belongs to all men of common
capacity, and who are come to the years of understanding.

THIS Liberty is opposed to that want of capacity, by which there is a total
ignorance of all moral objects, and so, a natural incapacity of choosing with
regard to them. Again, the term Liberty is frequently used to denote a power of
doing as we please, or of executing our acts of choice; this refers principally
to external action, or bodily motion; and is opposed to force or opposition: --
thus the prisoner who is bound in fetters, and secured with bolts and bars of a
prison, is not at liberty to go out, he is deprived of this kind of liberty,
and is in bondage.

AGAIN, Liberty may be considered and defined with reference to society: --
Mankind in a state of nature, or considered as individuals, antecedent to the
supposition of all social connections, are not the subjects of this freedom,
but it is absolutely necessary to the well being of society.

HUMAN society is founded originally in compact, or mutual agreement. All the
larger circles of society originate from family connection or mutual compact
between husband and wife; and mutual compact necessarily implies certain rules
and obligations which neither of the parties may violate with impunity.

IN the early ages of the world, before vice and wickedness had corrupted and
destroyed the original natural form of civil government, as a fine writer of
our own nation expresses it; -- "each patriarch sat king, priest and prophet
of his growing state." Mr. POPE.
But when the wickedness of man was become exceeding great, and every
imagination of his heart evil, the earth was filled with violence: by the
daring efforts of wicked men to subvert the original excellent form of society,
and introduce despotic rule where the lives and happiness of many, even whole
kingdoms should depend on the will, and be subservient to the pleasure of one
man. Genesis vi. 4, 5, and x. 8, 9.
But as society evidently originates from mutual compact or agreement, so it is
equally evident, that the members who compose it, unite in one common interest;
each individual gives up all private interest that is not consistent with the
general good, the interest of the whole body: And, considered as a member of
society, he has no other interest but that of the whole body, of which he is a
member: The case is similar to that of a trading company, possessed of a common
stock, into which every one has given his proportion; the interest of this
common stock is now the property of the whole body, and each individual is
benefited in proportion to the good of the whole, and is a good or bad member
in proportion as he uniteth to, or counteracteth the interest of the body. And
thus it is in the present case: civil society is formed for the good of the
whole body of which it is composed. Hence the welfare and prosperity of the
society is the common good, and every individual is to seek and find his
happiness in the welfare of the whole, and every thing to be transacted in
society, is to be regulated by this standard. -- In particular, all the laws
and rules formed in such society must tend to promote the general welfare; this
is the test by which they must be tried, and by which they must stand or fall;
all regulations in the body, and all rewards and punishments to individuals,
must be determined agreeable to this. -- Those who seek and promote the public
interest, are to be esteemed and rewarded; and those who counteract and oppose
it, must be punished in proportion to the injury aimed or committed against the
public welfare.

WE may add, that as the good of the public is the end and design of all good
laws and rules, established in a well regulated society, so they must be
enacted by the public, i. e. by the wisest and best men in the society,
appointed by the body for this purpose. -- Men who best understand the public
good, and have a common interest with the body, and who are above the narrow
pursuits of private interest. -- If Laws and rules in society are established
by any man, or body of men, who have not a common interest with the whole body
of the members, but the contrary, it is evident at first view, they will be
exposed to act in opposition to the general good. -- None therefore but the
representatives of the whole body, in whom as far as possible, the interest of
all ranks is contained, are proper to make laws for the regulation of society.
For the same reason, those who are to execute the laws, should be appointed in
such a manner, and by such authority, as in the best possible way secures their
attachment to the general good: And, the members of civil community who are
disobedient to such laws and oppose the administration of such authority
agreeable to them, deserve punishment according to the degree of their
opposition, and their opportunity to promote, or counteract the general good.
The crime of every private member in opposing the interest of society, is
greater than that of opposition to the interest of an individual, as much
(other things being equal) as the interest of the society is greater and of
more worth than that of an individual.

IN this view of our subject, we may form some conception of the crime of a
civil ruler, who sacrifices the public interest committed to his trust by
society, for the sake of his own private gain; -- who betrayeth that sacred
deposit, to gratify his narrow, sordid thirst of wealth or honor: -- We may
form some conceptions of his crime, but we want words to paint the horrors of
it. -- If a private man is without excuse, and is justly doomed to die as a
traitor and rebel, when he deserts his country's cause, or basely betrays it,
though to save his life, what epithets of lasting infamy are black enough to
draw the picture of the inhuman paricide, who basks in the glare of riches and
grandeur, at the expense of the public welfare: Yea, may we not depend that
heaven itself will assert the cause of liberty, defend the injured innocent,
and discharge its thunderbolts on the guilty head of the oppressor, red with
uncommon wrath, to blast the man that owes his greatness to his country's ruin?

FROM this general view of society, we are led to observe, that civil liberty
does not consist in a freedom from all law and government, -- but in a freedom
from unjust law and tyrannical government: -- In freedom, to act for the
general good, without incurring the displeasure of the ruler or censure of the
law: -- And civil slavery or bondage consists in being obliged either by a
bad set of laws, or bad and tyrannical rulers, to act in opposition to the good
of the whole, or suffer punishment for our steady attachment to the general
good.

RELIGIOUS LIBERTY is the opportunity of professing and practicing that
religion which is agreeable to our judgment and consciences, without
interruption or punishment from the civil magistrate. And religious bondage or
slavery, is when we may not do this without incurring the penalty of laws, and
being exposed to suffer in our persons or property. --

ECCLESIASTICAL LIBERTY, is such a state of order and regularity in christian
society, as gives every member opportunity to fill up his place in acting for
the general good of that great and holy society to which the true church of
Christ belongs, and of which they are a part. And ecclesiastical slavery, is
such a state as subjects some branches of this society to the will of others,
(not to the good of the whole glorious kingdom) and punishes them with the
loss of some, or all of the privileges of ecclesiastical society, if they
disobey such tyrannical will, however they may act for the good of the whole,
and so, agreeable to the law of Christ.

FINALLY, there is another kind of liberty and bondage, which deserve
particular attention in this place, only as they are especially pointed to in
our text, but as being of principle concern to men, they may be denominated
spiritual liberty and bondage. -- This liberty is spoken of by our Lord, John
viii. 32, 36. Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free, -- if
the Son make you free, ye shall be free indeed. And, by the Apostle, Romans vi,
18. Being then made free from sin, ye became the servants of righteousness.
Gallat. v. 1. stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. 2.
Cor. iii. 17. Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.

SPIRITUAL LIBERTY then, is freedom or readiness and engagedness of soul in the
love and service of God and Christ, and discharge of the various branches of
christian duty.

SPIRITUAL BONDAGE, takes place in the dominion of sin and satan in the soul,
or that state of allienation from God and Christ, to which all impenitent
sinners are subject.

THIS brief view of the various significations of the terms liberty and
slavery, might be usefully improved in many inferences and remarks. I will
detain you only with those which follow.

INFERENCE first.

IF civil liberty consists in acting freely, and without constraint, or fear
of punishment, for the public good, and tyranny and slavery are the reverse of
this, -- it follows, that every one who acts for the general good of society,
is entitled to the approbation and assistance of the body. None can justly fall
under the frowns of society, but those who prefer some private benefit to the
public welfare: And every society which suffers, or even connives at the
practice, in any of its members, of taking away the liberty or property of
those who have done nothing against the public interest, connives at injustice,
and is so far guilty of tyranny and oppression.

OF all the enjoyments of the present life that of liberty is the most precious
and valuable, and a state of slavery the most gloomy to a generous mind -- to
enslave men, therefore, who have not forfeited their liberty, is a most
attrocious violation of one of the first laws of nature, it is utterly
inconsistant with the fundamental principle and chief bond of union by which
society originally was, and all free societies ever ought to be formed. I mean
that of a general union for the common good, by which every individual is
secure of public approbation so long as he acts for the public welfare.

COULD it be thought then that such a palpable violation of the law of nature,
and of the fundamental principles of society, would be practiced by individuals
and connived at, and tolerated by the public in British America! this land of
liberty where the spirit of freedom glows with such ardour. -- Did not
obstinate incontestible facts compel me, I could never believe that British
Americans would be guilty of such a crime -- I mean that of the horrible
slave trade, carried on by numbers and tolerated by authority in this country.
It is not my design to enter largely into the arguments on this subject; all
who agree to the general principles already laid down, will join in pronouncing
the African slave trade a flagrant violation of the law of nature, of the
natural rights of mankind. What have the unhappy Africans committed against the
inhabitants of the British colonies and islands in the West Indies; to
authorize us to seize them, or bribe them to seize one another, and transport
them a thousand leagues into a strange land, and enslave them for life? For
life did I say? From generation to generation to the end of time! However the
cruel bondage is somewhat lightened in these northern colonies, through the
kindness and lenity of the masters -- kindness and lenity, I mean as far as
these terms are applicable in the present case; I say, however the cruel
bondage of the poor Africans is somewhat lightened among us; if we would for a
just estimate of the nature of the slave trade we must be acquainted with the
method of procuring the slaves -- transporting them, and their treatment in the
West Indies, to which, and the southern colonies a great part of them are
transported, and where the nature of the slave trade is consistently displayed.

WHEN the Guinea traders arrive on that coast if the trading natives are not
already supplied with a proper number of slaves, they go into the back
settlements and either by secret ambush, or open force, seize a sufficient
number for their purpose; in accomplishing which great numbers, many times are
slain, and whole towns laid in ashes. When taken they are driven like cattle to
the slaughter, to the sea shore, and sold to our Guinea traders, often for a
small quantity of that soul and body destroying liquor, rum, qualified however
with a large proportion of water, by which the ignorant natives are imposed
upon, cheated, and disappointed. -- The poor slaves are bound and thrust into
the filthy holds of the ships -- men, women, fathers, daughters, mothers, sons,
without distinction; where they are obliged to rot together through a long sea
passage, which happily releives numbers from more intolerable sufferings on the
shore. --

WHEN they are arrived at the West Indies they are again exposed in the
markets, and sold like beasts of burden to the inhuman planters, by whose
cruelty many more of them perish. It is supposed that out of near an hundred
thousand which are computed to be transported from Africa annually, almost one
third perish on the passage and in seasoning; and those unhappy numbers whose
hard lot it is to be doomed to longer slavery, wear out their wretched lives in
misery which wants a name. The Egyptian bondage was a state of liberty and ease
compared with the condition of these unhappy sufferers; and for a trifling
offense their barbarous masters will seize and butcher them, with as little,
and in many instances, perhaps less ceremony or regret than you would take away
the life of one of your domestic animals. It would be an affront to your
understandings to enter on a long course of reasoning to prove the injustice
and cruelty of such a trade as this. Let us for once put ourselves in the place
of the unhappy Negroes. Suppose a number of ships arrived from Africa at a
neighboring sea port to purchase slaves, and transport them to that distant
and to us inhospitable climate and those burning sands -- put the case that a
prevailing party in the neighboring towns were so lost to all sense of public
welfare and to the feelings of humanity as to accept their bribes and join with
them to effect the ruin of their fellow men. Let this be the devoted town --
and even now while you are met to assert and exercise that invaluable liberty
which is the distinguished glory of Englishmen, the honor and safety of
Connecticut; in this distined hour while your hearts glow with the love of
liberty and exult in her possession; behold this house surrounded, whole armies
from the neighboring towns rush on you, those who resist are at once
overpowered by numbers and butchered, the survivors, husbands, wives, parents,
children, brethren, sisters, the ardent lover and his darling fair one, all
seized, bound and driven away to the neighboring seaport, where all ranged on
the shore promiscuously, in a manner that pity and modesty relent to name: you
are sold for a trifling sum, and see your inhuman purchasers rejoiceing in
their success. But the time is come for a last farewell, you are destined to
differnt ships bound to different and far distant coasts, go husbands and
wives, give and receive the last embrace; parents bid a lasting adieu to your
tender offspring. What can you say? What do to comfort or advise them? Their
case and yours admit not of consolation -- go, mothers, weep out your sorrows
on the necks of your beloved daughters whom you have nursed with so much care,
and educated with such delicacy; now they must go to a distant clime, to attend
the nod of an imperious mistress, covered with rags and filth (if covered at
all) they must descend to the most servile and intolerable drudgery, and every
the least symptom of uneasiness at their hard usuage, meet the frowns and
suffer the merciless lash of a cruel master. -- But why ruminate on this;
behold the inhuman monsters tear you from your last embrace, bound in chains
you are hurried to different vessels, crowded in their holds and transported
away forever from the sight of all you love, to distant cruel lands, to live
and die in slavery and bondage, without the smallest hope of ever enjoying the
sweets of liberty, or revisiting your dear native country, with this only
consolation, that your sons and daughters are suffering the same cruel bondage,
and that from you a race of abject slaves will, probably, be propagated down
for hundreds of years! Such are the sweets of this beloved slave trade! It is
the same to the unhappy sufferers now, that it would be to us if it was our own
case; and the reasons against it are as strong and powerful as they would be
then -- in short the man that can deliberately attend to this subject and not
feel the emotions of pity, or indignation, or both, appears to be sunk quite
below the feelings of humanity! Is it not high time for this colony to wake up
and put an effectual stop to the cruel business of stealing and selling our
fellow men, so far as it can be stopped by one province?

WITH what a very ill grace can we plead for slavery when we are the tyrants,
when we are engaged in one united struggle for the enjoyment of liberty; what
inconsistence and self-contradiction is this! Who can count us the true friends
of liberty as long as we deal in, or publicly connive at slavery. --

THE general assembly of a neighboring colony Rhode Island.
have prohibited the importation of Negro slaves under a large penalty, and
have enacted that such slaves shall be free as soon as they set foot on the
shore within the colony. Can this Colony want motives from reason, justice,
religion, or public spirit, to follow the example? When, O when shall the happy
day come, that Americans shall be consistently engaged in the cause of liberty,
and a final end be put to the cruel slavery of our fellow men? Then may we not
expect that our liberties will be established on a lasting foundation and that
British America and English liberty will flourish to the latest posterity!

INFERENCE 2. IF civil liberty consists in acting freely and without
constraint or fear of punishment for the public good, and so, agreeable to the
laws framed to promote and secure it, and civil bondage or slavery is the
reverse of this. We learn the importance of intrusting those, and none but
those, with the guardianship of our civil liberties who are themselves free,
who are not under the dominion of that sordid selfishness and narrowness of
soul by which they will betray their country, our dear Country for a little
private profit or honor to themselves.

MEN who know the worth of public liberty, and are able and willing defenders
of it, be the consequences what they may to their private interest, are the
only proper persons to be rulers or representatives of this free and happy
colony. In such the votes of the freemen should unite, without the least regard
to party, interest, or any private views, agreeable to the nature and solemnity
of their oath, and as they value their inestimable liberties, and would dread
to fall a helpless prey to tyranny and oppression.

INFERENCE 3. IF it is of such importence that we enjoy and secure civil
liberty, which respects only a comparatively small circle of society which must
disband, at the latest, with the close of fleeting time; of what moment is it
to us all, that we are the subjects of that spiritual liberty, which unites us
to, and interests us in the good of the whole kingdom of God our Savior, and
which shall last forever!

IT is a just way of reasoning in the present case, from the less to the
greater, let me say then, with what astonishment and abhorrence should we look
on a person who chooses slavery and bondage under the most cruel tyrant, with
the certain prospect of a shameful, painful death, by the hand of the
executioner, rather than all the sweets of English liberty!

BUT with what an unspeakable greater madness is be chargable who prefers the
guilty slavery of sin and satan, to the glorious, perfect liberty of the
children of God! Yet how many make this fatal choice! How many too, who are at
great expense and trouble in the cause of civil liberty and zealous assertors
of it! What self-contradiction and inconsistence is here! Is not this to strain
out a gnat and swallow a cammel? What is English liberty? What is American
freedom? When compared with the glorious liberty of the sons of God? And what
is slavery under the gauling yoke of oppression, to the hard bondage of sin and
satan! Let the hitherto, willing slaves of sin and satan then rouse up, there
is now an opportunity to escape from bondage; there is one come to preach
deliverance to the captives, and the opening the prison to them who are bound.
Jesus Christ the mighty king and Savior, the scourge of tyrants, and destroyer
of sin and satan, the assertor, the giver and supporter of original, perfect
freedom; he sets open your prison doors, knocks off your chains, and calls you
to come forth. Oh! What prisoner who will not leap for joy at the sound of this
jubilee trumpet, accept the offered pardon, embrace the given freedom, -- bid
adieu to slavery and bondage, and stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ
makes his subjects free. Here the most perfect liberty may be enjoyed. The
exalted king seeks and secures the public interest; to this all the branches of
his good government and wise administration tend, and in this they center, for
this joy which was set before him, he came into our nature and world, and even
endured the cross and despised the shame. -- All the subjects in this happy
kingdom are united in the same honorable cause, to them their is neither
Barbarian, Scythian, Greek, or Jew, bond or free, they are all one, in one
cause, and pursue it animated by one spirit; they feel how good and pleasant it
is for brethren to dwell together in unity. -- In vain shall the tyrant satan
vent his impotent rage against these happy sons of liberty: be wise in season
then, bid adieu to the kingdom of darkness, the cause of tyranny and
oppression, inlist under the Captain of the Lords host, fight under his banner,
you may be sure of victory, and liberty shall be your lasting reward, for whom
the son makes free shall be free indeed.

FINIS.

