Mr. Lyman's THANKSGIVING SERMON.

A SERMON PREACHED At Hatfield December 15th, 1774, BEING THE DAY RECOMMENDED
By the late Provincial Congress; To be observed as A Day of THANKSGIVING.

BY JOSEPH LYMAN, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN SAID TOWN.

The Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice. Psalm. xcvii. 1. BOSTON: Printed and
Sold by EDES and GILL, in Queen Street. 1775.

At a Meeting of the Town of Hatfield, Jan. 9th 1775.
Voted, THAT Messirs. John Hastings, Elijah Moreton and Jonathan Allis, be a
Committee to wait upon the Rev. Mr. Lyman, and present him the Thanks of the
Town for his Sermon delivered last Thanksgiving Day; and desire that he would
favor the Town with a Copy thereof, in order that it may be printed.

Copy of Record Attest. Oliver Partridge, Town Clerk.

The Answer.
To the Inhabitants of the Town of Hatfield.
Gentlemen,
I Thank you for the Honor done me, in requesting a Copy of my Sermon,
delivered upon the last Thanksgiving Day, for the Press. Your desires and the
Importance of the Subject then attempted to be discussed, are my Motives for
consenting in my early Life to appear in such a public Manner. My Concern is,
least I should do a Dishonor to the great Doctrine of God's Righteousness and
Goodness to his Churches, by my unequal endeavors to make it illustrious, and
to confirm the Faith of his People upon the sure Foundation of the Gospel.

I have made some Additions for Illustration in the Marginal Notes, and some
small Corrections in the Original, which are submitted to your pleasure, by

your affectionate Pastor, JOSEPH LYMAN.
Hatfield Jan. 25. 1775.
A SERMON.
Delivered upon a Day of Thanksgiving.
Malachi, III Chap. 1, 2. Ver. Behold I will send my Messenger, and he shall
prepare the way before me: And the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his
temple, even the Messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight in: Behold, he shall
come, says the Lord of Hosts.

But who may abide the day of his coming? And who shall stand when He
appears? For He is like a refiner's fire and like fuller's soap.


THE two first chapters of this prophecy contain a reproof of the ingratitude
of the children of Israel, and the contempt which they cast upon God in their
sacrifices. The aggravation of their sin arose from the peculiar favor and
goodness of heaven to their nation, in placing them above the rest of mankind,
by the enjoyment of special privileges.

The priesthood incurred reproach by a base perversion of their office and the
introduction of manifold corruptions into divine worship.

Their violation of the covenant of Levi, provoked God to render them
contemptible before all the people: They were impoverished and became
despicable among their brethren, by the neglect of the tribes in withholding
their tithes and offerings. From censuring the Levites the Prophet proceeds to
reprove the other inhabitants of Jerusalem for their intermarriages with
strangers, and for violating the covenant with their lawful wives: hereby they
were seduced into idolatry and all the abominations of the heathen, whom the
Lord had cast out before the face of their fathers.

The Jews wearied God with their impatience and murmuring complaints.

They looked carefully for the promised Messiah, a Prince to arise up in the
family of David to be their deliverer out of all their afflictions, and to
exalt them high above the nations. They impeached the divine goodness for
delaying this distinguishing benefit to them, and said, 'Where is the God of
Judgment'. Or wherefore does not the just God fulfill his promises, and send us
deliverance? Hereby they discovered their distrust of the divine faithfulness;
and they wearied God with their infidelity and suspicious jealousy of his power
and goodness. But instead of chastizing them, as their impatient murmurings had
merited, God sent his Prophet with a new and merciful prediction of Christ's
coming, and the signs and manner thereof. This prophecy begins with our Text.
In treating of which I shall attempt

I. A brief explanation of the several distinct parts thereof -- And then,

II. Dwell upon some general truths contained therein, with more particular
attention. And,

I. Let us attend to a brief explanation of the several distinct parts of the
text.

The Prophet ushers in his gracious prediction with the word, "Behold", thereby
challenging the attention of his countrymen to something worthy their highest
notice and regard. "I will send" I the Lord Jesus, who am the author of this
promise, by the mouth of my Prophet, "will send". Christ is the source of all
benefits to the church. "My messenger." Christ's messenger or the forerunner
who proclaimed his approach, was John the Baptist. "And he shall prepare the
way before me". This did the Baptist, by preaching repentance unto Israel for
the remission of sins. He enjoined renunciation of all their iniquities as a
necessary preparation for the reception of the Messiah, upon his public
manifestation to the world. He preached that the kingdom of heaven was at hand.
-- "And the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple". In about
six months after the Baptist's preaching, Christ was made manifest, and
anointed publicly by the Holy Ghost, to his work. In the days of our Prophet
the people lamented the inferiority of the second temple to that which was
builded by Solomon; yet he lets them know for their consolation, that it should
become illustrious, by the personal appearance of our Lord therein; agreeable to
the words of the Prophet Haggai. "And I will shake all nations, and the desire
of all nations shall come: and I will fill this house with glory, says the
Lord of Hosts. The glory of this latter house shall be greater than the former,
says the Lord of Hosts" Hag. chap. 2. ver. 7, ^.
The temple of Christ extends not only to the temple at Jerusalem, but likewise
to the gospel church, which is frequently styled, "His temple", and, "the
temple of the living God". Christ will always protect his church; he will not
long absent himself therefrom. Although for their declension he may visibly hide
his face and withdraw some of his special favors for a season, yet he will not
long delay his coming: He will never leave nor forsake them; he will return
upon the wings of his love: He will not tarry, but come "suddenly", "even the
messenger of the covenant* whom ye delight in." Christ is the great Prophet of
his people and the head of the covenant of Grace; and he will not be negligent
in bearing messages of peace to the church. He will be faithful and active in
his work. The expressions, "whom ye seek, and whom ye delight in," evidence,
that at all times there are some who are in a measure faithful to the Savior,
who rejoice in his presence, and earnestly look for his return and abode in his
church or temple. -- "Behold he shall come, says the Lord of Hosts". The
promise is repeated with the most solemn assurances to strengthen our
confidence therein. The Father has promised by his great Name, that Christ
shall return to his people. That so they might have a strong consolation, since
it is impossible for God to lie.

"But, who may abide the day of his coming?" However we are assured; that the
messenger of the covenant will come; yet it will frequently be with his
terrible Majesty; in the way of severe Judgments: He will chastise his heritage
for their apostacies; and send the most fearful calamities upon the wicked, who
desire not the Savior's appearance. "God will shake nations, when the desire
of all nations shall come." The hearts of many may fail them: Many may fall
away in the tribulation of those days: The cause may at times appear desperate,
and there may be an almost total defection; some may be brought to death in the
terrible conflict: "For there shall be distress of nations; the waves and sea
roaring." The Lord shall break forth in his glory, from a dark and pitchy Cloud.
-- "And who shall stand when he appears?" Who shall persevere in the midst of
these distresses? Who shall maintain their integrity? who be found faithful to
the end? The Prophet's words intimate, that very few would stand the trial.
"For he is like a refiner's fire, and like fuller's soap." Fire is for the
purification of metals. Silver and Gold are cast thereinto to burn up the
dross. The fuller's soap is used to take out the spots in clothes and garments.
Gold is cast into the furnace, into the extremity of heat, before the alloy,
the reprobate metals are consumed; when it returns, it comes forth pure gold.
And likewise clothes go through a severe purification before all the blemishes
are washed away. Christ is like this fire and soap; he raises the fire of
affliction and persecution to purge away the sins of his people. Many are
washed away in the filth: Many are consumed with the dross. God's children are
severely tried: Many of their darling sins are burnt up. He consumes in them,
the wood, the hay and the stubble: Things very precious to them. They are often
feeble and sore-broken under divine judgments, and are ready to cry out with
the Psalmist Psalm. 74. 1.
, "O God, why have thou cast us off forever? why does thine anger smoke against
the sheep of thy pasture?" Christ comes "with the fan in his hand, and he will
thoroughly purge his floor: He shall gather the wheat into his garner, and burn
up the chaff with unquenchable Fire."

Thus I have explained each part of our text separately. Let us see how the
promise which is twice repeated with so much solemnity, was fulfilled, as it
referred immediately to the Jews -- In due time, John the Baptist, our Lord's
forerunner, preached in the desert of Judea the baptism of repentance for the
remission of sins. Luke 3.
He cried saying, prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. He
warned the people, that the Kingdom of Heaven was at hand. And accordingly,
while he was fulfilling his course, Christ came and was baptized of him in
Jordan, and set up his public administrations. He came with Power and
Authority. His doctrines were unexpected. He had his fan in his hand. He cast
off the Scribes and Pharisees and Jewish doctors: disappointed their fond hopes
of distinction: He refused to associate with them. He chose his followers among
the despised and rejected of the nation. These were led into such tribulation,
that their hearts misgave them, and finally when the messenger of the covenant
was cut off in the midst of his week, they all forsook him and fled. And after
his Resurrection, the church was beset with all the malice of a rancorous and
persecuting zeal. They were murdered; they were dispersed; they were wasted and
laid most desolate, until the iniquities of their persecutors were full. Then
Christ came in fearful Judgments to avenge his Blood and the Blood of his
Martyrs, and the breach of his covenant. Mat. 24. -- Luke 21.
There were wars and rumors of wars. Nation rose again Nation, and Kingdom
against Kingdom; there were Famines and Pestilences, and Earthquakes, in diverse
places; and such tribulation as was not from the beginning of the world, even
unto that time; no, nor ever shall be. And had not God shortened those days, no
flesh would have been saved; but for the Elect's sake, he shortened them. --
Josephus,
There were voices and sights in the air; the most portentous prodigies; army
against army in battle array, engaged over the city: The sound of trumpets and
the most astonishing noises, to fill their hearts with terror and dire dismay.
These were but the beginnings of sorrows, a prelude to that awful and final
excision which they suffered at the hands of Titus -- Thus did the messenger of
the covenant come to his temple; to protect his church, and to execute wrath
upon his enemies. Thus was he a Refiner's Fire, and Fuller's Soap, And how few
did abide the day of his coming? or stand when he appeared? But let us now pass
on,

II. To consider of some of the more general truths in our text.

We are thence taught;

I. That Christ will defend his church.

He came into the world a messenger of the covenant: And his covenant will he
keep with his people. And he has the security of the Father's promise. Psalm.
89. 29 -- 35.
His seed also will I make to endure forever, and his throne as the days of
Heaven. If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my Judgments; if they
break my statutes, and keep not my commandments; then will I visit their
transgression with the rod, and their iniquities with stripes. Nevertheless, my
loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to
fail. Once have I sworn by my Holiness, that I will not lie unto David. And our
blessed Lord, when he was parting from his Apostles, after his Resurrection, to
revive their drooping spirits under the pressure of his absence, gives them
this refreshing cordial Mat. ^^ ^0.
"Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world". By this we have
assurance, that at all times, and to the end of time, God will have a true
ministry, and a true church. Although he may in a measure forsake them for a
little season, yet he will return; he will return suddenly. The gates of hell
shall not prevail. At times, the church may decline; and God may frown: His
people may go about the city seeking him whom their soul loves: They may
entertain fears left he may have departed to visit them no more. "But their
beloved shall make haste, and be like to a roe, or to a young heart, upon the
mountains of spices". Solomon's Song.
Christ will visibly maintain his church wherein his worship and ordinances
shall be regularly administered. Although after repeated provocations, and
long-suffering forbearance, he may cast off a particular people; yet he will
direct his ministers to turn to other nations; and he will be found of them
which sought not after him. We may never distrust the divine promise, "For the
Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the
covenant, whom ye delight in; behold he shall come, says the Lord of Hosts."
Again,

II. God will be sought unto, that he may come and visit his church.

"The Lord whom ye seek; the messenger of the covenant whom ye delight in".
Agreeable to these words, we read that before the coming of our Savior, there
were some who were devoted to his service, who earnestly looked for his
appearing. Christ's forerunner prepared the hearts of several for his
reception. Among others, there was good old Simcon, who waited for the
consolation of Israel. And there was Anna, of the tribe of Asher, "who departed
not from the temple, but served God with fastings and prayers night and day".
These sought the Lord and according to their desires they were permitted to
depart in peace: "For their eyes had seen his salvation". Luke 2.
In every dark period of the church there are some names which are found
faithful; who are constantly waiting upon God with an humble, firm confidence
in his goodness, and merciful designs to his church. He expects his people to
wait thus patiently upon him, and acknowledge him as the only repairer of
breaches, who can restore again their waste and desolate places. When God was
about to visit his people Israel with the most precious temporal and spiritual
blessings, he says, "I will yet for this be enquired of, by the house of Israel
to do it for them". Ezekiel. 36. 37.
Before Christ's merciful return to visit his heritage, he sends down his holy
Spirit into the hearts of his children, to excite longing desires after his
gracious approach. The motives of our Lord's return to his temple, after the
primary design of displaying the divine Glory, are the tears and supplications
of his people.

III. Christ frequently comes to his church in the Majesty of Judgments.

When his special presence has been for a season withdrawn, his church grows
corrupt. Many unworthy practices and many unworthy professors creep in. His
children become loose and negligent in their lives, and bring dishonor upon
his name and ordinances. After a series of mercies, they are often remiss in
their walk; return again to the pollutions of the world; and are proud and
forgetful of the rock of their salvation. Thus they tarnish the beauty of the
temple and give occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme; to despise
God; and refuse his worship. Hereby he is lightly spoken of by those who are
without. Christ therefore comes with the fan in his hand; to purge his church;
to separate between the precious and the vile; the gold and the dross. He sends
his judgments abroad in the earth, that men may learn righteousness, Isai, 26.
9.
God's children are chastized for forsaking him, for their worldliness; for
their pride and carnal security. The dead, formal and hypocritical, he will by
his great severity bring to submit to his righteousness, or otherwise burn them
in the fire of his jealousy, and consume them as the alloy in the refining of
silver. To effect these holy purposes the church is cast into tribulation; and
this will often bring on apostacies, whereby the corrupt are through fear or
malice induced to forsake the congregation of God's people; or God's people are
induced to forsake the wicked. Here by the ends of divine judgments are more
effectually answered. Those who have not the root of grace abiding in them, are
ready to apostatize from the truth, when they can thereby escape some temporal
calamity, or secure any considerable good. This method therefore God adopts to
prove men, whether or not his fear be in them; whether they can stand the test
of the fire, and come forth pure gold.

Another design of Providence herein, is suitably to humble a people, and fit
them rightly to prize the favor and protection of heaven. Good obtained
through suffering, is much the most delightsome. And when judgments proceed
mercies, God's children will become truly dependant, submissive and thankful to
him. They who have the most distinguished reward are those who have come out of
great tribulation. These have white robes, and palms in their hands, the
ensigns of their victory. Rev. 7. 9.
There are, therefore many weighty and necessary reasons why Christ in a time
of deep declension, should come to his church in the way of judgments. The most
excellent design hereof is, "That he may purify the sons of Levi, and render
the offering of Judah and Jerusalem pleasant unto the Lord" Context ver. 3, 4.
Again,

IV. It is high matter of comfort in the midst of severe trials, that God often
graciously appears for his church in the way Judgment.

Were divine judgments always a token of God's leaving his church and people,
believers and all others, would be cast into a most dreadful plunge upon the
approach of calamity. But the history of divine providence shows that God is
averse from giving up his people; that his corrections are very commonly the
stripes of a Father: And that nothing but a series of obstinate rebellion
against repeated mercies and chastisements, will induce him to cast off
forever. Therefore when his judgments are abroad, we may hope that it is, that
the inhabitants of the world may learn righteousness Isa. 26. 9.
That he is endeavoring to reclaim and bring to repentance a revolting people.
Although judgments are an invariable sign of some wrong conduct; yet the
faithful are allowed, yea it is their bounden duty to hope, that Christ is
coming to his church to purify it; to purge away the tin, and cleanse it from
wrinkles and blemishes: That he is acting the refiner, and the fuller, and is
determined to sanctify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

When therefore God's arm is stretched out, let repentance mitigate his anger,
and hope establish the soul, that good days are yet to come, when he has
sufficiently purified the house of Levi and the house of Judah. It is high
ground of joy and thankfulness, that he who is head over all things for the
church, overrules every affliction and distress for his own glory, in the
peace and enlargment of his heritage.

I have concluded the general truths which I purposed to consider from the
text; I proceed to apply them.

APPLICATION.
Use 1. It is of infinite importance to every of us to be prepared in this day
of declension, for the coming and appearance of our Lord to his church.

The Prophet who wrote our text, gives us an example in some who lived in a
season of degeneracy. "Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to
another; and the Lord hearkened, and heard it: And a book of remembrance was
written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his
name. And they shall be mine, says the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make
up my jewels; and I will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves
him" Mal. 3. 16, 17.
.

We shall all be speedily called to meet our Lord in the way of death; if not
in his judgments in this world. It is highly important therefore, that we have
our lamps trimmed and burning, with oil therein, that we may be ready to go
forth at any watch in the night. And beside, those who live in such a season of
declension as the present, may be called to severe trials of their faith in
this life. It is, therefore, no small thing which I enjoin, that we gird up the
loins of our minds, and prepare for the conflict. God may prove us, whether we
be wheat or chaff; whether we be refined or reprobate silver. We may be called
to shaking and perplexity of nations; to the waves and sea roaring. He who
stands upon the circuit of eternity, alone knows the events which await us.
It is certainly our duty and interest to be up, and preparing for the worst:
And this, by every man's mourning for his own sins; reforming his life; putting
on faith, patience, fortitude; and by a good example, and pious conversation,
commending repentance and reformation to all about him. It would be a most
deplorable condition, for any of us, to be marked out as the objects of divine
wrath, as the dross, which Christ shall purge from his church. Apostasy is a
fearful judgment: Nothing is more to be deprecated than falling beneath God's
hand, when it is lifted up for the correction of his heritage. Let us therefore
be in readiness, that we be not surprised into any thing dishonorable to
ourselves, or our christian profession. In those who are fitted for the
conflict, it shall only burn up the wood, hay and stubble; the gold, silver,
and precious stones shall remain. Therefore set each one himself upon immediate
and diligent preparation.

Use 2. We have abundant reason to think, that as he has already appeared so,
the Lord purposes hereafter to come to his church in this land, with severe
Judgments.

We cannot, nor dare we deny that we have grievously apostatized from the God
of our forefathers. The story of our obligations to heaven, for merciful
interpositions, would exceed the limits of this discourse. To forget a God, who
has so wonderfully saved us, and enlarged our borders, and given us such
precious privileges in this good and large land, is base ingratitude, and
merits his chastising rod. Accordingly, he has holden it over us, and
threatens still further to punish our backsliding. It is no less a calamity,
than an evidence of our sin, that his holy spirit has so visibly departed from
us, in his gracious operations upon the hearts of men. Added to our guilt, we
have further evidences of God's purpose to afflict and purify us.

He has suffered amongst us luxury, lust and dissipation. And he has
likewise, as a righteous punishment of our disobedience to his laws, raised up
adversaries against this land. Men who have had designs of their own,
incompatible with the general interests of the British empire, moved with a
jealousy of the liberties of the American Colonies, which stand so much in the
way of their ambition, have, by the sufferance of God's holy providence, been
able to procure measures, wholly repugnant to the civil rights of the
inhabitants of this country. The British administration by the force of great
abilities, perverted to base purposes, and by their command of the national
treasure, have influenced the Parliament to enact the most grievous edicts
against us. Laws made, with the feigned pretense of protecting and securing us,
and for the support of civil government, have been the most direct invasion of
our property, and subversive of every idea of English freedom.

They have been permitted to lay us under tribute, when we have not even a
distant restraint upon them. So far are we from having any voice in the Levies
which are made, that our situation is so distant from them, that they cannot
even hear our groanings under oppression. We cannot recieve one kind word, to
sooth our aching hearts. They have applied our moneys for the purpose of
supporting Witness, the exorbitant Pensions given to the Governor, and
Lieutenant Governor, and the Justices of the Superior Court, out of the
American Revenue.
civil officers independent of our grants, thereby still further to detach from
our interest men who have never, as I may appeal to every one, shown any such
The Advocates for the independency of civil Officers upon the People, have
never attempted to produce a single instance, wherein those Officers while
supported from the free Gifts of the People, have by this their dependence,
been swerved from an industrious, persevering maintenance of the royal
Prerogative. This is an argument, either of their unparallelled
disinterestedness; or that their appointment by the King, and removal at his
Pleasure, are at least a counterbalance to the People's Power of giving, or
withholding their support. Those who ^hile dependant upon the Grants of our
Assemblies for their Sala^^^s, have never shown an overweaning affection, for
the claims of the People will not have very strong temptations thereto, when
not only their appointment and continuance in Office; but the Profits thereof,
are altogether in the Hands of the King's Ministers of State.
fond attachment to the people as in the least to prejudice the Crown. Thus
have they endeavored, to make the interests of the Governor and Judges as
distinct, separate, yea opposite to the people as possible. See the Proceedings
of the Continental Congress held 1774. Hartford Edition, Page 7 and 21, ^2, and
32.
Not only so, they have erected new, unusual and unconstitutional Courts of
Admiralty, with the most exorbitant powers, to the high prejudice of the King's
faithful and loyal subjects in these colonies. They have constituted a This
Board among other inquisitorial Powers, has authority to appoint at Pleasure,
any number of under Officers at pleasure, to fix their respective Salaries; at
pleasure to dispose of the Moneys in their Chest, without once being liable to
a Prosecution in any Court whatever, for misapplication or embezzlement of the
Revenue. The whole Penalty of Malfeasance is removal from Office; when without
being subject to enquiry, they may go off loaded with the spoils of our
Merchants industry. They may carry away thousands from the Revenue Chest, and
can never be summoned upon an examination. According to the plenitude of their
Powers, they had (as I was credibly informed) before the Port of Boston was
shut up, created not less than 200 underofficers for that Port, and given them
very ample Provisions out of the Taxes laid upon our Trade. No wonder to see
the neat produce of the American Revenue amounting to eighty-four Pound
sterling per Annum!
board of commissioners with a commission so extraordinary, that it cannot be
parallelled since the destruction of the star chamber, and the high commission
Court set up by Queen Elizabeth. They have taken from our general assemblies
the privilege of free deliberation: Dissolved them from acting like honest
men. They have refused us the privilege to make petitions for redress; and
have termed our decent remonstrances against our burdens seditious. They have
sent over armies to be quartered upon a free people, in direct opposition to
their wishes and privileges; and this, to keep in awe a people who have
labored, who have Particularly in several Expeditions to Nova Scotia, Canada,
and the Island of Cuba: In the Conquest of Annapolis, Louisbourgh, the Havannah
and Canada. The profits of which acquisitions have mostly centered in Britain.
Not to name our many expensive and bloody Indian Wars, whereby not only our
Borders are enlarged, but their Riches and Power abundantly augmented.
fought and bled for them. They have armed the soldiery to butcher our brethren
in our streets The Massacre in King Street Boston, on the 5th of March 1770, by
a party of the 29th Regiment.
. They have blocked up the harbor of our great trading town, for nothing but
the forcible opposition, which a few individuals made to their attempts to
enslave us: And because the ground of contention was not at that time removed,
by one who had it in his power, and was under the strongest obligations to
remove it; they have placed a garrison in our metropolis, for no other crime,
but their generously distinguishing themselves as enemies to tyrannic measures.
Added to this, they have in a great measure taken away the chartered rights of
this province, which has as just claims to their favor and protection, as any
of her sister colonies on the Continent. They have made unjust alterations in
the course of civil trials; and given the governor a power as exorbitant, as
that of a general at the head of his army in time of war. They have annihilated
one branch of our legislative council: And by the regulations respecting Town
Meetings, laid a most cruel burden upon all our towns, and extended without
limitation, the boundaries of the Governor's authority. You may not repair an
highway without his permission. But what is the worst part of the whole, they
have put the religious establishment of the Province into his hand. You can
settle no minister but of that persuasion which he shall choose. These things
are obvious upon the slightest attention to the Act. The regulating Act for
this Province, together with two others passed by the Parliament in their last
Sessions, were grounded upon ex part evidence. The people of Boston, and the
Province, were never summoned to make their defense. They were proceeded
against without legal evidence, and in direct opposition to every usage of law.
In the one case, the property of twenty thousand freemen, were put absolutely
into the hands of the King and his Ministry. There are no conditions and
limitations in the Bill, by which, after every possible concession which
sovereignty could demand, they can have the least security of being ever
restored to the possession of their Estates and Privileges. And all this was
inflicted while they were unheard. -- As for the regulating Bill; the Charter
Council of the Province is abolished, from the plea of convenience. Not a
single example is pretended to be alleged, wherein the Assembly have ever
chosen a Member, whom they had not a right to elect, and who was not qualified
by Charter to be one of the Board. Nor have they pointed out any instances of
their Male Administration. A new Council is appointed, with scarce a shadow of
that ancient authority which resided in the constitutional Council, as a check
upon the arbitrary proceedings of the Governor. -- It is a notorious fact, that
the Juries of this Province, have time immemorial, been exemplary for a
faithful discharge of their trust. But it was convenient, that they should be
more in the power of the Governor's Sheriff, although nothing was alleged or
could be alleged against the manner of their appointment by the Provincial
Laws.

By the clause respecting Town-Meetings, the Governor's warrant is necessary,
to render valid any Town Votes, excepting merely in the choice of Town
Officers, and Representatives. Not a farthing can be raised to pay salary Men,
or any other town debts. Should the Governor entertain any dislike to a Man's
religious or civil principles, it is only to give his negative, and he must be
forever deprived of his living -- So that although you may choose
Town-Officers, yet you cannot proceed one step further in either civil or
religious matters, only by his Fiat. Even the poor, distressed Canadians, may
make Bylaws; but we cannot put a Plank into a broken Bridge.


Thus are your liberty and religion laid at the footstool of a Governor. And
then to enforce these acts aforesaid, they have made another law in their last
sessions, to screen murderers in this province from public justice. The evident
design of the Act, entitled an Act for the better Administration of Justice,
was to convey away their instruments, when guilty of Felony, beyond the reach
of a legal Prosecution and Conviction.
But that which shows in it is true light, their desperate design, is their
establishment of a religion upon our backs, which every one who is in the least
acquainted with it, knows to be subversive not only of all other religion, but
of all civil government.

These things being enumerated, it is but trifling, to speak of the invasion of
private property; the commitment of individuals, without the authority of any
pretended law; and under the form of law, investing the Castle, one great
bulwark of the province.

This is a true representation of facts, without exaggeration.

These are facts, which cannot soberly be denied. This is the protection, which
we have been taught to expect from the British ministry.

These are the rewards which they have given us, for our vigorous exertions to
advance their wealth, and increase the laurels of the British arms. These are
what are called by ministerial writers, our imaginary burdens. Our
apprehensions from these things, are termed imaginary fears. They have not been
ashamed to say, that we are in no real danger of oppression; that we have no
cause of fear; that they have no design to injure us. Thus have they derided
our sorrow, and insulted our understanding. "For it was not an enemy that
reproached me; then I could have borne it; neither was it he that hated me,
that did magnify himself against me; then I would have hid myself from him: But
it was thou, a man, mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance." Psalm. 55. 13,
14.
"False witnesses did rise up; they laid to my charge things that I knew not.
They rewarded me evil for good, to the spoiling of my soul. But as for me, when
they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth: I humbled my soul with fasting, and
my prayer returned into mine own bosom. I behaved myself, as though he had been
my friend or brother: I bowed down heavily, as one that mourns for his
mother" Psa. 35, 11, 12, 13, 14
.

But this is not the conclusion of God's judgments against us. For since the
beginning of this unhappy controversy, many rash violent and unjustifiable
measures, have been taken by some amongst ourselves. In the heat of passion,
and under the madness of oppression, many injurious attacks have been made,
upon the persons and properties of our fellow subjects. And however these
cannot justify the proceedings against us, yet they have been greedily catched
at, as an handle. In these things therefore, we have been permitted to become
enemies to ourselves. Even the burden of our oppression, and the threatenings
levelled against us, cannot excuse such criminal excesses. And how are we now
distressed, by the tumult and confusion of our public affairs. And we have not
a little to fear, from the new attacks of those who are contending against us.
As in times past, they will still attempt to bring us to sacrifice our
liberties by high threats, bold assaults, and the voice of terror; some they
may endeavor to sooth into tame and servile compliances. I doubt not they will
employ their Treasury, their Army, their Navy, their Authority, their Promises
to terrify some, and to allure others into a consent to wear the chains. Nay we
cannot doubt of a design of letting loose our natural and inveterate enemies
against us. They may attempt, and God only knows whether they will succeed in
it, to revive the late tragedy acted upon us by the Indians and Canadians, of
dashing our little ones and ripping up the wom^^ with child. This is no
imaginary Fear: For the Quebec Bill was made, as it was said in Parliament, and
has been repeatedly avowed since, in order to be a curb upon the licentiousness
of the other colonies. By which we are to understand, that the Bill was framed
for a restraint upon the freedom, and liberties of the ancient English
colonies. -- We cannot conjecture, how far God will suffer us to be afflicted.
It is best that the future designs of heaven should be a secret, that our
faith, patience, and fortitude, may have a suitable trial and exercise. There
may probably be frequent and great changes in our affairs. At times, our hopes
will be led to keep up our vigorous endeavors; and then a cloud be cast over
us, to exercise our resignation to trust in God. One while, perhaps, the cause
may appear desperate, and we shall give all over for lost: We may be threatened
with confiscation of estates, with halters and military execution. It is
possible that some of our trading towns, may by treachery and violence, be
brought to pass under the yoke. There may be a defection among ourselves.
Undoubtedly, attempts are using and will be used, to divide and distract our
counsels. They will strenuously endeavor to break the happy union of the
Colonies, and prevent the full operation of the association entered into, by
the general Congress. They may refuse those measures, however prudent, just and
pacific they certainly are. If they can effect a disunion, a violation of the
peaceable measures proposed, they may bring on bloodshed. Otherwise this evil
would most probably be avoided -- But the Ministry may strike some bold stroke,
before the effects of the general association are felt by the people in Britain
(to whose liberties they are no b^^^^^ friends than they are to ours) -- These
things I mention before hand, as what may come to pass, that when they do come,
you may not faint in the conflict. And as a motive to your stedfastness, and
confidence in God, you may depend on it for a certainty, that when your civil
liberty is once gone, your religion will be driven into corners. And nothing
will await us, but silver chains for Great slaves, and iron yokes for the rest
of us -- These are not the fears and dangers of Fancy. They are real,
substantial evils, which will always be dreaded and resisted by brave and good
men. However from our natural love of case, we may flatter ourselves with
peace, these dangers cannot be winked out of sight by any of us. The present
system of colony-administration if pursued and succeeded, will leave us and our
posterity for many generations, to fetters; without property, without feeling,
without virtue and without religion. Therefore it concerns every man of us, as
we love our God, our Country, ourselves and our posterity, that we do not by
defection, or inactivity, conspire to bring all these mischiefs upon this land.
I speak plainly, from a sense of duty as a christian, and a member of the
community: We know not how soon the lips of the faithful may be sealed up.
Therefore I say again, prepare for the conflict, which we may have when Christ
shall come to his temple. But again lastly,

Use 3. We have abundant reason of thanksgiving this day, for the evidence
afforded us, that Christ will finally visit these churches of our land, with
his favor and peace.

The grounds of this consolation are not our general goodness; not from our own
strength; not from the relentings of our oppressors; not that we are able to
rival the army, the navy and the wealth of Britain. The difficulties now
subsisting will not easily subside. Nor can I think, that this country will
soon be brought to shackles. The foundation of our hope is, that God is
merciful, and we are called by his Name. And many godly people, however we have
declined, and notwithstanding the derision which our enemies may make of our
prayers, are yet in the midst of us, who depart not from the temple, but are
humbly waiting day and night, for the consolation of Israel. We may not fear
the boasted omnipotence of Parliament, so long as we have a resource in the
omnipotence of heaven. For who has any might against our King. He delights
to save the oppressed, and how easily does he carry headlong, the devices of
the crafty? Although we are great sinners, yet by repentance, and trust in God,
we may hope, that he will deliver us. -- For as to men, our cause is good. Our
adversaries have been the Aggressors. Our burdens are likewise great, and
threatening; and to the cries of those, who are groaning under such heavy
afflictions, the ears of the Lord of Sabbath, are ever open. Christ will
maintain his Church: He will glorify his longsuffering toward it. And as the
Gospel has not been continued to this country, so long as he is wont to
continue it with a professing people; and as the method of divine Providence,
is to grant a series of mercies and judgments, for the trial and reformation of
his covenant people, so we may still humbly hope that the Lord will yet again
return to his temple in this land. As public religion cannot flourish without
civil liberty; so God will again restore us to our rights.

Further to establish a firm reliance upon heaven, I might point you to various
nations, much weaker than we are, and assaulted by foes no less powerful, who
by the goodness of God, have been the successful maintainers of their
privileges. As a specimen of many others, take the following examples.

When Israel was greatly impoverished, because of the Midianites, and cried
unto the Lord, the Lord heard them, and raised up Gideon to be their savior.
And he blew a trumpet, and the people were gathered after him. But when the
people were too many for the Lord to deliver the Midianites into their hands,
he chose out from amongst them three hundred men. With these Gideon came upon
the Midianites and the Amalekites, and the children of the east country who lay
along the valley, like grasshoppers for multitude, and their camels were
without number, as the sand of the sea shore for multitude.

And they cried, "the sword of the Lord and of Gideon." And the Lord set every
man's sword against his fellow, even throughout all the host; and they were
overthrown with a very great slaughter. Thus was Midian subdued before Israel,
so that they lifted up their heads no more. And the country was in quietness
forty years. Judges 6, 7, ^ 8. Chap


After Nehemiah had obtained a decree from the King of Persia, to rebuild the
walls of Jerusalem, and had set forward the work; the enemies of the Jews were
very wroth, and took great indignation and, mocked them, and practiced to put
them in fear, and divert them from their holy purpose. And Sanballat said
before his brethren, What do these feeble Jews? will they fortify themselves?
will they sacrifice? will they make an end in a day? will they revive the
stones out of the heaps of the rubbish which are burnt? Now Tobiah the Ammonite
was by him, and he said, even that which they build, if a fox go up, he shall
even break down their stone wall. Neh. Chap. 4. An useful parallel might be
drawn from this Part of sacred History.
But notwithstanding all their scoffings and artifices, Nehemiah by his
stedfastness and perseverance, finished the walls in fifty and two days.

When Phillip reigned in Spain, the Netherlands were under his dominion: But
being induced by the counsels of wicked ministers, he abused his power, and
made an attack upon the liberties of those Provinces: He attempted to introduce
the inquisition, and other innovations amongst them. He had all the strength of
the large Kingdom of Spain, all the wealth of the new world which was then but
lately discovered, and brought immense revenues to the crown. In confidence of
success, he made war upon the turbulent, rebellious Hollanders, as they were
termed by Phillip's courtier. -- The Dutch lay under the disadvantage of being
accessible in every part of their country, by their canals: They had to
struggle with a very powerful interest, which Spain had within their own walls:
Their leaders were taken off by treachery and private assassination: In the
midst of their contest, they were deserted by ten of the provinces. Seven only
remained: They were almost unassisted by any other powers: And yet the good God
of heaven carried them through all these, and countless other difficulties; and
rewarded their struggle with the establishment of the reformation and their own
liberties. And they have since become one of the most powerful and flourishing
states in Europe. I will point you to an instance nearer home.

In the arbitrary reign of James 2d. Sir Edmund Andross was sent with an
armament, to take possession of the Charters and Government of the New England
colonies; to overthrow their civil and religious rights; and set up Popery and
arbitrary power. The land was covered with a cloud of midnight darkness. Our
present distresses, great as they are, are much inferior to theirs. Their new,
Governor executed his commission with rigor. Nothing to human appearance
awaited this country, but slavery and persecution from the Man of Sin. But God
moved the hearts of our pious Forefathers, to use some resolute attempts, for
the recovery of their lost privileges, and so blessed their endeavors, in
bringing about the glorious revolution, as to secure this land in the
possession of their liberty and religion, until of these late years, they have
been unhappily made the subjects of a new and bold attack. The four examples
given as instances of God's gracious interposition to aid the virtuous
endeavors of a People, to maintain their civil and religious immunities, are
probably very different in manner of expression from the original discourse, as
the Author depended merely upon Memory in perusing them for the Press.


As there seldom ever was a nation, who in the beginning of oppression were
more violently assaulted, than we have been; so History does not afford us a
single instance, wherein such a number of people, resolutely opposed to
slavery, have been soon reduced under the yoke. It is no small matter of
comfort to us, that God will probably frustrate the counsels of those, who have
called in the aid of a religion, in a peculiar manner accursed by him.

Their associations with the Man of Sin, to lay waste the liberties of this
country, will cause their ships with Jehosaphat's, to be broken at Ezion-Geber.
However the Quebec Bill may at present appear to be a very unfavourable
circumstance, yet I verily believe, that under God, it shall be one great means
of our deliverance. -- Let me therefore exhort you, to humble yourselves before
God for your sins, the cause of his permitting these judgments to fall upon us.
Repent of all your iniquities; trust in the Lord, and be of good courage. Put
away the vices of the land. Live frugally and temperately; deal justly; do
violence to no man. Let the eternal Laws of Justice, be the guide of your whole
conduct. Let each one resolve to use economy in his dress, at his table, and
toward his visitants. This private economy, and self-denial, joined with
industry, and a public spirit, will enable us to go cheerfully through the
burdens of our necessary, public expenses.

Upon our faithful adherence to that plan, devised by the united wisdom of
these Colonies, much under God depends. Thereby we have some well-grounded
hope, of escaping from greater confusion and bloodshed. Our defection herein,
may hereafter justly fill us with deep remorse, that we have been instrumental,
either in forging chains for our country, or in bathing her bosom in the
precious Blood of our fellow subjects. -- But especially, while we renounce any
secure confidence in human help; let our eyes be directed to the Great Savior
of New England; use faithfully the means which Providence has put into our
hands for deliverance; nor suffer ourselves by treachery, by cowardice, by
flattery and false hopes, to betray our unalienable property, in our
constitution and religion. In this case we need not fear the wrath or subtilty
of Man. "Trust in him at all times, ye people; pour out your hearts before him:
God is a refuge for us, Selah. Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of
high degree a lie. God has spoken once; twice have I heard this, That power
belongs unto God." Psalm. 62.


Trust therefore in the Lord at all times; and he shall secure you from the
force and wiles of oppressors. He shall give wisdom and efficacy to your
counsels: He shall fortify your hearts as dangers may arise. He shall teach you
hardiness as good soldiers: He shall bless you, and increase you like a flock
in the midst of your afflictions: He shall bring confusion into the counsels of
those who imagine evil devices against you. And however he may for a season
cast you into tribulation, to purge and purify you, yet the Lord shall suddenly
come to his temple. For he is a merciful God and gracious.

Fear not, little flock; for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the
Kingdom. Luke 12. 32.


AMEN.

