A PRAYER, COMPOSED For the Benefit of the Soldiery, IN THE AMERICAN ARMY, To
assist them in their private Devotions; and recommended to their particular Use.

By ABIEL LEONARD, A. M. CHAPLAIN to General PUTNAM'S Regiment, in said ARMY.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed and sold by S. and E. HALL. 1775.

A PRAYER.
MOST great and glorious God, thy name alone is Jehovah! Thou existest
independent of all beings, and art possessed of eternal and absolute
perfection! I adore thee as the supreme Governor and Judge among the nations of
the earth; who have in thy wise and good providence divided them, and settled
the bounds of their habitations! Thou have placed the inhabitants of
Great Britain, and of America, not only under the common laws of justice and
equity; but also under the most endearing bonds and obligations of brotherly
love and kindness toward each other. Those sacred bonds have been violated;
and that mutual confidence, harmony and affection, that once subsisted to
mutual advantage, in a great measure lost. The enemies of America have sent
over a great multitude to cast thy people in this land, out of thy possession,
even the good land which thou have given them to inherit; and to deprive them
of their liberties and properties: whereby, O Lord, they have been reduced to
the dreadful alternative of submitting to arbitrary laws and despotic
government; or of taking up arms in defense of those rights and privileges,
which thou, in thy goodness, have conferred upon them as men and as Christians.

I would adore and bless thy name, that thou have given thy people a just sense
of the value of their important privileges, civil and sacred; and that, that
love of liberty and willingness to encounter every temporary difficulty and
danger to enjoy it, which glowed in the breasts of their ancestors, and brought
them over to settle this land, is enkindled in their breasts: and that they are
united in their counsels, and in their measures for their protection, defense
and security. O my God, will thou be graciously pleased to strengthen and
establish the union of these colonies; and favor the CONGRESS with thy
blessing and presence! Prosper the means of defense, -- be the God of the
American army, -- bless all in general, and in particular command, and grant
unto thy servant the COMMANDER IN CHIEF, wisdom and fortitude suited to his
important military station, and crown him with prosperity, success and honor.

O my God, in obedience to the call of thy providence, I have engaged myself,
and plighted my faith, to jeopard my life in the high places of the field in
the defense of my dear country and the liberties of it* acknowledging thy
people to be my people, their interest my interest, and their God to be my God.
Thou know, O Lord, that it is not from a spirit of licentiousness, -- lust
of independance or delight in the effusion of human blood: but from a sense of
that duty I owe to my country and posterity I have voluntarily engaged in this
service. -- And I desire now to make a solemn dedication of myself to thee in
it through Jesus Christ; presenting myself to thy Divine Majesty to be disposed
of by thee to thy glory and the good of America. Oh do thou, I most fervently
entreat, wash away mine iniquities, blot them out of thy remembrance, purify
and cleanse my soul in the blood of the great Captain of my salvation -- accept
of -- own and bless me!

Teach, I pray thee, my hands to war, and my fingers to fight in the defense of
America, and the rights and liberties of it! impress upon my mind a true sense
of my duty, and the obligation I am under to my country! and enable me to pay a
due and ready respect and obedience to all my officers. Grant unto me courage,
zeal and resolution in the day of battle, that I may play the man for my
people, and the cities of my God; choosing rather to lay down my life, than
either through cowardice or desertion betray the glorious cause I am engaged
in. And, O Lord, if it seem good in thy sight, shield and protect me; cover my
head in the day of battle; and suffer not the arrows of death that may fly
around me, to wound or destroy me: but may I live to do further service to my
country -- to the church and people of God, and interest of Jesus Christ, and
see peace and tranquillity restored to this land.

Give me grace, that I may spend my time in my proper employment as a soldier;
furnishing myself with such military skill as may qualify me to stand in a day
of war, and to speak with the enemy in the gate; wisely filling up my spare
hours in acts of religion. May I detest and abhor all sinful oaths, execrations
and blasphemies; never using thy name, but on solemn occasions, and then with
the most profound reverence! May I never so far lose my liberty, as to become a
servant of meats and drinks; but teach me to use thy good creatures soberly and
temperately: not enslaving myself to, nor losing my reason by indulging a
brutal appetite! Enable me to flee all those vices of gaming, rioting,
chambering and wantoness which have a destructive and fatal tendency: but as a
stranger and pilgrim may I abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the
soul! Enable me to put off all anger, wrath, malice and strife; and live in
love with, and in the exercise of kindness to my fellow soldiers! Being content
with my wages, may I never do violence to any man, nor seize upon his property
through covetousness or greediness of spoil! And may I prove myself a faithful
follower of Jesus Christ, whom all the armies of heaven follow; fight the good
fight of faith; and have my present conflicts against the world, the flesh and
the devil crowned with victory and triumph!

Now, O my God, from a mind deeply affected with a sense of thy wisdom, power,
goodness and faithfulness, I desire to commit all my concerns to thee, -- to
depend upon thy help and protection, in all the difficulties and dangers; and
upon thy care and provision, in all the wants and necessities that can befall
me! And my family and kindred, whom I have left behind, I recommend to thy
care; to receive the blessings of God, the comforts and supports of thy
providence and the sanctification of thy Spirit.

And, O Thou, who did preserve the children of Israel from the hand of
Pharaoh and his host, -- did protect and deliver them from all dangers, --
did redeem them out of all their troubles, -- and broughtest them out of the
land of bondage into a state of liberty, -- deliver, I pray thee, thy
distressed, afflicted and oppressed people in this land out of all their
troubles! preserve them in truth and peace* in unity and safety, in all storms,
and against all temptations and enemies! And by means of the present contest
may the liberties of America be established upon a firmer foundation than ever;
and she become the excellency of the whole earth, and the joy of many
generations!

And grant, O Lord, that the inhabitants of Great Britain may arise and
vindicate their liberties; and a glorious reunion take place between them and
thy people in this land, founded upon the principles of liberty and
righteousness: that the Britons and the Americans may rejoice in the King as
the minister of God to both for good.

Hear me, O my God, and accept of these my petitions through Jesus Christ, to
whom with thee, O Father, and the Holy Spirit, one God, be glory, honor and
praise, forever and ever.

AMEN.

