Mr. Gordon's THANKSGIVING DISCOURSE.

A DISCOURSE PREACHED December 15th 1774.

BEING THE DAY RECOMMENDED By the Provincial Congress; And Afterward at the
BOSTON LECTURE.

BY WILLIAM GORDON.

PASTOR OF THE THIRD CHURCH IN ROXBURY.

And the King consulted with the old men that stood before his father, while he
yet lived, and said, how do ye advise, that I may answer this people? And they
spoke unto him, saying, if thou will be a servant unto this people this day,
and wilt serve them, and answer them, and speak good word* to them, then they
will be thy servants for ever.
I Kings. 12. 6. 7. I ardently with that the common enemies to both countries
may see to their disappointment, that these disputes between the Mother
country, and the colonies have terminated like the quarrels of lovers, and
increased the affection which they ought to bear to each other.
Governor Gage's Letter to the Hon. Pey^on Rand^^ph. Esquire.

BOSTON; Printed for, and Sold by THOMAS LEVERETT, in Cor^-Hill 1774

A DISCOURSE
FROM
Lam. III. 22. It is of the Lord's mercies that we are not consumed, because
his compassions fail not.
THE pulpit is devoted, in general, to more important purposes, than the fate
of kingdoms, or the civil rights of human nature; being intended, to recover
men from the slavery of sin and satan -- to point out their escape from future
misery, through faith in a crucified Jesus -- and to assist them in their
preparations for an eternal blessedness: But still, there are special times and
seasons when it may treat of politics. And surely, if it is allowable for some
who occupy it, by preaching up the doctrines of non-resistance and passive
obedience, to vilify the principles, and to sap the foundations of that
glorious revolution, that exalted the house of Hanover to the British throne;
it ought to be no transgression in others, nor be construed into a want of
loyalty, to speak consistently with those approved tenets, that have made
GEORGE the third, the first of European sovereigns, who otherwise, with the his
personal virtues, might have lived an obscure Elector.

Having then, the past morning of this provincial thanksgiving, accommodated
the text to the case of individuals, I shall now dedicate it, according to its
original intention, to the service of the public, the situation of whose
affairs, is, both distressing and alarming.

THE capital of the colony is barbarously treated, pretendedly for a crime, but
actually, for the noble stand she has made in favor of liberty, against the
partisans of slavery. She has distinguished herself by an animated opposition
to arbitrary and unconstitutional proceedings; and therefore has been marked
out, by ministerial vengeance, to be made an example of, whereby to terrify
other American cities into a tame submission. She is an example -- and, thanks
to heaven! an example of patience and fortitude, to the no small mortification
of her enemies, whose own base feelings led them to imagine, that she would
immediately become an abject suplicant for royal favor, though at the expense of
natural and charter'd rights. May some future historian, the friend of mankind
and citizen of the world, have to record in his faithful and ever-living page,
that she never truckled, though British sailors and soldiers, contrary to their
natural affection for the cause of liberty, were basely employed to intimidate
her; but perseveringly held out, through the fiery trial, 'till a revolution of
(...) and measures brought on her deliverance.

But it is not the capital alone that suffers. The late venal Parliament, in
compliance with the directions of admini^tration, have, under the false color
of regulating the government of the colony, (...) its charter, and conveyed
dangerous powers to individuals, for the enforcing and maintaining those
encroachments, that they have ventured, in defiance of common equity, to make
upon the rights of free people. -- And had not the calmness and prudence of
others supplied their lack of wisdom, the country might by this time have
become an Aceldama. I take this opportunity of making my public acknowledgments
to his Excellency the Governor, for not having precipitated the country into a
civil war -- an event, which as, appears by his letter, he ardently wishes may
never exist. Should the continent be exercised with so great an evil, I promise
myself from the known humanity, the constant attendant of true bravery -- the
known humanity of the British officers and troops, that they will not add
barbarity, to the unavoidable calamities of war: But should any hellish policy
order it is being done, the colonies, it is to be supposed, will dread all, less
than slavery to those (...) masters that can issue such (...) edicts.


UPON the principles, which the British legislature have adopted in their late
extraordinary proceedings, I see not, how we can be certain of any one
privilege -- nor what hinders our being really in a state of slavery to an
aggregate of masters, whose tyranny may be worse than that of a single despot
-- nor that a man can with propriety say, his soul's his own, and not the
spring to move his bodily machine, in the performance of whatever drudgery his
lords may appoint -- nor that the public have a permanent and valuable
constitution. If the British legislature is the constitution, or superior to
the constitution, Magna Charta, the bill of rights, and the protestant
succession, these boasts of Britons, are toys to please the vulgar, and not
solid securities.

THE operation of the late unconstitutional acts of the British Parliament,
would not only deprive the colony of invaluable privileges, but introduce a
train of evils, little expected by the generality, and give the British
ministry such an ascendency in all public affairs, as would be to the last
dangerous. In support of this paragraph, I shall quote the following passages,
from the protest of the Lords against the regulating Act, viz.

"The new constitution of judicature provided by this bill is improper, and
incongruous with the plan of the admistration of justice in Great Britain.

The Governor and Council thus instituted with powers, with which the British
constitution has not trusted his Majesty and his Privy Council, have the means
of returning such a jury in each particular cause, as may best suit with the
gratification of their passions, and interests. The lives, liberties and
properties of the subject are put into their hands without control; and the
invaluable right of trial by jury, is turned into a snare for the people, who
have hitherto looked upon it as their main security against the licentiousness
of power.

We see in this bill the same scheme of strengthening the authourity of the
officers and ministers of state, at the expense of the rights and liberties of
the subject, which was indicated by the inauspicious act for shutting up the
harbor of Boston.

By that act which is immediately connected with this bill, the example was set
of a large important city (containing vast multitudes of people, many of whom
must be innocent and all of whom are unheard) by an arbitrary sentence deprived
of the advantage of that port, upon which all their means of livelihood did
immediately depend.

This proscription is not made determinable on the payment of a fine for an
offense, or a compensation for an injury; but is to continue until the
ministers of the Crown shall think fit to advise the King in Council to revoke
it.

The legal condition of the subject (standing unattainted by conviction, for
treason or selony (ought never to depend upon the arbitrary will of any person
whatsoever.

I would add also. The clause in the regulating act, respecting town meetings,
leaves it in the power of a Governor, to prevent them all at pleasure, those
only excepted for the choice of town officers in March, and for the choice of
Representatives. Neither the most trifling, nor the most important business can
be legally transacted, so as to be binding upon the inhabitants, even in the
most distant towns of the government, without leave first had and obtained of
the Governor in writing, expressing such special business, though it should
happen that if not done, within less time than necessary for the obtaining of
that leave, it cannot be done at all. The town's-men can neither lay out a new
road, nor raise moneys for mending an old one: nor can they settle a minister,
without obtaining the express written leave of the Governor. Yea, they are
forbid so much as to talk, for they are not to treat, of any other matter at
their March meeting, except the election of their officers, nor at any other
meeting, except the business expressed in the leave given by the Governor, or
in his absence by the Lieutenant Governor. If this is not to establish slavery
by legislative authority, I beg to know what is? The arbitrary mandates of the
Grand Monarch enjoining his slaves silence, when state affairs are disagreeable
to the public, will scarce be thought by many, so great an attack upon the
rights of mankind, as an attempt to perpetuate something of the like nature by
a permanent law. Should the favorite of a Governor have embezzled the
towns-money, how shall a meeting be obtained to vote and order a prosecution
against him? Should a candidate be reported as a warm friend to the liberties
of the people, how shall leave be had for his being settled, though unanimously
approved of, and admired? Should an oppressed town be desirous of stating it is
grievances, and praying a redress, how shall the inhabitants do it in a
corporate capacity, should the Commander in chief be prejudiced against them?
Should the electors be inclined to instruct their representatives upon matters
of the highest concern to them, how shall they do it without violating the law,
when the Ruler's interest prevents his giving them leave? A thousand other
events are made to depend upon the arbitrary wi^^ of a Governor, by the clause
before us. And why are all the towns of the colony to be reduced to such a
slavish dependence? Because, as the British legislative asserts, "a great abuse
has been made of calling town meetings, and the inhabitants have, contrary to
the design of their institution, been misled to treat upon matters of the most
general concern, and to pass many dangerous and unwarrantable resolves. O!
abominable! That a people should be deprived of their precious and long enjoyed
liberties, not for any wilfully perverse known crime, but because of their
being foolishly misled, Why did not the wise ministry ^ase themselves of the
opposition given them by the city of London, by a like regulation of their
charter, upon the ground of the citizens having been misled? Why do they not,
upon the same ground, prevent all corporation and county meetings in
Great Britain, that so they may not be pestered with any future petitions or
remonstrances? But, should the operation of ^he regulating act secured, who can
tell, now long it (...), ^re the British legislative will assign the solid
reason of having been misled to treat upon matters of the most general concern,
and to pass many dangerous and unwarrantable resolves, for suspending all the
American assemblies, or at least of reducing the members of each, to the more
convenient number of the Yorkers.?

I decline as wholly unnecessary, all remarks upon the miscalled act for the
impartial administration of Justice etc.




THE spirited behavior of the country under these innovations, has charmed,
and affrighted, numbers: And, should it be continued, with prudence unremitted
zeal and true fortitude, will produce monuments of praise more lasting than
brass; even though it should not prove successful, which is scarce supposable.

THE distresses that the late acts have already occasioned, (...) many and
great; and too well known to requ^re an enumeration: And yet, could we be
secure of a speedy relief, in the permanent redress of our grievances, we
should soon forget them. But we have our fears, lest they should be only the
beginning of sorrows: and are in doubt, whether we may not be called to
experience the horrors of a civil war; unless we will disgrace our descent,
meanly submit to the loss of our privileges, and leave to posterity -- the many
millions that shall people this continent, in less than a century -- bonds and
fetters.

The important day is now arrived, that must demine whether we shall remain
free; or, alas! be brought into bondage, after having long enjoyed the sweets
of liberty. The event will probably be such as is our own conduct. Will we
conform to the once exploded, but again courtly, doctrines of passive obedience
and non-resistance, rather than hazard life and property, we may have the
honor of burning under the heats of summer, and freezing under the colds of
winter, in providing for the luxurious entertainment of lazy, proud, worthless
pensioners and placemen. There are some honorable exceptions to this general
intimation; but they are so few that they can save themselves only and not the
list from deserved reproach.

In the year 1697, the pensions amounted only to seven thousand and seventy
seven pounds sterling; but in the year 1705, they amounted to eighteen thousand
one hundred and eleven pounds. Since then they have increased to a most
enormous sum. A late publication informs us, that, about ten years back, there
was a million of debt contracted on the 6d per pound tax laid on pensions. The
interest of a million at 4l. per cent, being forty thousand pounds per annum,
the pensions, to have answered for it, must have amounted to one million six
hundred thousand pounds per annum; if at 3l. per. cent to one million two
hundred thousand. There might possibly have been a deficiency in this fund, but
it cannot be thought that the financier would have proposed it, had it been
very considerably deficient.

I heartily wish the some, who have leisure, and can procure the necessary
materials, would inform the public, as near as possible, what sums are
exhausted by places and pensions. As to the numerous expenditures in the secret
services of rewards bribery and corruption, jobs and contracts, they must
remain among the arcana imperii. But was a virtuous patriotic administration to
close all those unnecessary drains, whereby the wealth of Great Britain is
carried off, they would in a few years of peace, greatly reduce the national
debt, and have no temptation to gull the people, under a pretense of eating
them by American taxes, when they defign only to provide for their numerous
dependants, and to increase the power of the crown, alias the ministry.




WILL we make our appeal to heaven against the intended oppression; venture
all, upon the noble principles that brought house of Hanover, into the
possession of the British diadem; and not fear to bleed freely in the cause,
not of a particular people, but of mankind in general; we shall be likely to
transmit to future generations, though the country should be wasted by the
sword, the most essential part of the fair patrimony received from our brave
and hardy progenitors, the right of possessing, and of disposing of, at our own
option, that honest fruits of our industry. However, it is alarming to think,
that, through the mistaken policy of Great Britain, and the absurd notion of
persisting in wrong measures for the honor of government, we may be obliged to
pass through those difficulties, and to behold those scenes, and engage in
those services that are shocking to humanity, and would be intolerable, but for
the hope of preserving and perpetuating our liberties. Our trade ruined, our
plantations trodden down, our cattle slain or taken away, our property
plundered, our dwellings in flames, our families insulted and abused, our
friends and relatives wallowing, and our own garments rolled, in blood, are
calamities that we are not accustomed to, and that we cannot realize but with
the utmost pain: And yet we must expect more or less of these, should we be
compelled to betake ourselves to the sword in behalf of our rights. It Is not a
little grievous to be alarmed with the apprehension of such severe trials,
unless we will in our conduct resemble those simple ones, that for the sake of
indulging themselves in present ^ase and plenty, barter away their whole
interest in future happiness. It may be objected, that the points in dispute
are too trifling to justify the hazard of such severe trials. It will be
answered, that it is the principles the continent is opposing, in it is attempts
to prevent the establishment of precedents. The real dispute is, whether the
long enjoyed constitution of these American colonies, when they are not
consenting to it, shall be liable to every alteration, that a legislative,
three thousand miles off, shall think convenient and profitable to themselves
-- and whether a house of commons at that distance, to which they neither do,
nor can send a single representative, shall dispose of their property at
pleasure. --; Obsta Principiis.


BUT though the situation of public affairs is both distressing and alarming;
it is by far better than we have deserved, from the Sovereign of the universe.
It would have been much worse had we been dealt with according to our demerits.
It is of the Lord's mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions
fail not. Some may at first hearing object agianst this, as being too strong an
expression, and may think, considering the morals of the people when compared
with the inhabitants of other places, that it is mis-applied. I am ready to
allow, that the morals of this people, taken collectively, are superior to
those of other places (Connecticut excepted, where I suppose they are nearly
the same) whether in the new or the old world, all things considered; and I
cannot but view, as a strong proof hereof, the order that prevails through the
country, now that the execution of the laws, because of the peculiarity of the
times, is suspended. And yet after all, I must hold to the text; and, that we
may be fully convinced, and be duly affected with the truth of it, shall make
some remarks upon this people, considered as the subjects of God's moral
government.

1. IN the first place I remark, that the prevalency of any vices and
immoralities among this people, must be peculiarly provoking.

Circumstances aggravate or alleviate the crimes, of societies, no less than of
single persons; and far more and other is expected from some, than from many
others in a very different situation and condition.

NOW it should be remembered, that this is but a young people, not a hundred
and fifty years old; for, they were not a people for the few first years of
their settlement in this wilderness, no more than a small company, who must
have soon perished by the hands of the native Indians, had not God interposed.
They youth is an aggravation to the crimes committed by them. For a young
person to be given to vice, though he has a corrupted nature the same as
others, is highly offensive. We look for a decent, modest, and orderly
behavior in him.

IN like manner, a young state should be pure in its morals; should be addicted
to no particular vices; should observe the utmost regularity of behavior; and
should not even think of, much less practice, the crimes too generally to be
met with in countries of long standing, when attained to their height in power
and affluence. There is an utter unfitness in the former's attempting to
imitate the latter. Can we say, that this rising young state is clear as to
this matter; that it has not copied the corrupt manners of it is aged parent;
and that it has not it is particular vices that are a reproach to it? However
willing we may be, through self love and native fondness, to apologize for it; we
cannot conscientiously pronounce it not-guilty, while we know how notorious,
intemperance, uncleanness, luxury and irreligion are among us.

BUT another thing that makes that vices and immoralities of this people
peculiarly provoking is, their descent and education. This sins of a youth
descended from pious parents, who has had good examples set him, and who has
been carefully educated, are worse than those of a common youth, that has not
enjoyed such advantages.

Now the ancestors of this people were eminently godly. I was the strength of
their zeal for true unadualterated religion, and the ardour of their love to
God and Christ, that prevailed upon them to venture over the great deep, and to
(...) an abode in this then inhospitable and dangerous country; and that
reconciled them to the numberless difficulties, that they had long to
encounter, without ever attaining to the various comforts that we enjoy. They
were concerned to perpetuate the same spirit of piety which they were actuated
by; paid great attention to the rising generation; and wisely provided for the
good instruction of succeeding ones. Wherein can we charge them with want,
either of wisdom, or faithfulness to posterity? Do we not still reap the fruits
of their contrivance and foresight, though not in so ample a manner as might,
be through our own faultiness? Judge ye, what could have been done more,
through their instrumentality, for this part of the Lord's vineyard, than what
has been done? Wherefore then, has it brought forth so many wild and bad
grapes, when it should have yielded the choicest fruit? Is not this people
strangely degenerated, so as to possess but a faint resemblance of that
godliness, for which their forefathers were eminent! And, could these last
appear for a while, again in this colony, with the common passions and
sentiments of human nature, would they not stand amazed at the sinfulness of
the present generation, and be ready to disown them for their posterity! Is it
not another generation of professors, very different both as to sentiments and
practice, from that which by their emigrations for conscience sake, first
planted the gospel in New England; would not the like zeal for the leading
doctrines of christianity, and the like strictness in morals, that prevailed in
the first settlers, be severely censured and be stigmatized by some reproachful
epithet, as in their day, by the generality among us, though through the spirit
of the times, the persecution might not be more than that of the tongue. They
that will divest themselves of prejudice, and judge impartially, will be
obliged, I apprehend, to acknowledge that this people do not answer to the
honourablenss of their descent; any more than to the care that was taken by
their predecessors, for their being well-educated in the principles and
practices of religion; the full benefit of which care, though they may not
enjoy, through the censurable faultiness of some in neglecting their duty, yet
is so far enjoyed, as that people in general, including all ranks, are not
better instructed and educated any where, it is probale, than in this country.
But certainly the more honorable their religious descent, and the better their
education, the more provoking must their vices and immoralities be; and nothing
can be more worthy of their particular consideration, especially in these
threatening times, than those words in the 3d of Amos 2d. wherein the Lord
addresses the children of Israel saying, You only have I known of all the
families of the ^arth; therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities. I
might add more particulars to this first remark, but choose to make them
distinct ones of themselves.

2. I therefore proceed to mention in the second place, that the obligations
this people are under to holiness, are special, from the many appearances of
God in their favor, and his having so multiplied and exalted them.

How often has the supreme Governor of the universe wonderfully, next to
miraculously, interposed for their deliverance, when in the utmost danger!
Their enemies expected to swallow them up, and were upon the point of doing it,
when providence has critically ininterposed, so that they have escaped, like a
bird out of a snare that has been thrown over it. When their eagerness to
cooperate with the parent state, in reducing the power of the common enemy,
led them into a bold and dangerous enterprise, in which if they had miscarried
they would have been subject to an almost irreparable damage, and which must
have miscarried according to the usual course of human and military affairs,
had not special events, carrying in them the evident marks of providential
appointment, though in the account of the unbeliever purely casual -- I say,
which must have miscarried, had not special events turned up; it pleased God to
order the existence of them, and, by crowning the expedition with success, not
only to avert the train of evils that must otherwise have followed, but to give
this people, then indeed in their infancy, a NAME among the warlike veteran
states of Europe and to show the world, what a few raw provincials could do,
under the smiles and care of heaven, against fortifications and batteries
really strong, and defended by regulars, though not by Britons, May they never
lose that NAME, nor blast the laurels gained at Louisbourg, by any future
cowardly conduct, when it is not conquest, but liberty and property that are at
stake!

GOD has not only appeared for this people, but has greatly multiplied and
exalted them. They were at first a few men in number, yea, very few and
strangers in the land. They came from a well cultivated kingdom to a savage
people and a wild country, enough to discourage the stoutest. However they
ventured to take up their abode in it, and, through the original blessing of
heaven upon them, which perhaps never displayed itself and wrought more
effectually, except in the instance of the Jews, they are become a considerable
nation, possess a tolerable share of wealth, and would enjoy much public
happiness, were the painful disputes between them and the parent country
comfortably terminated. The face of the colony is not less changed for the
better since first settled, than what is set forth in the language of Isaiah's
prophecy, the wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad; the desert shall
rejoice and blossom as the rose. I shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even
with joy and singing, the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the
excellency of Carmel and Sharon. They shall see the glroy of the Lord, and the
excellency of our God. Isa. 35. 1, 2. These enumerated, are special obligations
on this people to holiness. But does their holiness correspond with them? Are
the fruits yielded by them suited to such benefits? Are they that manner of
people, that might have been expected; and that they engaged to be when under
difficulties, and in great perplexity through threatening appearances? Or have
they not, like the Jews of old, after singing the divine praises, forgot the
works of God, and the wonders he has showed them? And has not the cast of
their after-conduct evidenced that, in renewing their engagements with him in
the day of their affliction, they did flatter him with their mouth, and lied
unto him with their tongues; and that their heart was not right with him; for,
they have not been steadfast in his covenant, have not walked agreeable to the
design and purport of God's covenant of grace, with which they have in much
mercy, been made acquainted.

3. I shall now remark in the third and last place, that though the appearances
of religion among this people, are great and many, yet it is to be feared, that
real religion is scarce, that the power of godliness is rare, and that while
there is much outward show of respect to the Deity there is but little inward
heart conformity to him.

Individuals are justly entitled to the benefit of an exception,
notwithstanding which it may be applied with too much truth to the community as
a body, this people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me
with their lips, but their heart is far from me. Math. 15. 8. What is religion
with the generality, more than being baptized, attending public worship
statedly on the Lord's day, owning the covenant, coming to the Lord's table,
and then being orderly in the outward deportment! If, besides all now
mentioned, there is a strict attendance upon private prayer, and the further
addition of family, though the prayer shall consist of nothing more than the
repeating of a certain set of words that the tongue has been habituated to, the
goodness of such religion must not be questioned; though not proceeding from a
work of regeneration -- not produced originally by any special influences of
the holy Spirit -- not accompanied, with any saving illuminations from above,
with any spiritual view of the divine glories, any true hatred, to sin, any
sense of the beauty of holiness, any soul-sanctifying love to God and the Lord
Jesus. Is there not a great, though unhappy affinity, between the case of this
people religiously considered, and that of the Laodi^^an church, as described
by the Alpha and Omega in Rev. 3. 15-18.

THE above remarks upon this people, considered as the subjects of God's moral
government, being duly weighed, shall we not be brought to own with humility
and gratitude, that it is of the Lord's mercies that we are not consumed,
because his compassion fail not. As yet we are not consumed.

Though, when we look down from the adjoining hills, and behold the capital, we
cannot but lament saying, "How is the gold became dim! "how is the most fine
gold changed! how does her port mourn, because her shipping come not to her as
formerly: all her wharfs are desolate! how is she possessed and surrounded by
an armed force, as though in the hands of an enemy! Yet, blessed be God! she
does not ^it solitary; she is full of people: she is honorable among the
nations: she is as a princess among the provinces, seeing that she has not
meanly become tributary. She weepeth fore in the night, and her tears are on
her cheeks: but, like beauty in distress, she is the more engaging. She has
many lovers to comfort her; and her friends have not dealt treacherously with
her, so far from having become her enemies. Her inhabitants are suffering, but
not starving. Her priests and her elders have not given up the ghost, while
seeking meat to relieve their soul. The tongue of the sucking child cleaves
not to the roof of his mouth for thirst. The young children ask not bread,
without any man's offering to break it unto them. We see not her dwellings and
public buildings, both civil and sacred, in flames; and the whole becoming, by
a speedy destruction, an horrid heap of ruins.

Though, when we survey the country, we bemoan the attempts that have been made
upon the ancient foundations of its civil government, which if successful, will
in all probability, after a time, undermine and destroy it is religious
liberties; yet we are thankful, that no dwelling has been destroyed -- that
none of any party, have as yet perished, by the shocks they have occasioned in
the state -- that the sword has not been commissioned by heaven to destroy,
and the way to an accommodation been rendered still more inaccessible, through
the shedding of blood. We adore the goodness of God, which has kept us from
being consumed by the ravages of war. It is of the Lord's mercies that we are
not consumed, because his compassions fail not. And much more so, that, in the
distressing and alarming situation of our public affairs, there have been so
many favorable circumstances to preserve us from fainting, to hearten us up,
and to encourage our hopes, in expecting that we shall at length, in the
exercise of prudence, fortitude, and piety, get well through our difficulties.

HERE allow me to run through a brief summary of these favorable
circumstances, composed of the following particulars -- The rising and growing
consistency of sentiments in the friends of liberty, whcih has (...) one
assembly and another on this continent, to attempt preventing the further
introduction of slaves among them, though herein they have been counter-acted by
governors, and which the American Congress has with so much wisdom and justice
adopted -- The increasing acquaintance with the rights of conscience in matters
of religion, as belonging equally alike to men of all parties and
denominations, while they conduct as good members of civil society, without
endeavoring to injoure their neighbors of different or opposite sentiments --
The blundering policy of the British ministry, in giving so cruel a cast to the
Boston Port-bill, taking away by it private porperty and subjecting it is
restitution to the pleasure of the Sovereign; in following that so hastily with
other acts, equally unjust and more extensively pernicious, affecting the whole
colony, and built upon principles and claims, that rendered every dwelling
plantation and right through the Continent precarious, dependent on the will of
the parliament, or rather of the junto or individual, that has the power of
managing it; in declaring openly while supporting the bills, that their design
was not against a single town or colony, but against all America; in presuming,
that the other towns and colonies, upon receiving the dreadful news, would turn
pale and tremble, conceal their spirit of resentment and opposition, in
sneaking professions of tame submission and a bandon the distressed, though
their own ruin must have followed upon it, however slowly; and, upon such
presumption, neglecting to divide in time, the different colonies, by
flattering promises suited to their several situations, and by secret
purchases, ere they could form a general union -- The re-establishment of
arbitrary power and a despotic government, in a most extensive and purposely
enlarged larged country, contrary to the royal declaration given a few years
before, qualified somewhat to the inhabitants, by that formal security of their
religious liberty, which was no ways wanting; but as is generally, I fear
justly, thought, with the base diabolical design of procuring their assistance,
if required, in quelling the spirit of freedom among the natural and loyal
subjects of Great Britain. -- I have no objection to the Canadians being fully
secured in the enjoyment of their religion, however erroneous and anit-
christian it may appear to me, as a protestant: But to the British
legislative's not having given an universal establishment to the rights of
conscience among them. The rights of conscience are too sacred for any civil
power on earth to interdict, wherein they produce not cuvert acts against the
necessary and essential rights of civil society -- I say, necessary and
essential, to guard against the reasonings of interested designing priests of
every denomination, who are for forming unnatural alliances between church and
state, the sword of the Spirit and the sword of the magistrate. Arguments drawn
from the ancient Jewish Theocracy, are of no avail, 'till the existence of a
christian Theocracy is proved, in direct opposition to the words of our great
Leader, who has said My kingdom is not of this world.

Should the necessity of our affairs convene another Congress, hope among other
things, it will be agreed upon, as the proper solid basis for the firmest and
most extensive union, that every colony should retain, while the majority of it
are so pleased, whatever is it is prevailing form of religion, and admit of an
universal toleration, to all other persuasions, whether professors of
chirstianity or not.

'Twas a special pleasure to me, on my first arrival in America among the
friendly Philadelphians, to observe how Papists, Episcopalians, Moravians,
Lutherans, Calvinists, Methodists and Quakers, could pass each other peaceably,
and in good temper, on the sabbath, after having broke up their respective
assemblies -- which I could not but take notice of, in an early letter to my
native country.

It may be said, that notwithstanding this apparent regard for the rights of
conscience, I am really unfriendly to them, unless I will admit of an American
episcopate. Though some may be prejudiced against it, from the fibbing,
rancarous and abusive opposition that certain D. D's are continually making to
measures for preserving the civil rights of this continent, (whose conduct I
can easily account for, and who have doubtless received intelligence, as well
as myself that the design of sending a Bishop to America, as soon as
circumstances will admit, is certainly kept in view; and that -- is intended
for the sea: And men, whose ambitious hopes of a deanery, arch-deaconship, or
crosier, are likely to be disappointed by the public maneuvers in favor of
liberty, will be out of humor, and should be patiently born with, though they
vent their spleen against liberty itself.) Yet, the rights of episcopalians are
not thereby forfeited: and whenever the majority of them, laity included, (and
not a few of the leading clergy, who are for more homage than the present
equality admits) are desirous of an American episcopate, and will see to it is
being with security, that the Bishop and every other dignitary, shall be
confined purely to spiritual matters -- shall have no more rule in civil
concerns, than the parochial priest -- shall be maintained by no kind of tax,
but by voluntary contributions, or from legacies given a full year before the
death of the testator, when coming out of a real estate -- and shall be
deprived of all power to injure or interrupt other denominiations, let them be
gratified. It will have a good effect, and will prevent our young men's making
a trip to England for orders, which generally proves dangerous -- to their love
of freedom. But it will be long enough, 'ere some who have been arduously
laboring to accomplish a protestant American episcopate, will, with all their
conscientious attachment to, and zeal for it, agree to it is existence in this
new world upon such equitable conditions; as may be inferred, from the little
attention paid to what L -- d S -- g mentioned to them, at or in the
neighborhood of Amboy.

As to the civil establishment given to the Canadians by the Quebec bill, the
slavery of it has been admirably exposed in the address of the Congress; and
yet, was it a fact, that the body of the French inhabitants preferred it to
every other form, I am of Lord Littleton's opinion, that they should have it
while the requested it; we have reason however to believe, that the made of
trial by juries, was desired by the bulk of the people, and that it was taken
away to gratify the petty noblesse of the country, who were for enjoying, as
when under France the power of oppressing their inferiors. But surely care
ought to have been taken by provisos in the act, that Britons should not have
been shut out from settling in a country, for the conquest of which they did
and do contribute, without giving up their liberties and commencing slaves: And
that a British Gentleman, was he pleased to make the tour of Canada, might not
be exposed to an imprisonment by a letter de cachet from a Governor, in
consequence of secret instructions from home, should he have unhappily fallen
under the high displeasure of a British ministry.


-- The speedy arrival of the Port-bill in the common way of conveyance,
whereby some difficulties were avoided and some advantages enjoyed, while
administration was not so merciful, as to attempt giving us the earliest
intelligence of what had been done -- -It Is arrival at Boston, New York and
Virginia, nearly at the same time -- The firmness that the Bostonians showed
upon the occasion -- The indignation with which it was received, as the news
flew through the continent -- The spirited behavior of the noble Virginian
Assembly, Many political ministerial writers have, with a malicious cunning,
attributed to the Massachusetts more merit in opposing the attempts against
American rights, than it is entitled to. The episcopal colony of Virginia
bravely led in the movements at the time of the Stamp Act; and was the first,
that, by their assembly, declared against the Boston Port-bill, in the
strongest terms of an b^^est indignation.
whereby they hastened their own dissolution -- The accounts from different
places and colonies, forwarded to the capital for her encouragement under her
distress, and to assure her of assistance and support, and that they considered
here is in the true light of a common cause; not in consequence of, but ere they
had received, her applications for adivce and direction, with the state of her
situation -- The forwardness, which showed itself every where, to contribute to
her relief, and to adopt measures that might, in the issue, recover and secure
the liberties of this and the other colonies -- The surprising agreement in
opinion, that has prevailed in persons at a great distance from each other,
while consulting for the general good, whereby they have been led to transmit
by letters, nearly the same proposals to each other, as though the inspiration
of the Most High gave them the like understanding -- The fixing upon a general
Congress, and choosing delegates, although inseveral places, governmental
chicanery was used to prevent it -- The tender compassionate feelings that
every delegate of whatsoever denomination, without regard to party
distinctions, discovered for the Bostonians, under the free and affecting
prayer of a worthy episcopalian. The Rev. Mr. Duch^.
when at the opening of the congress they had been alarmed with the false
rumor that Boston had been attacked by the mirumour that Boston had been
attacked by the military and navy -- The amazing consequences that this false
alarm did, and continues to, produce. It proved the means of showing that the
colonists were not to be intimidated, though martial appearances were to
terminate in actual hostilities; that they would be volunteers in the cause of
liberty; and that they meant not to avoid sighting, whenever it became
necessary. It put many thousands upon boldly betaking themselves to arms, and
marching forward, as they apprehended, to the assistance of their oppressed
fellow subjects. It kindled a martial spirit, that has spread through various
colonies, and put the inhabitants upon perfecting themslves in the military
exercise, that so they may be early prepared for the worst. To that it has been
owing, in a great measure, that the continent has put on such a warlike
appearance; that companies have been formed, and are continually training, as
far down as to, and even in Virginia, if not further We are informed of the
like in South Carolina.
; and that they will be better prepared, than was ever before the case, to
repel all invasions, that may be made upon their natural and constitutional
rights, even though supported by a British army. Should British officers and
troops, wrongly imagine, that their commissions and oaths oblige them to act,
though in opposition to those very principles of the constitution that supports
them, and empowers the King to give them their commissions, instead of
recollecting, that all obligations entered into, must (...) be attended with
this proviso, that they are not contrary to and subversive of the constitution,
and that it is a reverence for, and love to the constitution that distinguishes
the soldier from the mercenary: Still, they would have no inclination to fight
with fellow subjects, whose only fault was an excessive love of freedom, and a
fixed determination not to submit, to what they really believed, were designed
attacks upon their most precious lilberties. In such cricumstances, may we not
hope, that the former would rather wish to escape with honor, than to disgrace
themselves with conquest, and that the men of might would not find their hands.
But should it be otherwise, and their native bravery be sacrificed in support
of a bad cause; yet it might be too hard a task for them to subdue their
brethren, when ^ighting pro aris et socis, for all that is dear; and who almost
universally excel in the art of striking a mark, by which the waste of
ammunition will be greatly prevented Mr. Knoch, Lieutenant in the first
regiment of Orange-Nassau in a treatise on "the insufficiency of firearms, for
attack or defense demonstrated from facts, etc. wrote in about 1759, proves
"that, at a medium taken from any number of battles ^ought somewhat before the
period, not more than one man could have been killed or wounded, by eighthly
shot dischraged.
, the want of field artillery will not be much, nor long felt, under a
commander that has skill to avoid being attacked, and to choose his ground for
attacking, in a country with which he is perfectly acquainted, and where every
inhabitant, even the children, are standing spies upon all the motions of an
adversary. But as I earnestly beg of heaven, that the redress of our grievances
may be obtained without fighting: I shall not dwell longer upon this point, and
proceed to mention those other favorable circumstances of a pacifick kind,
that remain to be specified; such as, the generous donations made for the poor
the Boston, the union of the colonies, the prevailing harmony and unanimity
among the individuals composing the Grand Congress, their approbation of the
opposition giving by this colony to the acts for altering it is ancient forms of
government, their association respecting trade and the like The right of an
embodied people, in a contest for liberty, when the voice of the majority has
been fairly obtained, to interdict, and where necessary, forcibly to prevent, a
trade, that would ruin the common cause, and cannot be carried on without
subjecting them to slavery, notwithstanding the great injury it may occasion to
individuals, I apprehend, will, on the same principles that justify a
proscribing a traffic that would hazard the introduction of the pestilence,
admit of as much stronger a vindication, as slavery is the greater plague.
, the readiness of the people to conform to it, and the intrepid conduct of the
southern inhabitants in preventing the introduction of any more teas among them
-- These are favorable circumstances, beyond what the most sanguine friends of
liberty expected; that appear to be of the Lord's doing, and are mavelous in
our eyes; that, if foretold, would have been deemed morally impossible, by
those who are still inimical to them, though evidencing a wonderful
interposition of providence; and that may justly encourage us, as well as keep
us from fainting; especially when taken in connection with that spirit of
prayer and humiliation, which has discovered itself in different places on
occasion of the times. Would to God, there was more of this! Did it abound
universally, we should have greater ground of encouragement by much; for the
fervent prayers of the humble, penitent, and returning, avail with GOD, through
the mediation of the Lord Jesus. However, from what there is, and the other
favorable circumstances we are warranted to expect, that at length, in the
exercise of prudence, fortitude and piety, we shall get well through our
difficulties.

We must prudently fall in with the measures recommended by the Congress, that
so we may not be reported to other colonies, as disregarders of them, whereby,
first a jealousy may be produced, and then a disunion effected. We must promote
unanimity among ourselves, peace and good order, that we may not be represented
as desirous of confusion, in hopes of making an advantage of it. We should let
the laws of honor and honesty have their full weight with us, that we may fall
under no reproach, for abusing the present suspension of human laws. We should
diligently provide for the worst; and be upon our guard, that we may not be
suddenly stripped of those appertenances, the loss of which will be severely
felt, should we be called upon by a dire necessity to make our appeal to heaven.

I have been ready at times to infer, from that military spirit that has
spread through the continent, that though we are to be saved, it is not to be
without the sword, or at least the strong appearance of it; unless infinite
wisdom (which we shall heartily rejoice to find is the case) should be in this
way preparing the colonies, for cooperating with the parent state, after that
masters in dispute have been settled to satisfaction, in some important
struggle with a common enemy; and therein, by giving her effectual assistance,
fore wiping away the reproaches that interested calumny and malice have thrown
upon them, and for confirming an eternal friendship. But is it the awful
determination of heaven that we shall not retain our liberties without
fighting, let no one despair. The con^inent, after having discovered consummate
wisdom, can never conduct so absurdly, as to leave a single colony alone in the
dispute; their own security will constrian them to support whichsoever is
attacked; they will rather (...) at a distance, than have a war upon or within
their own borders, and will be sensible that whoever fights on the side of
American liberty, hazards his life in their battles. Should it be allowed, for
argument's sake, that some one province or other, through selfishness or
timidity, should basely slink from the common danger; yet would the rest have
greater probability of succeding, than had the Dutch, when they began to emerge
from slavery, and to acquire their liberties. "The whole country of the seven
United Provinces is not as large as one half of Pennsylvania and when they
began their contest with Philip the second for their liberty, contained about
as many inhabitants as are now in the province of Massachusetts Bay.
Philetc;irc;p's empire then comprehended in Europe, all Spain and Portugal, the
two Sicilies, and such provinces of the Low Countries as adhered to him -- many
islands of importance in the Mediterranean -- the Milanese and many other
valuable territories in Italy, and elsewhere -- In Africa and Asia, all the
dominions belonging to Spain and Portugal -- In America the immense countries
subject to those two kingdoms, with all their treasures, and yet unexhausted
mines, and the Spanish West Indies. His armies were numerous and veteran,
excellenty officered, and commanded by the most renowned generals. So great was
their force, that during the wars in the Low Countries his commander in chief,
the prince of Parma marched twice into France, and obliged that great general
and glorious king, Henry the fourth, to raise at one time the siege of Paris,
and at another that a of Roan So considerable was the naval power of Philip,
that in the midst of the same wars, be befitted out his dreadful armada to
invade England. Yet seven little provinces or counties, as we should call them,
(says that eminent Pennsylvanian) inspirel I by one general resolution -- "to
die free, rather than live slaves" -- not only baffled, but brought down into
the dust that enormous power, that had contended for universal empire, and for
half a century was the terror of the world. Such an amazing change indeed took
place, that those Provinces afterward actually PROTECTED Spain against the
power of (...)"
. Let us be but brave, and we may promise ourselves success, do we join piety
to our prudence and fortitude. Do we confess and repent of our sins, justify
God on his so trying us, accept of our punishment at his hands without
murmuring or complaining; Do we humble ourselves, amend our ways and doings,
give up ourselves to God, become an holy people, and make the most High our
confidence, we may hope that He will be on our side: And if the Lord is for us
what can men do unto us? Have we the God of hosts for our ally, we mgiht bid
adieu to fear, though the world was united against us.

LET us then be pious, brave and prudent, and we shall, some of us at least,
have room for thanksgivings, not merely for promising appearances, but for
actual deliverance out of present difficulties, though it should not be till we
have been conversant with the din of arms and the horrors of war. But should
the country be wasted for a few years, and numbers of it is inhabitants be
destroyed, ere the wished for salvation is granted, how soon, after having
secured it is liberties, will it regain it is former prosperity; yea, become far
more glorious, wealthy and populous than ever, through the thousands and ten
thousands that will flock ot it, with riches arts and sciences acquired by them
in foreign countries. And, how will the surviving inhabitants and their
posterity, together with refugees, who have fled from oppression and hardships,
whether civil, or sacred, to our American sanctuary, daily give thanks to the
Sovereign of the universe, that this general asylum was not consumed! How often
will they, with raptures think upon that noble exertion of courage that
prevented it; celebrate the praises of those that led and suffered in the
common cause; and, with glowing hearts, bless that God who owned the goodness
of it, and at length crowned it with success! Hallelu^ah. The Lord God
omnipotent reigns.

FINIS.
THE way to escape an attack is to be (...) readiness to receive it. While
admin^stration consists of those that have avow^^ their dislike to the
principles of this continer and the known friends of America are exclude there
should be not dependence upon the (...) speeches, or actual promises of any,
but the (...) should pursue the means of safety, vigorously as ever, that they
may not be s^^prized. It Is the most constant maxim of (...) that a man ought
never to be more upon (...) guard, than whilst he is in treaty. For want
attending to it, King Edward the 4th was (...) attacked, defeated, and made
prisoner, the Earl of Warwick in 1470.


