THE ORIGIN OF THE AMERICAN CONTEST WITH GREAT BRITAIN, OR The present
political State of the Massachusetts Bay, in general, AND The Town of Boston in
particular.

Exhibiting the Rise and Progress of the disordered State of that Country, in a
series of weekly Essays, published at Boston, under the Signature of
MASSACHUSETTENSIS, A Native of New England.

NEW YORK: Printed by JAMES RIVINGTON, 1775.

THE PRESENT POLITICAL STATE OF THE PROVINCE OF MASSACHUSETTS BAY IN GENERAL,
AND THE TOWN OF BOSTON, IN PARTICULAR, Exhibiting the Rise and Progress of the
disordered State of that Country, in a Series of Letters, published weekly, at
BOSTON, and now first collected.

By a Native of NEW ENGLAND,

NEW YORK: Printed for JAMES RIVINGTON, MDCCLXXV.

THE PRESENT POLITICAL STATE, OF THE PROVINCE OF MASSACHUSETTS BAY, etc.
WHEN a people, by what means soever, are reduced to such a situation, that
every thing they hold dear, as men and citizens, is at stake, it is not only
excusable, but even praiseworthy for an individual to offer to the public any
thing that he may think has a tendency to ward off the impending danger, nor
should he be restrained, from an apprehension that what he may offer will be
unpopular, any more than a physician should be restrained from prescribing a
salutary medicine through fear it might be unpalatable to his patient.

The press, when open to all parties, influenced by none, is a salutary engine
in a free state, perhaps a necessary one to preserve the fredom of that state;
but, when a party has gained the ascendency so far as to become the licensers
of the press, either by an act of government, or by playing off the resentment
of the populace, against printers and authors, the press itself becomes an
engine of oppression and licentiousness, and is as pernicious to society, as
otherwise it would be beneficial. It is too true to be denied that since our
controversy with Great Britain, the press in this town has been much devoted to
the partisans of liberty, they have been indulged in publishing what they
pleased, fas vel nefas, while little has been published on the part of
government, the effect this must have had upon the minds of the people in
general is obvious; they must have formed their opinion upon a partial view of
the subject, and of course it must have been in some degree erroneous; in short
the changes have been rung so often upon oppression, tyranny and slavery, that
whether sleeping or waking, they are continually vibrating in our ears, and it
is now high time to ask ourselves whether we have not been deluded by sound
only.

My dear countrymen, let us divest ourselves of prejudice, take a view of our
present wretched situation, contrast it with our former happy one, carefully
investigate the cause, and industriously seek some means to escape the evils we
now feel, and prevent those that we have reason to expect.

We have been so long advancing to our present state, and by such gradations,
that perhaps many of us are insensible of our true state and real danger.
Should you be told that acts of high treason are flagrant through the country,
that a great part of the province is in actual rebellion, would you believe it
true? Should you not deem the person asserting of it an enemy to the province?
Nay should you not spurn him from you with indignation? Be calm, my friends, it
is necessary to know the worst of a disease, to enable us to provide an
effectual remedy. Are not the bonds of society cut asunder, and the sanctions,
that hold man to man trampled upon? Can any of us recover a debt, or obtain
compensation for an injury, by law? Are not many persons who once we respected
and revered, forced to fly from their homes and families, to the army for
protection, for no other reason but their having accepted commissions under our
King? Is not civil government dissolved? Some have been made to believe that
nothing short of attempting the life of the King, or fighting his troops can
amount to high treason, or rebellion. If, reader, you are one of those, apply
to an honest lawyer* (if such a one can be found) and enquire what kind of
offense it is for a number of men to assemble armed, and forceably obstruct the
courts of justice, even to prevent the King's courts from being held at the
stated terms; for a body of people to seize upon the King's provincial revenue:
I mean the moneys collected by virtue of grants made by the General Court, to
his Majesty, for the support of his government within this province; for a body
of men to assemble without being called by authority, and to pass governmental
acts, or for a number of people to take the militia out of the hands of the
King's Representative, or to form a new militia, or to raise men and appoint
officers, for a public purpose, without the order or permission of the King, or
his representative; or for a number of men to take to their arms, and march,
with a professed design of opposing the King's troops; ask, reader, of such a
lawyer what is the crime, and what the punishment, and if per chance thou art
one that have been active in those things, and art not insensibility itself;
his answer will harrow up thy soul.

I assure you, my friends, I would not that this conduct should be told beyond
the borders of this province, I wish it were consigned to perpetual oblivion:
but alas, it is too notorious so to be concealed, our newspapers have already
published it to the world, we can neither prevent nor conceal it, the shaft is
already sped, and the utmost exertion is necessary to prevent the blow. We
already feel the effects of anarchy, mutual confidence, affection and
tranquillity, those sweetners of human life, are succeeded by distrust, hatred
and wild uproar; the useful arts of agriculture and commerce are neglected for
caballing, mobbing this or the other man, because he acts, speaks, or is
suspected of thinking different from the prevailing sentiment of the times, in
purchasing arms, and forming a militia. O height of madness! with a professed
design of opposing Great Britain. -- I suspect many of us have been induced to
join in the measures, or but faintly to oppose them, from an apprehension that
Great Britain would not, or could not exert herself sufficiently to subdue
America. Let us consider this matter. However close we may hug ourselves in the
opinion that the parliament has no right to tax or legislate for us, the people
of England hold the contrary opinion as firmly; they tell us we are a part of
the British empire, that every state, from the nature of government, must have
a supreme uncontrollable power, co-existent with the empire itself, and that
that power is vested in parliament; it is as unpopular to deny this doctrine in
Great Britain as it is to assert it in the colonies, so there is but little
probability of serving ourselves at this day by our ingenious distinctions
between external and internal taxes, between a right of legislation for one
purpose and not for another. We have bid them defiance, and the longest sword
must carry it, unless we change our measures. Mankind are the same in all parts
of the world, the same fondness for dominion that presides in the breast of an
American, rules in the breast of an European. If the colonies are not a part of
the British empire already, and subject to the supreme authority of the state,
Great Britain will make them so. Had we been prudent enough to confine our
opposition within certain limits, we might have stood some chance of succeeding
once more, but alas, we have passed the Rubicon. It is now universally said and
believed in England, that if this opportunity of reclaiming the colonies, and
reducing them to a sense of their duty, is lost, they, in truth, will be
dismembered from the empire, and become as distinct a state from Great Britain
as Hanover; that is, although they may continue their allegiance to the person
of the King, they will own none to the imperial crown of Great Britain, nor
yield obedience to any of her laws, but such as they shall think proper to
adopt. Can you indulge the thought for one moment, that Great- Britain will
consent to this? For what has she protected and defended the colonies against
the maritime powers of Europe, from the first British settlement to this day?
For what did she purchase New York of the Dutch? For what was she so lavish of
her best blood and treasure in the conquest of Canada, and other territories in
America? Was it to raise up a rival state, or to enlarge her own empire? Or if
the consideration of an empire was out of the question, what security can she
have of our trade, when once she has lost our obedience? I mention these
things, my friends, that you may know how people reason upon the subject in
England, and to convince you that you are much deceived if you imagine
Great Britain will accede to the claims of the colonies; she will as soon
conquer New- England, as Ireland or Canada, if either of them revolted, and by
arms, if the milder influences of government prove ineffectual? Perhaps you are
as fatally mistaken in another respect, I mean as to the power of Great Britain
to conquer, but can any of you that think soberly upon the matter, be so
deluded as to believe that Great Britain, who so lately carried her arms with
success to every part of the globe, triumphed over the united powers of France
and Spain, and whose fleets gave law to the ocean, is unable to conquer us?

Should the colonies unite in a war against Great Britain (which by the way is
not a supposeable case) the colonies south of Pennsylvania would be unable to
furnish any men; they have not more than is necessary to govern their numerous
slaves, and defend themselves against the Indians. I will suppose that the
northern colonies can furnish as many, and indeed more men than can be used to
advantage, but have you arms fit for a campaign? If you have arms, have you
military stores, or can you procure them? When this war is proclaimed, all
supplies from foreign parts will be cut off. Have you money to maintain the
war? Or had you all those things, some others are still wanting, which are
absolutely necessary to encounter regular troops, that is discipline, and that
subordination whereby each can command all below him, from a general officer to
the lowest subaltern, these you neither have nor can have in such a war. It is
well known that the provincials in the late war were never brought to a proper
discipline, though they had the example of the regular troops to encourage, and
the martial law to enforce it. We all know, notwithstanding the province law
for regulating the militia, it was under little more command than what the
officers could obtain from treating and humouring the common soldiers; what
then can be expected from such an army as you will bring into the field, if you
bring any, each one a politician, puffed up with his own opinion, and feeling
himself second to none? Can any of you command forty-thousand such men? Can you
punish the disobedient? Can all your wisdom direct their strength, courage, or
activity to any given point? Would not the least disappointment, or
unfavourable aspect cause a general dereliction of the service? Your
newfangled militia have already given us a specimen of their future conduct,
in some of their companies; they have already chosen two, in others three setts
of officers, and are as dissatisfied with the last choice as the first. I do
not doubt the natural bravery of my countrymen, all men would act the same part
in the same situation; such is the army with which you are to oppose the most
powerful nation upon the globe.

An experienced officer would rather take his chance with five thousand British
troops, than with fifty-thousand such militia. I have hitherto confined my
observations to the war within the interior parts of the colonies, let us now
turn our eyes to our extensive sea coasts; and that we find wholly at the mercy
of Great Britain; our trade, fishery, navigation and maritime towns taken from
us the very day that war is proclaimed, inconceivably shocking the scene; if we
turn our views to the wilderness, our back settlements a prey to our ancient
enemy, the Canadians, whose wounds received from us, in the late war, will
bleed afresh at the prospect of revenge, and to the numerous tribes of savages,
whose tender mercies are cruelties; thus with the British navy in the front,
Canadians and savages in the rear, a regular army in the midst, we must be
certain that whenever the sword of civil war is unsheathed, desolation will
pass through our land like a whirlwind, our houses be burnt to ashes, our fair
possessions laid waste, and he that (...) by the sword will be happy in
escaping a more ignominious death.

I have hitherto gone upon a supposition, that all the colonies from
Nova Scotia, to Georgia, would unite in the war against Great Britain; but I
believe, if we consider cooly upon the matter, we shall find no reason to
expect any assistance out of New England; if so, there will be no arm stretched
out to save us, New England, or perhaps this self-devoted province will fall
alone the unpitied victim of its own folly, and furnish the world with one more
instance of the fatal consequences of rebellion.

I have, as yet, said nothing of the different sentiments among ourselves; upon
a superficial view we might imagine that this province was nearly unanimous,
but the case is far different; a very considerable part of the men of property
in this province, are at this day firmly attached to the cause of government;
bodies of men compelling persons to disavow their sentiments, to resign
commissions, or to subscribe leagues and covenants, has wrought no change in
their sentiments, it has only attached them more closely to government, and
caused them to wish more servently, and to pray more devoutly for its
restoration; these, and thousands beside, if they fight at all, will fight
under the banner of loyalty.

I can assure you that associations are now forming in several parts of this
province, for the support of his Majesty's government and mutual defense; and
let me tell you whenever the royal standard shall be set up, there will be such
a flocking to it, as will astonish the most obdurate. And now, in God's name,
what is it that has brought us to this brink of destruction? Has not the
government of Great Britain been as mild and equitable in the colonies, as in
any part of her extensive dominions? Has not she been a nursing mother to us
from the day of our infancy to this time? has she not been indulged almost to a
fault? Might not each of us at this day have sat quietly under his own vine and
fig tree, and there have been none to make us afraid, were it not for our own
folly? Will not posterity be amazed when they are told that the present
distraction took its rise from the parliament's taking off a shilling duty on a
pound of tea, and imposing three pence, and call it a more unaccountable
phrenzy, and more disgraceful to the annals of America, than that of the
witchcraft? I will attempt in the next paper to re-trace the steps, and mark
the progressions that led us to this state.

I promise to do it with fidelity, and if any thing should look like reflecting
on individuals, or bodies of men, it must be set down to my impartiality, and
not to a desire of censuring.

I have endeavored, last week, to convince you of your real danger, not to
render you desperate, but to induce you to seek immediately some effectual
remedy. Our case is not yet remediless, as we have to deal with a nation not
less generous and humane, than powerful and brave, just indeed; but not
vindictive.

I shall, in this and successive papers, trace this yet growing distemper,
through its several stages, from its first rise to the present hour, point out
the causes, mark the effects, show the madness of persevering in our present
line of conduct, and recommend what, I have been long convinced, is our only
remedy. I confess myself to be one of those that think our present calamity is
in a great measure to be attributed to the bad policy of a popular party in
this province, and that their measures, for several years past, whatever may
have been their intention, have been diametrically opposite to their
prosession, the public good; and cannot, at present, but compare their leaders
to a guide that having led a benighted traveller, through many mazes and
windings, in a thick wood, finds himself at length on the brink of a horrid
precipice, and to save himself seizes fast hold of his follower, to the utmost
hazard of plunging both headlong down the steep, and being dashed in pieces
together, in the rocks below.

In ordinary cases we may talk in the measured language of a courtier; but when
such a weight of vengeance is suspended, over our heads by a single thread, and
threatens every moment to crush us to atoms, delicacy itself would be
ill-t^^ed; I will declare the plain truth wherever I find it, and claim as a
right to canvass popular measures, and expose their errors, and pernicious
tendency as freely, as governmental measures are canvassed, so long as I
confine myself within the limits of the law.

At the conclusion of the late war, Great Britain found, that though she had
humbled her enemies, and greatly enlarged her own empire, that the national
debt amounted to no less than one hundred and fifty millions, and that the
annual expense of keeping her extended dominions in a state of defense, which
good policy dictates no less in a time of peace than war, was increased in
proportion to the new acquisitions. Heavy taxes and duties were already laid,
not only upon the luxuries and conveniences, but even the necessaries of life
in Great Britain and Ireland. She knew that her colonies were as much benefited
by the conquest, in the late war, as any part of the empire; and indeed more
so, as their continental foes were subdued, and they might now extend their
settlements, not only to Canada, but even to the western ocean. The greatest
opening was given to agriculture, the natural livelihood of the country, that
ever was known in the history of the world, and their trade protected by the
British navy. The revenue to the crown, from America, amounts to but little
more than the charges of collecting it. She thought it as reasonable that the
colonies should bear a part of the national burden, as that they should share
in the national benefit. For this, purpose the stamp act was passed. The
colonies soon found that the duties imposed by the stamp act would be grievous,
and as they were laid upon custom-house paper, law proceedings, conveyancing,
and indeed extended to all their internal trade and dealings. It was generally
believed through the colonies, that this was a tax not only exceeding our
proportion, but beyond our utmost ability to pay. This idea united the colonies
generally in opposing it. At first we did not dream of denying the authority of
parliament to tax us, much less to legislate for us. We knew that by our first
charter, our exclusive right of taxation was to continue but twenty years. We
had always considered ourselves as a part of the British empire, and the
parliament as the supreme legislature of the whole. Acts of parliament for
regulating internal policy were familiar. We had paid postage agreeable to act
of parliament, for establishing a post office, duties imposed for regulating
trade, and even for raising a revenue to the crown, without questioning the
right, though we closely adverted to the rate, or quantum. We know that in all
those acts of government, the good of the whole had been consulted, and
whenever through want of information, any thing grievous had been ordained, we
were sure of obtaining redress by a proper representation of it. We were happy
in our subordination; but in an evil hour, under the influence of some
malignant planet, the design was formed of opposing the stamp act, by a denial
of the right of parliament to make it.

The love of empire is so predominant in the human breast, that we rarely find
an individual content with relinquishing a power that he is able to retain,
over a body of men. Some few months after it was known that the stamp act was
passed, some resolves of the House of Burgesses in Virginia, denying the right
of parliament to tax the colonies, made their appearance. We read them with
wonder -- they savoured of independence, they flattered the human passions --
the reasoning was specious -- we wished it conclusive. The transition, to
believing it so, was easy -- and we, and almost all America, followed their
example, in resolving that the parliament had no such right. It now became
unpopular to suggest the contrary; his life would be in danger that asserted
it. The newspapers were open to but one side of the question, and the
inflammatory pieces that issued weekly from the press, worked the populace to a
fit temper to commit the outrage that ensued. A non-importation was agreed
upon, which alarmed the merchants and manufacturers in England. It was novel,
and the people in England then supposed that the love of liberty was so
powerful in an American merchant, as to stifle his love of gain, and that the
agreement would be religiously adhered to. It has been said, that several
thousands were expended in England, to foment the disturbances there. However
that may be, opposition to the ministry was then gaining ground, from
circumstances foreign to this. The ministry was changed, and the stamp act
repealed. The repealing statute passed with difficulty however through the
House of Lords, forty at least protested against giving way to such an
opposition, and foretold what has since literally come to pass in consequence
of it. When the statute was made, imposing duties upon glass, paper, India
teas, etc. imported into the colonies, it was said, that this was another
instance of taxation, for some of the dutied commodities were necessaries, we
had them not within ourselves, were prohibited from importing them from any
place, except Great Britain, and consequently were obliged to pay the duties.
Accordingly news-paper publications, pamphlets, resolves, non-importation
agreements, and the whole system of American opposition was again put in
motion. We obtained a partial repeal of this statute, which took off the duties
from all the articles except teas. This was the lucky moment to have closed the
dispute. We might have made a safe and honorable retreat. We had gained much,
perhaps more than we expected. If the parliament had passed an act declarative
of their right to tax us, our assemblies had resolved, ten times, that they had
no such right. We could not complain of the three penny duty on tea, as
burdensome, for a shilling which had been laid upon it, for the purpose of
regulating the trade, and therefore was allowed to be constitutional, was taken
off; so that we were in fact gainers, nine pence in a pound, by the new
regulation. If the appropriation of the revenue, arising, from this statute,
was disrelished, it was only our striking off one article of luxury from our
manner of living, an article too, which, if we may believe the resolves of most
of the towns in this province, or rely on its collected wisdom in a resolve of
the House of Representatives, was to the last degree ruinous to health. It was
futile to urge its being a precedent, as a reason for keeping up the ball of
contention; for, allowing the supreme legislature ever to want a precedent,
they had many for laying duties on commodities imported into the colonies; one
of which I will mention, the statute commonly called the molasses act, by which
a duty is laid upon molasses imported into these colonies, and the purpose of
raising a revenue, is expressly mentioned: And besides, we had great reason to
believe that the remaining part of the statute would be repealed, as soon as
the parliament should suppose it could be done with honor to themselves, as
the incidental revenue arising from the former regulation, was threefold to
the revenue arising from the latter. A claim of the right, could work no
injury, so long as there was no grievous exercise of it, especially as we had
protested against it, through the whole, and could not be said to have departed
from our claims in the least. We might now upon good terms have dropped the
dispute, and been happy in the affections of our mother country; but that is
yet to come. Party is inseparable from a free state. The several distributions
of power as they are limited by, so they create perpetual dissentions between
each other, about their respective boundaries; but the greatest source is the
competition of individuals for preferment in the state. Popularity is the
ladder by which the partisans usually climb. Accordingly the struggle is, who
shall have the greatest share of it. Each party professes disinterested
patriotism, though some cynical writers have ventured to assert, that self-love
is the ruling passion of the whole. There were two parties in this province of
pretty long standing, known by the names of Whig and Tory, which at this time
were not a little imbittered against each other. Men of abilities and
acknowledged probity were on both sides. It is not for me to determine which
was the real, and which the false patriot. If the Tories were suspected of
pursuing their private interest through the medium of court favor, there was
equal reason to suspect the Whigs of pursuing their private interest by means
of popularity. Indeed some of them owed all their importance to it, and must in
a little time have sunk into obscurity, had these turbulent commotions then
subsided.

The Tories and Whigs took different routs, as usual. The Tories were for
closing the controversy with Great Britain, the Whigs for continuing it; the
Tories were for restoring government in the province, which had become greatly
relaxed by these convulsions, to its former tone; the Whigs were averse to it;
they even refused to revive a temporary riot act, which expired about this
time. Perhaps they thought that mobs were a necessary ingredient in their
system of opposition: However, the Whigs had great advantages in the unequal
combat, that scheme flattered the people with the idea of independence; the
Tories plan supposed a degree of subordination, which is rather an humiliating
idea; besides, there is a propensity in men to believe themselves injured and
oppressed whenever they are told so: the ferment raised in their minds, in the
time of the stamp act, was not yet allayed, and the leaders of the Whigs had
gained the confidence of the people by their success in their former struggles,
so that they had nothing to do but to keep up the spirit among the people, and
they were sure of commanding this province. It required some pains to prevent
their minds settling into that calm which is ordinarily the effect of a mild
government: the Whigs were sensible that there was no oppression that could be
either seen or felt; if any thing was in reality amiss in government; it was
its being too lax. So far was it from the innocent being in danger of
suffering, that the most attrocious offender escaped with impunity. They
accordingly applied themselves to work upon the imagination, and to inflame the
passions: for this work they possessed great talents; I will do justice to
their ingenuity; they were intimately acquainted with the feelings of man, and
knew all the avenues of the human heart: Effigies, paintings, and other imagery
were exhibited; the fourteenth of August was celebrated annually, as a festival
in commemoration of a mob's destroying a building, owned by the late
Lieutenant Governor, which was supposed to have been erected for a
stamp-office, and compelling him to resign his office of stamp-master, under
liberty-tree; annual orations were delivered, in the Old South Meeting House,
on the fifth of March, the day when some persons were unfortunately killed, by
a party of the twenty-ninth regiment; lists of imaginary grievances were
continually published; the people were told weekly, that the ministry had
formed a plan to enslave them; that the duty upon tea was only a prelude to a
window-tax, hearth-tax, land tax, and poll-tax; and these were only paving the
way for reducing the country to lordships; this last bait was the more easily
swallowed; as there seems to be an apprehension of that kind hereditary to the
people of New England; and were conjured by the duty they owed themselves,
their country, and their GOD, by the reverence due to the sacred memory of
their ancestors, and all their toils and sufferings, in this once inhospitable
wilderness, and by their affection for unborn millions, to rouse and exert
themselves in the common cause. This perpetual incantation kept the people in
continual alarm. We were further stimulated by being told that the people of
England were depraved, the parliament venal, and the ministry corrupt; nor were
attempts wanting to traduce Majesty itself. The kingdom of Great Britain was
depictured as an ancient structure, once the admiration of the world, now
sliding from its base, and rushing to its fall. At the same time we were called
upon to mark out our own rapid growth, and behold the certain evidence, that
America was upon the eve of independent empire.

When we consider what effects a well-wrote tragedy, or novel, has on the human
passions, though we know it all to be ficticious, what effect must all this
have had upon those that have believed all these high wrought images to be
realities?

The Tories have been censured for remissness in not having exerted themselves
sufficiently at this period: The truth of the case is this, they saw, and
shuddered at the gathering storm, but durst not attempt to dispel it, lest it
should burst on their own heads. Printers were threatened with the loss of
their bread, for publishing freely on the Tory side. One Mein was forced to fly
the country for persisting in it.

All our dissenting ministers were not inactive on this occasion. When the
clergy engage in a political warfare, they become a most powerful engine,
either to support or overthrow the state. What effect must it have had upon the
audience, to hear the same sentiments and principles, which they had before
read in a news-paper, delivered on Sundays from the sacred desk, with a
religious awe, and the most solemn appeals to Heaven, from lips which they had
been taught, from their cradles, to believe could utter nothing but eternal
truths? What, was it natural to expect from a people bred under a free
constitution, jealous of their liberty, credulous even to a proverb, when told
their privileges were in danger, thus wrought up in the extreme? I answer: --
Outrage disgraceful to humanity itself. What mischief was not an artful man who
had obtained the confidence and guidance of such an enraged multitude capable
of doing? He had only to point out this or the other man as an enemy of his
country, and no character, station, or merit could protect the proscribed, from
their fury. Happy was it for him if he could secret his person, and subject his
property only to their lawless ravages. By such means, many people, naturally
brave and humane, have been wrought upon to commit such acts of private
mischief, and public violence, as will blacken many a page in the history of
our country.

I shall next trace the effects of this spirit which the Whigs had infused into
the body of the people, through the courts of common law, and the General
Assembly, and mark the ways and means whereby they availed themselves of it to
the subversion of our charter constitution, antecedent to the late act of
Parliament, and erected a provincial democracy, or rather republic upon its
ruins, though the form and semblance of the monarchial and aristocratical parts
still remained.

To undertake to convince a person of his error, is the indispensable duty, the
certain, though dangerous test of friendship. He that could see his friend
persevering in a fatal error, without reminding him of it, and striving to
reclaim him, through fear that he might thereby incur his displeasure, would
little deserve the sacred name himself. Such delicacy is not only false, but
criminal. Were I not fully convinced, upon the most mature deliberation that I
am capable of, the temporal salvation of this province depends upon an entire
and speedy change of measures, which must depend upon a change of sentiment,
respecting our own conduct, and the justice of the British nation, I never
should have obtruded myself on the public. I repeat my promise, to avoid
personal reflection as much as the nature of the task will admit of; but will
continue faithfully to expose the wretched policy of the Whigs, though I may be
obliged to penetrate the arcana, and discover such things as, were there not a
necessity for it, I should be infinitely happier in drawing a veil over, or
covering them with a mantle. Should I be so unfortunate as to incur your
displeasure, I shall nevertheless think myself happy if I can but snatch one of
my fellow subjects, as a brand, out of the burning.

Perhaps some may imagine that I have represented too many of my countrymen, as
well as the leading Whigs, in an unjust point of light, by supposing them so
wicked as to mislead, or those so little circumspect as to be misled, in
matters of the last importance. Whoever has been conversant with the history of
man, must know that it abounds with such instances. The same game, and with the
same success, has been played in all ages, and all countries.

The bulk of the people are generally but little versed in matters of state.
Want of inclination or opportunity to figure in public life, makes them content
to rest the affairs of government in the hands where accident, or merit, has
placed them. Their views and employments are confined to the humbler walks of
business or retirement. There is a latent spark however in their breasts,
capable of being kindled into a flame; to do this has always been the
employment of the disaffected. They begin by reminding the people of the
elevated rank they hold in the universe, as men; that all men by nature are
equal; that Kings are but the ministers of the people; that their authority is
delegated to them by the people, for their good, and they have a right to
resume it, and place it in other hands, or keep it themselves, whenever it is
made use of to opress them. Doubtless there have been instances where these
principles have been inculcated to obtain a redress of real grievances; but
they have been much oftener perverted to the worst of purposes. -- No
government, however perfect in theory, is administered in perfection, the
frailty of man does not admit of it. A small mistake in point of policy, often
furnishes a pretense to libel government, and persuade the people that their
rulers are tyrants, and the whole government a system of oppression. Thus the
seeds of sedition are usually sown, and the people are led to sacrifice real
liberty to licentiousness, which gradually ripens into rebellion and civil war.
And what is still more to be lamented, the generality of the people, who are
thus made the dupes of artifice, and the mere stilts of ambition, are sure to
be loosers in the end. The best they can expect is to be thrown neglected by,
when they are no longer wanted; but they are seldom so happy; if they are
subdued, confiscation of estate, and an ignominious death are their portion; if
they conquer, their own army is often turned upon them, to subjugate them to a
more tyrannical government than they had rebelled against. History is replete
with instances of this kind. We can trace them in remote antiquity, we find
them in modern times, and have a very remarkable one in the very country from
which we were derived. It is an universal truth, that he that would excite a
rebellion, whatever professions of philantrophy he may make when he is
insinuating and worming himself into the good graces of the people, is at heart
as great a tyrant as ever wielded the iron rod of oppression. I shall have
occasion hereafter to consider this matter more fully, when I shall endeavor
to convince you how little we can gain, and how much we may loose, by this
unequal, unnatural, and desperate contest. My present business is to trace the
spirit of opposition to Great- Britain through the general court, and the
courts of common law. In moderate times, representative that votes for an
unpopular measure, or opposes a popular one, is in danger of loosing his
election the next year, and when party runs high, he is sure to do it. It was
the policy of the Whigs to have their questions upon high matters determined by
yea and nay votes, which were published with the representatives names in the
next Gazette. This was commonly followed by severe strictures, and the most
illeberal invectives upon the dissentients; sometimes they were held up as
objects of resentment and contempt, at others the abuse was in proportion to
the extravagance of the measure they opposed. This may seem not worth notice,
but its consequences were important. The scurrillity made its way into the
dissentient's town, it furnished his competitor with means to supplant them,
and he took care to shun the rock his predecessor had split upon. In this
temper of the times, it was enough to know who voted with Cassius, and who with
Lucius, to determine who was a friend, and who was an enemy to the country,
without once adverting to the question before the house. The loss of a seat in
the house was not of so much consequence, but when once he became stigmatized
as an enemy to his country, he was exposed to insult, and if his profession, or
business was such, that his livelihood depended much on the good graces of his
fellow citizens, he was in danger of loosing his bread, and involving his whole
family into ruin.

One particular set of members in committee, always prepared the resolves, and
other spirited measures: at first they were canvassed freely, at length would,
slide through the house without meeting any obstacle, the lips of the
dissentients were sealed up; they sat in silence, and beheld with infinite
regret the measures they durst not oppose. Many were borne down against their
wills, by the violence of the current; upon no other principle can we reconcile
their ostensible conduct in the house to their declarations in private circles.
The apparent unanimity in the house encouraged the opposition out of doors, and
that in its turn strengthened the party in the house. Thus they went on
mutually supporting and up-lifting each other. Assemblies and towns resolved
alternately, some of them only omitted resolving to snatch the scepter out of
the hands of our Sovereign, and to strike the imperial crown from his sacred
head.

A master-stroke in polities, respecting the agent, ought not to be neglected.
Each colony has usually an agent residing at the court of Great Britain. These
agents are appointed by the three branches of their several assemblies, and
indeed there cannot be a provincial agent without such appointment. The Whigs
soon found that they could not have such services rendered them from a
provincial agent, as would answer their purposes. The house therefore refused
to join with the other two branches of the general court in the appointment.
The house chose an agent for themselves, and the council appointed theirs. Thus
we had two agents for private purposes, and the expense of agency doubled, and
with equal reason a third might have been added as agent for the governor, and
the charges have been trebled.

The additional expense was of little consideration, compared with another
inconveniency that attended this new mode of agency. The person appointed by
the house was the ostensible agent of the province, though in fact he was only
the agent of a few individuals that had got the art of wielding the house at
their pleasure. He knew his continuing in office depended upon them. An office
that yielded several thousand pounds sterling annually; the business of which
consisted in little more than attending the levees of the great, and writing
letters to America, was worth-preserving. Thus he was under a strong temptation
to sacrifice the province to a party; and echo back the sentiments of his
patrons.

The advice continually received from one of the persons, that was thus
appointed agent, had great influence upon the members of the house of moderate
principles. He had pushed his researches deep into nature, and made important
discoveries; they thought he had done the same in politics, and did not admire
him less as a politician than as a philosopher. His intelligence as to the
disposition of his Majesty, the ministry, the parliament, and the nation in
general, was deemed the most authentic. He advised us to keep up our
opposition, to resolve, and re-resolve, to cherish a military spirit, uniformly
holding up this idea, that if we continued firm we had nothing to fear from the
government in England. He even proposed some modes of opposition himself. The
spirited measures were always ushered into the house with a letter from him. I
have been sometimes almost ready to suspect him of being the primum mobile, and
to think, that like the man behind the curtain at a puppet show, he was playing
off the figures here with his own secret wires. If he advised to these
measures, contrary to his better knowledge, from sinister views, and to serve a
private purpose, he has wilfully done the province an irreparable injury. --
However, I will do him justice, he enjoined upon us to refrain from violence,
as that would unite the nation against us; and I am the rather inclined to
think that he was deceived himself with respect to the measures he recommended,
as he has already felt the resentment of that very government which he told us
there was nothing to fear from. This disposition of the house could not have
produced such fatal consequences, had the other two branches of the legislature
retained their constitutional freedom and influence. They might have been a
sufficient check.

The counselors depended upon the general assembly for the political
existence, the Whigs reminded the council of their mortality, if a counselor
opposed the violent measures of the Whigs with any spirit, he lost his election
the next May. The council consisted of twenty- eight. From this principle near
half that number, mostly men of the first families, first note, abilities, with
every possible attachment to their native country, and as far from temptation
as wealth, and independence, could remove them, were tumbled from their seats
in disgrace. Thus the board which was intended to moderate between the two
extremes of prerogative and privilege, lost its weight in the scale, and the
political balance of the province was destroyed.

Had the chair been able to retain its own constitutional influence, the loss
of the board would have been less felt, but no longer supported by the board
that fell likewise. The governor by the charter could do little, or nothing,
without the council. If he called upon a military officer to raise the militia,
he was answered, they were there already. If called upon the council for their
assistance, they must first enquire into the cause. If he wrote to government
at home to strengthen his hands, some officious person procured, and sent back
his letters.

It was not the person of a Bernard or Hutchinson that made them obnoxious, any
other person would have met with the same fate, had they discharged their duty
with equal fidelity; that is, had they strenuously opposed the principles and
practices of the Whigs; and when they found the government here could not
support itself, and sent home for aid sufficient to do it. And let me tell you,
had the intimations in those letters which you are taught to execrate, been
tamely attended to, we had now been as happy a people as good government could
make us. Governor Bernard came here recommended by the affections of the
province, over which he had presided. His abilities are acknowledged. His true
British honesty, and punctuality, are traits in his character too strongly
marked, to escape the eye of prejudice itself. We knew Governor Hutchinson to
be amiable and exemplary in private life; his great abilities, integrity and
humanity are conspicuous in the several important departments that he filled,
before his appointment to the chair, and reflect honor upon his native
country. But his abilities and integrity, added to his thorough knowledge of
the province, in all its interests and connections, were insufficient in this
case. The constitution itself was gone, though the ancient form remained; the
spirit was truly republican. He endeavored to reclaim us by gentle means. He
strove to convince us by arguments, drawn from the first principles of
government, our several charters, and the express acknowledgement of our
ancestors, that our claims were inconsistent with the subordination due to
Great Britain; and if persisted in, would work the destruction of those that we
were entitled to. For this he was called an enemy to this country, and set up
as a mark for the envenomed arrows of malice and party rage. Had I entertained
a doubt about its being the governor, and not the man that was aimed at, the
admirable facility with which the news-paper abuse was transmitted from
governor Hutchinson, to his amiable successor, almost as soon as he set foot on
our shores, would have removed it.

Thus, disaffection to Great Britain being infused into the body of the people,
the subtle poison stole through all the veins and arteries, contaminated the
blood, and destroyed the very stamina of the constitution. Had not the courts
of justice been tainted in the early stages, our government might have expelled
the virus, and recovered its former vigor by its own strength. The judges of
the superior court were dependent upon the annual grants of the General court,
for their support. Their salaries were small in proportion to the salaries of
other officers in the government of less importance.

They had often petitioned the assembly to enlarge them, without success. They
were at this time reminded of their dependence. However, it is but justice to
say, that the Judges remained unshaken amidst the raging tempests, which is to
be attributed rather to their firmness than situation. But the spirit of the
times was very apparent in the juries. The grand jurors were elective, and in
such places where libels, riots and insurrections were the most frequent, the
high Whigs got themselves chosen. The Judges pointed out to them the seditious
libels on Governors, Magistrates, and the whole government, to no effect. They
were enjoined to present riots and insurrections, of which there was ample
evidence, with as little success.

It is difficult to account for so many of the first-rate Whigs being returned
to serve on the petit jury at the term next after extraordinary insurrection,
without supposing some legerdemain in drawing their names out of the box. It is
certain that notwithstanding swarms of the most virulent libels infected the
province, and there were so many riots and insurrections, scarce one offender
was indicted, and, I think, not one convicted. Causes of meum et tuum were not
always exempt from party influence. The mere circumstance of the Whigs gaining
the ascendency over the Tories is trifling. Had the Whigs divided the province
between them, as they once flattered themselves they should be able to do, it
would have been of little consequence to the community, had they not cut
asunder the very sinews of government, and broke in pieces the ligaments of
social life in the attempt. I will mention two instances which I have selected
out of many, of the weakness of our government, as they are recent and
unconnected with acts of parliament. One Malcolm, a loyal subject, and as such
entitled to protection, the evening before the last winter sessions of the
general court, was dragged out of his house, stripped, tarred and feathered, and
carted several hours in the severest frost of that winter, to the utmost hazard
of his life. He was carried to the gallows with a halter about his neck, and in
his passage to and from the gallows, was beaten with as cruel stripes as ever
were administered by the hands of a savage. The whipping, however, kept up the
circulation of his blood, and saved the poor man's life. When they had saciated
their malice, they dispersed in good order. This was transacted in the presence
of thousands of spectators, some of whom were members of the general court.
Malcom's life was despaired of several days, but he survived, and presented a
memorial to the general assembly, praying their interposition. The petition was
read, and all he obtained was leave to withdraw it. So that he was destitute of
protection every hour, until he left the country, as were thousands besides,
until the arrival of the King's troops. This originated from a small fracas in
the street, wherein Malcom struck, or threatened to strike a person that
insulted him, with a cutlass, and had no connection with the quarrel of the
times, unless his sustaining a small post in the customs made it.

The other instance is much stronger than this, as it was totally detached from
politics. It had been suspected that infection had been communicated from an
hospital, lately erected at Marblehead, for the purpose of inoculating
smallpox, to the town's people.

This caused a great insurrection, the insurgents burnt the hospital, not
content with that, threatened the proprietors and many others, some of the
first fortunes and characters in the town, with burning their houses over their
heads, and continued parading the streets, to the utmost terror of the
inhabitants, several days.

A massacre and general devastation was apprehended. The persons threatened,
armed themselves, and petitioned the general assembly, which was then sitting,
for assistance, as there was little or no civil authority in the place. A
committee was ordered to repair to Marblehead, report the facts, and enquire
into the cause. The committee reported the facts nearly as stated in the
petition; the report was accepted, and nothing further done by the assembly.
Such demonstrations of the weakness of government induced many persons to join
the Whigs, to seek from them that protection which the constitutional authority
of the province was unable to afford.

Government at home, early in the day, made an effort to check us in our
career, and to enable us to recover from anarchy, without her being driven to
the necessity of altering our provincial constitution, knowing the predeliction
that people always have for an ancient form of government. The judges of the
superior court had not been staggered, though their feet stood in slippery
places, they depended upon the leading Whigs for their support. To keep them
steady, they were made independent of the grants of the general assembly. But
it was not a remedy any way adequate to the disease. The Whigs now turned their
artillery against them, and it played briskly. The Chief Justice, for accepting
the crown grant, was accused of receiving a royal bribe. Thus, my friends,
those very persons that had made you believe that every attempt to strengthen
government and save our charter, was an infringement of your privileges; by
little and little destroyed your real liberty, subverted your charter
constitution, abridged the freedom of the house, annihilated the freedom of the
board, and rendered the governor a mere Doge of Venice. They engrossed all the
power of the province into their own hands. A democracy or republic I once
called it, but it does not deserve the name of either; it was however, a
despotism, cruelly carried into execution by mobs and riots, and more
incompatible with the rights of mankind, than the enormous monarchies of the
east. The absolute necessity of the interposition of parliament is apparent.
The good policy of the act for regulating the government in this province, will
be the subject of some future paper. A particular enquiry into the despotism of
the Whigs will be deferred for a chapter on congresses. I shall next ask your
attention to a transaction as important in its consequences, and perhaps more
so, than any I have yet mentioned, I mean the destruction of the tea, belonging
to the East India Company. I am sensible of the difficulty of the task, in
combating general received opinions. It is hard work to eradicate deep-rooted
prejudices. But I will persevere. There are hundreds, if not thousands, in the
province that will fe^^ the truth of what I have wrote, line by line, as they
read it, and as to those who obstinately shut their eyes against it now,
happily there may be some lucid interval, when their minds shall be open to
truth, before it is too late to serve them, otherwise it will be revealed to
them in bitter moments, attended with keen remorse, and unutterable anguish*
Magna est veritas et prevalebit.

Perhaps by this time some of you may enquire who it is that suffers his pen to
run so freely? I will tell you; it is a native of this province, that knew it
before many that are now basking in the rays of political sunshine, had a
being. He was favored not by Whigs or Tories, but the people, with such a
stand in the community, as that he could distinctly see all the political
maneuvers of the province. He saw some with pleasure, others with pain. If he
condemns the conduct of Whigs, he does not always approve of the conduct of the
Tories. He dwells upon the misconduct of the former, because that has been the
means of bringing us into this wretched state, unless the supiness of the
latter, at some periods, and some impolitic efforts, to check the Whigs in
their carreer, at others, that (...) like adding fuel to fire, ought to be
added to the account. He is now repaying your favors, if he knows his own
heart, from the purest gratitude, and the most undissembled patriotism, which
will one day be acknowledged. I saw the small seed of sedition, when it was
implanted, it was as a grain of mustard. I have watched the plant, till it has
become a great tree, the vilest reptiles that crawl upon the earth, are
concealed at the root, the foulest birds of the air rest upon its branches. I
now would induce you to go to work immediately with axes and hatchets, and cut
it down; for a twofold reason, because it is a pest to society, and lest it be
felled suddenly by a stronger arm, and crush its thousands in its fall.

An apprehension of injustice in the conduct of Great Britain toward us, I
have already told you was the source of our misery. Last week I endeavored to
convince you of the necessity of her regulating, or rather establishing some
government amongst us. I am now to point out the principles and motives upon
which the blockade act was made. It was the violent attack upon the property of
the East India Company, in the destruction of their tea. In order to form a
right judgment of that transaction, it is necessary to go back, and view the
cause of its being sent here. As the government of England is mixed, so the
spirit or genius of the nation is at once monarchical, aristocratical,
democratical, martial and commercial. It is difficult to determine which is the
most predominant principle; but it is worthy of remark, that to injure the
British nation upon either of these points, is like injuring a Frenchman in the
point of honor. Commerce is the great source of national wealth, for this
reason it is cherished by all orders of men, from the palace to the cottage. In
some countries a merchant is held in contempt by the nobles, in England they
respect him. He rises to high honors in the state, often contracts alliances
with the first families in the kingdom, and noble blood flows in the veins of
his posterity. Trade is founded upon persons, or countries, mutually supplying
each other with their redundancies. Thus none are impoverished, all enriched,
the asperities of human life worn away, and mankind made happier by it.
Husbandry, manufacture and merchandise are its treple support, deprived of
either of these, it would cease.

Agriculture is the natural livelihood of a country but thinly inhabited, as
arts and manufactures are of a opulous one. The high price of labor prevents
manufactures being carried on to advantage in the first, scarcity of soil
obliges the inhabitants to pursue them in the latter. Upon these, and
considerations arising from the fertility, and produce of different climates,
and such like principles, the grand system of the British trade is founded. The
collected wisdom of the nation has always been attentive to this great point of
policy, that the national trade might be so balanced and poised, as that each
part of her extended dominions, might be benefited, and the whole concentre to
the good of the empire. This evinces the necessity of acts for regulating trade.

To prevent one part of the empire being enriched at the expense and
impoverishing of another, checks, restrictions, and sometimes absolute
prohibitions are necessary. These are imposed or taken off as circumstances
vary. To carry the acts of trade into execution many officers are necessity.
Thus we see a number of custom-house officers so constituted as to be checks
and controuls upon each other, and prevent their swerving from their duty,
should they be tempted, and a board of commissioners appointed to supperintend
the whole, like the board of trade in England. Hence also arises the necessity
of courts of admiralty.

The laws and regulations of trade are esteemed, in England, sacred. And an
estate made by smuggling, or pursuing an illicit trade, is there looked upon as
filthy lucre, as moneys amassed by gaming, and upon the same principle, because
it is obtained at the expense, and often ruin, of others. The smuggler not only
injures the public, but often ruins the fair trader.

The great extent of seacoast, many harbors, the variety of islands, the
numerous creeks, and navigable rivers, afford the greatest opportunity to drive
an illicit trade in these colonies without detection. This advantage has not
been overlooked by the avaricious, and many persons seem to have set the laws
of trade at defiance; this accounts so far for many new regulations being made,
new officers being appointed, and ships of war from time to time stationed
along the continent. The way to Holland and back again is well known, and by
much the greatest part of tea that has been drank in America, for several
years, has been imported from thence, and other places, in direct violation of
law. By this the smugglers have amassed great estates, to the prejudice of the
fair trader. It was sensibly felt at the India House, the East India company
were prohibited from exporting their teas to America, they were obliged to sell
it by auction in London; the London merchant purchased it, and put a profit
upon it, when he shipped it for America; the American merchant, in his turn,
put a profit upon it and after him, the shopkeeper; so that it came to the
consumer's hands at a very advanced price. Such quantities of tea were annually
smuggled that it was scarcely worth while for the American merchant to import
tea from England at all, not because the Dutch was usually sold at a lower rate
to the consumer, people in general were no gainers by it, but because it
lessened the demand for that article. Some of the principal trading towns in
America were wholly supplied with this commodity by smuggling; Boston however
continued to import it, until advice was received that parliament had it in
contemplation to permit the East India company to send their teas directly to
America: the Boston merchants then sent their orders conditionally to their
correspondents in England, to have tea shipped for them in case the East India
company's did not come out; one merchant, a great Whig, had such an order lying
in England, for sixty chests, on his own account, when the company's tea was
sent. An act of parliament was made to enable the East India company to send
their tea directly to America, and sell it at auction there, not with a view of
raising a revenue from the three-penny duty, but to put it out of the power of
the smugglers to injure them by their infamous trade.

We have it from good authority, that the revenue was not the consideration
before parliament, and it is reasonable to suppose it, for had that been the
point in view, it was only to restore the former regulation, which was then
allowed to be the constitutional, and the revenue would have been respectable.
Had this new regulation taken effect, the people in America would have been
great gainers. The wholesale merchant might have been deprived of some of his
gains; but the retailer would have supplied himself with this article, directly
from the auction, and the consumer reap the benefit, as tea would have been
sold under the price that had been usual, by near one half. Thus the country in
general would have been great gainers, the East India company secured in
supplying the American market with this article, which they are entitled to by
the laws of trade, and smuggling suppressed, at least as to tea. A smuggler and
a Whig are cousin Germans, the offspring of two sisters, avarice and ambition.
They had been playing into each others hands a long time. The smuggler reeeived
protection from the Whig, and he in his turn received support from the
smuggler. The illicit trader now demands protection from his kinsman, and it
would have been unnatural in him to have refused it, and besides, an
opportunity presented of strengthening his own interest. The consignees were
connected with the Tories, and that was a further stimulus. -- Accordingly the
press was again set to work, and the old story repeated with addition about
monopolies, and many infatuated persons once more wrought up to a proper pitch
to carry into execution any violent measures that their leaders should propose.
A bold stroke was resolved upon. The Whigs, though they had got the art of
managing the people, had too much sense to be ignorant that it was all a mere
finesse, not only without, but directly repugnant to law, constitution and
government, and could not last always. They determined to put all at hazard,
and to be aut Caesar, aut nullus The consignees saw the approaching storm, and
detained the first ship that arrived with the tea at Castle William, a body
meeting was assembled at the Old South Meeting House, and a body meeting has
great advantages over a town-meeting, as no law has yet ascertained a
qualification of the voters; each person present, of whatever age, estate or
country, may take the liberty to speak or vote at such an assembly; and that
might serve as a screen to the town where it originated, in case of any
disastrous consequence. The body meeting consisting of several thousands, being
thus assembled, with the leading Whigs at its head, in the first place sent for
the owner of the tea ship, and required of him to bring her to the wharf, upon
pain of their displeasure; the ship was accordingly brought up, and the master
was obliged to enter at the custom-house: He reported the tea, after which
twenty days are allowed for landing it, and paying the duty.

The next step was to resolve. -- They resolved, that the tea should not be
landed, nor the duty paid, that it should go home in the same bottom that it
came in, etc. etc. This was the same as resolving to destroy it, for as the
ship had been compelled to come to the wharf, and was entered at the
custom-house, it could not, by law, be cleared out, without the duties being
first paid, nor could the governor grant a permit for the vessel to pass
Castle-William, without a certificate from the custom-house of such clearance,
consistent with his duty. The body accordingly, ordered a military guard to
watch the ship every night until further orders. The consignees had been
applied to, by the selectmen, to send the tea to England, they answered they
could not, for if they did, it would be forfeited by the acts of trade, and
they should be liable to make good the loss to the East India company. Some of
the consignees were mobbed, and all were obliged to fly to the castle, and
there immure themselves. They petitioned the Governor and Council to take the
property of the East India company under their protection. The Council declined
being concerned in it. The consignees then offered the body to store the tea
under the care of the selectmen, or a committee of the town of Boston, and to
have no further concern in the matter until they could send to England, and
receive further instructions from their principals. This was refused with
disdain. The military guard was regularly kept in rotation, till the eve of the
twentieth day, when the duties must have been paid, the tea landed, or become
forfeit; then the military guard was withdrawn, or rather omitted being posted,
and a number of persons in disguise, forceably entered the ships (three being
by this time arrived) split open the chests, and emptied all the tea, being of
ten thousand pounds sterling value, into the dock, and perfumed the whole town
with its fragrance. Another circumstance ought not to be omitted, the afternoon
before the destruction of the tea, the body sent the owner of one of the ships
to the Governor, to demand a pass, he answered, that he would as soon give a
pass for that as any other vessel, if he had the proper certificate from the
custom-house, without which he could not give a pass for any, consistent with
his duty. It was known that this would be the answer, when the message was
sent, and it was with the utmost difficulty that the body was kept together
till the messenger returned. When the report was made, a shout was set up in
the galleries and at the door, and the meeting immediately dispersed. The
governor had, previous to this, sent a proclamation by the sheriff, commanding
the body to disperse; they permitted it to be read, and answered it with a
general hiss. These are the facts as truly and fairly stated, as I am able to
state them. The ostensible reason for this conduct, was the tea's being subject
to the three penny duty. Let us take the advocates for this transaction upon
their own principle, and admit the duty to be unconstitutional, and see how the
argument stands.

Here is a cargo of tea, subject upon its being entered and landed, to a duty
of threepence per pound, which is paid by the East India company or their
factors, which amounts to the same thing. Unless we purchase the tea, we shall
never pay the duty, if we purchase it, we pay the three pence included in the
price; therefore, lest we purchase it, we have no right to destroy it. A flimsy
pretext! and either supposes the people destitute of virtue, or that their
purchasing the tea was a matter of no importance to the community; but even
this gause covering is so stripped off, when we consider that the Boston
merchants, and some who were active at the body meeting, were every day
importing from England* large quantities of tea, subject to the same duty, and
vending it unmolested; and at this time had orders lying in their
correspondents hands, to send them considerable quantities of tea, in case the
East India company should not send it themselves.

When the news of this transaction arrived in England, and it was considered in
what manner almost every other regulation of trade had been evaded by artifice,
and when artifice could no longer serve, recourse was had to violence, the
British lion was roused. The crown lawyers were called upon for the law, they
answered high treason. Had a Cromwell, whom some amongst us deify, and imitate
in all his imitable perfections, had the guidance of the national ire, unless
compensation had been made to the sufferers immediately, upon its being
demanded, your proud capital would have been levelled with the dust, not
content with that, rivers of blood would have been shed to make atonement for
the injured honor of the nation. It was debated, whether to attaint the
principals of treason. We have a gracious King upon the throne, he felt the
resentment of a man, softened by the relentings of a parent. The bowels of our
mother country yearned toward her refractory, obstinate child.

It was determined to consider the offense in a milder light; and to compel an
indemnification for the sufferers, and prevent the like for the future, by such
means as would be mild, compared with the insult to the nation, or severe as
our future conduct should be; that was to depend upon us. Accordingly the
blockade act was passed, and had an act of justice been done in indemnifying
the sufferers, and an act of loyalty in putting a stop to seditious practices,
our port had long since been opened. This act has been called unjust, because
it involves the innocent in the same predicament with the guilty, but it ought
to be considered that our news papers had announced to the world, that several
thousands attended those body meetings, and it did not appear that there was
one dissentient, or any protest entered. I do not know how a person could
expect distinction in such a case, if he neglected to distinguish himself. When
the noble Lord proposed in the house of commons, he called upon all the members
present, to mention a better method of obtaining justice in this case, scarce
one denied the necessity of doing something, but none could mention a more
eligible way. Even ministerial opposition was abashed. If any part of the act
strikes us like the severity of a master, let us cooly advert to the aggravated
insult, and perhaps we shall wonder at the lenity of a parent. After this
transaction all parties seem to have laid upon their oars, waiting to see what
parliament would do. When the blockade act arrived many and many were desirous
of paying for the tea immediately, and some who were guiltless of the crime,
offered to contribute to the compensation, but our leading Whigs must still
rule the roast, and that inauspicious influence that had brought us hitherto,
plunged us still deeper into misery. The Whigs saw their ruin connected with a
compliance with the terms of opening the port, as it would furnish a convincing
proof of the wretchedness of their policy, in the destruction of the tea, and
they might justly been expected to pay the money demanded themselves, and set
themselves industriously to work to prevent it, and engage other colonies to
espouse their cause. This was a crisis too important and alarming to the
province to be neglected by its friends. A number of as respectable persons as
any in this province, belonging to Boston, Cambridge, Salem, and Marblehead,
now came forward, publicly to disavow the proceedings of the Whigs, to do
justice to the much injured character of Mr. Hutchinson, and strengthening his
influence at the court of Great Britain, where he was going to receive the well
deserved plaudit of his Sovereign, that he might be able to obtain a repeal, or
some mitigation of that act, the terms of which they foresaw, the perverseness
of the Whigs would prevent a compliance with. This was done by several
addresses, which were subscribed by upwards of two hundred persons, and would
have been by many more, had not the sudden embarkation of Mr. Hutchinson
prevented it. The justices of the court of common pleas and general sessions of
the peace for the county of Plymouth, sent their address to him in England.
There were some of all orders of men among these addressers. But they consisted
principally of men of property, large family connections, and several were
independent in their circumstances, and lived wholly upon the income of their
estates. Some indeed might be called party-men, but a very considerable
proportion were persons that had of choice kept themselves at a distance from
the political vortex, had beheld the competition of the Whigs and Tories
without any commotion, while the community remained safe, had looked down on
the political dance in its various mazes and intricacies, and saw one falling,
another rising, rather as a matter of amusement; but when they saw the capital
of the province upon the point of being sacrificed by political cunning, it
called up all their feelings.

Their motives were truly patriotic. Let us now attend to the ways and means by
which the Whigs prevented these exertions producing such effects. Previous to
this, a new, and till lately, unheard of, mode of opposition had been devised,
said to be the invention of the fertile brain of one of our party agents,
called a committee of correspondence. This is the foulest, subtlest, and most
venomous serpent that ever issued from the eggs of sedition. These committees
generally consist of the highest Whigs, or at least there are Whigs among them,
that is the ruling spirit of the whole.

They are commonly appointed at thin town meetings, or if the meetings happen
to be full, the moderate men seldom speak, or act at all, when this sort of
business comes on. They have been by much too modest. Thus the meeting is often
prefaced with "At a full meeting," and the several resolves headed with nem.
con. with strict truth, when in fact, but a small proportion of the town have
had a hand in the matter. It is said that the committee of the town of Boston
was appointed for a special purpose, and that their commissions long since
expired. However that may be, these committees, when once established, think
themselves amenable to none, they assume a dictatorial style, and have an
opportunity under the apparent sanction of their several towns, of
clandestinely wreaking private revenge on individuals, by traducing their
characters, and holding them up as enemies to their country wherever they go,
as also, of misrepresenting facts, and propagating sedition through the
country. Thus a man of principle and property in traveling through the
country, would be insulted by persons whose faces he had never before seen, he
would often feel the smart without suspecting the hand that administered the
blow. These committees as they are not known in law, and can derive no
authority from thence, least they should not get their share of power,
sometimes engross it all; they frequently erect themselves into a tribunal,
where the same persons are at once legislator, accusers, witnesses, judges and
jurors, and the mob the executioners. The accused has no day in court, and the
execution of the sentence is the first notice he receives. This is the channel
through which liberty matters have been chiefly conducted the summer and fall
past. This accounts for the same distempers breaking out in different parts of
the province at one and the same time, which might be attributed to something
supernatural, by those that were unacquainted with the secret conduct of the
infection. It is chiefly owing to these committees, that so many respectable
persons have been abused, and forced to sign recantations and resignations:
That so many persons, to avoid such reiterated insults, as are more to be
deprecated by a man of sentiment than death itself, have been obliged to quit
their houses, families and business, and fly to the army for protection that
husband has been separated from wife, father from son, brother from brother,
the sweet intercourse of conjugal and natural affection interrupted, and the
unfortunate refugee forced to abandon all the comforts of domestic life.

My countrymen, I beg to pause and reflect on this conduct, have not these
people that are thus insulted, as good right to think and act for themselves in
matters of the last importance as the Whigs? Do not their former lives and
conversation appear to have been regulated by principle as much as those of the
Whigs? You must answer yes. Why then do you suffer them to be so cruelly
treated for differing in sentiment from you? Is it consistent with the liberty
you profess? Let us wave the consideration of right and liberty, and see it
this conduct can be reconciled to good policy. Do you expect to make converts
by it?

Persecution has the same effect in politics that it has in religion, it
confirms the sectary. Do you wish to silence them, that the inhabitants of the
province may appear unanimous? The maltreatment they receive for differing from
you is undeniable evidence that we are not unanimous. It may not be amiss to
consider, that this is a changeable world, and times rolling wheel may 'eer
long bring them uppermost; in that case I am sure you would not wish to have
them fraught with resentment It is astonishing, my friends, that those who are
in pursuit of liberty, should ever suffer arbitrary power in such an hideous
form and squalid hue, to get a footing among them. I appeal to your good sense,
I know you have it, and hope to penetrate to it, before I have finished my
publications, notwithstanding the thick atmosphere that now invelopes it. But
to return from my digression; the committee of correspondence represented the
destruction of the tea in their own way: They represented those that addressed
Governor Hutchinson, as persons of no note or property, as mean, base wretches,
and seekers that had been sacrificing their country in adulation of him. Whole
nations have worshipped the rising, but if this be an instance, it is the only
one of peoples worshipping the setting sun. By this means the humane and
benevolent in various parts of the continent, were induced to advise us not to
comply with the terms for opening our port, and engage to relieve us with their
charities, from the distress that must otherwise fall upon the poor. Their
charitable intentions ascend to heaven, like incense from the altar, in sweet
memorial before the throne of God; but their donations came near proving fatal
to the province: It encouraged the Whigs to persevere in injustice, and has
been the means of seducing many an honest man into the commission of a crime
that he did not suspect himself capable of being guilty of. What I have told
you, is not the mere suggestions of a speculatist; there are some mistakes as
to numbers, and there may be some as to time and place, partly owing to
mis-copying, and partly to my not always having had the books and papers
necessary to greater accuracy, at hand; but the relation of facts is in
substance true, I had almost said as holy writ. I do not ask you to take the
truths of them from an anonymous scribbler in a news-paper: The evidence of
most of them is within your reach, examine for yourselves: -- I promise that
the benefit you will reap there from will abundantly pay you for the trouble of
the research, you will find I have faithfully unriddled the whole mystery of
our political enquiry: I do not address myself to Whigs or Tories, but to the
whole people. I know you well; you are loyal at heart, friends to good order,
and do violence to yourselves, in harboring one moment disrespectful
sentiments toward Great Britain, the land of our forefathers nativity, the
sacred repository of their bones; but they have been most insidiously induced
to believe, that Great Britain is rapacious, cruel and vindictive, and envies
us the inheritance purchased by the sweat and blood of our ancestors. Could
that thick mist that hovers over the land, and involves it in more than
Egyptian darkness, be but once dispelled, that you might see our sovereign, the
provident father of all his people, and Great Britain, a nursing mother to
these colonies, as they really are; long live our gracious King, and happiness
to Britain, would resound from one end of the province to the other. I have yet
many things to say, but have already trespassed on the printer's patience,
perhaps the readers, and promise to be shorter in my future publications.

Some of you may perhaps suspect that I have been wantonly scattering
firebrands, arrows and death, to gratify a most depraved, malicious and
revengeful disposition: The truth is this, I had seen many excellent detached
pieces, but could see no pen at work to trace our calamities from their source,
and point out the many adventitious aids, that conspired to raise to its
present height, though I impatiently expected it, being fully convinced that
you wait only to know the true state of facts, to rectify whatever is amiss in
the province, without any foreign assistance. Others may be induced to think
that I grudge the industrious poor of Boston their scantlings of charity. I
will issue a brief in their favor. The opulent, be their political sentiments
what they may, ought to relieve them from their sufferings, and those who by
former donations have been the innocent cause of protracting their sufferings,
are under a tenfold obligation to assist them now; and at the same time to make
the most explicit declarations, that they did not intend to promote, nor ever
will join in rebellion. Great allowances are to be made for the crossings,
windings and tergiversations of a politician; he is a cunning animal, and as
government is said to be founded in opinion, his tricks may be part of the
arcana imperandi. Had our politicians confined themselves within any reasonable
bounds, I never should have molested them; but when I became satisfied, that
many innocent, unsuspecting persons, were in danger of being seduced, to their
utter ruin, and the province of Massachusetts Bay in danger of being drenched
with blood and carnage, I could restrain my emotions no longer; and having once
broken the bonds of my natural reserve, was determined to probe the sore to the
bottom, though I was sure to touch the quick. It is very foreign from my
intentions to draw down the vengance of Great Britain upon the Whigs; they are
too valuable a part of the community to lose, if they will permit themselves to
be saved; I wish nothing worse to the highest of them, than that they may be
deprived of their influence, till such time as they shall have changed their
sentiments, principles and measures. Sedition has already been marked through
its zigzag path, to the present times. When the statute for regulating the
government arrived, a match was put to the train, and the mine that had been
long forming, sprung, and threw the whole province into confusion and anarchy.
The occurrences of the summer and autumn past are so recent and notorious, that
a particular history of them is unnecessary. Suffice it to say, that every
barrier that civil government had erected for the security of property, liberty
and life, was broken down, and law, constitution and government, trampled under
foot, by the rudest invaders. I shall not dwell upon these harsh notes much
longer. I shall yet become an advocate for the leading Whigs; much must be
allowed to men in their situation, forcibly actuated by the chagrin of
disappointment, the fear of punishment, and the fascination of hope at the same
time.

Perhaps the whole story of empire does not furnish another instance of
forcible opposition to government with so much apparent and little real cause,
with such apparent probability without any possibility of success. The
stamp act gave the alarm. The instability of the public councils from the
Grenvillian administration, to the appointment of the Earl of Hillsborough, to
the American department, afforded as great a prospect of success, as the heavy
duties imposed by the stamp act, did a color for the opposition. It was
necessary to give the history of this matter in its course, offend who it
would, because those acts of government that are called the greatest
grievances, became proper and necessary, through the misconduct of our
politicians, and the justice of Great Britain toward us, could not be made
apparent without first pointing out that. I intend to consider the several acts
of the British government, which are held up as grievances, and enquire whether
Great Britain is chargeable with injustice in any of them; but must first ask
your attention to the authority of parliament. I suspect many of our
politicians are wrong in their first principle, in denying that the
constitutional authority of parliament extends to the colonies; if so it must
not be wondered at, that their whole fabric is so ruinous: I shall not travel
through all the arguments that have been adduced, for and against this
question, but attempt to reduce the substance of them to a narrow compass,
after having taken a cursory view of the British constitution. The security of
the people from internal rapacity and violence, and from foreign invasions is
the end and design of government. The simple forms of government are monarchy,
aristocracy and democracy, that is, where the authority of the state is vested
in one, a few, or the many. Each of these species of government has advantages
peculiar to itself, and would answer the ends of government, where the persons
entrusted with the authority of the state always guided themselves by unerring
wisdom and public virtue; but rulers are not always exempt from the weakness
and depravity which make government necessary to society. Thus monarchy is apt
to rush headlong into tyranny, aristocracy to beget faction and multiplied
usurpations, and democracy to degenerate into tumult, violence and anarchy. A
government formed upon these three principles in due proportion, is the best
calculated to answer the ends of government, and to endure. Such a government
is the British constitution, consisting of King, Lords, and Commons, which at
once includes the principal excellencies, and excludes the principal defects of
the other kinds of government. It is allowed, both by Englishmen and foreigners
to be the most perfect system that the wisdom of ages has produced. The
distributions of power are so just, and the proportions so exact, as at once to
support and control each other. An Englishman glories in being subject to, and
protected by, such a government. The colonies are a part of the British empire.
The best writers upon the law of nations, tell us, that when a nation takes
possession of a distant country, and settles there, that country though
separated from the principal establishment, or mother country, naturally
becomes a part of the state, equal with its ancient possessions. Two supreme or
independent authorities cannot exist in the same state. It would be what is
called imperium in imperio, the height of political absurdity. The analogy
between the political and human bodies is great. Two independent authorities in
a state would be like two distinct principles of volition and action in the
human body, dissenting, opposing and destroying each other. If then we are a
part of the British empire, we must be subject to the supreme power of the
state which is vested in the estates of parliament, notwithstanding each of the
colonies have legislative and executive powers of their own, delegated or
granted to them, for the purposes of regulating their own internal police,
which are subordinate to, and must necessarily be subject to the checks,
control and regulation of the supreme authority of the state.

This doctrine is not new, but the denial of it is. It is beyond a doubt that
it was the sense both of the parent country, and our ancestors, that they were
to remain subject to parliament. It is evident from the charter itself, and
this authority has been exercised by parliament, from time to time, almost ever
since the first settlement of the country, and has been expressly acknowledged
by our provincial legislatures. It is not less our interest than our duty to
continue subject to the authority of parliament, which will be more fully
considered hereafter. The principal argument against the authority of
parliament, is this, the Americans are entitled to all the privileges of an
Englishman, it is the privilege of an Englishman to be exempt from all laws
that he does not consent to in person, or by representative; the Americans are
not represented in parliament, and therefore are exempt from acts of
parliament, or in other words, not subject to its authority. This appears
specious; but leads to such absurdities as demonstrate its fallacy. If the
colonies are not subject to the authority of parliament, Great Britain and the
colonies must be distinct states, as completely so as England and Scotland were
before the union, or as Great Britain and Hanover are now: The colonies in that
case will owe no allegiance to the imperial crown, and perhaps not to the
person of the King, as the title to the crown is derived from an act of
parliament, made since the settlement of this province, which act respects the
imperial crown only. Let us wave this difficulty, and suppose allegiance due
from the colonies to the person of the King of Great Britain, he then appears
in a new capacity, of King of America, or rather in several new capacities of
King of Massachusetts, King of Rhode Island, King of Connecticut, etc. etc. For
if our connection with Great Britain by the parliament be dissolved, we shall
have none among ourselves, but each colony become as distinct from the others,
as England was from Scotland before the Union. Some have supposed that each
state having one and the same person for its Sovereign, is a sufficient
connection; where the Sovereign is an absolute Monarch it might be, but in a
mixed government, it is no union at all: For as the King must govern each state
by its parliament, those several parliaments would pursue the particular
interest of its own state, and however well disposed the King might be to
pursue a line of interest that was common to all, the checks and control that
he would meet with, would render it impossible. If the King of Great Britain
has really these new capacities, they ought to be added to his titles; and
another difficulty will arise, the prerogatives of these new crowns have never
been defined or limited. Is the monarchical part of the several provincial
constitutions to be nearer or more remote from absolute monarchy, in an
inverted ratio to each one's approaching to, or receding from a republic. But
let us suppose the same prerogatives inherent in the several American crowns,
as are in the imperial crown of Great Britain, where shall we find the British
constitution that we all agree we are entitled to. We shall seek for it in vain
in our provincial assemblies. They are but faint sketches of the estates of
parliament. The houses of representatives, or Burgesses, have not all the
powers of the House of Commons, in the charter governments they have no more
than what is expressly granted by their several charters. The first charter
granted to this province did not empower the assembly to tax the people at all.
Our Council-Boards are as destitute of the constitutional authority of the
House of Lords, as their several members are of the noble independance and
splendid appendages of Peerage. The House of Peers is the bulwark of the
British constitution, and through successive ages, has withstood the shocks of
monarchy, and the sappings of Democracy, and the constitution gained strength
by the conflict. Thus the supposition of our being independent states, or
exempt from the authority of parliament, destroys the very idea of our having a
British constitution. The provincial constitutions, considered as subordinate,
are generally well adapted to those purposes of government, for which they were
intended, that is, to regulate the internal police of the several colonies; but
have no principle of stability within themselves, they may support themselves
in moderate times, but would be merged by the violence of turbulent ones, and
the several colonies become wholly monarchical, or wholly republican, were it
not for the checks, controuls, regulations and supports of the supreme
authority of the empire. Thus the argument that is drawn from their first
principle of our being entitled to English liberties, destroys the principle
itself, it deprives us of the Bill of Rights, and all the benefits resulting
from the revolution, of English laws, and of the British constitution. Our
patriots have been so intent upon building up American rights, that they have
overlooked the rights of Great Britain, and our own interest. Instead of
proving that we are entitled to privileges that our fathers knew our situation
would not admit us to enjoy, they have been arguing away our most essential
rights. If there be any grievance it does not consist in our being subject to
the authority of Parliament, but in our not having an actual representation in
it. Were it possible for the colonies to have an equal representation in
Parliament, and were refused it upon proper application, I confess I should
think it a grievance; but at present it seems to be allowed by all parties, to
be impracticable, considering the colonies are distant from Great Britain a
thousand transmarine leagues. If that be the case, the right or privilege that
we complain of being deprived of, is not witheld by Britain, but the first
principle of government, and the immutable laws of nature, render it impossible
for us to enjoy it. This is apparently the meaning of that celebrated passage
in Governor Hutchinson's letter, that rang through the continent, viz. There
must be an abridgment of what is called English liberties. He subjoins that he
had never yet seen the projection, whereby a colony three thousand miles
distant from the parent state, might enjoy all the privileges of the parent
state, and remain subject to it, or in words to that effect. The obnoxious
sentence taken detached from the letter, appears very unfriendly to the
colonies; but considered in connection with the other parts of the letter* it is
but a necessary result from our situation. Allegiance and protection are
reciprocal. It is our highest interest to continue a part of the British
empire, and equally our duty to remain subject to the authority of parliament.
Our own internal police may generally be regulated by our provincial
legislatures, but in national concerns, or where our own assemblies do not
answer the ends of government with respect to ourselves, the ordinances or
interposition of the great council of the nation is necessary. In this case the
major must rule the minor. After many more centuries shall have rolled away,
long after we, who are now bustling upon the stage of life, shall have been
received to the bosom of mother earth, and our names are forgotten, the
colonies may be so far increased as to have the balance of wealth, numbers, and
power in their favor, the good of the empire make it necessary to fix the seat
of government here; and some future GEORGE, equally the friend of mankind with
him that now sways the British scepter, may cross the Atlantic, and rule
Great Britain by an American Parliament.

Had a person, some fifteen years ago, undertaken to prove that the colonies
were annexed to the realm, were a part of the British empire or dominion, and
as such subject to the authority of the British parliament, he would have acted
as ridiculous a part, as to have undertaken to prove a self evident
proposition: -- Had any person denied it, he would have been called a fool or
madman. At this wise period, individuals and bodies of men deny it,
notwithstanding in doing it they subvert the fundamentals of government,
deprive us of British liberties, and build up an absolute monarchy in the
colonies; for our charters suppose regal authority in the grantor, if that
authority be derived from the British crown, it pre-supposes this territory to
have been a part of the British dominion, and as such subject to the Imperial
Sovereign; if that authority was vested in the person of the King in a
different capacity, the British constitution and laws are out of the question,
and the King must be absolute as to us, as his prerogatives have never been
limited. Such must have been the Sovereign authority of the several Kings, who
have granted American charters, previous to the several grants, there is
nothing to detract from it, at this time in those colonies that are destitute
of charters, and the charter governments must severally revert to absolute
monarchy, as their charters may happen to be forfeited by the grantees, not
fulfilling the conditions of them, as every charter contains an express or
implied condition.

It is curious indeed to trace the denial and oppugnation to the supreme
authority of the state. When the stamp act was made, the authority of
parliament to impose internal taxes was denied, but their right to impose
external ones; or in other words, to lay duties upon goods and merchandise was
admitted. When the act was made imposing duties upon tea, etc. a new
distinction was set up, that the parliament had a right to lay duties upon
merchandise for the purpose of regulating trade, but not for the purpose of
raising a revenue: That is, the parliament had good right and lawful authority,
to lay the former duty of a shilling on the pound, but had none to lay the
present duty of three pence. Having got thus far safe, it was only taking one
step more to extricate ourselves entirely from their fangs, and become
independent states; that our patriots most heroically resolved upon, and flatly
denied that parliament had a right to make any laws whatever, that should be
binding upon the colonies. There is no possible medium between absolute
independance and subjection to the authority of parliament. He must be blind
indeed that cannot see our dearest interest in the latter notwithstanding many
pant after the former, misguided men! Could they once overtake their wish, they
would be convinced of the madness of the pursuit. My dear countrymen, it is of
the last importance that we settle this point clearly in our minds; it will
serve as a sure test, certain criterion and invariable standard 10 distinguish
the friends from the enemies of our country, patriotism from sedition, loyalty
from rebellion. To deny the supreme authority of the state is a high
misdemeanor, to say no worse of it; to oppose it by force is an overt act of
treason, punishable by confiscation of estate, and most ignominious death. The
realm of England is an appropriate term for the ancient realm of England, in
contradiction to Wales and other territories that have been annexed to it.
These as they have been severally annexed, whether by conquest or otherwise,
become a part of the British dominions, and subject to the authority of
Parliament, whether they send members to Parliament or not, and whether they
have legislative powers of their own or not.

Thus Ireland, who has perhaps the greatest possible subordinate legislature,
and sends no members to the British parliament, is bound by its acts, when
expressly named, Guernsey and Jersey are no part of the realm of England, nor
are they represented in parliament, but are subject to its authority: And, in
the same predicament are the American colonies, and all the other dispersions
of the empire. Permit me to request your attention to this subject a little
longer; I assure you it is as interesting and important as it is dry and
unentertaining. Let us now recur to the first charter of this province, and we
shall find irresistible evidence, that our being a part of the empire, subject
to the supreme authority of the state, bound by its laws and subject to its
protection, was the very terms and conditions by which our ancestors held their
lands and settled the province. Our charter, like all other American charters,
are in the royal style, and under the great seal of England; the grants are
named by the King, for his heirs and successors, the several tenures to be of
the King, his heirs and successors, in like manner are the reservations. It is
apparent the King acted in his royal capacity, as King of England, which
necessarily supposes the territory granted to be a part of the English
dominions, holden of the crown of England

The charter after receiving the several grants of the territory to Sir Henry
Roswell and others, proceed to incorporation in these words: And for as much as
the good and prosperous success of the plantations of the said parts of
New England aforesaid intended by the said Sir Henry Roswell and others, to be
speedily set upon, cannot but chiefly depend, next under the blessing of
Almighty God, and the support of our royal authority, upon the good government
of the same, to the end that the affairs of business, which from time to time
shall happen and arise concerning the said lands, and the plantations of the
same may be the better managed and ordered, We have further hereby, of our
especial grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion given, granted and
confirmed, and for us, our heirs and successors, do give, grant and confirm
unto our said trusty and well beloved subjects, Sir Henry Roswell; etc. and all
such others as shall hereafter be admitted and made free of the company and
society hereafter mentioned, shall from time to time and all times, forever
hereafter, be by virtue of these presents, one body corporate politic, in fact
and name, by the name of the Governor and company of the Massachusetts Bay, in
New England; and them by the name of the Governor and company of the
Massachusetts Bay, in New England, one body politic and corporate in deed, fact
and name. We do for us, our heirs and successors make, ordain, constitute and
confirm by these presents, and that by that name they shall have perpetual
succession, and that by that name they and their successors shall be capable
and enabled as well to implead, and to be pleaded, and to prosecute, demand and
answer, and be answered unto all and singular suits, causes, quarrels and
actions of what kind or nature soever; and also to have, take, possess, acquire
and purchase, any lands, tenements, and hereditaments, or any goods or
chattels, the same to lease, grant, de^ise, al^^^e, bargain, sell and dispose
of as our liege people of this our realm of England, or any other corporation,
or body politic of the same may do.

I would beg have to ask one simple question, whether this looks like a
distinct state, or independent empire? Provision is then made for electing a
governor, deputy governor, and eighteen assistants. After which is this clause;
we do for us, our heirs and successors, give and grant to the said governor and
company, and their successors, that the governor, or in his absence the deputy
governor, of the said company, for the time being, and such of the assistants,
or freemen of the said company, as shall be present, or the greater number of
them so assembled, whereof the governor, or deputy governor, and six of the
assistants, at the least to be seven, shall have full power and authority to
choose, nominate and appoint such, and so many others, as they shall think fit,
and shall be willing to accept the same, to be free of the said company and
body, and them into the same to admit, and to elect and constitute such
officers, as they shall think fit and requisite for the ordering, managing and
dispatching of the affairs of the said governor and company and their
successors, and to make laws and ordinances for the good and welfare of the
said company, and for the government and ordering of the said lands and
plantations, and the people inhabiting and to inhabit the same, as to them from
time to time shall be thought me^^^ So as such laws and ordinances be not
contrary or repugnant to the laws and statutes of this our realm of England.

Another clause is this, And for their further encouragement, of our especial
grace and favor, we do by these presents, for us, our heirs and successors,
yield and grant to the said governor and company, and their successors, and
every of them, their factors and assigns, that they and every of them shall be
free and quit from all takes, subsidies and customs in New England, for the
space of seven years, and from all taxes and impositions for the space of
twenty-one years, upon all goods and merchandise, at any time or times
hereafter, either upon importation thither, or exportation from thence into our
realm of England, or into other of our dominions, by the said governor and
company, and their successors, their deputies, factors and assigns, etc.

The exception of twenty-one years, plainly indicates, that after their
expiration, goods and merchandise imported or exported, would be liable to
taxes and impositions, which is rather an unfavourable circumstance for those
who call the three-penny duty on tea unconstitutional. It is true that this
charter has been vacated by a decree in chancery, for the governor and company
assuming powers which they were not invested with by it; but it is evidence
nevertheless of the terms stipulated between the crown and our ancestors, at
the first settlement of the country. If the province was then subject to the
authority of parliament, it must be now, unless it can be shown, by some act of
the whole legislature, that right has been renounced; for it is not in the
prerogatives of the crown to alienate a part of its dominions, excepting the
ceding of conquered countries, to obtain a more advantageous peace. I am no
advocate for internal taxation, let the right in theory be where it may. It is
impracticable in many cases, perhaps inexpedient in all. The right of
parliament to lay duties upon trade, is so intervowen with the right of
legislation, that it is impossible to discriminate them, and it is preposterous
to the last degree, to buoy ourselves up with a false principle, that must fail
us in the end, and sink us the deeper for having depended upon it.

I shall recite but one more clause of this charter, which is this, And further
our will and pleasure is, and we do hereby for us, our heirs and successors,
ordain, declare and grant to the said Governor and company, and their
successors, that all and every of the subjects of us, our heirs and successors,
which shall go to, and inhabit within the said lands and premises hereby
mentioned to be granted, and every of their children which shall happen to be
born there, or on the seas in going thither, or returning from thence, shall
have and enjoy all liberties and immunities of free and natural subjects,
within any of the dominions of us, our heirs or successors, to all intents,
constructions and purposes whatsoever, as if they and every of them were born
within the realm of England. It is upon this, or a similar clause in the
charter of William and Mary that our patriots have built up the stupenduous
fabric of American independance. They argue from it a total exemption from
Parliamentary authority, because we are not represented in parliament.

I have already shown that the supposition of our being exempt from the
authority of parliament, is pregnant with the grossest absurdities. Let us now
consider this clause in connection with the other parts of the charter. It is a
rule of law, founded in reason and common sense, to construe each part, of an
instrument, so as the whole may hang together, and be consistent with itself.
If we suppose this clause to exempt us from the authority of parliament, we
must throw away all the rest of the charter, for every other part indicates the
contrary, as plainly as words can do it; and what is still worse, this clause
becomes felo de se, and destroys itself, for if we are not annexed to the
realm, we are aliens, and no charter, grant, or other act of the crown, can
naturalize, or entitle us to the liberties and immunities of Englishmen. It can
be done only by act of parliament. An alien is one born in a strange country,
out of the allegiance of the King, and is under many disabilities, though
residing in the realm; as Wales, Jersey, Guernsey, Ireland, the foreign
plantations, etc. were severally added, or annexed, to the ancient realm, they
became parts of one and the same empire, the natives of which are equally free
as though they had been born in that territory which was the ancient realm. As
our patriots depend upon this clause, detached from the charter, let us view it
in that light. If a person born in England removes to Ireland, and settles
there, he is then no longer represented in the British parliament, but he and
his posterity are and will ever be subject to the authority of the British
parliament: If he removes to Jersey, Guernsey, or any other parts of the
British dominions, that send no members to parliament, he will still be in the
same predicament. So that the inhabitants of the American colonies do in fact
enjoy all the liberties and immunities of natural born subjects. We are
entitled to no greater privileges than those that are born within the realm,
and they can enjoy no other than we do, when they reside out of it. Thus it is
evident that this clause amounts to no more than the royal assurance, that we
are a part of the British empire, are not aliens, but natural born subjects;
and as such bound to obey the supreme power of the state, and entitled to
protection from it. To avoid prolixity I shall not remark particularly upon
other parts of this charter, but observe in general, that whoever reads it with
attention will meet with irresistible evidence in every part of it, that our
being a part of the English dominions, subject to the English crown, and within
the jurisdiction of parliament, were the terms upon which our ancestors settled
this colony, and the very tenures by which they held their estates.

No lands within the British dominions are perfectly allodial; they are held
mediately or immediately of the king, and upon forfeiture, revert to the crown.

My dear countrymen, you have many of you, been most falsely and wickedly told,
by our patriots, that Great Britain was meditating a land tax, and seeking to
deprive us of our inheritance; but had all the malice and subtilty of men and
devils been united, a readier method to effect it could not have been devised,
than the late denials of the authority of parliament, and forcible oppositions
to its acts: Yet, this has been done, planned and executed chiefly by persons
of desperate fortunes.

If we carry our researches further back than the emigration of our ancestors,
we shall find many things that reflect light upon the object we are in quest
of. It is immaterial when America was first discovered or taken possession of
by the English. In 1602 one Gosnold landed upon one of the islands, called
Elizabeth-Islands, which were so named in honor of Queen Elizabeth, built a
fort and projected a settlement, his men were discouraged, and the project
failed. In 1606 King James granted all the continent from 34 to 45 degrees,
which he divided into two colonies, viz. the southern, or Virginia, to certain
merchants at London, the northern, or New England, to certain merchants at
Plymouth, in England. In 1607 some of the patentees of the northern colony
began a settlement at Sogadahoc, but the emigrants were disheartened after the
trial of one winter, and that attempt failed of success. Thus this territory
has not only been granted by the crown for purposes of colonization, which are
to enlarge the empire, or dominion, of the parent state, and to open new
sources of national wealth, but actual possession had been taken by the
grantees, previous to the emigration of our ancestors, or any grant to them. In
1620 a patent was granted to the adventurers for the northern colony,
incorporating them by the name of the council for the affairs of New-Plymouth.
From this company of merchants in England, our ancestors derived their title to
this territory. The tract of land called Massachusetts was purchased of this
Company, by Sir Henry Roswell and associates, their deed bearing date, March
19th, 1627. In 1628 they obtained a charter of incorporation, which I have
already remarked upon. The liberties, privileges and franchises, granted by
this charter, do not perhaps exceed those granted to the city of London, and
other corporations within the realm. The legislative power was very confined;
it did not even extend to the levying of taxes of any kind, that power was
however assumed under this charter, which by law worked a forfeiture, and for
this, among other things, in the reign of Charles the Second, the charter was
adjudged forfeited, and the franchises seized into the King's hands. This
judgment did not affect our ancestors title to their lands that was not derived
originally from the charter, though confirmed by it, but by purchase from the
council at Plymouth, who held immediately under the crown. Besides our
ancestors had now reduced what before was a naked right to possession and by
persevering through unequal toils, hardships and dangers, at the approach of
which other emigrants had fainted, rendered New England a very valuable
acquisition, both to the crown and nation. This was highly meritorious, and
ought not to be overlooked in adjusting the present unhappy dispute, but our
patriots would deprive us of all the merit, both to the crown and nation, by
severing us from both. After the revolution, our ancestors petitioned the
parliament to restore the charter. A bill for that purpose passed the house of
commons, but went no further. In consequence of another petition King William
and Queen Mary granted our present charter, for uniting and incorporating the
Massachusetts, New-Plymouth, and several other territories into one province.
More extensive powers of legislation than those contained in the first charter
were become necessary, and were granted. And the form of the legislature made
to approach nearer to the form of the supreme legislature. The powers of
legislation are confined to local or provincial purposes, and further
restricted by these words, viz. So as the same be not repugnant, or contrary to
the laws of this our realm of England. Our patriots have made many nice
distinctions and curious refinements, to evade the force of these words, but
after all, it is as impossible to reconcile them to the idea of an independent
state, as it is to reconcile disability to omnipotence. The provincial power of
taxation is also restricted to provincial purposes, and allowed to be exercised
over such only as are inhabitants, or proprietors, within the province. I would
observe here, that the granting subordinate powers of legislation, does not
abridge or diminish the powers of the higher legislatures: thus we see
corporations in England, and the several towns in this province, vested with
greater or lesser powers of legislation, without the parliament, in one case,
or the general court in the other being restrained, from enacting those very
laws, that fall within the jurisdiction of the several corporations. Had our
present charter been conceived in such equivocal terms as that it might be
construed as restraining the authority of parliament, the uniform usage ever
since it passed the seal, would satisfy us that its intents was different. The
parliament in the reign when it was granted, and in every reign since, has been
making statutes to extend to the colonies, and those statutes have been as
uniformly submitted to as authoritative, by the colonies, till within ten, or a
dozen years. Sometimes acts of parliament have been made, and sometimes have
been repealed in consequence of petitions from the colonies. The provincial
assemblies often refer to acts of parliament in their own, and have sometimes
made acts to aid their execution. It is evident that it was the intention of
their Majesty's, to grant subordinate powers of legislation, without impairing
or diminishing the authority of the supreme legislature. Had there been any
words in the charter, that precluded that construction, or did the whole taken
together, contradict it, lawyers would tell us, that their Majesty's were
deceived in their grant, and the patentees took no estate by it, because the
crown can neither alienate a part of the British dominions, nor impair the
supreme power of the empire. I have dwelt longer on this subject than I at
first intended, and not by any means done it justice, as to avoid prolix
narratives, and tedious deduction, I have omitted perhaps more than I have
adduced, that evinces the truth of the position, that we are a part of the
British dominions, and subject to the authority of parliament. The novelty of
the contrary tenets, will appear by extracting a part of a pamphlet, published
in 1764, by a Boston gentleman, who was then the oracle of the Whigs, and whose
profound knowledge in the law and constitution is equaled but by few.

I also lay it down as one of the first principles from whence I intend to
deduce the civil rights of the British colonies, that all of them are subject
to, and dependant on Great Britain; and that therefore as over subordinate
governments, the parliament of Great Britain has an undoubted power, and lawful
authority to make acts for the general good, that by naming them, shall and
ought to be equally binding, as upon the subjects of Great Britain within the
realm. Is there the least difference, as to the consent of the colonists,
whether taxes and impositions are laid on their trade, and other property by
the crown alone, or by the parliament. As it is agreed on all hands, the crown
alone cannot impose them, we should be justifiable in refusing to pay them, but
must and ought to yield obedience to an act of parliament, though erroneous,
till repealed.

It is a maxim, that the King can do no wrong; and every good subject is bound
to believe his King is not inclined to do any. We are blessed with a prince who
has given abundant demonstrations, that in all his actions, he studies the good
of his people, and the true glory of his crown, which are inseparable. It would
therefore be the highest degree of impudence and disloyalty, to imagine that
the King, at the head of his parliament, could have any but the most pure and
perfect intentions of justice, goodness and truth, that human nature is cap^^^^
of. All this I say and believe of the King and parliament, in all their acts;
even in that which so nearly affects the interests of the colonists; and that a
most perfect and ready obedience is to be yielded to it, while it remains in
force. The power of parliament is uncontrollable but by themselves, and we must
obey. They only can repeal their own acts. There would be an end of all
government, if one or a number of subjects, or subordinate provinces should
take upon them so far to judge of the justice of an act of parliament, as to
refuse obedience to it. If there was nothing else to restrain such a step,
prudence ought to do it, for forceably resisting the parliament and the King's
laws is high treason. Therefore let the parliament lay what burdens they please
on us, we must, it is our duty to submit and patiently bear them, till they
will be pleased to relieve us.

The Pennsylvania Farmer, who took the lead in explaining away the right of
parliament, to raise a revenue in America, speaking of regulating trade, tells
us that He who considers these provinces as states distinct from the British
empire has very slender notions of justice, or of their interest; we are but
parts of the whole, and therefore there must exist a power somewhere to preside
and preserve the connection in due order. This power is lodged in parliament,
and we are as much dependant on Great Britain as a perfectly free people can be
on another. He supposes that we are dependant in some considerable degree upon
Great Britain; and that, that dependence is nevertheless consistent with
perfect freedom.

Having settled this point, let us reflect upon the resolves and proceedings of
our patriots. We often read resolves denying the authority of parliament, which
is the imperial Sovereign, gilded over with professions of loyalty to the King;
but the golden leaf is too thin to conceal the treason: It either argues
profound ignorance, or hypocritical cunning.

We find many unsuspecting persons prevailed on openly to oppose the execution
of acts of parliament with force and arms. My friends! some of the persons that
beguiled you, could have turned to the chapter, page and section, where such
insurrections are pronounced rebellion, by the law of the land; and had not
their hearts been dead to a sense of justice, and steeled against every feeling
of humanity, they would have timely warned you of your danger. Our patriots
have sent us in pursuit of a mere ignis fatuus, a fascinating glare, devoid of
substance; and now, when we find ourselves bewildered, with scarce one ray of
hope to raise our sinking spirits, or stay our fainting souls, they conjure up
phantoms more delusive and fleeting, if possible, than that which first led us
astray. They tell us we are a match for Great Britain: -- The twentieth part of
the strength that Great Britain could exert, were it necessary, is more than
sufficient to crush this defenseless province to atoms, notwithstanding all the
vapouring of the disaffected here and elsewhere. They tell us the army is
disaffected to the service: What pains have our wretched politicians not taken
to attach them to it? The officers conceive no very favorable opinion of the
cause of the Whigs, from the obloquy with which the general has been treated,
in return for his humanity, nor from the infamous attempts to seduce the
soldiers from his Majesty's service. The policy of some of our patriots has
been as weak and contemptible as their motives are sordid and malevolent, for
when they found their success, in corrupting the soldiery, did not answer their
expectations, they took pains to attach them firmer to the cause they adhered
to, by preventing the erecting of barracks for their winter quarters, by which
means many contracted diseases, and some lives were lost, from the unwholesome
buildings they were obliged to occupy; and, as though some stimulus was still
wanting, some provocation to prevent human nature revolting in the hour of
battle, they deprived the soldiers of a gratification never denied to the brute
creation, -- straw to lie on. I do not mention this conduct to raise the
resentment of the troops, it has had its effect already, and it is proper you
should know it; nor should I have blotted paper in relating facts so mortifying
to the pride of man, had it not been basely suggested that there would be a
defection should the army take the field. Those are matters of small moment
compared to another, which is the cause they are engaged in. It is no longer a
struggle between Whigs and Tories, whether these or those shall occupy posts of
honor, or enjoy the emoluments of office, nor is it now whether this or the
other act of parliament shall be repealed. The army is sent here to decide a
question, intimately connected with the honor and interest of the nation, no
less than whether the colonies shall continue a part of, or be forever
dismembered from the British empire. It is a cause in which no honest American,
can wish our politicians success, though it is devoutly to be wished, that
their discomfiture may be effected without recourse being had to the ultima
ratio -- the sword. This our wretched situation is but the natural consequence
of denying the authority of parliament, and forcibly opposing its acts.

Sometimes we are amused with intimations that Holland, France or Spain will
make a diversion in our favor. -- These, equally with the others, are
suggestions of despair. These powers have colonies of their own, and might not
choose to set a bad example, by encouraging the colonies of any other state to
revolt. The Dutch have too much money in the English funds, and are too much
attached to their money to espouse our quarrel. The French and Spaniards have
not yet forgot the drubbing they received from Great Britain last war; and all
three fear to offend that power which our politicians would persuade us to
despise.

Lastly, they tell us that the people in England will take our part, and
prevent matters from coming to extremity. This is their fort, where, when
driven from every other post, they fly for refuge.

Alas! my friends, our congresses have stopped up every avenue that leads to that
sanctuary. We hear by every arrival from England, that it is no longer a
ministerial (if ever it was) but a national cause. My dear countrymen, I deal
plainly with you; I never should forgive myself if I did not. Are there not
eleven regiments in Boston? A respectable fleet in the harbor? Men of war
stationed at every considerable port along the continent? Are not three ships
of the line sent here, notwithstanding the danger of the winter coast, with
more than the usual compliment of marines? Have not our congresses, county,
provincial and continental, instead of making advances for an accommodation,
bid defiance to Great Britain? -- He that runs may read.

If our politicians will not be persuaded from running against the thick bosses
of the buckler, it is time for us to leave them to their fate, and provide for
the safety of ourselves, our wives, our children, our friends and our country.

I have many things to add, but must now take my leave for this week, by
submitting to your judgment whether there be not an absolute necessity of
immediately protesting against all traitorous resolves, leagues and
associations, of bodies of men that appear to have acted in a representative
capacity. Had our congresses been accidental or spontaneous meetings, the whole
blame might have rested upon the individuals that composed them, but as they
appear in the character of the peoples delegates, is there not the utmost
danger of the innocent being confounded with the guilty, unless they take care
timely to distinguish themselves?

As the oppugnation to the King in parliament tends manifestly to independance,
and the colonies would soon arrive at that point, did not Great Britain check
them in their carreer; let us indulge the idea, however extravagant and
romantic, and suppose ourselves for ever separated from the parent state. Let
us suppose Great Britain sinking under the violence of the shock, and
overwhelmed by her ancient hereditary enemies; or what is more probable,
opening new sources of national wealth, to supply the deficiency of that which
used to flow to her through American channels, and perhaps planting more loyal
colonies in the new discovered regions of the south, still retaining her
preeminence among the nations, though regardless of America.

Let us now advert to our own situation. Destitute of British protection, that
impervious barrier, behind which in perfect security, we have increased to a
degree almost exceeding the bounds of probability, what other Britain could we
look to when in distress? What succedaneum does the world afford to make good
the loss? Would not our trade, navigation and fishery, which no nation in
Europe dares violate or invade, when distinguished by the British colors,
become the sport and prey of the maritime powers of Europe? Would not our
maritime towns be exposed to the pillaging of every piratical enterprise? Are
the colonies able to maintain a fleet, sufficient to afford one idea of
security to such an extensive seacoast? Before they can defend themselves
against foreign invasions, they must unite into one empire, otherwise the
jarring interests, and opposite propensities, would render the many headed
monster in politics, unwieldy and inactive. Neither the form or seat of
government would be readily agreed upon; more difficult still would it be to
fix upon the person or persons, to be invested with the imperial authority.
There is perhaps as great a diversity between the tempers and habits of the
inhabitants of this province, and the tempers and habits of the Carolinians, as
there subsist between some different nations; nor need we travel so far, the
Rhode-Islanders are as diverse from the people of the adjoining colony of
Connecticut, as those mentioned before. Most of the colonies are rivals to each
other in trade. Between others there subsist deep animosities, respecting their
boundaries, which have heretofore produced violent altercations, and the sword
of civil war has been more than once unsheathed, without bringing these
disputes to a decision. It is apparent that so many discordant, heterogenius
particles could not suddenly unite and consolidate into one body: It is most
probable, that if ever they were united, the union would be effected by some
aspiring genius, putting himself at the head of the colonists army (for we must
suppose a very respectable one indeed before we are severed from Britain) and
taking advantage of the enfeebled, bleeding and distracted state of the
colonies, subjugate the whole to the yoke of despotism. Human nature is every
where the same, and this has often been the issue of those rebellions that the
rightful Prince was unable to subdue. We need not travel through the states of
ancient Greece and Rome, or the more modern ones in Europe, to pick up the
instances, with which the way is strewed; we have a notable one in our own. So
odious and arbitrary was the protectorate of Cromwell, that when death had
delivered them from the dread of the tyrant, all parties conspired to restore
monarchy, and each one strove to be foremost in inviting home, and placing upon
the imperial throne, their exiled prince, the son of the same Charles, who not
many years before, had died on the scaffold: The republicans themselves now
rushed to the opposite extreme, and had Charles the second been as ambitious,
as some of his predecessors were, he might have established in England a power
more arbitrary than the first Charles ever had in contemplation.

Let us now suppose the colonies united and molded into some form of
government. Think one moment of the revenue necessary to support this
government, and to provide for even the appearance of defense. Conceive
yourselves in a manner exhausted by the conflict with Great Britain, now
staggering and sinking under the load of your own taxes, and the weight of your
own government. Consider further, that to render government operative and
salutary, subordination is necessary. This our patriots need not be told of,
and when once they had mounted the steed, and found themselves so well seated
as to run no risk of being thrown from the saddle, the severity of their
discipline to restore subordination, would be in proportion to their former
treachery in destroying it. We have already seen specimens of their tyranny, in
their inhuman treatment of persons guilty of no crime, except that of differing
in sentiment from the whigs. What then must we expect from such scourges of
mankind, when supported by imperial power?

To elude the difficulty resulting from our defenseless situation, we are told
that the colonies would open a free trade with all the world, and all nations
would join in protecting their common mart. A very little reflection will
convince us, that this is chimerical. American trade, however beneficial to
Great Britain, while she can command it, would be but as a drop of the bucket,
or the light dust of the balance, to all the commercial states of Europe:
Besides, were the British fleets and armies no longer destined to our
protection, in a very short time France and Spain would recover possession of
those territories, that were torn reluctant and bleeding from them, in the last
war, by the superior strength of Britain. Our enemies would again extend their
line of fortification, from the northern to the southern shore, and by means of
our late settlements stretching themselves to the confines of Canada, and the
communication opened from one country to the other, we should be exposed to
perpetual incursions from Canadians and savages; but our distress would not end
here, for when once these incursions should be supported by the formidable
armaments of France and Spain, the whole continent would become their easy
prey, and would be parcelled out, Poland like. Recollect the consternation we
were thrown into last war, when fort William Henry was taken by the French: It
was apprehended that New England would be overrun by their conquering arms: It
was even proposed, for our own people to burn and lay waste all the country
west of Connecticut river, to impede the enemies march, and prevent their
ravaging the country east of it. This proposal came from no inconsiderable man.
Consider what must really have been our fate, unaided by Britain last war.

Great Britain aside, what earthly power could stretch out the compassionate
arm to shield us from those powers, that have long beheld us with the sharp
piercing eyes of avidity, and have heretofore bled freely, and expended their
millions to obtain us? Do you suppose their lust of empire is satiated? Or do
you suppose, they would scorn to obtain so glorious a prize by an easy
conquest? Or can any be so visionary and enthusiastical as to believe that the
Father of the universe will work miracles in favor of rebellion? And after
having, by some unseen arm, and mighty power, destroyed Great Britain for us,
will in the same mysterious way defend us against other European powers?
Sometimes we are told, that the colonies may put themselves under the
protection of some one foreign state, but it ought to be considered that to do
that, we must throw ourselves into their power. We can make them no return for
protection but by trade, and of that they can have no assurance, unless we
become subject to their laws; this is evident by our contention with Britain.

Which state would you prefer being annexed to, France, Spain or Holland? I
suppose the latter, as it is a republic; but are you sure that the other powers
of Europe would be idle spectators, content to suffer the Dutch to ingross the
American colonies, or their trade? And what figure would the Dutch probably
make in the unequal contest? Their sword has been long since sheathed in
commerce. Those of you that have visited Surinam, and seen a Dutch Governor
dispensing, at discretion, his own opinions for law, would not suddenly
exchange the English for Dutch government.

I will subjoin some observations from the Farmer's letters. "When the appeal
is made to the sword, highly probable it is, that the punishment will exceed
the offense, and the calamities attending on war outweigh those preceding it.
These considerations of justice and prudence, will always have great influence
with good and wise men. To these reflections it remains to be added, and ought
for ever to be remembered, that resistance in the case of the colonies against
their mother country, is extremely different from the resistance of a people
against their prince: A nation may change their King, or race of Kings, and
retaining their ancient form of government be gainers by changing. Thus
Great Britain under the illustrious house of Brunswick, a house that seems to
flourish for the happiness of mankind, has found a felicity unknown in the
reigns of the Stewarts; but if once we are separated from our mother country,
what new form of government shall we adopt, or where shall we find another
Britain to supply our loss? Torn from the body to which we are united by
religion, laws, affection, relation, language and commerce, we must bleed at
every vein. In truth, the prosperity of these provinces is founded in their
dependence on Great Britain."

Thus, not only our allegiance binds us to obey acts of parliament, but every
civil and religious privilege we enjoy depends upon it. I shall next enquire
into those acts that are called grievances. I do not know that I could wish
that Great Britain should appear altogether blameless, but I assure you, we
shall find nothing to justify the conduct of our patriots.

In the Press, and speedily will be published a Continuation of this Work.

