A FEW REMARKS UPON SOME OF THE Votes and Resolutions OF THE Continental
Congress, Held at Philadelphia in September, AND THE Provincial Congress, Held
at Cambridge in November 1774.

By a FRIEND to Peace and good Order.

O! my People they which lead thee, cause thee to err, and destroy the Way of
thy Paths.

Prophet Isaiah. And the People shall be oppressed every one by his Neighbor:
The Child shall behave himself proudly, against the Ancient, and the base
against the honorable.

Isa. But lo! I will deliver the Men every one into his Neighbors hand, and
into the hand of his King.

Prophet Zechar. Wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his Loins as a
Woman in Travail, and all Faces are turned into paleness.

Prophet Jer. Printed for the Purchasers in 1775.

Remarks, andc.
IT is a fact not controverted by any, that the opposition, made by this town
and province to a British act of parliament, laying a duty upon the importation
of tea in any of the American colonies, has involved us in great misery and
distress; and that we are threatened with much greater calamities, the horrors
of which are beyond description.

Whether the parliament have or have not a constitutional power to impose this
duty, I shall not pretend to determine; but this I may venture to say, and I
hope without giving offense; that the opposition that has been generally made
to it, is inconsistent with our profession of christianity, with the loyalty we
owe to our SOVEREIGN, and the reverence and respect that is due to the British
parliament; and consequently, instead of being a means to obtain a repeal of
the ACTS, will in all probability being on us a heavier condemnation than that
of the port-bill, or the ACT for the alteration of our constitution. All that
is proposed by the following pages is to give an impartial representation of
the destruction of the tea in Boston, and to make a few remarks upon the
proceedings of the continental and provincial congresses.

In the month of December 1773, a number of persons in disguise collected from
Boston and the neighboring towns, not having the fear of GOD before their
eyes, or the good of their country at heart unlawfully assembled themselves
together, and in a riotous, tumultuous manner destroyed a great quantity of
tea, belonging to the honorable East India company -- An action of such a gross
immoral nature as cannot be justified upon the principles of equity or policy:
An action which laid the foundation for the miseries and calamities we are now
groaning under: An action of such a malignant atrocious nature, as must expose
the wicked perpetrators of it, without sincere repentance, to the vengeance of
that BEING, who is a GOD of order and not of confusion, and who will punish all
THIEVES as well as liars in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone.

This diabolical action it is true, was disclaimed by the sober thinking part
of the town, but no steps were taken either by the town or government, to show
their dislike of it; on the contrary, many amongst us, who would be thought to
be religious, in which class were some of the clergy, endeavored to palliate
the crime, as they said it prevented a worse evil, not duly considering that
christianity forbids our doing moral evil though ever so much good should come
from it.

The parliament of Great Britain, highly incensed against the town, for such an
outrageous action, thought proper to punish us by passing an act called the
port bill. By which act it must be acknowledged that the innocent suffer as
much, if not more than the guilty, which is often the case in national
punishments and cannot well be avoided. However, as severe as this act may be
accounted by some, the severity of it would have been in a great measure
lessened, if the town had done their duty upon the news we had or the bill's
having the royal sanction, by paying the money to the order of the East India
company; and had they complied with the other parts of the act, which justice
and good policy required them to do, the port would not have been shut up above
four months, the damages then would have been inconsiderable to what we now
suffer by our refusing to comply with the requisitions of said act; the
charitable donations from the other governments, being very short of a
conpensation for what we suffer by the loss of our trade. -- But to do justice
to the sober thinking part of the town, upon the certain news of the port
bill's being carried into an act, they thought it to be our interest and duty
immediately to pay for the tea; accordingly a town meeting was called to
consult what was proper to be done upon this alarming occasion: And it seemed
to be the sense of most who were then present, that out of policy at least, we
ought to comply with the requisitions of the act, but many difficulties were
started as to the manner of doing it; some proposed the voting of the money
directly; this was objected to, as being illegal, the town not having any
authority by law to raise moneys for that purpose without the special aid of
the general court, but as they were to set in a few weeks, it was motioned that
a petition should be preferred to them to enable the town to borrow the money
upon the credit of a future tax; others thought that the province ought to pay
the money, or at least to let them have the loan of it for a number of years
without interest, and that a committee should be raised to apply to them for
that purpose: But others, whose importance and political salvation depend upon
the province being kept in a continual flame, and observing that the general
sense of the town was in favor of paying for the tea, though they did not
choose openly to oppose such a righteous measure, yet artfully threw
difficulties in the way of the different methods that were proposed: They did
not pretend to deny the justice and equity of paying for it, but observed that
this act might affect all the colonies; and that as in all probability there
would soon be a continental congress; it would be our wisdom to do nothing
until we had the united sense of the colonies; and that they did not doubt they
would recommend the payment for the tea, and each colony would willingly
advance their proportion of it; whereas, if we should immediately order the
payment they may possibly resent it, and construe it as our submitting to the
act of parliament imposing the duty upon that article, and so the union and
harmony which at present subsists between the colonies would be in great danger
of being destroyed. -- In the mean time it was proposed that we should
represent to the several colonies our distressed condition, praying them for
relief for our suffering brethren, who were out of employ by reason of the port
bill. These reasons though altogether destitute of sincerity, seemed to be very
plausible, and they accordingly had their effect: And the town did nothing
further concerning it.

The general court met upon the last wednesday in May, and were adjourned to
Salem the tuesday following, but as no application was made to them, they took
no order relative to it: And as nothing was done by the general court, nor
likely to be done by the town, in order to open the port, the worthy tradesmen
began to be very uneasy, and thought it proper, that they, who were like to be
such great sufferers, should have a meeting by themselves, and consult what was
proper to be done to prevent their ruin; they accordingly assembled at
Faneuil-hall to the number of two or three hundred, and many if not most of
them went with a resolution to use their endeavors that the tea should be paid
for; but so artful and industrious were the principal heads of the opposition
to government, that they placed themselves at the doors of the hall and told
the tradesmen as they entered, that now was the time to save our country. --
That if they gave their voice in favor of paying for the tea, we should be
undone, and the chains of slavery would be rivitted upon us! which so terrified
many honest well meaning persons, that they thought it not prudent to act at
all in the affair, and so nothing was concluded upon.

The next day the committee of correspondence dispersed among the people a most
wicked, diabolical hand bill called a league and covenant, which was sent to
every town and district in the PROVINCE, calling upon the inhabitants to sign
it, which paper was introduced in many towns by the minister of the parish, who
set them the example of signing first, and then called upon his parishioners to
engage in the same covenant, and to sign it upon the communion table, and it is
reported that a certain clergyman in the county of Plymouth, gravely told his
people, that they who refused to sign it were not worthy to come to that table.
-- I do not pretend to say positively that this is a fact, though it is
generally believed: But be that as it may, it is certain that many of the
dissenting clergy have so far prostituted their sacred office, as to be leaders
and encouragers of the people to sign this wicked covenant, whereby they have
led many of their people to commit the horrible crime of perjury; for not one
of many hundred of those who have signed it, have paid any regard to it, and
what makes it more surprising that they should have exerted themselves upon
that occasion is, that not one in Boston where this covenant was fabricated has
signed it; and consequently every countryman who has, and has any dealings with
the Bostonians must infallibly perjure himself.

We have now done with the solemn league and covenant, and shall proceed to the
considerations of the proceedings of the continental Congress. In the month of
September they assembled at Philadelphia with all the pomp and grandeur of
Plenipotentiaries; when the expectations of the people in general were, that by
their wise and prudent councils, respectful and dutiful petitions to his
MAJESTY and to his parliament, a door would be open for the supreme legislature
of Great Britain, consistent with the honor and dignity of that august
assembly, to have our grievances redressed, and that the first step that would
have been taken for that purpose, would have been to have advised the town of
Boston to pay for the tea. But alas how have we been disappointed! Those
persons who have been the occasion of our political troubles in this province,
were members of this continental body, and having already become desperate
themselves had no other card to play, but to involve the whole continent in
their rebellion. -- No doubt vainly imagining, that although a single town or
province may be reduced by the power of GREAT BRITAIN; they would not venture
an attack against the whole continent. -- The Massachusetts delegates so far
succeeded in their plan, that the first thing the congress did that was made
public, was the adopting of the resolutions of the county of Suffolk, which
were not short of high treason and rebellion, nothing healing or salutary could
then be expected from such a congress, the only apology that could be made for
their conduct was, that they came into this vote immediately after drinking
thirty two bumpers of the best madeira, and it seems the next morning when
their heads were cool, they were ashamed of what they had done; but it was then
too late for a reconsideration of the vote, a copy of it attested by the
president, having been forwarded to Boston by our worthy citizen Paul Revere,
who was dispatched from Boston as a courier with the Suffolk resolves; however,
to avoid making any such mistakes for the future, they prudently determined to
do no business after dinner.

Their whole proceedings as they are made public, no doubt are in the hands of
every gentleman who has any taste for political controversy; though by the
way, they cautiously omitted inserting this extraordinary vote in the pamphlet
they published, entitled, "Extracts from the votes and proceedings of the
American continental congress."

As several gentlemen at New York, have made very sensible remarks upon their
proceedings, and have proved to demonstration if their association be strictly
adhered to, we must be involved in one common ruin: For trade and commerce is
the support of the farmer as well as the merchant and shopkeeper; and the
foundation of learning; without which, in process of time, there will be no
true rational religion amongst us; and as their writings are dispersed through
the province, it is needless for me fully and particularly to animadvert upon
them: However, it may not be amiss to make a few cursory remarks upon their
conduct, which, whether pertinent or not, is humbly submitted.

And here it is worthy of notice, they have reduced the number of those that
were concerned in the destruction of the tea, to thirty or forty, when it is
very evident that TWO THOUSAND at least, were employed either directly in
destroying the tea, or in keeping a centry at the entrance of the wharf where
the ships lay, and at those wharves contiguous thereto: They then exclaim
against the severity of the port bill, in punishing thirty thousand, as they
say, for the offense of a few individuals. It is possible that most of the
congress might not have been acquainted with the truth of the fact, and
depending upon the veracity of the Massachusetts delegates, put full faith and
confidence in their representations; be that as it may, it is manifest that
those members who went from Boston, knew better; they certainly gave their
voice in favor of a notorious falsehood, knowing it to be such. What apology
then can be made for gentlemen of their EXALTED CHARACTER, that for the sake of
carrying a point, could be guilty of such a crime, that every one who is not
entirely lost to all sense of honor would be ashamed of? Possibly these
casuistical and patriotic, not to say jesuitical gentlemen, to ease their
consciences, may think it no harm to lie for the good of their country; and as
it is said they have often enthusiastically declared, they would willingly
sacrifice their lives and fortunes in defense of their civil rights and
liberties; and as they have little or no property to lose, in order to transmit
their names with honor to posterity, they are willing to part with their souls
in lieu of it; but to adopt the language of inspiration with a very little
variance, "What will it profit a man though he recovers all his civil rights and
privileges, if he loses his own soul?"

We shall now proceed to make a few strictures upon the tenth article of their
association, which runs thus, In case any merchant or trader, or other person,
shall import any goods or merchandise after the first day of December, and
before the first day of February next, the same ought forthwith at the election
of the owner, to be either reshipped or delivered up to the committee of the
county or town wherein they shall be imported, to be stored at the risk of the
importer, until the nonimportation agreement shall cease; or be sold under the
direction of the commit aforesaid; and in the last mentioned case, the owner,
or owners of such goods, shall be reimbursed (out of the sales) the first cost
and charges; the profit, if any, be to be applied toward relieving and
employing such poor inhabitants of the town of Boston, as are immediate
sufferers by the Boston port bill; and a particular account of all goods so
returned, stored or sold, to be inserted in the public papers: And if any goods
or merchandise, shall be imported after the said first day of February, the
(...) ought forthwith to be sent back, without breaking any of the packages
thereof. This association was agreed upon the 20th of October, 1774.

Although there is nothing compulsive in this article, yet being compared with
some other of their articles and resolves, it is manifest they designed it
should have the operation of law; and it has accordingly had that effect in
regard to several vessels that have arrived at Salem and Plymouth, since the
first day of December, the owners of which cargoes, have had their goods
piratically taken from them and exposed to public sale, agreeable to the
forementioned article.

Now admitting for argument sake, this congress were constitutionally the
supreme legislature of the whole continent, could any thing be more unjust,
tyrannical, arbitrary and oppressive? Can the edicts of the most despotic
princes under heaven exceed it? Pray what offense against the laws of GOD or
man, or even against the sense of the continent, have these merchants been
guilty of, who have ordered goods to be shipped them from Great Britain,
Ireland or the West Indies, and which could not possibly arrive here 'till
after the first day of December, that they should be subjected to such severe
penalties? Was it in their power from the twentieth of October to give counter
orders to their correspondents, if they were so disposed, that should reach
them in time to prevent their shipping of the goods? By no means; they knew it
to be impossible at least for the province of the Massachusetts, who were not
acquainted with the determination of the congress 'till the beginning of
November. It is therefore no breach of charity to suppose, that the motive that
induced them to pass such a wicked edict, was, that the profits arising thereby
should be applied for the relief and employ of the poor inhabitants of the town
of Boston, who are immediate sufferers by the Boston port bill.

Charity to the proper objects of it, is no doubt a christian duty, and a
sacrifice acceptable to the SUPREME BEING; and GOD forbid that any thing should
be said to discourage it; but it is an old saying, that we ought not to rob
Peter to pay Paul; nay, charity to the poor, when what we bestow on them is the
fruit of theft and robbery, is so far from being a sacrifice with which GOD
will be well pleased; that it will be a stench in his nostrils. It is no better
than if a number of VILLAINS should enter into an association, to go upon the
highway, and rob every gentleman they should meet, with a pious design to
relieve their poor brethren who were suffering in Newgate for their crimes; or
even for the relief of those, who by the providence of GOD were reduced to a
state of poverty; in neither of which cases would they be entitled to the
reward which is promised the charitable christian.

Besides, these poor inhabitants among whom this charity is distributed, are
not all of them necessarily sufferers by the port-bill: Many of them might have
been employed by the army in their respective occupations, whereby they would
have accumulated more wealth than they could possibly have earned, if that act
called the Boston port-bill had never been passed, but they were prevented by
the troublers of our Israel, left a stop should be put to the charitable
donations from the neighboring colonies. -- Now the real unavoidable sufferers
by this act are the merchants and traders, and consequently they are the
persons who have an equitable claim at least to a part of the donations; but
instead of considering them in that light, the wisdom of the congress has laid
a tax upon them, to support some of those who by their industry in their
several callings may get as comfortable a support, as if this act had never
passed. "Tell it not in Gath!"

The continental congress have recommended it to the respective provincial
congresses, to make such further orders, as may by them be thought necessary to
carry their orders into execution, which naturally leads me to take some notice
of the proceedings of the provincial congress of the Massachusetts Bay held at
Cambridge in November, 1774.

But before we proceed to make any remarks upon their conduct it will not be
improper to observe, that the continental congress as they had no business with
any acts of parliament, but those that affected all the colonies, consequently
the Boston port-bill, and the act for altering the charter and government of
the Massachusetts Bay, and the Quebec bill, ought to have been out of the
question any further than as the port-bill being manifestly for the punishment
of a certain offense that was charged upon the town of Boston, they ought to
have advised them to pay the money for the tea, so that all the colonies might
stand upon an equal footing in their humble application to his MAJESTY and to
the parliament of Great Britain, to repeal the act for laying a duty upon the
importation of tea, in which all the colonies are equally concerned. But for
them to pretend that the port-bill affected all the colonies and therefore it
was their duty to interest themselves in it, is perfectly ridiculous. -- The
respective inhabitants of each colony may with as much propriety object to a
law made by their own assemblies for punishing theft with death, and even
endeavor to rescue a delinquent, because possibly it may hereafter be their own
turn to suffer for the like offense. -- But the folly and ingratitude of the
congress, it is humbly apprehended will appear in a striking point of light by
the following similitude.

Let us suppose a wealthy farmer had acquired a considerable real estate, and
was the father of ten sons; and that these children were very serviceable to
him in their minority, in clearing his lands and in improving his farms; at the
same time he exercised a tender and paternal care and affection for them, and
assisted them in setting out in life; and although they had got the means of a
comfortable subsistence, they were still in a great measure dependent upon
their aged father. -- And that one of them who had in a peculiar manner, been
nourished by his indulgent parent, impatient of those restraints that every
parent has a right to lay upon his children, should unnaturally rebel against
him, throw of his dependence, and treat him in an insulting, injurious manner,
so as to provoke the father to disinherit him, and turn him off from his farm,
which he occupied by sufferance, and by that means this rebellious son, was
reduced to great want and indigence. And suppose that his indulgent father at
the same time willing to receive him to his favor, and reinstate him in the
possession of his farm, by the improvement of which, he could get a comfortable
support, upon the easy conditions of his humble submission, and recognizing his
proper authority, and his promising to obey him in all things lawful for the
future. -- Suppose this undutiful son should reject these lenient proposals,
with indignation, and continuing in his rebellious conduct, should apply to his
brethren for support, and they, instead of advising their unhappy brother to go
to his offended father and say "Father I have sinned against heaven and in thy
sight and am no more worthy to be called thy son, treat me as one of thy hired
servants." Should for answer, say, our father is grown old and pevish, and
become a tyrant, and designs to make us all slaves; when he has subdued you, he
will attack us; wherefore we advise you by no means to submit to his arbitrary
injunctions, and we will support you; and when he finds there is a UNION
amongst us to oppose his tyrannical measures, he will restore you to his favor,
for we know he has a peculiar affection for you. But admiting the old gentleman
should think his honor was too much concerned to give up this unhappy
controversy without a humble submission on your part, and should persist in
oppressing you, we will enter into an association among ourselves, and endeavor
to engage all our friends not to have any commercial dealings with him, or with
those who shall countenance him; we will not purchase any of the produce of his
farm, we will discourage his hired servants from working for him, or any ways
assisting him, in ploughing, sowing and reaping; in which case, his farms, will
be rendered in a manner useless to him; neither will we supply his friends and
those who adhere to him, with the necessaries of life; we will convince the old
tyrant that we can live without him, as well as he can without us; and although
we acknowledge that he has formerly been very kind to us, yet we have fully
balanced all his favors by the profits that he has accumulated by our labor;
and further, dear brother, that you may not suffer in your GLORIOUS OPPOSITION
to him, we will seize upon the produce of his farm, if he should send any to
market after the first of December, and apply a certain proportion of it for
your support. Now I ask you, if children could act such an unnatural, unfilial
part, what must the sober, judicious part of mankind think of them? What must
the aged compassionate father think of them? And how must he treat them? Not
surely as sons but as bastards. And what do you think, if these rebellious
children should have such interest with some of the ministers of the gospel,
that (...) their public addresses to heaven, gave thanks that GOD had put it
into the hearts of these children to contribute for the relief of their
rebellious brother, when part of the support thus afforded him, was what they
got by robbery. The application of this similitude is very obvious and needs no
comment.

Having finished the remarks which I originally designed to make upon the
proceedings of the grand continental congress; by some sycophants and
flatterers called the collected wisdom of the colonies. -- I shall proceed very
briefly to animadvert upon some of the votes or resolutions of the provincial
congress held at Cambridge in November last; and here it is proper to observe
that two gentlemen of the continental were also members of the provincial
congress, and by their influence no doubt obtained a vote to confirm and adopt
the proceedings of the grand congress, and as though what they had done was not
sufficient to ruin the trade of the town and country, in order to complete our
misery, this new fangled congress unconstitutionally assembled, have in
addition thereto, recommended, that in the month of October, 1775, the
committees of inspection for the several towns in the province, should repair
to the several stores and shops, and take an invoice of the goods they shall
then have by them, and strictly forbid their exposing any of them for sale, and
if the respective owners of such goods shall refuse to comply with their
demands, they are directed to take them into their possession, and store them
at the risque of the owners until the acts they complain of are repealed; and
the inhabitants of the towns where such goods are found, are advised to assist
them in this high handed robbery.

Now, can it be supposed, that any set of men professing christianity, or even
common honesty, can possibly be guilty of a greater offense? -- Nay is the
crime of a highwayman, who robs the rich traveller of a few guineas, to be
compared with this for it is iniquity? By no means; the latter is not so great
an offender as the former; for in one case the gentleman only loses a few
guineas (as it may be) he can very well spare; but in the other, many a family
may be deprived of the means of support, and in time be reduced to the most
abject state of poverty. The congress not content with this wicked resolve have
impiously recommended it to the ministers of the gospel, who, by their sacred
office, are not only to preach the doctrine of grace but to inculcate the
duties of morality, in which a due submission to government is included; I say,
have advised them by their circular letters, to use their endeavors, that their
tyrannical and wicked directions be put in execution. But as the weapons of
those reverend gentlemen are not, or ought not to be carnal, but spiritual, it
is to be hoped they will not make use of the former, but confine themselves to
the latter. And certainly it would be more for the reputation of the clergy,
and the real interest of religion, if instead of preaching politics, as two
many of them do, they would cry aloud and not spare, but lift up their voice
like a trumpet, and show unto Boston their transgressions, and unto the whole
province their sins, and plainly tell them, that it is "their iniquities, that
have separated between them and their GOD," and have occasioned the loss of
what they esteem their rights and privileges; and that sincere repentance and
reformation are the only means to have them restored to us. But while we
continue in a state of rebellion, "despising government," "speaking evil of
dignities," "and reviling the ruler of God's people" -- encouraging mobs, riots
and tumults -- destroying the substance of our fellow creatures; insulting and
abusing their persons in such a manner as a BARBARIAN would be ashamed of; and
robbing them of their private property, to enable us to do acts of charity to
the poor; it will be of no avail to us to observe days of prayer and
humiliation. -- With such sacrifices GOD will not be well pleased. -- But will
say to us as he did by his prophet Isaiah to his people of old, "When you
spread forth your hands I will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when you make many
prayers I will not hear; your hands are full of blood; you have made lies your
refuge, and under falsehoods you have hid yourselves."

I have now finished what I first proposed, but cannot conclude without a word
or two of advice to my deluded countrymen, who have been drawn into rebellion,
by the lies and misrepresentations, of artful, wicked, and desperate men. -- I
would charitably hope, that when you first enlisted under their banners, you
designed no more than a rational peaceable defending your rights and
privileges, and had you been early told, that you should ever have gone such
lengths as you have, no doubt you would have adopted the language of Hazael and
answered, "Is thy servant a dog, that he can do such things;" and as many of
you have forfeited your lives by your treasonable practices, you may possibly
think that there will be no mercy for you, and that therefore you had as good
persist in your rebellion as not, but let me tell you this is a suggestion of
the devil. Our most GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN is far from being vindictive: Punishment
is his strange work; and he never inflicts any, but when the honor and dignity
of government, and the real good of his subjects require it. And although the
ringleaders of this horrible rebellion, may meet with the punishment that their
crimes do justly deserve, yet those who have been deluded by them, if they give
evident proof of their repentance and submission to government, and that
speedily, may have some reason to hope, that from his MAJESTY's wonted clemency
they shall obtain forgiveness.

Let me therefore entreat you if you have any love for your country, any
affection for your wives and children, and regard for your own safety and
happiness; to lay down the weapons of your rebellion; and submit yourselves to
the wise, lenient and constitutional government we have the happiness to be
under; for we have abundant evidence of his MAJESTY's tender and impartial
regard for the rights of his subjects; and although he will not suffer those who
deny his authority, and the authority of his parliament to escape with
impunity, yet he will most graciously approve of every constitutional measure,
that may contribute to the peace, happiness and prosperity of his colony of the
Massachusetts Bay, and which may have the effect to show to the world, that he
has no wish beyond that of reigning in the hearts and affections of his people.


