THE SPEECHES IN THE LAST SESSION of the present PARLIAMENT, Delivered by
several of the PRINCIPAL ADVOCATES

IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, IN FAVOR OF THE RIGHTS OF AMERICA.

VIZ.

Governor JOHNSTONE, Mr. CRUGER, The Hon. Capt. LUTTERELL, Colonel ACLAND, The
Hon. HENRY TEMPLE LUTTERELL, Mr. HARTLEY, The Marquis of GRANBY, Son of the
late magnanimous Hero, JOHN MANNERS, Marquis of GRANBY.
With the SPEECH of Mr. EDMUND BURKE, in Favor of the Protestant Dissenters,
in the second Parliament of George the 3d.

NEW YORK: Printed by JAMES RIVINGTON.

MDCCLXXV.

The following Pamphlets are to be had of James Rivington, in New York; Mr.
James Humphrey's, jun. Printer, and Mr. John Airey, in Market-street,
Philadelphia:

1. Mr. Burke's Speech on American Taxation, April 19, 1774.

2. Mr. Burke's Speech on moving his Conciliation with the Colonies, March 22,
1775.

3. Dr. Arthur Lee's Appeal to the Justice and Interests of the People of
Great Britain, in the present dispute with America.

4. Major General Lee's Letters, etc. etc.

Governor JOHNSTONE's SPEECH, UPON Lord BARRINGTON's MOTION, That 17, 547
effective Men, Officers and Invalids included, be employed for the Year 1775.
I THINK, a true determination upon this question can only be made after
knowing the plan which the gentlemen in Administration are resolved to pursue,
with respect to American affairs. It is now clear, that the people of America,
actuated with the same firm and resolute spirit, and tinctured with the same
enthusiasm which enabled our ancestors to withstand the unjust claims of the
crown, in the days of Charles the First, are determined to resist the high
doctrines of parliamentary supremacy, held forth by this country, which must,
in its consequences, reduce their liberties to a level with the colonies of
France and Spain. If we are resolved to adhere to those incomprehensible
tenets, echoed with so much applause in the last parliament, and on the first
day of the present sessions, nothing but the sword can now decide the contest.
In that event it is in vain to suppose, that the peace establishment of the
army now proposed will be sufficient; for every wise man must foresee, that our
rivals in Europe cannot be idle spectators in such scene. Supposing then, a
sufficient force is employed to subdue the Americans, this country must be left
destitute of the necessary defense. No man is less desirous of augmenting a
military establishment than myself. I foresee that the liberties of this
country must, in the end, fall a sacrifice to that power which has annihilated
the rights of mankind in other states. Between the danger from abroad, and the
danger from those who are to defend us, according the present establishments of
Europe, the situation is very nice. For my own part, however wisely the
military system is interwoven into our constitution in time of peace, citizen
and soldier happily intermixing with each other in equal privileges, yet, upon
an invasion, or a civil war, when men of high minds come to assemble in
military camps, with the weapons in their hands, the contagion of power will
soon spread; nevertheless, we must maintain (though with a watchful eye) a
necessary force for defense in case of invasion. I speak as a seaman,
confident, that whenever France shall find an enterprizing officer, capable of
conducting such an attempt with skill and resolution, that the landing of an
army in this country, is not to be prevented by all the ships we can arm, while
the elements continue so various, and the distance so short. There are several
methods to accomplish this, which I shall not repeat here, from prudential
motives; but I am so convinced of the truth of my assertion, that I consider it
as the duty of every man in this country to be ready to dispute the fate of
this kingdom on a battle; and if we are left without a necessary strength to
support wavering minds in such a conjuncture, while we are thinking of
depriving our fellow-citizens of their just and legal rights in America, we
may, as a proper punishment, lose our own. It is true, that, by the present
vote, we do not preclude ourselves from an augmentation in the course of the
session, in case the exigencies of the state shall require it, and so far I am
willing to assent to the present motion; but, I beg gentlemen in
administration, will, in the mean time, draw no merit from proposing so low an
establishment, unless they intend to alter their measures, since it is
undoubtedly inadequate to our situation; and, I would likewise caution the
landed interest, not to plume themselves on the escape they have made, since it
is equally evident, a further taxation, if not included in the general vote of
this must be demanded by extraordinaries, or a vote of credit, to meet them
next session, under the multiplied expenses of that mode of raising money.

With regard to the navy, I confess it to be extremely hard, that the noble
Lord should be attacked in the last session of parliament for too great
profusion, and blamed in this for the reduction that was then deemed necessary:
But I am not one of those who are captivated with a simple proposition upon
paper, when all the avenues of extravagance are kept open; while the situation
of our affairs, from the worst judged policy, necessarily leads us to open
these sluices of expense. It is therefore in vain to hold out oeconomical
resolutions in our votes, when our conduct must produce a contrary effect. I
hope, however, that the sentiments of gentlemen on the subject of American
affairs begin to alter. I hope, they will now see what men, uncorrupted by the
luxurious vices of a great capital, are capable of suffering, in support of
essential privileges; and that the flattering expectations of seeing America at
our feet, are now vanished.

To those who conceive that men are to yield their rights from oppression and
distress, I would recall to their memory the sufferings of the late Parliament
of Paris. The haughty mind of a debauched Minister and an imperious Chancellor,
had induced the late King of France to violate all the ancient and established
privileges of that august body, the only remaining check against the despotism
of the monarch: even men of wit and genius were found base enough to villify
the claims of the Parliament; for I am sorry to observe, that fortitude of mind
does not always accompany excellent talents; and that many mer possessing those
rare gifts, are too often induced to lend their ingenuity to the hand that pays
them, in support of the doctrines of the day. Is it possible for any of the
people of America to undergo greater distress than those worthy patriots in
France have suffered? Deprived of their office and subsistence, banished from
their friends, vilified by the court, no prospect of a change; yet supported by
principle and a good conscience, they have now seen their day of triumph, and
felt the reward of virtue; securing to their country, by their perseverance,
more essential rights than have been obtained by three civil wars. After such
concessions from the King of France, shall the King of Great Britain be ashamed
to yield to the just cries of two millions of his subjects!

I know all the arguments which are used to entangle weak men in support of the
present arbitrary tenets. The subject, indeed, is complicated; and men are
confounded, more than convinced. It is said that legislation existing in the
Parliament of Great Britain, taxation, which is a part of legislation, must
necessarily be included. The various privileges which subsist in every free
state, are hardly to be determined by any reasoning a priore. Such dilemmas
occur on every subject. Can any position appear more ridiculous to those who
maintain the doctrines of virtual representation, than, that a borough should
send two members to Parliament, without house or inhabitant? And yet there are
many who hear me, strenuous advocates against American charters, that hold
their feats in this House under such a curious representation. At the same
time, I confess, the basis of the constitution depends on preserving their
privileges entire, since no man can say how far the reform would reach; and the
whole art of government consists, in preserving to every one his established
rights. The most certain science we know is mathematics; yet, if I was to say
to many men, that two lines might approach nearer and nearer to all eternity,
and never could meet, they would think the assertion ridiculous and absurd.
Nevertheless, there is nothing so certain as the truth of that theorum. It is
equally true, that legislation may exist without the power of taxation. The
kingdom of Ireland, within our own dominion, is a proof of what these learned
gentlemen assert to be so impossible. A worthy member in my eye, being pressed
with this argument in the last session of Parliament, from the fairness of his
mind, he avowed, as his opinion, that we could tax Ireland. I remember there
were some gentlemen in the gallery when this declaration was made, whom I
immediately perceived, by the contorsions in their countenance, to be Irish
members: Next day the worthy member chose to make some apology to his friends.
He said, no parallel could be drawn between Ireland and the colonies; for
Ireland had a paraphernalia; and this satisfied both the English and Irish
members. For my part, I do not see what difficulty can occur, in leaving the
different colonies on the same footing of raising money by requisition, as from
the people of Ireland. If it is thought this manner of raising supplies might
throw too much power into the hands of the crown, that power might be limited,
so as not to be exerted, except upon the address of both Houses of Parliament,
such as has been lately adopted respecting the prerogative in regulating the
coin. I am still hopeful, that the tense chord, on which our American creed has
been said and sung, will be relaxed. I think I perceive the tone of the noble
Lord is not so loud, or so lofty, as on some former debates on this subject. I
hope it does not proceed from want of health, in which case, no man could feel
more sorrow for his Lordship than myself; but, I hope, it arises from a more
serious and deep reflection on the subject, where his own good sense has had
room to operate, free from those violent associates, who seem to have
precipitated his Lordship into such rash and cruel measures, contrary to his
own natural good temper. Here then, I shall conclude, as I set out, hoping,
that generous, just, pacific measures will be adopted; but still insisting,
that no man can determine properly on the number of forces to be employed,
until we know the measures that are to be purfued respecting America

[ It was Mr. Righy, Master of the Rolls in Ireland, who bad declared that the
Parliament of Great Britain had a right to tax Ireland in all cases whatever,
as well as America.]

MR. CRUGER.
I Rise, Sir, to say a few words on this important subject, with all the
diffidence and awe which must strike the mind, on a first attempt to speak
before so august an assembly. Had I remained silent on this occasion, I must
have condemned myself for seeming to desert a cause which I think it my duty to
espouse. I cannot but be heard with candor by Englishmen, when what I offer is
dictated by a love to my country.

I am far from approving all the proceedings in America. Many of their measures
have been a dishonor to their cause. Their rights might have been asserted
without violence, and their claims stated with temper as well as firmness. But
permit me to say, Sir, that if they have erred, it may be considered as a
failing of human nature. A people animated with a love of liberty, and alarmed
with apprehensions of its being in danger, will unavoidably run into excesses:
the history of mankind declares it in every page; and Britons ought to view,
with an eye of tenderness, acts of imprudence, to which their fellow subjects
in America may have been hurried, not, as has been unkindly said, by a
rebellious spirit, but by that generous spirit of freedom, which has often led
their own ancestors into indiscretions.

Acts of severity are far from having a tendency to eradicate jealousies; on
the contrary, they must produce new fears, and endanger that attachment and
obedience which kindness and gentleness might have insured.

No country has been more happy in its colonies than Great Britain. Connected
by mutual interests (till the era of the fatal sta^^p act) they flourished in
an intercourse of amity, protection and obedience, supporting and supported by
each other. Before than hated period, we meet with no instances of disobedience
to your laws; no denial of the jurisdiction of Parliament; no marks of jealousy
and discontent. They ever loved liberty; their zeal for it is coeval with their
first emigration to America. They were presecuted for it in this country; they
sought a sanctuary in the unexplored regions of that. They cleared their
inhospitable w^^ds, cultivated their lands, and poured the wealth which they
derived from agriculture and commerce into the bosom of the mother country.

You protected them in their infant state, and they returned it, by consining
to you the benefits of their trade. You regulated their commerce for the
advantages of this country, and they never discovered an opposition, either to
the authority or the exercise of it. Are these evidences of a spirit of
disaffection to Great Britain, or ingratitude for its protection? Are they not
rather proofs, that if the same line of mild and lenient government had been
pursued, the same cordiality and submission would have been continued?

Every American who loves his country must wish the prosperity of
Great Britain, and that their union may ever subsist uninterrupted. If the
paternal trunk is injured, the branches must suffer with it. A subordination on
the part of the colonies is essential to this union. I acknowledge, Sir, that
there must exist a power somewhere to superintend and regulate the movements of
the whole, for the attainment and preservation of our common happiness; this
supreme power can be justly and adequately exercised only by the legislature of
Great Britain. In this doctrine the colonies tacitly acquiesced, and were
happy: England enjoyed by it all the advantages of an exclusive trade. Why then
strain this authority so much, as to render a submission to it impossible,
without a surrender of those liberites which are most valuable in civil
society; and were ever acknowledged the birthright of Englishment? When
Great Britain derives from her colonies the most ample supplies of wealth by
her commerce, is it not absurd to close up those channels, for the sake of a
claim of opposing taxes, which (though a young member) I will dare to say,
never have, and probably never will defray the expense of collecting them?

The expediency of coercive measures is much insisted on by some, who, I am
sorry to say, seem to consider more the distresses into which they will involve
the Americans, than the benefits they can procure from such vindictive conduct
to this country. Humanity, however, will prompt the generous mind to weep over
severities, though they may be even necessary; and a prudent statesman will
reflect, that the colonies cannot suffer without injury to Great Britain. They
are your customers -- they consume you manufactures; -- by distressing them, if
you do not drive them to foreign markets, you will most assuredly disable them
from taking your commodities, and from making you returns for what they have
taken.

Should coercive measures reduce them to an acknowledgement of the equity of
parliamentary taxation, what are the advantages which will result from it? Can
it be thought that the Americans will be dragooned into a conviction of this
right? Will severities increase their affection, and make them more desirous of
a connection with, and dependence on, Great Britain? Is it not, on the
contrary, reasonable to conclude, that the effect will be an increase of
jealousy and discontent; that they will seek all occasions of evading laws
imposed on them by violence; that they will be restless under the yoke, and
think themselves happy in an opportunity of flying to the protection of any
other power, from the subjection of a mother, whom they consider cruel and
vindictive?

I would not be understood, Sir, to deny the good intentions of administration.
The abilities of the Minister, it seems are universally acknowledged; but I
must add, humanum est errare. Though an American, I applaud his jealousy for
the dignity of parliament, and think the impolicy and inexpediency of the late
measures may reasonably be imputed to the difficulty of the occasion, and the
unsettled and undefined nature of the dependence of the colonies on the mother
country; and vice versa, candor must admit the same apology for the violences
and mistakes of America.

But since these measures have been found, by sad experience, totally
inadequate; since they have widened the breach, instead of closing it;
diminished the obedience of the colonies, instead of confirming it; increased
the turbulence and opposition, instead of allaying them; it may be hoped, that
a different plan of conduct will be pursued, and some firm and liberal
constitution adopted, by the wisdom of this house, which may secure the
colonists in their liberties, while it maintains the just supremacy of
parliament.

Mr. CRUGER's SPEECH on the MOTION for an ADDRESS to the KING.
HE said, though interested as he was in the business before the House, he
should have remained silent, had be not conceived that an honorable gentleman
* had thrown some undeserved reflections on the Americans, which he should take
some notice of before he sat down, but that he chose first to pay a little
attention to the general business. He observed, that the dispute between this
country and her colonies was of such infinite importance to both, that he hoped
he should be forgiven if he said it would be imprudent to enter into it, but
with the utmost caution and deliberating; that we were now like men walking on
the brink of a precipice; that there was danger in every step, and that in his
opinion the salvation of this country depended on the measures that were
adopted by the house this night. He then apprized the house, that the
settlement of the unhappy disputes between England and America did not
particularly concern any set of men, whether in or out of administration; that
it related to all, was connected with all, and materially affected the
interests of the whole state. He then strongly recommended to all parties to go
into an examination of the question, free from resentment or prejudice; to
consider it with impartiality, to discuss it with temper, and to adopt with
unanimity and salutary proposition, regardless of the man or party that may
suggest it. He then endeavored to vindicate the Americans, both as to their
courage and gallantry, (in opposition to the assertions of the colonel;) the
latter he did with much good humor and pleasantry, but lost his temper in the
former, became personal, and was called to order. He concluded with saying,
that as many schemes of accommodation were talked of, he earnestly wished that
some one might be adopted which would tend to restore the harmony any affection
that once subsisted between Great Britain and her colonies, and produced so
many invaluable blessings to both.

Governor JOHNSTONE's MOTION for recommitment of the Address.
BEFORE you pronounce this dreadful sentence upon a meritorious, sober, and
industrious people, I hope the House will indulge me with a few words in
discharge of the duty I owe myself, and likewise a view of transmitting my
character fair to posterity, when those black scenes shall be examined without
prejudice.

The real question before us is, upon the proper measures to be pursued
respecting our fellow subjects in America. In order to judge of this, we must
consider the real cause of dispute. I say, the substantial difference turns
upon the right of taxation. Most of the advocates on the other side have
endeavored to slur this point, and allege, That the claims of the Americans
extend far beyond this article, and that the act of navigation itself is in
danger. -- But it is impossible for a judicious mind to read the material
papers, and not see that this is illusory. The Congress has expressly told us,
They are willing to acquiesce in those laws which secure to us the monopoly of
their trade, as necessary in the mutual connection; -- and the instructions
from Philadelphia, on which the proceedings of the Congress are chiefly formed,
avow these doctrines in more full and explicit terms. This method of condemning
men by inference and conjecture, contrary to their repeated declarations. I
cannot approve; I shall therefore bend the whole force of my argument to the
original cause of quarrel, -- taxation.

The great and only secret yet found out, for preserving the liberties of
mankind from the encroachments of that power which is necessary for the
executive in large kingdoms, is the power of the purse. This was the subject of
contention in the civil wars of Charles the First. It is this privilege alone
which makes the House of Commons respectable: this is the point which Hampden
obtained for us! And I leave every one acquainted with the history of those
memorable times, to determine in his own mind, "Whether we should ever have
enjoyed this blessing, if he had tamely paid the tax, and had not resisted?" --
From, this power we derive the certainty of assembling the representatives of
the people; by this redress of grievances may precede supplies; and the
security that the exercise will not be abused is derived from hence, that the
House cannot impose on others what they are not to feel themselves. By the
principles of the constitution, every man should be ^^presented; but the
deviation from a rule, too nice for practice, is safely borne, because the
interest of every particular member remains as a pledge, that no individual can
be over-burthened: when this security is removed, there is no longer any safety
for those to whom the fact (...) not apply. What is the case respecting the
American (...) Does any member feel himself affected by the impositions he
shall lay on them? Nay, does not the contrary principle prevail? The more he
shall burden America, the more he will relieve himself. Judge Hobart says, "If
an act of Parliament was made constituting a man a judge in his own cause, it
would be void by the law of nature." Yet such is the precise si^uation in which
we contend we ought to be placed, respecting the Americans, and for the denial
of which we are ready to condemn our fellow subjects to all the tortures
enacted by the laws of treason.

Let us look round, and view the fate of different states that have yielded or
preserved the privileges for which the Americans contend. So soon as the cortes
lost this power, their slavery was complete. Portugal has now no vestige of
this Palladium -- Here is tyranny supreme! In France, where the traces are
left, (as in the pays d'etat,) their happiness is distinguishable from the
misery of other parts. In Britain we are yet free, because we retain it. In
Holland, Switzerland, and the other states of Europe, they are more or less so
as they preserve it.

What are the circumstances that distinguish and protect the British colonies
from those of other nations? The representatives of the people met in general
assembly and the trial by jury. -- It the system of taxation by the Parliament
of Great Britain, takes place, what being can be so credulous as to expect the
Assembles of the people will ever meet; and it is confessed, that Admiralty
Courts, disclaiming trials by jury, are necessary to enforce this species of
taxation. Here then are all the essential privileges of an Englishman dependent
on this question, and the real interest of the state is no way concerned in the
contrary scale, since the prosperity of the colonies must ever prove the riches
and glory of England. Nothing but the absurd pride, or narrow ignorance of the
present administration, can be thrown into it. When once this system takes
place, we shall then feel the tyranny and oppression of Governors, with all
their train of dependents, as in the provinces of Rome, which are now quoted as
an example.

Thus much, supposing the Americans right in the dispute (as I believe they
are;) but supposing them wrong, I shall now state their excuse, and see what
heart can condemn them, and retain any claims to humanity.

The question concerning the right to tax the colonies, though clear to those
who are accustomed to think deeply on the principles of free governments, is
difficult to common apprehensions. Montesquieu has observed, "that in despotism
every thing ought to depend on two or three ideas." As for instance, is there
any thing so fit to solve this dispute, as the unity of the British empire --
the supremacy of the legislative authority of Great Britain -- the omnipotence
of Parliament? Is there any man so ignorant, after having heard those sounding
words, as not clearly to comprehend the whole of the controversy? Plodding,
thinking creatures, who are accustomed to consider the complicated privileges
in a free government, from whence the harmony of the whole springs may be
puzzled; but men who have never disturbed their repose with such dry
considerations, can have no doubt on the matter; be that as it may, certain it
is, that the discussion of this most important question was debated in this
assembly by the greatest abilities, after the fullest information that ever
accompanied any political question. The decision was in favor of the
Americans; the stamp-acts was repealed. -- I admit that "principles of
expediency" are alleged as the reason, in the preamble of the bill, but the
men who boldly denied during this discussion, the power of taxing the colonies,
as constitutionally existing in the commons of Great Britain, namely, Lord
Chatham and Lord Camden, (men of as extraordinary talents as ever adorned
society) the one was made prime minister, the other was created a peer, and
Lord High Chancellor of Great Britain, the keeper of the King's conscience! --
What American could have retained any doubt of his cause in the mind of his
Majesty, or the nation, after such a decision? The compromising act soon
followed (for the sake of gratifying a party) violating all the principles of
commerce and policy in the lump-giving draw backs here, exacting duties there,
committing the power and authority of the nation on subjects which never could
produce any effectual revenue, and this in a manner that all men of sense must
ever condemn.

When the Americans saw, by this act of parliament, that the great question was
likely again to return upon them, in the progress of time, though the
greediness, ignorance, or caprice of statesmen, they met the position in its
fly, circuitous, questionable shape; they recurred to their old principles;
they revolted against the preamble; they transmitted petitions; and all
failing, they entered into non-importation agreements; this produced Lord
Hillsborough's circular letter, which I will repeat again, and again, till a
contrary conduct is pursued; for no satisfactory answer can be given about it,
while the present doctrines are avowed. The Americans thus fortified in their
opinions concerning the point of taxation, are unanimous against our power,
from Nova Scotia to Georgia. If there be any doubt on this fact, why not call
Governor Eden? We are told he lately arrived; it would have been becoming to
have produced him; but I call on his relations friends, or any man, to
contradict me in this assertion, "that the Americans are unanimous against this
power of taxation, as lodged in the British Parliament." They are resolved to
resist; and since you have placed them in a situation, where they must either
be rebels or slaves, the blame must lie with those who have drove them to this
dilemma.

In discussing the question of resistance, the gentlemen on the other side have
great advantages. We stand on difficult ground, since, from its nature, it
never can be defined, or admitted as lawful. The first officer of the crown has
fairly expressed my ideas on the subject. The principle should never be
extinguished in any government, much less in a free country; the occasion must
ever be referred to the general feelings of mankind. Now, if depriving a
trading town of its commerce -- if cutting of whole societies from the benefit
of the element which God has given them -- if proceeding to deprive them of the
fishery, their subsistence -- if altering their charter, and annihilating all
their rights, without hearing them in their defense -- if establishing, in its
stead, a new form of government, which leaves all things in confusion -- if
erecting a system of tyranny in their neighborhood, and establishing not
tolerating) all the absurdities of the Roman catholic religion -- trial by jury
dismissed -- babeas corpus denied -- the representatives of the people
determined useless -- inferior duties levied by act of parliament -- in short,
precedents for the violation of ever thing we hold most sacred in this country:
I say, if acts like these can vindicate resistance, the Americans can quote
them, and God and the world must judge between us. For my own part, I consider,
with Lord Summers, "that treason against the constitution is the first species
of that crime." Acts of parliament are sacred things, and yet they may be so
made, grinding the face of mankind, that human nature will revolt at their
severity. Dudley and Empson were hanged for acting -- according to act of
parliament.

I have now stated the arguments which should induce you to pause at least
before you take this irretrievable step. I shall examine next the consequences.

Suppose we should succeed in subduing the Americans, is it not clear from
henceforward that we must govern them by military force? Must not our army be
increased in proportion? While his Majesty retains the power of moving his
troops from one part of his dominions to another, can there be any safety for
the liberties of this country? If the mortification begins at the extremities
will it not soon communicate to the center? Every man acquainted with the
history of nations must foresee the consequences. If we fail in the attempt,
which is the happiest event that can occur what difficulties may not disgust,
irritations, and all the horrors of civil war, enge^der? While the justice and
moderation of this country are blotted from the face of the earth, and the
accumulated expense, when the springs of riches are cut off, must shake public
credit t^ the very center.

The noble Lord has hinted, "if repealing the tea tax would do, he would yield
that," and he speaks even faintly on the power of taxation. If these are his
principles, we are yet more inexcusable. We are going to punish men for
maintaining what we are ready to yield, and to engage the nation in endless
expense, for the sake of a quiddity. Since whether renounced on the principles
of expediency or right, the satisfaction must be equally complete to the
Americans.

But the noble Lord alleges, "that yielding the point of taxation would not
now do." This is conjecture on his part; but at least it would produce this
good effect, we should divide the Americans; we should unite men in this
country, and go to the contest with better hopes of success. The proofs the
noble Lord gives for his opinion are several indiscreet acts of different
meetings since the late confusion in America. Such detail never affects me. I
think no conclusions can be drawn from them -- In all civil wars, when the
people are let loose to reason on government, a thousand absurd doctrines are
broached. Let us apply this to our own country -- let us remember all the
ridiculous circumstances which Hudibras has painted better than I can. But
should the great cause of liberty, in which our ancestors were engaged, suffer
from such circumstances? To their feelings we may trust; on the reasoning of
the multitude there is little dependence. For my own part, I think with
Cardinal De Retz, "that any number above one hundred is at best but a more
mob." [ Here the House felt the expression as too strong.] -- It never could be
my intention to apply the rule to this House, long trained in form and
discipline, though sometimes there are doctrines and proceedings, eyes here,
that would surprise a stranger into this belief.

But the noble Lord says, "Why not petition first, and acknowledge the right,
and then we will grant relief." Have they not petitioned? Is there a means of
supplication and protestation they have not tried? I am convinced they went to
the crown merely as a mode of introducing their petition here. Now you deny
hearing their agents. An honorable gentleman in administration says, "he
wished we had heard their petitions." Do not then condemn them for not
petitioning, till you have declared your resolution to hear them. Can it be
expected the Americans will act on the inuendos of a minister? If you mean
fair, why not declare your intentions by some binding act? After the East India
company, who will trust you? You invited them to petition, under hopes and
declarations, and afterward made use of this very petition, to deprive them
both of their money and their privileges. In the ceded islands you invited men
to settle under the royal proclamation, and then levied four and a half per
cent. on their produce, which precedure has lately been condemned in the courts
of law. In Canada you have been guilty of a greater violation, as liberty is
dearer that property. Here you have despised the royal proclamation, and
forfeited your engagements to mankind. I repeat it again, What man or society
of men can trust you?

The next objection to the Americans is the congress. This is now termed an
illegal meeting. Government here, lay by with great expectation, waiting their
resolves. If they had been favorable to their views, or had any untoward
circumstances broke their union, we should have had much eulogium on the
congress. Now they have come to resolves favorable to the liberties of
mankind, all is abuse. I do not know by what law (except that of common sense)
mankind can be regulated on these occasions. What kind of meeting can that be
called, which was held in this place at the Revolution? Aldermen and old
members of parliament mixing in consultation. The necessity on these occasions
gives rise to the case. You wished to know the sense of the people of America:
Was ever the judgment of a people so fairly taken? First the occasion is
promulgated: The people choose representatives; these choose deputies; the
deputies in congress publish their proceedings, each member returns to his
respective colony, where his conduct is again approved -- No place, no pension,
no bribe, to influence his election, or bias his vote. But even as to the
legality, the manner of meeting is not new; government itself called a congress
in the last war, to apportion the quotas of men and troops.

One gentleman has said, "that our situation is quite new, and there is not
example in history to direct our steps." I say there is a case directly
similar, but we are too conceited to profit from such experience. Philip the
Second and his seventeen provinces are the counterpart of what we are acting.
The debates in his council on sending the Duke of Alva into the Netherlands,
are applicable in every part. He was advised by two sensible men, to repair
thither himself, and hear the complaints of his people, before he came to such
rash resolves; but the majority said, as in this case, that his glory was
compromised. It was not religion only, but taxing without consent of their
states, that brought matters to the last extremity: The Duke of Alva, it is
true, was victorious every where at first, but his cruelties were but sowing
the serpent's teeth. The Gues, the Beggars of the Briel esteemed at that time
infinitely more despicable than the New-Englandmen are represented, gave the
first shock to the power of Spain. In comparing the probability of events, can
any man say Great Britain has such a prospect of victory in the contest, as
Spain might then have expected? Yet we know the event, and how that mighty
empire was rent in pieces. The present resolution hurries us into that
situation, from which there is no retreating. It obliges the Americans
immediately to act. By declaring them in rebellion, they must have recourse to
arms; all negotiation is cut off. -- I think the word rebellion both impolitic
and unjustifiable. I beg to know what paper on your table can vindicate that
term? The first law officer of the crown said, "A number of men committing
treason was rebellion." I differ from him in the definition: According to my
conception of the phrase, they must be in military array, to affect some
military purpose. One hundred men coining money are not in rebellion, though
committing treason. Insurrections to pull down enclosures is not rebellion,
though deemed a constructive levying war. In the case of Purchase and Demerce,
for pulling down the meeting houses, they were convicted of treason, but no one
ever thought of saying the confederates or associates were in rebellion. I
think we should be very cautious how we criminate bodies of men on such
intelligence. I dare say the noble Lord has been deceived himself; but this I
affirm, he has hitherto constantly deceived this house. It appears to me that
no intelligence from General Gage can be depended on. I beg the house will
attend particularly to what I now say, before they engage their lives and
fortunes. It appears General Gage has regularly deceived administration. No
event has turned out as he foretold, or gave reason to hope; the next letter
constantly contradicts the expectations raised in the former. He seems never to
have known what they were about -- no doubt grossly imposed on himself -- but
the facts are undeniable. When he first arrived, he writes the malcontents
were abashed, and the friends of government would soon appear. Next, his
expectations from the assembly were disappointed, and he dissolves them in
surprise: Then, there would be no congress; next, though there would be a
congress, they would differ and disagree: In short, led on, and leading others
by vain expectations, till the last letter, which announces a total
disaffection, and which I believe to be the true state of the provinces.

Singling out the province of Massachusetts Bay, can answer no purpose, but to
expose our partiality. It is the cause of all, and the other colonies can never
be so mean as first to encourage and then desert them before the general right
is settled.

The noble Lord talks next of stopping their fisheries; but he says, "the act
is only to be temporary." Does the noble Lord think he can turn the channels of
trades as easily as he can turn the majorities of this house? The explain the
idea, supposing the New England fisheries stopped, their utensils must waste and
destroy. But, will the English merchant madly increase his stock, and fit out
new ships, if the act is merely temporary? If it is perpetual, the people in
America are ruined. The consequence is, the French must in the end reap the
benefit of all this strange policy.

We are constantly stating the great obligation we have conferred on the
colonies by our former behavior toward them: If it was ever so good, we can
claim no merit from hence in private or public concerns, to do injury in
future. They do not complain of your former behavior, but they say, you have
altered this very system from whence you would now derive their submission.

There are two arguments of the noble Lord which I must remark upon before I
sit down; the first is, "the comparative view of taxation between this country
and the colonies, according to the number of inhabitants." His Lordship says,
"we pay about twenty-five shillings a head, and they pay about sixpence." Who
is there so unacquainted with political arithmetic as not to know that the
small sum people pay in taxation is often a proof of their poverty, and a large
sum a proof of their prosperity, by demonstrating the riches from the greatness
of the consumption? Let this kind of reasoning be applied to Ireland and
Scotland, where we know the multitude to be poor in comparison to the
inhabitants of London, whom we know to be rich; besides, if the colonist does
not pay in palpable cash from his own hand, does not he pay all the taxes on
the four millions of manufactures he receives, and part of those taxes on the
raw materials he sends hither?

The other argument is still more extraordinary. The noble Lord says. "if we
fail in our attempt of forcing America, we shall still be in the same situation
we are in at present." What! after our armies have been disgraced, our
fellow subjects destroyed, all the irritation of a civil war, public
confidence, and fair opinion lost? Does the noble Lord think he will be in the
same situation himself? I really speak it with regret; for personally I have
much regard for the noble Lord, and particularly because I perceive, from his
faint manner of stating his propositions, that they are not the dictates of his
own mind, and that they are forced on him.

I cannot see my other memorandums, and therefore I shall conclude by heartily
concurring with the noble Lord who moved for the recommitment of this address.

Honorable TEMPLE ^TTERELL's SPEECH on the Employment of 2000 additional Sea
men.
I Rise up under a number of disadvantages, and shall scarce be able to express
my sentiments without much agitation and embarrassment, a novice as I am at
political disquisitions, and attempting, (from a seat which till this hour I
might not call my own) to speak on a subject of such high import, in the
presence, and possibly against the opinion of the most experienced statesmen in
any country of the universe. -- But, Sir, it has been earnestly recommended to
me, as well by the electors of the borough of which I have the honor to be a
representative, as by several other persons of respectable consideration, that
I will exert the utmost of my humble endeavors and faculties, toward the
establishing of peace, and conciliating the affections of the American colonies
with the parent-state of Great Britain, and to promote the joint happiness of
both divisions of this mighty empire, on the firm basis of equity and mutual
good offices: and I should hold it an unpardonable omission of duty were I to
remain now silent, especially as I was precluded, by the dependence before
Parliament of a controverted return, from declaring my disposition toward the
oppressed colonists, at the opening of the present session, when a speech from
the throne of the most inimical tendency to America, and therefore the most
alarming and dangerous tendency to the whole British realm, received the thanks
of this House. I was under the same preclusion when commerce here stood a
dejected supplicant, in just apprehension from the impending storm. Well, Sir,
might she be alarmed, to see a pilot at the helm, as the winds and the billows
arise, who, rather than part with the guns, throws the merchandise overboard:
save them, Sir, he may, by so costly a sacrifice, but not for jubilee or
triumph; they shall be saved for signals of distress, and to solemnize the
obsequies of your empire.

The merchants were not then to be heard lest their candid story should set in
the proper point of view those insidious fragments of official letters laid on
your table. What human understanding could cement such a mangled correspondence
together, so as to derive any clear accurate knowledge of the real condition or
sentiments of the Americans? -- Whatsoever might extenuate offenses, excuse
error, and restore perfect amity between the two countries, did the partial
hand of administration wickedly suppress, while in too glaring a light was
exhibited every fact that could serve to widen the breach, and inflame the
passions, and blow up a faint, luckless spark of animosity to the full
combustion and horrors of a civil war! -- These misrepresentations however
answered the ends proposed, for both Houses were blindly entrapped to give
their sanction to as sanguinary a scroll (in the form of an address) as was
ever laid by a prostitute senate at the feet of deluded majesty. -- Did not
your ancestors, Sir, manfully fight, did not some of them heroically fall, to
preserve those constitutional Rights of the subject to every Briton, which you
have not by one vote pledged yourself, at the hazard of life and fortune to
subvert and annihilate throughout the better part of the whole British monarch?

I do not conceive it possible that any man here present can feel as he ought,
be conscious of a participation of the least participation, in the
superintendence of the commonwealth, and remain a mere tranquil observer, when
so weighty, so interesting a subject comes before you; a subject, on the issue
of which perhaps his own individual happiness or misery, doubtless the
happiness or misery of his nearest posterity, will depend.

With what hebetude, Sir, must the blood circulate through his veins! What must
his definition be of an ignominious supineness and apathy! -- This is not a
debate of slow animation, in which few persons are concerned, and of limited
influence; we are now to decide upon the fate of millions through a long series
of ages, and the part which every man shall take on this occasion must stamp
him with characters indelible through all eternity -- a patriot or a parricide.

It Is, Sir, from the collisions of controversy that those radiant sparks are
struck out by which truth lights her sacred torch -- nor have I less
expectation from those gentlemen who are but just initiated into parliamentary
business, than from your veteran politicians "deep on whose front engraven (to
use the phrase of Milton) deliberation sits and public care." Such veterans
might indeed be our surest guides, were we now about to agitate questions wrapped
up in subdolous Machiavelian mystery, and only to be developed by the acutest
abstract reasoning. The present juncture, Sir, requires only a well principled
heart, and a head moderately conversant with the nature of men and things.

It is not, I own, I feel, given to a young member of this august assembly to
deliver his ideas with that method, that guarded correctness, that unagitated
confidence which long habitude of speaking usually supplies; but will he, Sir
yield with less ductility to the dictates and honest zeal of inward conscience?
He comes among you at least with a judgment unbiassed: he has not pledged
himself to any partial junto, whose maxims and interests he is at all events to
adopt for the measure of his political career: he has not stood forth an
accomplice to any of those manifold mischiefs and blunders which have
heretofore been committed in the administration of your colonies: he has had no
share in inflaming the evil by temporary anodynes; nor has he treated the
imperial concerns of that wide-stretched continent as only accessory to, and of
trivial account when compared with his own private schemes of ambition and
aggrandisement. Upon the whole, Sir, I can but thinks him rather the more
likely to execute the share of such important award committed to his
discretion, as becomes an upright delegate of the people at large, heedless
whether his conduct therein may quadrate with the narrow, selfish views of this
or that set of men who are candidates for titles or power: not but that I have
the satisfaction to see here present some characters animated with the true
patriotic spirit, who have long and worthily been seated within these walls; on
whose eminent talents, on whose approved integrity, America rests her best hope.

Such gentlemen as come within the scope of any of those disadvantageous
allusions I have just thrown out, will consider, that a well-timed recession
from error claims the next praise to a perfect exemption therefrom; they will
no longer endeavor to palliate a dreadful disease, which, if once arrived at a
full paroxism, it will baffle the Esculapian skill of their expertest
state-doctors to cope with.

Our present sagacious rulers had, it seems, drawn their political clue in that
quarter of the globe to so Gordian a tie, that despairing to revolve by
patience and sober wisdom through the several implications their hands had
wrought, they took a summary recourse to the edge of the sword. Sir, their
sword-law will best agree with the arbitrary principles and system of
government applied to almost every department of the state by that flagitious
confederacy which has latently presided over the councils and arcana of the
cabinet ever since the accession of our present most gracious sovereign.

I say, Sir, that these occult dictators to the royal conscience should prefer
the sword-law, I am not at all astonished; but that the ostensible adviser, a
man of profound judgment, and the clearest penetration; a man whom the most
slanderous of his enemies allow to possess the tenderest feelings of social
affection, to be even prodigal of the practices as well as professions of
humanity, that he, Sir, should with a ruthless composure, adopt and carry into
execution their bloody mandates, may well create general consternation and the
deepest concern.

It was pronounced by a consummate minister, who once held the reins of
government with so much honor to himself, and transcendant glory to the whole
empire of Britain, that the Canadian America was conquered in Germany.

It is, it seems, by the German policy of dominion, which our own clan-bred
feudists are ever prone to expose, that British America is to be reduced to
vassalage: but let the all-potent minions beware, lest while they are bowing
the stubborn necks of these colonists to the yoke, they find not their own
necks bow to the block of an executioner.

Sir the far more considerable part of the people of England do now wish us to
use temper, moderation, and forbearance toward America. "Dignos esse qui
Romani ^iant (said the illustrious consul to the senate, of certain tributaries
in allegiance to the Roman eagles) eos, qui nihil praeterquam de liberate
cogitent."

Sir, when the two most renowned republics of ancient time had long contended
for universal empire, and victory over many a well-fought field had held almost
an equal balance then it was the rigid censor (M. Cato) denounced that
memorable judgment, "Delenda est Carthago." Sir, the Carthagenians were the
natural rivals of the trade and glory of Rome; they had in cool blood inhumanly
put to death one of the most perfect heroes and patriots her annals could
boast: in their national character they were perfidious to a proverb; and they
early led their children to the altar to lisp assent to solemn adjuration of
eternal warfare and vengeance against Rome. In short, Sir, the further
existence of these Africans was become quite incompatible with the peace and
security of the Roman commonwealth.

The words, Delenda est Carthago, were, in the reign of our Charles the Second,
borrowed by a member if the other House of Parliament, the famous Earl of
Shaftesbury, in the height of passionate resentment against the Hollanders:
but, Sir, though the Hollanders had to the most substantial injuries added the
provoking insult of sailing up to the emporium of your commerce, with brooms at
their mast heads; though they had by many an inveterate combat on the ocean
brought your marme power, and consequently our very being as people, to as
desperate a crisis as ever befell Rome during the rage of the punic wars, yet,
Sir, it is a well known anecdote of that day, there was scarce a peer in the
assembly but stood aghast, and shuddered at the unchristian severity of the
sentence.

Delenda est Carthago has been applied for the third time: it has, Sir, been
recently and publicly applied, by an avowed zealous partizan of the present
administration of your government, to our fellow subjects of America, and the
news will, I fear, ere long, reach your colonies.

I am not master of language sufficient in energy to give the due comment to
such an expression: but, Sir, should it be here uttered in sobriety, and calmly
listened to, might you not be apt to imagine yourself feated amidst the
deputies of the Indian tribes, near the interior lakes of that continent, and
sacrisicing to the demon of revenge, rather than with the deputies of the free,
polished natives of the British isles, in their imperial seat of legislation?

I can indeed easily conceive that the gentleman alluded to, Mr. Van.
was rather more forward, rather more ingenious, than the chieftians of his
cause will thank him for: they hardly could mean, that the sinal catastrophe of
this their tragic plot should be discovered just at the opening of the very
first act.

It was a noble sentiment of Fenclon (Archbishop of Cambray) that "he loved his
friend equal to himself: his country far better than his friend and himself;
mankind in general beyond all put together."

What that ami^ble prelate makes Mentor say, on revealing a celestial form to
the son of Ulvsses, who had just attained to years of manhood) may afford and
allegory to assist the British legislature at some futu^^ period, in the safest
and sagest conduct toward, (...). "I have guided you through rocks and
quicksands, through the ensangumed battle, and the various calamities incident
to the human species: I have taught you, through forcible experience, the good
and the bad maxims by which government may be carried on: it is now time that
you be fully emancipated. Love your fellow creatures, endeavor to renew the
golden age; avoid effeminacy, profuseness and ostentation; let simplicity be
your best ornaments: on virtue and your own just actions rest your chief
security, pure liberty, peace, delightful abundance, and unsullied glory ever
attend you!

I am sensible, Sir, that I have too long withheld the attention of the House
from persons of far superior weight and abilities. I shall therefore at a
future day hope for the same indulgence that has now been shown me, while I
urge, that to compel the Americans by a military force to acknowledge the
paramount and unbounded authority of Parliament in the taxation of their
property, property created by their intellects and industry, is neither just,
politic, nor practicable; a measure totally repugnant to the liberal notions of
rectitude which have ever characterized the happy natives of England, and
irreconcilable with the spirit of those very rules and institutes, by which the
three estates of this realm hold existence.

Colonel ACLAND's SPEECH on the Report from the Committee on the 20th of
February, concerning the American Affairs.
I Hope the House will pardon me, if I beg their attenttention a few moments,
and but for a few moments; for I should make a very ill return to the
favorable indulgence shown me on a former day, if I presumed to trouble it
long on this. Uninformed, unacquainted, unexpecting a proposition of so
extraordinary a nature, as that laid before us by the noble Lord on that day. I
felf myself forced from a seat of silence, which perhaps would then have, and
might still better become me; but which I should have thought, under such
circumstances, it would have been shameful to have continued. After having
maturely considered the resolution, whether, on the principles of accommodation
with American demands, or on the principles of enforcing the authority of this
country, I think it nugatory and humiliating. Does the noble Lord really think,
that a people who deny all right of taxation will be satisfied with having the
mode of taxation left to them? Does he not think, the Americans will feel
themselves as effectually put under contribution as any town or country ever
yet was, in any state of open war? Will he presume to call that an amicable
plan, which asks for contribution at the mouth of your cannon and point of your
bayonets? Sir, by holding out these terms of accommodation, ridiculous in
themselves and nugatory in their effect, by making the first offer to treat
with those men you have just declared rebels, you will lower the dignity of
this country; you will bring your government into contempt, and, by the insult
of the offer, irritate, not appease, that spirit which your are now about
publicly to declare to the whole world you tremble to encounter. This, Sir, I
am confident, is the light the Americans will see it in; and these are the
principles on which they are expected to accommodate.

I will now, Sir, beg permission of the House to make a few remarks on the
resolution itself, and for this purpose I must beg leave to refer it. Sir, I
would beg leave to ask of the noble Lord, what consequences he means to draw
from these words of the resolution, "According to the condition, circumstances,
and situation of such province or colony, for contributing their proportion,
shall be approved; and I hope, if my questions should not appear as pertinent
to the House as they do to me, it will be recollected under how many
disadvantages a young man, unacquainted with parliamentary proceedings,
unacquainted with parliamentary language, must labor. Before I give my assent
to any measure, I ought to inform myself what is meant to be founded on that
measure, and what consequences are meant to be drawn from it; for by these
means alone I can judge of the propriety or impropriety of the measure. I do
not doubt, therefore, that the noble Lord will answer me with as much candor,
as I shall ask with diffidence. Now the words I would wish to draw the
attention of the House to are these: "According to the condition,
circumstances, and situation of such province for contributing their
proportion, shall be approved. Sir, the questions I would ask are these, Is
this proportion to be annually offered by the colonies, and annually refused or
accepted by Parliament? Or is it in the first instance to be settled for a
certain period of years, or is it to be settled for ever?

The questions demand a serious answer: in the first case, you perpetuate the
feeds of discord, and lay the foundation of a dispute that can never end, but
in a total convulsion of the British empire. In the second case, adopting a
temporary expedient, you withdraw your own shoulders from a burden you have no
resolution to bear, leaving the great point in dispute as unsettled as you
found it, leaving it to arise at that fixed period, whenever that period shall
arrive, to be the cause of new disturbances, new quarrels, and fresh bloodshed.
If you settle it for ever, do consider what a miserable bargain you are
contending for. The Americans are supposed to double in twenty years; it is but
reasonable to suppose, that their wealth and opulence will increase in
proportion; that, therefore, what would be a reasonable proportion now, will,
in a few years, become comparatively with their increased wealth, a miserable
pittance.

I must here take notice of an argument the noble Lord has enforced more than
once, with great weight; it is, that these terms are such as should be offered,
after the most complete victory. For the sake of the argument, I will agree
with the noble Lord, and therefore conclude, that they are improper to offer
before the victory. That, Sir, which is generosity, which is magnanimity after
victory, is timidity and foul disgrace before it. There may be situations, Sir,
in which states may be found where they cannot, without certain ruin, acqu^es^e
even in just claims; there are situations too, in which states may grant more
than is asked, and gave more than is desired, with honor, security and
advantage. The first of these situations precede great commotions, the second
succeed complete victory. I remember, Sir, the Romans, in a war they had with
the Italian states, granted them, when conquered, those privileges which, with
a firmness peculiar to their nation, with a firmness that led them to universal
empire, they haughtily refused them before their contest.

I will now tell the noble Lord the effect these propositions have had on the
minds of the people. I will not take upon me to say what confidence the people
reposed in administration before, but I will take upon me to say, that whatever
confidence they might repose in administration before, it is now entirely done
away; they no longer expect to find firmness, resolution and unanimity in the
councils of the King's servant, they have seen them weak, irresolute
dis^^^^mous; for the reception these propositions met with within these walls.
I will appeal to the apparent, undeniable, unequivocal effects they had at
their first opening, on the members of this House. I will recall to the noble
Lord's memory, the feelings he must have had, during those awful moments in
which the common sense of the House stood amazed at the propositions that were
held out to her, when (...), surprise distraction, was seated on every
countenance wh^^ the doctrine held out to us, was so new and unheard of, (...)
contrary to every principle we have been thought to adopt, that no man could
guess at the opinion of his neighbor, when those, who had relied on that
firmness, which the noble Lord had so often and so publicly pledged, turned
pale with shame and disappointment, when within the space of a few awful
moments, the dignity of government and the honor of this country were given up
for ever. That this was the immediate effect, I believe every gentleman that
hears me and was present on that very extraordinary day must admit. I have
expressed myself warmly, I felt and do still feel my disappointment warmly; I
estimated the noble Lord's public wisdom, prudence, and above all his political
resolution, at as high a rate as I honored, and do still honor, those
privated virtues which adorn his character, and which shine illustriously pure
amidst a (...) and a dissipated age.

I will address a few words to the honorable Lord, and have done; I will tell
him that decision and resolution, even when employed to but indifferent
purposes, render their possessor respectable; I will speak with tenderness, I
will not tell the noble Lord what effect, even with the best intentions, the
contrary qualities will have.

I will conclude with telling the noble Lord, that if he adopts a decided line
of conduct, he will have decided friends, and he may still stand on firm
ground; but that if he continues to waver between both, he will fall to the
ground unsupported by either.

The Hon. HENRY TEMPLE LUTTRELL, a Junior Son of SIMON, Lord IRNHAM.
UPON a former occasion I presumed to state a few of my sentiments of the
House, relative to the war impending over the Americans, because I was sure I
could not answer it to my own feelings. I thought I could not answer it to my
country, had I neglected at the very earliest moment that might offer, to
declare my utter abhorrence of those unconstitutional, arbitrary, and
diabolical projects, devised by his Majesty's ministers for the destructin of
that unhappy people.

I flatter myself a certain illustrious character may soon be left out of this
opprobious list of projectors; there seems to be a divine gleam of radiance
coming round his temples; and I foresee almost, if not altogether, as
mavelous a conversion into the right path, as that which happened in days of
yore to the great persecutor of the christian followers on the plains of
Damascus.

To what black storm in the political firmament we are indebted for this sudden
change, I, Sir, move in too contracted a sphere to discover; but the noble Lord
will allow me to tender him my hearty congratulations, that he is at length
awakened to that clemency, and to that justice, which will best agree with the
innate temper of his heart. There is a long line of statesmen seated in firm
array not far from your chair, who have, ever since the birth of this
parliament, uniformly shrunk (and I am sure their consciences always must
shrink, whatsoever their politics or their eloquence may do) from the great
American question; they have wished to defer to the latest hour possible, all
discussions of this critical topic, in hopes, as they term it, to learn what is
actually doing on the other side of the Atlantic. Sir, I can inform them, there
rises not a sun in that hemisphere, but sets to such additional grievances and
outcries, as the most soothing future concessions, the most exemplary future
sacrifices on your part, will scarce be able to atone for.

However grating to the ears of some individuals the subject may be, I shall
take the liberty, with the indulgence of the House, to affirm, that these
measures of compelling the Americans by force of arms to acknowledge the
paramount and unlimited authority of parliament, in the taxation of their
property, a property created by their faculties, and by their industry, are not
just, are not politic, are not practicable, but a traitorous infringement on
the constitution of the colonies, which rests upon the same fundamental
principles that uphold the property and uphold the franchises of every native
of this island.

Sir, I ever will contend, that the united parliaments of England and Scotland
cannot legally impose a tax on the subjects in any other part of the British
dominions, without the consent of such subjects, either by themselves in
person, or by their representatives. Let the champions of despotism avail
themselves of all their knowledge and sophistry, I will venture to maintain
this proposition, not arrogantly presuming on my talents or skill to manage it,
but on its own clear intrinsic merits, and the conviction that to every
dispassionate mind must naturally result from its investigation.

The coertion proposed militates against the privileges of all emigrants of
their description, from the time of the patriarchal disjunctions to this day;
emigrants who carried with them as their penates) certain inherent rights
natural to mankind, immutable and unalienable; confirmed to them for an
heritage, by that blessed constitution of S^xon contexture under which they
were (...).

Laws established on first necessity and impotence between them and the present
state, either by express or r^cit assent, were not of an universal, indol^^ite
obligation, they were of a fiduciary nature (of the nature of a trust) adapted
to the comparative state of the contracting parties, for the purpose of
temporary expedience, and must of course vary conformable to such other
relative alterations as lapse of time and the vicissitude of human affairs may
effect.

Acts of parliaments, or other deplomatic titles, may be produced to show a
formal, and perhaps uncontested assumption of power at some given period of
time, but will not countervail the primeval and indefeasible rights of mankind,
whenever such rights shall be asserted by a clear major part of the community.
On this ground, and this ground only, rests our spiritual reform under Harry
the VIIIth, and that most glorious of all civil revolutions -- the Revolution
by which James II. lost the throne of these realms.

Those gentlemen who plead for the omnipotence of parliaments, and the
infallibility of their codes, should advert to the many absurd, contradictory
positions and doctrines laid down during the contention of the several
pretenders of the Plantagenet line, and afterward of the heiresses of the
House of Tuder.

In fact, Sir, your statutes of those days borrowed too frequently their maxims
and complexion from whatsoever brow might happen to be encircled with the regal
diadem. In the reign of King Richard II. a law passed to transfer the power of
both houses of parliament to twelve barons. By an act under one of the Henry's,
the King's proclamation, with the consent of his pravy-council, was
thenceforward to carry with it the force and efficacy of a law of the land. And
we all know that the parliament of 1641 voted itself perpetted, never to be
dissolved nor prorogued but by its own consent; and the act read by an
honorable member to the committee on the present resolution, and which he
treated with so much deference, because it declared the people of the
Massachusetts Bay in a state of revolt, was passed by this immaculate
parliament.

Now, Sir, let us suppose (what in these our incorrupt days there can be no
reason to apprehend) that a statute should be procured by some future minister
and minion of the Sovereign. vesting the whole legislative as well as executive
power in the crown, totally to abolish both houses of parliament; would such
statute be valid and binding on the subject throughout Great Britain and
America? All persons have natural rights -- a free people have legal rights,
independent, of parliamentary edicts, and of which no form of government
whatever can deprive them. Laws not founded on constitutional justice, are in
themselves null and void; nor are the makers of them legislators, but usurpers.

A very wise and learned writer (Judge Blackstone) has in his commentaries the
following passage: "If the sovereign power advance with gigantic strides to
threaten desolation to a state, mankind will not be reasoned out of the
feelings of humanity, nor will sacrifice their liberty in a scrupulous
adherence to those political maxims, which were originally established to
preserve that liberty."

If the powers and pretensions of a few adventurers and fugitives, occupying
about two centuries ago a small corner of a grac^less desert, and possessed of
none of the good things of this life, are to ascertain the powers and
pretensions of three millions of people spread over a land flowing with milk
and honey, and a thousand leagues in circumference, they may, with the same
justice and propriety, be brought two centuries hence to ascertain the rights
and pretensions of thirty millions, when the inhabitants of this diminutive
isle shall scarce reach a fourth part of that number: neither can I own such
disparity in the calculation of increase to be at all exaggerated, if we
consider the various drains from this country, and the daily influx of persons
of both sexes at the very meridian of life into these inviting regions; besides
new settlers usually restrict themselves to hunting and agriculture, to toil
which afford vigor to the body, and enterprise to the mind. They live on
plain, wholesome diet; their progeny is healthful, and of boundless increase;
whereas in nations that have reached their full zenith of luxury, the mass of
the people are occupied at sedentary arts and manufactures, drawing in, from
morn to eve, an impure, confined atmosphere, or brooding over unwholesome
furnaces: hence the vital stamina are hurt, the appetites soon appaled, the
spirits easily depressed; they become enfeebled ere the sand of their mortal
glass be half run out; their offspring is sapless and emasculate.

America has been loudly charged with ingratitude toward the parent country,
from whom she received protection during the late conflict of war. It Is not
quite clear how far the balance of that account is in her disfavour: however,
she cannot be so ignorant of the real springs of war or peace, as to persuade
herself that your numerous embattled legions, under triumphant fleets sent to
her coasts, were supplied purely from motives of parental affection, or
sympathetic benevolence. Had, Sir, that vast territory been planted with
Portuguese scior^s, instead of those from your own stock, ponderating as the
political scales of Europe then were, would you have not afforded to a people,
in their natural and moral character as far from unison with yourselves as
discord is from harmony, an equal supply of men and treasure? Remember, Sir,
your prowess at the eve of that same war, near the banks of the Tagus.

The love or enmity of one people to another, cannot be estimated by their
occasional alliances, compacts, or guarantees, as a body politic. It is but a
century ago that our English brigades served with unparallelled ardor in the
army of that arch-enemy to civil and religious liberty, Lewis XIV. of France;
the execrated revocator of the edict of Nantz; the aspirer to universal
despotism. We served, Sir, against a people, whose tolerance and charity of
religion, whose whole system and freedom of government we at that very time
held in emulative veneration; a people whose assistance we supplicated and
obtained, scarce twenty years after, to deliver us from monarchical tyranny.

Such coertion were highly impolitic, because it is from the prosperity, peace,
and contentment of her colonies, that resources of wealth and laurels of honor
are won to a mother country. History teaches us, that populousness and
affluence are the product of that clime alone, where the people may reap in
security a full harvest of their labor; where they have affluence in their
leaders and governors; where no exactions are inflicted by an alien hand; where
the municipal, if not the imperial jurisdiction, together with the power of
levying taxes, are vested in substitutes of their own free choice or
approbation.

That saying of a despot, " Oderint dum metuant," may be applicable to the
swarthy sons of the opposite division of the globe; but, Sir, it will never
accord with the sentiments of our brethren in America.

Threats and violence used against hearts of the same sturdy temper with your
own, must induce the most calamitous events to both parties. There will be
seeds of equal courage and perseverance found in one battle as in the other,
with this difference at the onset, that the arm of the aggrieved is usually
braced to bolder, more decisive efforts of rage and despair, than that of the
aggressor. -- " Aquiloe non generant columbus." Let us, Sir, rather rejoice
that our breed has not degenerated; that these colonists have a sense of
rational freedom, becoming the sons of such high mettled progenitors.

Ill would it answer your purpose to bring their bodies under a short-lived
subjection, and to leave impressed upon their minds an unabating rancour and
aptness for revolt.

Revenge is an unchristian passion, yet how rarely do we find the human soul
possessed of a sublimer heroism, without this alloy!

Neither, Sir, am I altogether unacquainted with the peo^^^ of whom I am now
speaking. Curiosity once led me to travel many hundreds of miles along their
flourishing and hospitable provinces. I found in most of them the Spartan
temperance, in many the urbanity of Athens; and, notwithstanding the base and
groundless imputations on their spirit, which the cankered tongue of prejudice
and slander has with so licentious a virulence here poured forth against them,
they will, I am confident, if set to the proof, evince the Roman magnanimity,
ere Rome fell under sceptered usurpation. But, Sir, if a foreign enemy should
appear at your gates, and you need their assistance, will there then be found
among them many a Coriolanus? He stands single as a prodigy of forgiveness, in
the annals of a people whose attachment to their native land was carried to the
utmost height of enthusiasm. How soon that foreign enemy may appear at your
gates, I know not. According to the horological predictions of a most
enlightened state soothsayer, we have about seven years more of profound
tranquillity with the House of Bourbon to trust to; but, from the symptoms of
our domestic distraction, and the improved state of the government and finances
of our neighbors, I should judge it prudent to be somewhat better provided
than we are at present for an early rupture; not entirely to dismantle our
ports and our coasts of soldiers and seamen, sent to immolate the martyrs to
liberty of their own flesh and blood, on the distant continent of America.

It has been made evident to you, that a defection of the northern colonies
will soon bring on the complete ruin of your West India settlements, which
cannot elsewhere affordably provide themselves with cattle, lumber, and diverse
other articles requisite for the support of a plantation.

Let us turn our eyes to the inland trading towns here at home; those large
iron founderies which used to supply the anchors of commerce and implements for
husbandry and the ingenious arts, and now set at work in moulding the sword and
the bayonet to enslave America. From the former commissions there accrued
constant returns of profit, and numberless comforts; from the latter, what can
be expected but poverty, dejection, and mourning! Peace with America will make
your thousands of manufacturers and artisans a thriving, obedient people; war
with America will make them idle, profligate, and tumultuary. In short, the
first open hostilities committed by your troops on that continent, will realize
to the race of man, from one extremity of the earth to the other, more fatal
evils than were even contained in the fabled box of Pandora.

It is well known, through melancholy observation, drawn from the fate of the
Assyrian, Persian, and Roman empires, that national societies, as well as the
individual mortals of whom those societies are composed, have their nonage,
their adult vigor, and their decline. Whatsoever share of indulgence and
independency Great Britain shall, in this her florid and athletic stage,
generously bestow on her rising colonies, they will, no doubt, amply repay her
in some future generation, when she is verging toward that awful goal which
must close her race of glory.

The military coertion of America will be impracticable* What has been the fate
of your famous bill passed in the laft session of the deceased parliament? I
mean, Sir, the Boston port bill, and the bill for altering the charter of
Massachusets-bay. America, as an earnest of her triumph over the future labors
for which envy and malice may reserve her, has, like another Hercules in the
cradle, already grappled with those two serpents sent for her destruction.
Neither shall we be long able to sustain the unhallowed war at so remote a
distance; -- unexplored deserts, wood-land ambuscades, latitudes to which few
of our soldiery have been seasoned; the southern provinces scarce to be endured
in the summer months, the northern provinces not approachable in the winter
season; -- shipwrecks, pestilence, famine. The unrelenting inveteracy and
carnage of York and Lancaster, will here be joined to all the elementary
hardships and maladies of a bigot crusade. Shall not such dreadful aeras in our
earlier chronicle, serve us for beacons at this perilous crisis? Those rash
expeditions indeed, undertaken by a few martial zealots on misconceived piety,
began to decline at the death of the hot-brained, savage-hearted King, under
whom they were first enterprized; and the sluices of kindred blood, which had
long inundated the land in the red and white roses, were at length happily put
a stop to, by a single matrimonial contract. Now, Sir, who can look forward to
a probable epoch in the red volume of time, when the sword drawn in this
quarrel shall be sheathed in peace! I can see no end, till slaughter,
proscription, extirpation, shall totally have annihilated either one or the
other people.

Far be it from me to anticipate by conjecture to either country so dreadful a
sentence; but, Sir, without a gift of preternatural foresight, I may remark,
that there are features in the aspect of infant America, which denote at
maturer years a most colossal force. The Helvetic and Flemish confederacies
have demonstrated what extraordinary obstacles a small band of insurgents may
surmount in the cause of liberty. The Helvetic confederacy consisted of a few
straggling peasants, bannered against a mighty Prince; yet firmness and
desperation supplied that energy, which the best disciplined numbers could not
resist.

The tragic scenes of Numanti^, and of Saguntum, show to how dire a catastrophe
a spirited people will devote themselves, sooner than submit to an unjust
dominion. It appears from one of the American letters of a late date brought to
your table, that the inhabitants of Boston were inclined to copy in part these
dire examples; that they meditated to abandon the town with their wives and
families, and the reducing it to ashes.

Did not we ourselves give a very striking proof at the commencement of the
12th century, to what an incendiary height the flame of vengeance might reach,
when we invited over, and received into the very center of this island, a whole
army of Frenchmen to aid us against a tyrant monarch and his iniquitous
counselors? We owe perhaps that sacred palladium of our liberty, Magna Charta,
as much to a Dauphin of France, as to a King of England.

The Americans allege, that what they now contend for is that reasonable
portion of liberty with which they were chartered as their birthright, not by
any earthly potentate, but by the King of Kings, "to make their lives happy, in
the possession of which liberty they do now hourly invoke that King of Kings,
or to make their death glorious in its just defense."

What is the aim and scope of the resolution before you? To lure some of the
less refractory provinces of America, to dissociate from, and betray their
fellow sufferers; to join in raising a contribution throughout one half of the
colonies, to support your armaments and outrages against the other half, with a
view to annihilate trade, cut off every natural channel of livelihood and
subsistence, and butcher the disobedient; and how are these seceders to be
recompensed for such signal perfidy? Why, by a temporary exercise of certain
empty forms and modes of taxation, confirming at the same time a right in the
crown and Parliament of Great Britain, to fix the gross amount of all
continental subsidies whatsoever; that is, in fact, they are to be still
subject to a ministerial majority in this House, which may levy imposts on
them, not by any fair scale of proportion, to the burden laid on the mother
country, but the demand may perhaps be carried beyond their abilities, or they
may be liable to the discharge of an immense national debt. By way of earnest,
however, against the numerous abuses in future to which this curious plan lies
open, they small instantly repose entire faith and confidence in the present
set of the King's Ministers at Westminister, so remarkable for consistency,
lenity, and wisdom.

The noble Lord on the other side of the House puts me in mind of King Arthur,
in our modern dramatic mask, where that first of the British worthies stands
balancing between Grimbald and Philadel. He has just caught a glimpse of the
cloven foot of the infernal fiend by whose dazzling snares and incantations he
has been thus long fascinated, and is turning to the fair, heavenly spirit, who
would guide him into the ways of happiness and honor. Let him not stop short,
but pursue the only tract that can save his country -- perhaps save himself
from perdition.

I should be as strenuous an advocate for the just authority of parliament as
any man; but I think we ought heartily and effectually to relinquish all vain
pretenses to supreme sovereignty, in cases where they are not maintainable on
principles of justice, of sound policy, or the constitution of the land.

If you persist in pride and error, what will be the consequence? Intestine
enmities will be increased -- devastation and havoc must ensue.

When questions of such weight and magnitude as these now in agitation,
concerning America, shall come before you, every member ought to reflect, that
the fate of a whole nation may possibly depend on his single vote.

Whosoever gives the power of oppression, is in fact a tyrant -- whosoever
gives the power of murder, is in fact an assassin.

I am against this resolution, because I think, that so far from extinguishing
the flame, it will only throw oil upon it to aggravate its fury; and, however
specious, however conciliatory, it may seem at first sight, when it comes to be
analyzed on the other side of the water (fashioned as it now stands) it cannot
possibly have any other construction put upon it, than that of adding insult to
injury.

Mr. HARTLEY's SPEECH on the MOTION for reading the Bill, for restraining the
New England Fishery Bill.
HE moved, that the following clause be inserted in the bill, viz. "Provided
always, and be it further enacted, that nothing in this act contained shall
extend, or be construed to extend, to prohibit the importation into any or
either of the said colonies or provinces, of fuel, corn, meal, flour, or other
victual brought coastwife from any part of America." This clause, said he,
cannot be objected to, even by the most vindictive spirit, against the four
provinces of New England, who are the objects of this bill, as it is extracted
from the Boston port bill of the last year. The lenity or humanity of which was
never so much as pretended, even by its advocates. There cannot be a reason why
you should throw away this year, the little share of humanity which you had the
last; more especially, as we are come to discover, and even to acknowledge, by
the votes of this House, that we have proceeded hitherto, in this business with
America, with rashness, mi^judgment and precipitation. The vote I allude to is
passed but a few days since; which says, or pretends to say, that it would have
been proper (that is the term) to have proceeded in a way of asking a supply of
the Americans, by the constitutional way of requisitions, before proceeding to
compulsory or forcible methods. Having confessed ourselves wrong in the
foundation, it is but equal justice to our rellow subjects of meric^ to
suppose, that those riots and resistance would not have happened, if we had not
begun with them con^essedly in an unconstitutional way. Surely then, it is not
a time to add to the severity of our acts, in proportion as we find, that we
have been unjust in the outset, and that they have been less to blame. It is
surely but a little matter to ask, that you would not be more severe or cruel
toward America, who have never been heard on their defense this year, than you
were the last. Besides, what construction can the town of Boston put upon your
measures, if you refuse the clause now offered? They will be besieged, as in
actual war with a foreign enemy. General Gage has fortified the Neck which
joins Boston to the continent, by which he may intercept provisions; and by
this bill you proclaim the same intention by sea. Do you expect, that they will
submit to be starved, in passive obedience? What resource have they left, but
resistance; and, perhaps, to take advantage of the smallness of numbers of
General Gage's troops, before they are reinforced; for this act puts it out of
all doubt, that you mean to proceed to all extremities. I have been informed,
by those who know best the temper of the Americans, and I hope and believe that
they will hold out their patience to the utmost, and that they will not strike
the first blow: but what is the difference to them, whether you strike the
first blow by the musket or the sword, or, to equal effect, by famine? The
refusal of this clause will be a declaration on your part, that you mean to
bring famine upon them, to the utmost of your power, and therefore a warning to
them of the mercy which they are to expect at your hands. As to the bill in
general, it has been so ably debated by my friends near me, that I shall only
add two remarks: this bill, by destroying the North-American fishery, not only
destroys that nursery of seamen, but will disable the provinces, under the
prohibition, from the means of paying their debts to this country, who
therefore will finally be the sufferers; and when the next year comes, and you
find this consequence, you will then turn accusers of the North-Americans for
not paying their debts, and you will add, according to the usual falsehoods
toward the Americans, that they never intended to pay their debts; and, by the
distance of the place, and the falsehood of representations, you will impute
those very effects which you have produced yourselves, as the justifying causes
of resentment. This is the unjust way in which the Americans have been treated,
on all occasions. I myself asked, the other day, why, on a particular occasion
of a slight riot of not more than a few hours continuance four regiments and a
train of artillery, were ordered to Boston? To justify this enormous
intervention of the military, I was told in this House, that indeed the riots
were trifling, but that the Americans had come to a resolution to arm the
country. What then was the real fact, as testified by dates? The fact was, that
the resolution to arm, was not taken till the troops were seen in the offing.
It was the fight of the troops, upon so trivial an occasion, that gave to
understand what they were to expect; and, by dates, the fact is verified, that
they did not take to arms till some months after the troops were ordered; but
it was upon their first notice of the troops being to come, and the resolution
to arm against the worst, was actually debated but a few hours before the
troops were landed. So it is that facts are misrepresented in America, and so
let me put in my caution now, that the Americans do now actually pay their
debts, like honest men, to the utmost of their power, and let me be before hand
with this change; if when the natural consequences of these measures come next
year, we should hear any false accusations of the Americans, as combining not
to pay their debts, I shall make but one remark more, but which seems to me to
be of the utmost importance to the whole commercial system of England, which
is, that the plantation-built bottoms are two thirds, or three quarters, of all
the bottoms upon which the British merchandise, to every quarter of the globe,
is carried on; when we meditate a blow at the American trade, we should
recollect at least, that there is this one manufacture (if I may so call it) of
ship-building, upon the encouragement of which our very existence in this
kingdom, as a trading people, depends. However we may think it our interest to
suppress the rivalship of the colonies with ourselves, in other manufactures,
yet in this trade of ship-building, they are our most material and essential
support. This revengeful blow at the American ship-building, will fall most
immediately and fatally upon the manufacturers and merchants of every
commercial article in this kingdom. For these reasons, I am against the whole
principle of the bill now before us; and if we cannot prevail to have the whole
rejected, I must humbly move, at least, the admission of the clause which I
have just now offered to the House.

The Marquis of GRANBY's SPEECH on the Bill for restraining the Trade of
New Jersey Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, and South Carolina.
I Rise to trouble the House with a few words on the (...) now before it. I
have sat, Sir, during the course (...) two divisions, without taking any part;
even so much (...) giving a silent vote on any American question: because Sir,
as I will fairly confess to you, I entered these wal^ with prejudices against
the system administration was pursuing I thought it was but justice to hear the
arguments that might be urged on both sides, to compare those arguments, and
draw my opinion from that comparison. As to the bill, immediately the object of
our consideration, I think it in every respect to arbitrary, so oppressive, and
so totally founded on principles of resentment, that I am exceedingly happy at
having this public opportunity of bearing my testimony against it, in the
strongest manner I am able. In God's name, what language are you now holding
out to America! Resign your property, divest yourselves of your privileges and
freedom, renounce every thing that can make life comfortable, or we will
destroy your commerce, we will involve your country in all the miseries of
famine; and if you express the sensations of men at such harsh treatment, we
will then declare you in a state of rebellion, and put yourselves, and your
families, to fire and sword. And yet, Sir, the noble Lord on the floor has told
this House, that a reconciliation is the sole object of his wishes. I hope the
noble Lord will pardon me, if I doubt the perfect sincerity of those wishes; at
least, Sir, his actions justify my doubts; for every circumstance in his whole
conduct, with regard to America, has directly militated against his present
professions: and what, Sir, must the Americans conclude? Whilst you are
ravaging their coasts, and extirpating their commerce, and are withheld only by
your impotence, from spreading fresh ruin by the sword, can they, Sir, suppose
such chastisement is intended to promote a reconciliation, and that you mean to
restore to their forlorn country those liberties you deny to their present
possession; and in the insolence of persecution, are compassing earth and sea
to destroy? You can with no more justice compel the Americans to your
obedience, by the operation of the present measures, by making use of their
necessities, and withholding from them that commerce on which their existence
depends; than a ruffian can found an equitable claim to my possessions, when he
forcibly enters my house, and with a dagger at my throat, or a pistol at my
breast, makes me seal deeds which will convey to him my estate and property.

[ Mr. Rigby having declared the Americans to be in rebellion, Lord Granby, in
answer, said, his ideas of rebellion were totally different from Mr. Rigby's.
If, according to his ideas of rebellion, the Americans were in that state, he
should be as warmly their opp^nent as he was their friend; and then went on:]

I have a very clear, a very adequate idea of rebellion, at least according to
my own principles; and those are the principles on which the revolution is
founded. It is not against whom a war is directed, but it is the justice of
that war that does, or does not, constitute rebellion. If the innocent part of
mankind must tamely relinquish their freedom, their property, and every thing
they hold dear, merely to avoid the imputation of rebellion, I beg, Sir, it may
be considered what kind of peace and loyalty there will then exist in the
world, which consists only in violence and rapine, and is merely to be
maintained for the benefit of robbers and oppressors. I hope, Sir, I shall be
believed, when I assure you that I am as warm a friend to the interests of my
country, as any man in this House; but then must be understood, when those
interests are founded in justice. I am not attached to any particular acre of
land; the farmer in Cumberland o^ Du^ham, is as little connected with me as the
peasant in America; it is not the ground a man stands on that attaches me to
him; it is not the air he breathes that connects me with him, but it is the
principles of that man, those independent, those generous principles of liberty
which he professes, cooperating with my own, which call me forth as his
advocate and make me glory in being considered his friend. As for myself, Sir,
I am not in the least ashamed to avow, that my attachment is to a noble Lord,
who has been in my opinion, very unjustly reflected on in the course of this
debate, (I mean Lord Chatham) I am not even personally acquainted with the
noble Lord, I do not know the inconsistencies of which he stands accused; but
this, Sir, I know, I shall not support his inconsistencies, I shall only
support him in those principles, which have raised his name to the elevation on
which it is now placed in this country, and have so deservedly procured him the
love and admiration of his fellow citizens.

Sir, I shall not trouble this House any longer, as this matter has been so
fully discussed, though I must confess, I am not sorry a debate has taken
place, because I was rather desirous of making a kind of political creed, some
professions of my sentiments on this very important, this very serious national
question.

From the fullest conviction of my soul, I disclaim every idea both of policy
and right internally to tax America. I disavow the whole system. It is
commenced in iniquity; it is pursued with resentment: and it can terminate in
nothing but blood. Under whatsoever shape in futurity it may be revived, by
whomsoever produced and supported, it shall, from me, meet the most constant,
determined, and invariable opposition.

Mr. HARTLEY's SPEECH for an Address to the Throne; that his Majesty will be
pleased to give Orders that Letters of Requisition be written to the several
Provinces in America, to make Provision for the Purposes of defending,
protecting and securing the said Provinces, etc.
I Find myself under the necessity of making some apology to the House for the
trouble I am going to give them this day; and to assure them, that it is with
the greatest deference that I presume to obtrude any sentiments of mine, upon
the important subject of America. Though I have so lately had the honor of a
seat in this House, yet I have for many years turned my thoughts and attention
to matters of public concern and national policy. This question of America, is
now of many years standing; of the greatest public notoriety, as to the facts
upon which it turns; and every opinion has been so fully debated over and over,
that any man who has given his mind to public business, may be supposed equally
informed out of the House as in it.

When I threw out the propositions casually before Christmas, which I shall
offer to you more formally today, my view was in no sort hostile to the
administration. I saw the difficulty that we were got into by our own
precipitancy; that unhappy dilemma, which offered nothing but ruin in going
forward, or disgrace in the retreat. I was in hopes, from some phrases dropped by
the noble Lord at the head of the treasury, in the beginning of the session, of
others being more sanguine and more impatient than himself; that he at least
would have shown some disposition to relent; and, I still believe, if he were
at liberty to follow his own inclination and judgment, that it would be so. I
am the more warranted in thinking so, from the proposition which the noble Lord
himself offered to the House some time ago. There was in that proposition, a
show of conciliation to captivate one side of the House, and sufficient to
betray what were his own wishes; but on the other side there was the reality of
every unrelenting and vindictive measure annexed, to prove, that there still
were others more sanguine and more impatient than himself; over whom, with all
his abilities, with all his eloquence, with all the advantages of his
situation, he could not maintain his ascendant. Whatever struggles the noble
Lord may have had with himself or his friends, they are all at an end; the dye
is cast for war with America. It was found, that any conciliatory proposition
must have been in some degree a concession, which none of his unrelenting
friends would consent to.

However, by the noble Lord's proposition, there is one concession made to
America, under the authority of this House, which cannot be recalled; and which
finally and conclusively condemns the conduct of every administration for these
ten years past, one excepted; I mean the repeal of the stamp act. If it can be
proper now to offer to the colonies, to pay upon requisition, what can this
nation say for having kept out of the only right road for ten years? How can we
censure the colonies for any errors committed by them, which were the
consequences of our beginning at the wrong end? Though a threat is now annexed
to the noble Lord's requisition, yet if, at first, we had begun with a
requisition instead of taxation, it would have been more just and prudent.
There could be no justice or prudence in threatening a people who had always
contributed most freely; who never would have called our supposed right in
question, but for our misapplication of it. Therefore, Sir, when I have brought
back the noble Lord's compulsory requisition, to my free requisition, it stands
confessed, upon the very nature of his proposition itself, that I have set it
upon its own true original ground.

There is another objection to the noble Lord's plan, which, as I have
mentioned it upon a former occasion, I shall only remind you in a few words: I
mean a breach of faith with the colonies. A Secretary of State writes, in 1769,
a circular letter to the colonies, to assure them, That you will never raise a
revenue by taxing. A few years after, upon a negotiation with the East India
Company, the three-penny tea tax becomes not merely a quit-rent for the point
of honor, but rises to an actual revenue. Then you plead, that you did not
break your word, as the revenue arising was not in your original intentions,
but only casual, from a regulation of trade. But what can you say now? The
noble Lord boasts, that he has put the question upon the true ground, a demand
for a substantial revenue, a demand attended with threats of compulsion. What
is this less than raising a revenue by a tax?

But in any case, let the noble Lord think what he will of his proposition, why
has he not, in so many weeks, given it some practicable shape? Why has he not
offered some act of Parliament to give it effect? However, as he has omitted
that, I shall take the proposition without its objectional parts, and propose
an address to the King to give it force; in which motion, I hope to meet with
the support of those gentlemen who gave it countenance originally, when it came
from the noble Lord. I shall give the whole substance of the proposition; only
leaving out in the address to the King, any threats of the compulsion, which
you meditate in reserve. If you think that you have the right of taxing, I pass
it over in silence, -- if you have the power, I do not, -- I cannot, take that
away. Then make a free requisition; and be contented to keep to yourselves the
satisfaction of thinking, that you have something in reserve, in case of
noncompliance. Keep that sub silentio; at least till you find that it becomes
necessary. I am not an advocate either for the right or the expediency of
taxing the Americans, but the contrary. However, as far as we go the same road
of requisitions, let us go together.

As what I have to offer, will be founded upon requisitions to the colonies, I
will endeavor to answer an objection before hand, which I have heard in this
House. It is to the plan of royal requisitions. This objection to the
interference of the royal name, comes from a side of the House, from which one
should least have expected it. However if this be an objection, mine are not
royal requisitions. My motion originates from the House of Commons, to desire
the King, as the executive magistrate, to put their plan into effect. If the
power of making requisitions to the colonies, is not in the King; my motion is
to give the authority and sanction of Parliament to this measure. It is so far
from being my proposition, to enable the crown to raise what supply it can from
America, independent of Parliament; that my motion is the very first which has
ever had in contemplation, to lay a parliamentary control upon that power; and
to require that all answers from America shall be laid before this House for
the very purpose of controuling that power in the crown. I have so doubly
guarded that point, that my motion is not even for the crown to demand a supply
from America; but for services to be performed in America; for the defense,
security and protection of the colonies themselves.

I would wish to state to the House the merits of this question, of
requisitions to the colonies; and to see upon what principles it is founded; to
revise and settle the accounts between Great Britain and her colonies; and
then, upon a foundation of distributive justice, to come to some settlement. We
hear of nothing now, but the protection which we have given to them; of the
immense expense incurred on their account. -- We are told that they have done
nothing for themselves; that they pay no taxes; in short, every thing is
asserted about America to serve the present turn, without the least regard to
truth -- I would have these matters fairly sifted out.

To begin with the late war. The Americans turned the success of the war, at
both ends of the line. General Monkton took Beausejour in Nova Scotia, with
1500 provincial troops, and about 200 regulars. Sir William Johnson in the
other part of America, changed the face of the war to success, with a
provincial army, which took Baron Dieskau prisoner. But, Sir, the glories of
the war, under the united British and American arms, are recent and in every
one's memory. Suffice it to decide this question; that the Americans bore, even
in our judgment, more than their full proportion; that this House did annually
vote them an acknowledgement of their zeal and strenuous efforts, and a
compensation of the excess of their zeal and expenses, above their due
proportion. They kept, one year with another, 20,000 men on foot, and lost in
the war the flower of their youth. How strange must it appear to them to hear
of nothing down to the year 1763, (March 14, 1763) but encomiums upon their
active zeal and strenuous efforts, and then, no longer after than the year
1764, in such a trice of time, to see the tide turn, and from that hour to
this, to hear it asserted they were a burden upon the common cause; asserted
even in that same Parliament, which had voted them compensations for the
liberality and excess of their services.

Nor did they stint their services to North America: They followed the British
arms out of their continent, to the Havannah and Martinique, after the complete
conquest of America. And so they had done in the preceding war. They were not
grudging of their exertions, -- they were at the siege of Carthagena, -- yet
what was Carthagena to them, but as members of the common cause, of the glory
of this country! In that war too, Sir, they took Louisbourg from the French,
single-handed, without any European assistance; as mettled an enterprise as any
in our history! an everlasting memorial of the zeal, courage, and perseverance
of the troops of New England. The men themselves dragged the cannon over a
morass which had always been thought impassable, where neither horses nor oxen
could go, and they carried the shot upon their backs. And what was their reward
for this forward and spirited enterprise? for the reduction of this American
Dunkirk? Their reward, Sir, you know very well; it was given up for a barrier
to the Dutch, the only conquest in that war which you had to give up, which
would have been an effectual barrier to them against the French power in
America, though conquerred by themselves, was surrendered for a foreign
barrier. As a substitute for this, you settle Halifax for a place d' arms,
leaving the limits of the province of Nova Scotia as a matter of contest with
the French, which could not fail to prove, as it did, the cause of another war.
Had you kept Louisbourg instead of settling Halifax, the Americans may say, at
least, that there would not have been that pretext for im^uting the late war to
their account. It has been their forwardness in your cause, that made them the
objects of the French resentment. In the war of 1744, at your requisition, they
were the aggressors with the French in America. We know the orders given to
Mons. D'Anville, to destroy and lay all their seaport towns in ashes; and we
know the cause of that resentment; it was to revenge their conquest of
Louisbourg.

Whenever Great Britain has declared war, they have taken their part. They were
engaged in King William's wars and Queen Ann's, even in their infancy. They
conquered Acadia in the last century, for us; and we then gave it up. -- Again,
in Queen Ann's war they conquered Nova Scotia which, from that time, has always
belonged to Great Britain. They have been engaged in more than one expedition
to Canada, ever foremost to partake of honor and danger with the mother
country.

Well, Sir, what have we done for them? Have we conquered the country for them
from the Indians? Have we cleared it? Have we drained it? Have we made it
habitable? What have we done for them; I believe precisely nothing at all, but
just keeping watch and ward over their trade, that they should receive nothing
but from ourselves and at our own price. I will not positively say, that we
have spent nothing; though I do not recollect any such article upon our
journals; but I mean, not any material expense in setting them out as
colonists. The royal military government of Nova Scotia cost, indeed, not a
little sum; above 500,000 l. for its plantation, and its first years. Had your
other colonies cost any thing similar, either in their out-set or support,
there would have been something to say on that side; but instead of that, they
have been left to themselves for 100 or 150 years, upon the fortune and capital
of private adventurers, to encounter every difficulty and danger. What towns
have we built for them? What deserts have we cleared? What country have we
conquered for them from the Indians? Name the officers -- name the troops --
the expeditions -- their dates. Where are they to be found? Not in the journals
of this kingdom. They are no where to be found.

In all the wars which have been common to us and them, they have taken their
full share. But in all their own dangers, in all the difficulties belonging
separately to their situation, in all the Indian wars which did not immediately
concern us, we left them to themselves to struggle their way through. For the
whim of a minister, you can bestow half a million to build a town, and to plant
the royal colony of Nova Scotia; a greater sum than you have bestowed upon
every other colony together, since their foundation.

And notwithstanding all these, which are real facts, now that they have
struggled through their difficulties, and begin to hold up their heads, and to
show that empire which promises to be the foremost in the world, we claim them
and theirs, as implicitly belonging to us, without any consideration of their
own rights. We charge them with ingratitude, without the least regard to truth,
just as if this kingdom had for a century and a half, attended to no other
object; as if all our revenue, all our power, all our thought, had been
bestowed upon them, and all our national debt had been contracted in the Indian
wars of America, totally forgetting the subordination in commerce and
manufactures, in which we have bound them; and for which, at least, we owe them
help toward their protection.

Look at the preamble of the act of navigation, and every American act, and see
if the interest of this country is not the avowed object. If they make a hat or
a piece of steel, an act of Parliament calls it a nuisance: a tilting hammer, a
steel furnace must be abated in America as a nuisance. Is it so with their
fellow subjects on this side of the Atlantic? Are the hats and cloths of
Gloucestershire nuisances? Are the tilting hammers of Pontipool nuisances? Are
the cutleries of Sheffield and Birmingham nuisances? Are the stockings of
Nottingham nuisances? Are the linens of Scotland, Ireland, or Broomsgrove
nuisances? Are the woollen cloths of Yorkshire, the crapes of Norwich, or the
cottons of Manchester, nuisances? Sir, I speak from facts. I call your books of
statutes and journals to witness. With the least recollection every one must
acknowledge the truth of these facts.

But it is said, the peace establishment of North America has been, and is,
very expensive to this country. Sir, for what has been let us take the peace
establishment before 1739, and after 1748. All that I can find in your journals
is, four companies kept up at New York, and three companies in Carolina. As to
the four companies at New York, this country should know best why they put
themselves to that expense; or whether they were really at any expense at all;
for these were companies of fictitious men. Unless the money was repaid into
the treasury, it was applied to some other purpose; for these companies were
not a quarter full. In the year 1754, two of them were sent up to Albany, to
attend commissioners to treat with the Six Nations, to impress them with a high
idea of our military power; to display all the pomp and circumstance of war
before them, in hopes to scare them; when in truth, we made a very ridiculous
figure. The whole complement of the two companies did not exceed thirty
tattered, tottering invalids, fitter to scarce the crows. This information I
have had from eyewitnesses.

It has not fallen in my way to hear any account of the three Carolina
companies; these are trifles. The substantial question is, what material
expense have you been at in the periods alluded to, for the peace establishment
of North America? Ransack your journals, search your public offices for army or
ordnance expenses. Make out your bill, and let us see what it is. No one yet
knows it. Had there been any such, I believe the administration would have
produced it before now, with aggravation; as was the case a few years ago with
the East India Company, who had their effects arrested for a long bill, when
they little expected it, and that bill too not very scrupulously charged; but
when money is in the case, whether from the East or from the West, ministers
can make as long bills as other people.

But is not the peace establishment of North America now very high, and very
expensive? I would answer that by another question; Why would the peace
establishment since the late war, and the total expulsion of the French
interest, be higher than it was before the late war, and when the French
possessed above half the American continent? If it be so, there must be some
singular reason.

I cannot suppose that you mean, under the general term of North America, to
saddle all the expenses of Canada, Nova Scotia, Cape-Breton, Newfoundland,
Florida, and the West Indies, upon the old colonies of North America. You
cannot mean to keep the sovereignty, the property, the possession (these are
the terms of the cession in the treaty of 1763) to yourselves, and lay the
expense of the military establishment, which you think proper to keep up, upon
the old colonies.

Sir, the colonies never thought of interfering in the prerogative of making
war or peace; but if this nation can be so unjust as to meditate the settling
the expense of your new conquests separately upon them, they ought to have had
a voice in settling the terms of peace. It is you, on this side of the water,
who have first brought out the idea of separate interests, by planning separate
and distinct charges. It was their men, and their money, which had conquered
North America and the West Indies, as well as yours, though you seized all the
spoils; but they never thought of dictating to you what you should keep, or
what you should give up, little dreaming that you reserved the expense of your
military governments for them. Who gave up the Havannah? Who gave up
Martinique? Who gave up Guadaloupe, with Mariegalante? Who gave up Santa Lucia?
Who gave up the Newfoundland fishery? Who gave up all these, without their
consent, without their participation, without their consultation, and after all
without equivalents? Sir, if your colonies had but been permitted to have
gathered up the crumbs which have fallen from your ^table, they would gladly
have supported the whole establishment of North America.

Your colonies have now shown you the value of lands in North America; and
therefore you have vested in the crown the sovereignty, property, and
possession of infinite tracts of land, perhaps as extensive as all Europe,
which the crown may dispose of at its own price, as the land rises in America,
and grants become invaluable; and to enable the crown to support an arbitrary
military, nay, even a Romish government, till these lands rise to their future
immense value, you are casting about to saddle the expense either upon the
American or the British supplies. The Americans must, indeed, be in a state of
insanity, if they do not see the tendency of all this; and we ourselves must be
more insane and blind even than the Americans: We, who have already seen the
patronage of the East Indies put into the hands of the crown, and who now see
the sovereignty, property, and possession of North America, with every military
and despotic power, vested solely in the King's hands; we, who are made to
learn every hour, by precept and example, the charters, being but the breath of
Kings, are to be annihilated by the breath of pliable Parliaments; we must be,
Sir, I say, more insane than them, if we do not see the tendency of all this;
and if we do not provide in time for our own security, as well as for that of
America. I will not suppose, that we can be so improvident as not to attend to
these important and perhaps not very distant events; nor, with respect to the
present question, will, I suppose, that Parliament can meditate so great an
injustice, as to require your old colonies to support the charge of all your
new conquests, and of all the rest of America.

This country is very liberal in its boasting of its protection and parental
kindness to America. Is it for that purpose that we have converted the province
of Canada into an absolute and military government, and have established the
Romish bigotry dominant, as a terror upon all our ancient and protestant
colonies? What security, what protection do they derive? In what sort are they
the better for the conquest of the French dominions, if we take that
opportunity to establish a government, civil, military, and ecclesiastical, in
the utmost degree hostile to the government of our own provinces, and with the
intent to set a thorn in their sides: Is this affection and parental kindness?
Surely you do not expect that they should be taxed and talliaged to pay for
this rod of iron which you are preparing for them!

Now, Sir, I come to a point, in which I think you may be said to have given
some protection. I mean the protection of your fleet to the American commerce.
And even here I am at a loss by what terms to call it; whether you are
protecting yourselves or them. They are your cargoes, your manufactures, your
commerce, your navigation. Every ship from America is bound to Great Britain.
None enter an American port, but British ships and men. While you are defending
the American commerce, you are defending Leeds and Halifax, Sheffield and
Birmingham, Manchester and Hull, Bristol and Liverpool, London, Dublin, and
Glasgow. However, as our fleet does protect whatever commerce does belong to
them, let that be set to the account. It is an argument to them, as well as to
us. As it has been the sole policy of this kingdom, for ages, by the operation
of every commercial act of parliament, to make the American commerce totally
subservient to our own convenience, the least we owe to them in return is
protection.

Sir, I have now stated my sentiments upon the preliminary matters. I have
endeavored to state the services, in war, of the Americans, with ours, and
their mutual proportions; in which, by our own confession, the Americans have
taken more than their share. I have stated the expense of your military
establishment for them, such as it has been, or such as it need to be, always
protesting against the imposition of the charge of the conquered provinces upon
them; and I have stated the necessity and convenience of your fleet to their
commerce. Let this line of dividing the question, be pursued to what minuteness
you will, in order that we may come to a fundamental judgment; let debtor or
creditor fall on which side it w^ll, I have no bias to either side of the
argument; but to have perfect and liberal justice done, and reconcilement, if
possible effected, upon sound and equitable principles. I will beg leave to
read to the House a draught of a letter of requisition, which I have drawn up
after the manner of former requisitions to the colonies, and which I have
endeavored to adapt to the present circumstances.

[Here he read a letter of requisition to the colonies.]

This is the plan, and the terms, or to the effect, that, according to the best
of my judgment, a requisition on the present subject should be drawn. I have
endeavored to state the case in such a manner as may open a way to
reconcilement on both sides. Make your requisitions free, and let them be
founded on reason and justice; and there are no subjects in any kingdom that
will be deaf to reason, justice, common interest, and mutual obligations: And I
am sure, from the repeated liberality and zeal of our colonies, we, of all the
kingdoms in the world, have the least reason to distrust those of our own
consanguinity.

I cannot think it a possible thing in our constitution, that any one
seriously, upon a moment's reflection, can admit the thought of denying the
Americans their judgment upon the necessity or application of money required.
That is the right of all free subjects, without which they have nothing they
can call their own. Let your requisitions be free, for reasonable and
substantial services, and faithfully performed, and there is no example of a
refusal in such a case, in any state. That consents are withheld, and ought so
to be, in case of grievances unredressed, our own history abounds with
examples. Our rights and liberties would have long ago been trampled under foot
but for that reserved power in the commons. But a refusal, in a reasonable
case, is as yet without example. Absurdity and caprice are not the principles
which govern men, in the great concerns of state; but reason overrules all
little caprices. In Holland, the consent not only of the States General, but of
the provincial states, and in many instances, I believe, of every town in each
province, is necessary for great acts of state; and yet that negative never
stands in the way against reason. Where measures have common sense, and common
reason, for their foundation, they will never be obstructed; where they have
not, they ought to be defeated.

But it is said, that we can hear of no terms with the Americans, who have been
in a state of resistance to our authority. Sir, I wish to cast no retrospect,
but only to look forward to reconciliation, and to prevent the shedding of
blood. The resolution of the noble Lord has confessed, and the House has
adopted the truth of it, that requisition is the proper way. Your colonies have
been calling our to you incessantly, for ten years, to make your demands by
constitutional requisitions. This House, after a ten years misunderstanding,
has confirmed that to be, in their opinion too, the right way. Then why not
close now at least upon that ground, without retrospect. The colonies have been
driven to resistance against their wills, lest they should have nothing they
could surely call their own. The right to take any nation's money indefinitely,
without their consent, without measure, without account, without any enquiry
into the application, is not to be conceded or compromised by any nation upon
the earth. Resistance or ruin must infallibly be the consequence; and those who
are compelled to resistance, by your having persevered in the principle of
taking by force, till the noble Lord's proposition, which has at last condemned
it, have been forced to deny that authority, which they always had, and always
would have wished to acknowledge and support. It was that unconquerable and
irresistible impulse of nature, self-defence, which cut off all retreat: then
let us cast no retrospect. If the grounds of this unhappy dispute can be
settled, all may be peace yet. If the Americans could be assured, that you
would not again make resistance absolutely necessary to their security and very
being as a people, they are ready enough to acknowledge their subordination,
and all the rights of Great Britain. Let them know that peace and security to
their rights and properties shall be the certain condition of acknowledging the
supreme legislation of this country, and the matter is ended.

Sir, after I shall have received the determination of the House upon the
motion for requisitions, I shall take the liberty to offer three other motions,
for a suspension of the three vindictive American bills of the last session.
The connection of those motions with the preceding, is too obvious to require
any explanation or debate. I would only take leave to say, that I should not
have moved for a mere suspension of these bills, if a motion for their repeal
had not already been rejected by this House. Having given an unavailing vote
for their repeal, I now come to entreat for the next degree, at least for
suspension. You have excommunicated Boston, and proscribed the whole province
of New England unheard: then recollect your justice, and whether you send the
noble Lord's compulsory requisition to America, or this motion of mine for a
free requisition; suspend your vindictive hand, and, whilst you treat for
peace, arrest the sword.

Sir, I have now offered what I have to say upon this important subject. I have
given it my most serious, I may say my only attention, ever since I have been
in a situation to give a responsible vote upon it; and I heartily wish that
some means or other may be found in time to stop the effusion of civil blood.
And here, Sir, I offer my poor sentiments to the House, and to the noble Lord,
as in the place of minister. It is a great responsibility that will lie at his
door, who is to have the recommendation. I might say the decision of the
measures to be adopted. We on this side the House, who have opposed the whole
system of American measures, have not done it merely for the sake of
opposition. We have not sheltered ourselves under -- No, no, -- But we have
declared our principles, we have offered our plans; and they must now remain
with Great Britain and America at large, to discuss and weigh their merits, to
accept or reject them. The noble Lord has a great ascendant in this House.
Perhaps his plan, if he has any thing to be called a plan, may find advocates
and voices here. But our country at large, Great Britain and America, must
finally decide. My honorable friend near me (Mr. Burker has, with unrivalled
ability, opened to you his principles and plan. The Earl of Chatham has, in the
other House, offered his provisional bill for conciliation, to the ministry
there: and for myself, Sir, it is with the greatest deference and humility that
I presume to offer any thing of mine, in conjunction with such great names and
abilities. I can only plead the sincerity of my intentions, as an apology for
my presumption. All our plans tend to one center, and to one point of
reconciliation, to save the effusion of blood between those who ought to be
reciprocally good and useful friends. If the noble Lord has any secret feelings
of relenting, as many of his friends, and many more who would be his friends,
most sincerely wish, let him stand our, and do justice to his own feelings. His
country calls upon him, not to give way to sangumary and impatient councils,
contrary to his own better judgment. This is the decisive hour; the fate of
Great Britain and America are depending.

The eyes of all this country, and America too, are turned toward the noble
Lord, as the ostensible and responsible minister, to receive his find
determination, as to the measures which are to decide the safety or ruin of
this empire. The ways of peace are still before him. If war is to be the
measure with America, let him consider, that it is not a majority of this House
that can conquer America. The support of reason and justice to his measures
will stand him better in stead, than the noisy tumult of a majority; in which
majority, there may be ^^rking treacherous counselors, and pretended friends,
secretly urging him to his ruin, even against his own judgment. The important
responsibility is out of measure. When the debates and measures of this year
are transmitted to America, they may, perhaps, tell the noble Lord, had you
pursued a plan of equity and justice, all had been peace. At home, one plan of
conciliation has already been proposed, for which the city of London,
foreseeing the certain ruin of other measures, has given thanks to its great
and noble author, as an earnest for the rest of the kingdom. If Great Britain
and America should come to one mind of peace, they may unite to crush those men
who keep them asunder.

He moved, That an humble address be presented to his Majesty, that he will be
graciously pleased to give orders, that letters of requisition be written to
the several provinces of his Majesty's colonies and plantations in America, to
make provision for the purp^ses of defending, protecting and securing the said
colonies and pl^^^ations; and that his Majesty will be pleased to order all
(...) addresses as he shall receive, in answer to the aforesaid letters of
requisition, to be laid before this House.

This motion passed in the negative.

[ The Printer having been applied to by several Gentlemen for Mr. Burke's
Speech, in favor of the Protestant Dissenters; it is at their request added to
this collection, and preceded by that of Sir William Bagot, to which it has
immediate allusion.]

SIR WILLIAM BAGOT.
I Rise, Sir, consistent with the principles I have hitherto professed, to
enter my protest against the bill now before us. I shall not, Sir, commence a
war with particles, nor shall I contend with any Gentleman about the propriety
of this or that expression, as whether the House 'might,' 'should,' or 'ought,'
to agree to the passing of the bill: I shall not take up the time of this House
about such frivolous trifles, though I have been, and do again expect to be,
attacked on this head by an ingenious Gentleman [Mr. Edmund Burke] whose
critical sagacity well qualifies him for the task of adjusting sentences, and
rectifying the violations of grammatical niceties. I shall request the
attention of the House to matters of infinitely greater importance, and, whilst
I relate the reasons which induce me to oppose the bill, I shall hope my
deficiency in point of elocution may be in some degree atoned for by that
sincerity and sense of duty which, conspiring together, thus prompt me to
submit my sentiments to the candor of this respectable Assembly.

To proceed, Sir, with as much regularity as possible, I shall arrange my
arguments under a few general heads: I shall show that the very thing these
Dissenters pray for is the very thing they now enjoy; that the general
toleration solicited would be detrimental to Christianity, the established
religion in this country; that, in the time of Heathenism, the toleration
allowed was the occasion of Atheists of every denomination overrunning the
state; and in like manner, if we remove subscription to the articles (it not
being them alone, but the doctrines contained in them, which give offense) that
therefore, Sir, if we set aside subscription to these articles, we throw the
best barrier of Christianity, and open a door for the admission of infidels of
every species into the pale of the church.

To begin, Sir, by tracing this bill step by step. -- Last year an attempt was
made to obtrude a petition on this House, which, I am sorry to say, was a
disgrace to every party concerned in the measure. I mean Sir, an indelible
disgrace on those persons without doors who set on foot the project; the
petition to which I allude is that manufactured at the Feathers Tavern; to the
shame of some of the episcopal clergy be it spoken, they were the first who
agitated the matter of subscription, and prayed to be released from making the
profession of a belief in those articles which contain doctrines clearly
revealed in the scriptures. This petition, Sir, meeting with the fate in richly
deserved, the presenting it answered no other end than that of paving the way
for the application this House has since been troubled with. Whilst the tavern
petition was under consideration, the promoters were no less busy in publishing
a variety of pieces addressed to some particular Bishops, others to men of
eminence in the church, resident in one or both of our Universities. The style
of these publications was various; sometimes intimidations were used, at others
the heads of the church were beseeched with all humility to relieve those
conscientious priests, who, sooner than not enjoy the temporalities of the
church, would conscientiously turn occasional conformists to her doctrines,
though they wished to be exempted from the necessity of declaring their
conformity to any doctrines containing the sum and substance of Christianity.
About this time, Sir, another reverend author, willing to promote the pious
work of reformation, and to declare his own abhorrence of articles which he had
subscribed, and doctrines he had professed to believe, published a pamphlet
called, THE CONFESSIONAL, a work full of sophistry, abounding in language
without sentiment, and argument without reason. This also served the cause; the
Dissenters seized the lucky opportunity, the indignant petitioners joined them,
and thus formidable the present bill was framed, was brought in, and though
opposed by the truly orthodox amongst the Dissenters, yet council was refused
to be heard, at least sufficient time was not given them to prepare for arguing
the merits of the various petitions which have been presented against it. Now,
Sir, I consider this bill in the same light as the petition from the club at
the Feathers; the form indeed differs, the end is the same; and both are
detrimental to the doctrinal parts of Christianity.

Nor is the thing prayed for by this bill wanting. The Dissenters pray to be
exempted from the necessity of subscription to the articles; this is required
as a qualification from those who commence teachers, or even schoolmasters; and
penal laws are now in force against such as omit thus to qualify themselves.
But, Sir, are these penal laws ever put in execution? Is it not notorious, that
the far greatest part of the Dissenters do neglect subscription? And are they
ever called upon? And are they ever punished? What then would they have? They
desire liberty; they enjoy it by connivance, and are now in as actual
possession of the very liberty they solicit for, as if their favorite bill was
actually passed; it is absurd, therefore, to pray for that they already
possess; nor can any thing account for the absurdity of the request, but a
supposition that some latent views, some het^rodox tenets, are at the bottom of
this application. I will speak out, Sir, I will "cry aloud and spare not" in a
case of religious importance; I scorn to dissemble. I say then, Sir, that I
verily believe this attempt to set aside the articles is agitated with a design
unfavourable to Christianity. Instead of the articles, (...) ^est is proposed,
drawn up in such a vague manner, and couched in such general terms that a
Mohammedan might sign it. The Dissenters, Sir, are to declare that they "believe
the Holy Scriptures." Pray, Sir, do not Papists in their sense believe the Holy
Scriptures? Have not Mahometans a very high opinion of Jesus Christ? and do
they not believe many things recorded of him in the Scriptures? They,
therefore, Sir, might subscribe the test proposed by the bill; and whatever
opinion I may have, the Dissenters are good subjects, yet as to those who
declare that they can conscientiously subscribe only such a test as Mah^^metans
might assent to, I must be pardoned for saying, I think them not very good
Christians. To tolerate, therefore, such men, Sir, is to injure the established
religion of our country; they are dissatisfied with the articles, so they are
with the doctrines which constitute the most essential parts of Christianity.
The sacrifice of Christ, the economy of our redemption; and in particular the
divinity of our Savior; these, Sir, are the stumbling blocks in the way of our
conscientious gentry! Yet these are doctrines maintained in scripture, and
inculcated by the articles; who then can wonder, that an effort to set aside
the articles should be made? Arians are numerous amongst us; too many deny the
divinity of him who created all things, and "without whom nothing was made that
is made." A test requiring subscription to this truth must be obnoxious to such
as disavow it; therefore, Sir, under the notion of toleration, we must lend our
aid to an attack upon Christianity, and by passing this bill, open a passage
for heresies the most abominable, which threaten the ruin of our religious
establishment.

Sir, in times of Heathenism, toleration, because carried too far, became
detrimental to the state; Lucretius, a poe^ of considerable genius, was
permitted to broach the Atheism of Epicurus: his followers were as numerous as
those of any of our modern skeptics; like them, Sir, he made converts; they
were the wits, the beaux esprit, the macaronies of that time. [ A laugh through
the House.] Yes, Sir, Gentlemen may laugh, but the Atheists of old, were like
the skeptics of modern times; they were occasional conformists, and, by being
tolerated, they gained proselytes to infidelity, and tore up the foundations of
morality by the roots; they broached their cursed opinions, and infected the
minds of the people.

In remoter times, Sir, we find, indeed, atheistical skeptics, though from not
being tolerated they were restrained from doing the mischief they intended.
Epicurus was not the first skeptic; in the times of David and Solomon the sect
prevailed. The former King, who was a poet also, tel^s us, that the fool said
in his heart, what the wits of our time scruple not openly to assert, viz. that
there is no God. In David's days, Sir, though persecution prevailed not., yet
the skeptics were not allowed to debauch the minds of their fellow creatures,
by obliging the world with their ^efarious opinions. Yet a toleration of this
kind is now solicited. But whether we are to show ourselves so unmindful of our
duty as to grant the request, this day's debate will discover. I, Sir, have
borne my testimony against the bill; I do it conscienciously; I do it with
serious reverence; my sincerity has, during the course of the debate on this
subject, been called in question; and I could, perhaps, with much greater
propriety, retort, by questioning the sincerity of the promoters of this bill;
I have a right, Sir, so to do; and I will say, that the sincerity of the
advocates for this bill stands in need of strong positive proofs; the
presumptive is against them.

I am sure, Sir, I ought to ask pardon of this House for detaining in thus
long, and I cannot sufficiently express my thankfulness for the indulgence
which has been shown me. I shall trespass no longer upon your time than to say,
Sir, that I am against your quitting the chair.

Mr. PAGE.
I THINK, Sir, after the learned manner in which my honorable friend has
argued the matter, little remains to be said. I entirely coincide with him in
opinion; and the division amongst the Dissenters themselves shows that in
numbers the advocates for the bill are as inconsiderable as they are far from
being unanimous. The Chatham petition may convince us of the want of unanimity
which prevails, and I am glad to find that we are indebted to the lines of
Chatham for a support of orthodox Christianity.

MR. EDMUND BURKE.
THE Honorable Gentleman who favored us last but one with his favorite
harangue, had little reason to apprehend that I should engage him in a war
about particles. Whether the House might, could, should, or ought, to
interfere, I leave to be discussed by more grammatical heads. Neither, Sir,
shall I rejoice, with the honorable gentleman who spoke last, at the "support
the lines of Chatham have afforded to orthodox Christianity." "Whether the
walls have defended the lines, or the lines have afforded defense to the walls,
is altogether foreign to the debate in question; but this, Sir, I shall take
upon me peremptorily to assert, that if the objections to the bill are founded
upon those two contemptible petitions [that from Chatham and another] which now
lie on the table, if they are to furnish the opposers with weapons wherewith to
attack the measure, I fear the combatants must take the field accoutred by no
means in a martial manner.

I propose, Sir, taking notice of what fell from the honorable gentleman's
lips [Sir William Bagot's] considered in a twofold view. He advanced the
following positions, "that the Dissenters now enjoyed liberty by connivance."
and "that toleration was an attack upon Christianity." The honorable gentleman
to be sure has treated his subject in a masterly manner, and has displayed a
profusion of learning; but whether he has not been too lavish of his
erudition, considering the absurdity of the positions, will appear by more
fully considering the subject. The Dissenters enjoy liberty by connivance! My
God, Sir, what sort of liberty is this? A writer [Mr. Hume] whose name has
lately been made free with in this House, he, Sir, compares tyranny to a
thunder storm or volcano, each moment gathering, and certain at some period to
burst forth and scatter destruction on all within its reach. What, Sir, is
liberty by connivance, but a temporary relaxation of slavery? is this a sort of
liberty calculated for the meredian of England? Montesquieu places liberty in
an exemption from fear: Are persons who enjoy it by connivance only, are they
exempt from fears and divested of apprehensions? the very bill before us
demonstrates the contrary. Granting that the Dissenters do now enjoy a fort of
liberty by connivance, a liberty which has this for its dependence is
precarious, may exist to day and be annihilated tomorrow; it therefore creates
alarms in the minds of men, and makes them apply, as in the case before us, for
a confirmation and establishment of that, the precarious tenure of which
renders the continuance of the possession uncertain.

To talk then, Sir, of a connivance, is to talk only of a temporary suspension
of tyranny. You are desirous to keep the rod hanging over the Dissenters heads
at the very instant that you assure them they shall never smart under its
stripes. Why then, at once not set their hearts at rest by removing the
impending danger? Why not release them from the dread of these penal statutes,
the cruelty of which so shocks your generous natures, that you think it
incumbent on you to declare they never should be put into execution? The
question, Sir answers itself; and to cavil at it is propriety, is to carp at
truth and elude conviction.

Much has been urged respecting the want of unanimity among the Dissenters; but
I, Sir, should apprehend, that the reasonableness of a request, and not the
numbers who prefer it, is the thing which ought to determine this House in its
proceedings and resolves: For, my God! Sir, how can the opinions of those who
petition militate with any sort of propriety against the bill? Two bodies of
men approach the House, and prostrate themselves at your bar; we cannot in
conscience, say the one, agree to the test imposed; we ask not honors; we have
no aspiring wishes; no views upon the purple; the Mitre has no charms for us;
(...) aim we at the chief cathedral seats; content to pass our days in an
humble state, we pray for the sake of him, who is the Lord of conscience, that
our consciences may be relieved from what at present is a burden; nor that,
assuming the garb of hypocrites, we may be the longer forced to (...) this
burden, or be treated as vagrants for acting agreeable to the dictates of
sincerity and internal rectitude. We on the contrary, say the men who petition
against the Dissenters, we enjoy every species of indulgence we can wish for;
and as we are content, we pray that others, who are not content, may meet with
no relief! What, Sir, shall we say to these reptiles? what but arangez-vous,
canaille!

Great pains, Sir, have been taken to make us believe that the clergy of the
established church are alarmed; but what signs of such alarm have appeared?
has either of the Universities opposed this bill? have the church dignitaries
petitioned against it? no, Sir; as men, they hold the rights of humanity too
dear; and, as Christians, they breathe a spirit too tolerant, not to wish a
total abolition of the reli^s of ecclesiastic tyranny. Are we then to be
dissuaded from granting relief, because a petition comes dated from the lines
of Chatham? I should blush to see such a production quoted as authority by
which British Senators were guided in their decisions.

As to what the honorable gentleman [Sir William Bagot] let fail concerning
"Toleration being an attack upon Christianity." it is an assertion so contrary
to truth and history, that it scarcely stands in need of refutation. By
toleration Christianity flourished: whilst the eastern and western churches
were tolerant they were illustrious; they were venerated; they were held in
sacred estimation. When the Romish church cast aside its toleration, and betook
itself to threatenings, slaughter, and persecution, commotions ensued;
ecclesiastical anarchy prevailed; and the kingdom of darkness was erected on
the ruins of Christian Charity and mutual forbearance: instead of combating the
common foe, Christians fought and combated each other; instead of taking arms
against the grand deceiver, they strove, by every deceptious ^^t, to harrass
and torment those whom they ought to have lived as brethren. In short, Sir, the
want of toleration has lessened the number of believers; I would have them all
united: that they might be the better enabled to make a common cause, and put
infidels to a total rout. These, Sir, are the men; these scepti^s are the
persons against whom your penal laws should be directed; they are monsters
actually destructive; yet you let them escape; you clip no^ their broad
pinions, whilst you tear piecemeal the silken wings of some feeble, harmless
insect who falls into your clutches! Away, Sir, with such absurdity! the
skeptics, who labor to degrade us below brutes: the skeptics who would fain
persuade us that we are inferior to those animals that wallow in a stye; the
skeptics, who sap the foundation of all morality and social virtue; who
daringly attempt to plunder us of the dearest privilege annexed to manhood,
that of being of religious animal; the skeptics, who, by rediculing revelation,
set at naught the various dispensations of the godhead to his creature man.
These, Sir, are the Pythons against whom Christians should be armed; but
amongst themselves toleration cannot be carried to too great a length; nor is
there any danger that Christianity should suffer by such a toleration. Ask you
what is lest to defend it? I answer, the strongest defense imaginable; the
learning, the wit, and the genius of its advocates. To whom has christianity
been most indebted for the completest victory it ever gained over the whole
body of deistical writers? to a man who never did nor I am sure never would
have subscribed the articles. The learned writer I allude to is Dr. Leland,
who, in his "view of the D^istical writers," had rendered christianity an
essential service (if so divine a system could receive assistance from mortal
hands.)

As to the toleration afforded by Heathenism, I am yet to learn that it went so
far as the honorable gentleman seems to think, for those who were admitted
within the pale of the Heathen church were at least required to assist in the
performance of the religious rites, those to Bacchus and some others. Such a
conformity was necessary, and, perhaps, in every establishment it is the only
conformity the Magistrate has a right to exact, for I take the reverse of our
mode of proceeding to be the just one; the constraint should be put not so much
upon the doctrinal as the ritual part of the religion, a conformity in the
latter being the chief thing requisite for the support of a religious
establishment connected with the state. But, Sir, the toleration the learned
gentleman speaks of as exercised toward the Epicureans, proves nothing to the
purpose; for being athe^sts and believing nothing, they would have subscribed
to any and every thing; persecution therefore would not have reached them; nor
would any articles, any human tests, how well soever contrived, have kept them
as they ought to have been kept, distinct from the believing part of their
species. I trust, Sir, I am penetrated with as deep a sense of the benefits
derived to us by the birth of a Savior, as any man within these walls; I
trust, I would go as far as any man in maintaining the essential articles of
christanity; I also fancy, Sir, the church of England has not a firmer friend
than myself. I wish her illustrious; I wish her head may reach that heaven to
which she would conduct us! but I would also wish her family as numerous as
possible; I would wish a brotherly affection to prevail amongst her offspring;
I would have Christians united; I would have them join in every attempt to
crush the powers of darkness, and trample under foot the foe to God and man;
like a mother tender of her children; I would have the church, with wide
extended arms, clasp to her bosom her believing sons; nor by unnatural
au^^^rity repudiate her offspring, and tempt them to seek for ease, for
pleasure, and for comfort, in the harlot lap of Infidelity.

FINIS.

