Some OBSERVATIONS and DIRECTIONS for the CULTURE of MADDER.
Charlestown, South Carolina, 1775.
AN Endeavor to introduce any new Article of Agriculture and Commerce to the
Public, ought to be well considered and viewed in every Light, that all the
Advantages and Disadvantages may appear; otherwise the well-meaning,
industrious Plan'er may be brought into an Error by cultivating it, and the
Encourager of Commerce sustain a Loss by adventuring in what is useless and
unsaleable. The Writer, by the Experience he has had in cultivating MADDER,
ever since the Year 1764, from a few Sets which he then brought from England;
and notwithstanding the many Disadvantages, since that Period, of being deeply
engaged in Business, in but an indifferent State of Health, and being very near
two Years in England, has at present near thirty Acres of Madder in a thriving
and even flourishing Condition.

THE Article of Madder is so useful in dying every Kind of Woollen Cloth, from
the lightest Reds to the deepest Purples, and also for printing and staining
all Linens, Cottons and Callicoes the same Color, and every interveening Shade
between, that these Manufactures could not be carried on, to any Degree of
Perfection, without it: Therefore, no doubt can be made of its Utility and
constant Demand in every Part of Europe, and in every other Part of the World
where Manufactures are or may be carried on. Besides, the Production of Dies is
peculiarly beneficial to this Province, and likely to be p^^^^nently so from
our natural Connection, as we may be sure they never will be saddled with a
Duty, as Tobacco, Sugar, etc. these Articles being for the perfecting the
Manufactures of Great Britain; and it is a Piece of fixed and true Policy
there, that all Goods for Dyers Use, if regularly imported, entered and landed,
are free of Duty, when even the very same Article, used as a Drug and not for
Dyers Use, is sometimes loaded with a Duty.

IT was with some Difficulty at first that the Culture of Indigo was
introduced, nor can a Planter be blamed for using due Caution in a Thing,
perhaps, he is little acquainted with, and on which a great Deal depends; we
have now happily succeeded, though it struggled with many Difficulties both
here at Home.

BUT the planting of Madder, on a small Scale, can hurt no Planter much; for as
it is raised from Slips, though it has a very great Increase, it will be two or
three Years before they can go largely upon it, during which Period every
judicious Man will make Observations how it will answer, which he may easily do
in less than a Quarter of an Acre.; by digging it in October or November, which
will be about twenty-one Months from the Time of Planting, and then drying the
Roots and weighing them, he can soon judge whether it will be worth his while
to proceed.

I HAVE hereto subjoined such Observations and Experiments as I have been able
to make, both here and in Places where it is cultivated to Profit in England,
and I am sensible the Advantage is greatly in Favor of this Province, as it
does not grow larger there in three Years than here in twenty-one Months; the
Rent of Land there for Madder being about forty Shillings sterling an Acre,
each Year, which, when considered, will make a material Difference in Favor of
the Carolina Planter. In this Province, we have Plenty of Land that will suit
it; indeed I am persuaded it will grow on any Kind of Land; yet nothing will
pay better for good Land than Madder. I would particularly recommend it to be
planted in old Fields, to bring them into Tilth and good Heart again; it being
a meliorating Crop, owing partly to the shady covering it gives it, and to its
being laid in Ridges and obliged to be dug deep, in order to get up the Roots,
in which its Value Consists. The great Destruction to Land, by yearly clearing
new for Indigo, requires some Article of this Nature to bring Land into good
Order again; and I know nothing will do it more effectually; not even Turnips
when eat on the Ground; nor could I ever find that any Insect affects it. The
busiest Time will fall out in February, March and April; and again in October
and November, when some small Negroes may also be employed to Advantage.

THE Expense of erecting Stoves and large Buildings, such as are used in the
Low Countries, particularly in Zealand, may, I think, here be saved; and any
rough built Sheds or Barn Lofts, will dry the Roots sufficiently; and, if upon
repeated Trial it be found to be more advantageous when pounded, our Rice
Machines are exactly the Model of a Madder Mill, such as are used in Holland,
but in England they generally grind it with a Stone, moving in the Manner of a
Cider or Bark Mill. The Madder which comes from the Levant, and is produced in
the Archipelago and about the Island of Cyprus, is sent to England and other
Markets in Bags or Serons; the dried Roots unpounded. The Zealanders pound
theirs, as they then can make two or three Sorts, and pack it in large tight
Casks; this last Method will sell the highest, and saves a good Deal of
Freight; but I have been told by some Callico Printers, they would rather
choose to pound or grind it themselves. The usual Price in the Root unpounded
is from 201. to 251: Currency a hundred Weight; the best Crop Madder pounded is
from 301. to 401. Currency a hundred; some Samples sent Home from hence and
tried, was valued at 61. sterling a hundred. We have a Species of wild Madder
grows common in this Province, the botanical Description of which agrees with
the Sort cultivated for Use, except that the wild Madder is much smaller, has
little Root and a whitish Flower; the Character of the cultivated Sort has a
small yellow Flower of four Leaves; the Flower has one bell-shaped Petal with
four awl-shaped Stamina; after the Flower is past, it becomes a twin black
hairy Berry; the Leaves are star-shaped, and disposed from four to six in
Whorls round the Stalk; the Stalk is hairy, four cornered and of the Vine Kind,
and grows from two to five Feet high, according to the Culture and Goodness of
the Land, and spreads over the Beds in the Nature of our Spanish Potatoe Vine.
The Roots are composed of many long coral shaped Branches, not much larger than
a Goose Quill, and will often run three Feet in the Ground, if the Land be soft
and mellow; they are of a brownish red Color on the Outside, but of a clear
orange or yellow within, of a sweetish bitter Taste; this yellow pithy Part is
of the most Value, and turns of a red Color, when exposed to the Air, or any
Alkali is added, but it is most saleable when it breaks of a bright yellow; it
must be well dried in the Shade, and packed and pressed in tight Casks for Fear
of getting wet. It is easily propagated and increased by slightly covering the
Stalk or Haulm when it has done flowering, which generally happens twice in a
Year in this Province, though never but once in England, when a great Number of
new shoots will spring up from the Crown of the Plant, besides a Numder of
horizontal Fibers, which also send out a Number of Shoots fit to set out.

IT is supposed to be a Native of the Levant, about this Latitude. and was, it
is said, brought into Europe, about the Time of the Holy War, where it has been
carefully cultivated ever since.

I SHALL now proceed to the CULTURE of this useful Plant from the Observations
I have been able to make, which, though perhaps far from being perfect, are
sufficient for any Person, with a little Attention, to help him on his Way,
till Experience may have made him more perfect.

THE Land most proper is a soft, rich, sandy Loam, of a good Depth, but it will
succeed very well in any Land that will grow Corn or Indigo, and will grow on
any Land except a cold blue Clay, though not to the same Advantage as in the
Land first mentioned.

As the Roots will run very deep, where the Culture and Land suit, in which the
Goodness and Largeness of the Crop consists, the Land should be plowed or hoed
up as deep as can conveniently be done in November or December, the sooner the
better; and if old Field or strong Land should be plowed or hoed again in
January, the Frost having mellowed it, should in February be drawn in Ridges,
like Potatoe Beds, about three Feet asunder and two Feet high; I would
recommend to do this about two or three Weeks before you intend to plant, that
the Beds may acquire a little Solidity, and when you are going to plant, let a
Person rake the Tops of the Bed even. As soon as your Shoots or Plants are
about four to six or eight Inches long, which will generally happen here early
in March, a careful Person must take the Shoots from the old Plant, as near the
Crown as he can, when another takes and divides each Shoot singly, leaving a
Bit of the yellow Root to each, which is very easily and quickly done, laying
them strait with all the Roots one Way; another good Hand in the mean Time is
making a Hole with a Dibble at every eight Inches Distance on the Top of the
Ridge or Bed; a Boy following him, drops a Plant or Shoot close to each Hole,
whilst other Hands follow and fix the Plant and press the Earth close to it, a
little deeper than the yellow Part of the Shoot. Thus the Work going on
regularly, a great deal may be planted in a Day. The best Time, I think, is
March or early in April, as about that Time we generally have Rain, and the
Plants take immediately; but if later and a Course of dry Weather succeed,
Numbers of them will fail; when that cannot be avoided, a careful Hand must
supply every Plant that has failed, taking always the Advantage of soft, moist
or rainy Weather. If the Plants stand long out of the Ground, or are obliged to
be carried a great Way, they should be covered with wet Moss, or their Roots
put ten Minutes in Water to stiffen them, and make them take more kindly at
Planting. If your Land be grassy, as old Fields, it will require a slight
Hoeing downwards in a Month or six Weeks after it is planted. About the latter
End of June, when the Shoots or, more properly Haulm of the Plant begins to
spread, and some of it will be near blossoming, what was hoed down the last
Month must now be drawn up toward the Roots of the Madder; this buries the
Grass near the Plant, and increases the Shoots and horizontal Roots, which soon
strike down and increase the Quantity of Tap Roots. The Grass must still
continue to be kept under during the rest of the Summer; it is light Work if
attended to in Time, and a Hand will go through a great Deal of it. About
November the Haulm will appear to be dead, then you are to draw the Earth over
it one or two Inches deep, which covers it for the Winter. This is all that is
necessary to be done the first Year.

THE second Year, in the beginning of March, or as soon as the Shoots begin to
be from four to eight Inches long, for they push their ^eads early and strong
like young asparagus; they may be taken off, as before directed, so many as you
want to plant out, and in a Fortnight you will have from the old ^other Plant a
Number more of Shoots, which the Crown of the Plant pushes out with great
Exuberance; there should not again be taken off, as it will impoverish the
^oots too much. All the Management necessary the second Year, is to keep it
clear of Grass and Weeds; and about June, when the Haulm has done blossoming
and beginning to appear white, to turn it over the Beds and draw a very little
Earth over it, to prevent its falling back; but observe not to cover it too
much, for if you do, in the latter Part of the summer you will be plagued with
Crab Grass. Many People may condemn this Way of turning over the Haulm as
tedious; (one Negro will turn over an Acre a Day) besides inverting Nature and
answering no End. The Reason for treating it so is this: I observed the Haulm
by spreading over the Beds, would rot in the Intervals, and supposed that to be
the Reason, I could not procure a Quantity of Seed; I therefore had one Bed
sticked like Pease, in order to keep the Vine or Haulm from the Ground, but
stili the End I had in View of producing Seed was not answered; but I had a
Mind to see what Alterat on this would have on the Roots, and was agreeably
surprised to find I had about a fourth more Roots, and larger sized than the
adjoining Bed, which in Quantity, Culture and every other Respect, was the
same. As it would be too tedious to stick a large Quantity, I think the above
Method of raising and inverting the Plant the nighest Substitute for it;
besides the Sun gets better to the Sides of the Beds, and by shading the Crown
of the Plant keeps the Middle of the Ridges moist: But above all, I observed
that inverting the Plant stops the Circulation and Perspiration, which is great
at that Season of the Year, and seems to repel or throw down the Juices into
the Roots; the old Haulm seems to die away by Degrees, and a new Vegetation
insues in about three Weeks. In some Parts of Europe, the Haulm is cut off, but
this certainly hurts the Tap Roots, for as soon as it is cut, a greater Number
of new Shoots will come up; but the beforementioned Method affords the Roots
near three Weeks in the Middle of Summer to grow, without being impoverished by
the Shoots; however, every judicious Planter will try different Methods, and no
doubt great Improvements may in future be made, by communicating to the Public
their several Observations, always remembering the Good of the Whole is to be
preferred to that of a Few.

THE Madder Roots are seldom dug up in any Part of Europe the second Year, but
it certainly is come to as much or more Maturity in Carolina, if dug in October
or November, having then been about Twenty-one Months in the Ground. At any
Rate it is then fit for Market, and though perhaps it may pay great Interest to
such as can afford to keep it another Year in the Ground, and still keeping it
clean; yet, as it has already become Merchantable, the Planter may, after it is
properly dried as before, by spreading it on a boarded Floor, and having
thrashed the Dirt and Sand out of it, have his Crop sent to Market. A Premium
of five Pounds sterling an Acre was sometime ago offered by the Society of Arts
to the Cultivator, and no doubt, by proper Application, a Bounty for raising it
might be obtained. At present I can only add, that I wish it may succeed and
become a valuable Product to this Province.

AARON LOOCOCK.


