AN Englishman's Answer, TO THE ADDRESS, FROM THE DELEGATES, TO THE PEOPLE of
GREAT BRITAIN, IN A LETTER TO The Several Colonies, WHICH WERE REPRESENTED IN
THE LATE CONTINENTAL CONGRESS.

NEW YORK: Printed by JAMES RIVINGTON, M,DCC,LXXV.

AN Englishman's Answer, TO THE ADDRESS, etc.
Fellow Subjects,
THOUGH I am at present on a journey of business in America, yet, being one of
the people of Great Britain, to whom you address yourselves in congress, I
thought it my duty to peruse your address with as much attension as the nature
of my present business would permit; and having so done, I beg leave to address
you in answer to it. But as the nature of my business will not permit me to
devote so much time to it, as would be necessary to transcribe your particular
passages, verbatim, and then to answer them at large; I would request that your
address to us may lay before you, while you read what I shall write on the
subject.

When a nation, led to greatness by the hand of liberty, turns advocate for
slavery, there, doubtless, must be great reason to suspect, either, that virtue
is fled, or that negligence in the appointment of rulers has crept in; but I
must not be so hasty as to charge Britain with this, till I proceed farther
into your address.

Our ancestors, in almost every age (if you mean since they have been a
distinct kingdom) have indeed, during both foreign and civil wars, maintained
their independence (if you mean with respect to any other state in point of
government) and I am happy in agreeing with you, that they transmitted their
rights and liberties to us their posterity: Neither am I surprised, that you,
who are descended from the same ancestors, and entitled to the same rights,
should refuse to surrender them to men, who found their claim on no principles
of reason, and who prosecute them, with a design, that by having your lives and
property in their power, they may with the greater felicity enslave us. The
cause of America, is indeed an object of universal attention; and it is really
become very serious; but I am in a great measure unacquainted with the
oppressions, abuses, and misrepresentations, which you speak of; and though you
assure us, that you are led to address us, by a dutiful respect for our general
welfare, yet, till I get further on in your address, I shall not join with you
in those apprehensions of slavery, which you say is intended for you and for us.

I, and I believe, all my fellow subjects in Great Britain, consider, that you
are, and ought to be as free as us, and that you are entitled to all the
benefits of English subjects, a trial by jury, and a hearing in your defense. I
think, with you, that the legislature of Great Britain, is not authorized to
establish an impious religion, or an arbitrary form of government; but till I
have advanced farther, I cannot join with you that these sacred rights have
been so frequently and flagrantly violated.

The proprietors of the soil of Great Britain, are, indeed, lords of their own
property, subject only to the regulations of the legislature; but the
legislature has power to dispose of any part or all of it, without the consent
of the owner; and this power they do exercise, when they judge it necessary for
the public good; had they not, we never should have had that elegant avenue to
Black Frier's bridge, or the numerous navigable canals made, and now making,
all through the kingdom; but I would not be understood to say, that they ever
exercise it without giving the owner its honest value, unless he be obstinate
and will not receive it, which I might say is sometimes, though not very often,
the case.

The proprietors of the soil of America, are no less lords of their property
than we are of ours, neither is there any reason that you should submit it to
the disposal of our parliament, provided our parliament be not your parliament
also. The intervention of the sea that divides us, can in my opinion cause no
disparity of rights, neither can any reason be given, why English subjects who
live three thousand miles from the Royal Palace, should enjoy less liberty than
those who live three hundred miles from it; and, vice versa (for it cannot be a
good rule unless it works both ways) no reason can be given, why they should
enjoy more.

Reason looks with indignation on such distinctions, and as I am a freeman I
cannot perceive their propriety. But yet you say, that the parliament asserts,
that it has "authority to bind you in all cases without exception, whether you
consent or not." I grant that it does assert that it has full power and
authority to bind you in all cases whatsoever. And now let us consider on what
this assertion is founded.

First, the parliament consider you to be a part of the British empire or
state: Entitled to all the privileges of British subjects, capable of holding
any office of profit, trust, or honor, in Great Britain, and of setting in
parliament: Entitled to the protection of the British fleets and armies, and to
every benefit which accrues to members of that society.

And Secondly, the parliament consider themselves to be the legislature of that
empire, (consequently to be our parliament, and your parliament, and the
parliament of every other British subject,) whose duty it is to make laws, to
regulate the members of that empire, for the common good of the whole, and to
affix and determine for each of the respective parts, such orbs, as that the
motion of one part, shall not retard the motion of another part; and to make
provision out of the whole, for the support and maintenance of a sufficient
force, to protect, secure, and defend, every of the respective parts, in their
respective orbs, against the force of all its enemies, whether foreign or
domestic, so that the whole shall form one regular, strong, and lasting system.

It would be absurd to suppose, that an empire composed of several parts,
should be without an imperial legislature to regulate and bind the whole; for
without such a legislature, the whole could not be considered together, and
regulated as one empire. To suppose then that America is not to be bound by the
statutes of the British legislature, and that too in all respects, must
confound every idea of its being part and parcel of the British empire* must
invalidate your claims to the benefit which accrue to members of that empire or
society; and totally destroy your title to the protection of the British (...)
and armies.

It is true, it might nevertheless be a part of the dominions of the King (but
not of the imperial crown) of Great Britain, in which case you would be in the
same state (with respect to our society) as his Majesty's subjects in Hanover
are; but give me leave to ask, are his Majesty's Hanoverian subjects entitled
to partake of the benefits of the British society in any respect whatever?
Surely not.

Would you say, that your Royal charters give you the rights and privileges of
English subjects, and declare that you shall always be esteemed as members of
the British society? But even if the King's charter was sufficient for such a
purpose, each of you, as are not in charter-governments, could not make this
plea. -- But let me ask again, is it in his Majesty's power to give his foreign
subjects (for instance his Hanoverian subjects) the privileges of Englishmen?
Surely not: He may, it is true, give them privileges among themselves, similar
to those which are enjoyed by his British subjects, but cannot make them
partakers of the privileges of the British society. He cannot make them capable
of holding any office in Britain, or of sitting in the British parliament,
neither can he entitle them to the protection of the British forces. Nothing
but the legislature can give them those privileges, or receive them into that
society; nor could any thing be more absurd, than to suppose, that any person
should be capable of sitting in parliament, but such as are a part of that
society, over which the parliament presides. That the Americans do both claim
and enjoy this privilege, I could give many instances, but I shall mention only
two, viz: Mr. Beckford and Mr. Trecothick, both of which served the office of
Lord Mayor of the city of London, 1770, and both were Representatives for the
city of London in parliament, both those Gentlemen were Americans. Seeing
therefore, that the Americans are capable of sitting in parliament, they must
be a part of that society, over which the parliament presides.

From what has been said, it appears, that your title to those privileges does
not flow from your charters in the least degree, but is in fact this; you were
a part of the British society previous to your emigration; you emigrated under
the seal of the empire, or imperial seal of that society (which surely could
not be of any the least validity in Hanover, or elsewhere out of the empire;)
nor did you emigrate to form a new society, but to (...) a part of that
society, to which you had ever belonged; and such of you as emigrated from
other nations, were received into the British society by virtue of an act of
parliament.

Seeing then that you were at that time under the authority of parliament, and
that you have ever remained a part of the same society; and seeing also, that
the parliament never relinquished its authority over you, how is it possible
that you can be exempt from it now? Would you say, that you emigrated to a
country over which the parliament or imperial legislature had no authority? But
this, as I said before, destroys every idea of its being part and parcel of the
British empire: -- For, to be a part of the empire, lying out of the
jurisdiction of the imperial legislature, would be a most palpable absurdity,
fairly affronting to common sense.

But let us consider whether the authority of the parliament, or imperial
legislature should in reason extend hither or not -- The legislature at the
expense of the nation, fits out a fleet, and sends it on discoveries: They
discover a new country, and take possession of it in the usual manner, by
hoisting the flag of the nation thereon: -- Quere, then does it become the
private domains of the King? or does it become a part and parcel of the
imperial dominions, the same as though it had not been separated from the old
dominions by the sea? Surely the latter. The intervention of the sea can cause
no desparity, reason would look with indignation on such distinctions. --
Should it be obtained by consent from a foreign nation, (which was the case
with several of the colonies) the only difference would be that the expense
must be the greater.

But it is said, that the English constitution is such, that the subject shall
not be bound by any laws, or pay any taxes, without his consent, given either
by himself, or his representative, by him chosen for that purpose: That America
has no vote in such elections, and therefore cannot be constitutionally bound
by such laws.

But in this the English constitution is grossly misrepresented: The English
government being a mixed one differs from a monarchy (or any other single
constitution of government,) only in this, that in a monarchy, the Prince is in
himself the supreme legislature, (as is the Nobles in Aristocracy, and the
elected in a Democracy,) and in our mixed government, the supreme legislature
is composed of all three, viz. the King, the Lords, and the Commons in
parliament; and the constitution is this, that the two first of these branches
shall be hereditary, and that the third shall be chosen, by and out of the
commons: To wit, that the counties of Middlesex, Surrey, and shall send two
members each, which shall be elected by a majority of such of the freeholders
of the county, as choose to attend and vote at the election. That such and such
cities and towns shall send two members each (the city of London sends four)
which shall be elected by a majority of the freemen of such city or town: That
such and such towns shall send two members each, which shall be elected by the
majority of the corporation in such town; and here give me leave to observe,
that some towns which contain several thousand inhabitants, have not twenty
voters; and many large towns (of which Birmingham, Sheffield and Manchester are
three, the smallest of which is larger than the largest city or town in
America) send no members at all; and a large part of Southwark, whose houses
were pulled down by authority of parliament, to make that elegant avenue to
Black-Fryars bridge, is also without the privilege of voting; and upon the
whole, there is not one thirtieth part of the people of Great Britain, that are
entitled to vote in the elections. This is the English constitution, with
respect to the commons representatives in parliament, notwithstanding the many
misrepresentations of it among the common people of America. -- Neither do
these commons represent that part in which they are elected, more than they do
any and every other part of the empire: -- Forty of them make a house of
parliament; and the King, the majority of the lords, and the majority of
commons representatives, are by our constitution the representatives of the
whole empire, and by that constitution are empowered to make laws, which shall
be binding, on every part of the empire* Not only on every subject of the
empire, but also on the person of the King, and on the Imperial-Crown itself.
-- For how came we by our present gracious sovereign? by an act of parliament,
which placed the crown on the head of his royal ancestors.

Here we see that upwards of twenty-nine thirtieth parts of the people of
Great Britain are in the same situation as you are, with respect to election,
and representation. -- They consent no more to the laws which are made, or to
the taxes which are laid by parliament than you do, -- The only thing to which
they in reality give their consent, is this, they consent to be British
subjects, -- To be considered as a part of the British society, and to be
governed according to the constitution thereof: Which is, in effect, consenting
to be governed by such laws as shall be made, and to pay such taxes as shall be
laid, by those whom the constitution has empowered to make the laws, and to lay
the taxes. And this kind of consent is as much given by you as by us. Shall we
say then, that this is unconstitutional? Surely not. It is the very
constitution itself. That this part of the constitution might be altered for
the better, I would very readily grant, and I should be happy in seeing an
equal representation of the commons of the whole empire in parliament; but I
could never suppose it consistent with reason or the common good, to be without
a supreme sovereign legislature over the whole, which should have authority to
bind every part of the empire; for without that, it would be impossible that
the whole should be regulated for the common good, which is the most essential
point in government. -- This equal representation, however, cannot be had
without an alteration in that part of the present constitution: and by the bye,
a constitution of an empire is too great a thing to be tampered with. --
Alterations in a thing of such vast importance, should never be made, but with
the greatest and coolest consideration, and never attempted while the heats of
party prejudices actuates the mind, lest, instead of being mended, it should be
made far worse.

It is alleged too, that if the Parliament have authority in America, they
can, if they will, lay on such burdens as would inevitably enslave you; -- but
surely it is time enough to complain, when they lay on you more than your
proportion, which none of you have ever yet pretended to accuse them of.

The history of your Buccaneers, will furnish you with ample accounts of the
piracies in your seas formerly; -- What else but the British fleets protects
your trade now from those pirates? Or what else protects your coasts in time of
war from the enemy? -- A time of peace is the only time to prepare for war; --
What kind of title then would you have to the protection of our fleets in time
of war, unless you pay a proportion of the expense of the preparations which
are made in time of peace? Would it not be extremely unjust, that the
Parliament should lay taxes on us, to build ships, or to support a fleet, to
protect your trade from pirates in time of peace, or to defend your coasts from
the enemy in time of war, was it not that you were a part of our society, under
their authority and protection, and that they laid a part of the expense on you
also?

Doubtless, the Parliament could, if they were so evil minded, destroy or
enslave you: -- But what kind of reasoning is this? -- So also if a man be
permitted to walk about at large, he could, if he was so evil minded, kill
another man that he might meet with: -- If, therefore, it be said, that the
Parliament ought not to have authority, lest it should mis-use it; it will
follow, by the same rule, that every man ought to be kept penned up in some
little apartment by himself, lest he should fall foul on his neighbor. Strange
times these! But let us for a moment suppose both these absurdities to happen
(for the one is just as reasonable as the other) who, in the first case is to
regulate the state? and in the second case, where in the name of good luck do
we find the jailer?

But let us enquire, whether you did not always, till of late, consider
yourselves to be under the supreme authority of Parliament, and whether the
Parliament did not also consider you in the self same light?

The first colonization patent worth notice, was (if I remember right) granted
by King James the first, to the Virginia company, in the year 1606, which
covered all the lands from Carolina to Nova Scotia; and though that Prince
would willingly have been absolute over those countries, yet so far were the
then House of Commons, from supposing that the parliamentary authority did not
extend to Virginia, that we find the Virginia affairs in that House so early as
the year 1614; wherein the Commons firmly asserted the authority of Parliament
over those countries, and only three of the members who made the least doubt of
its authority, and these quickly altered their opinions. -- So great an
unanimity is scarcely ever to be found in that House. -- And so far were the
first settlers from supposing themselves to be out of the authority of
Parliament, that we find in the House of Commons, a petition to Parliament from
the inhabitants of Virginia, so early as the year 1621. -- But as this, and the
next reign, is generally spoken of with dislike in many parts of America,
especially in the New England governments, I will look into the Commonwealth
Parliament, under Oliver Cromwell, in the time of the great rebellion. In this
Parliament we find in act passed in the year 1650* declaring, to all intents
and purposes the authority of the Parliament over the colonies; and so far were
the people of New England from denying their authority, that (though the
southern provinces declared for King Charles the second) they (in New England)
joined with the Common-wealth's-men; and even to this day, many of them, (who
are now most inveterate against Parliament) speak of Cromwell with the highest
veneration and esteem. -- In the charter for Pennsylvania, which was granted
about two years after the Restoration of King Charles the second, the King
gives up the idea of absolute dominion (which his grandfather in all
probability aimed at, in Virginia) but he expressly reserves the power of
taxing them, with either "the consent of the Proprietor, or chief governor, or
Assembly, or by act of Parliament in England." -- In this reign, nay, in the
first session of Parliament after the Restoration, we find an act regulating
the shipping trade of the colonies, in which the words "Englishmen and English
shipping," are explained to mean all the shipping and all the subjects of the
British empire, in Europe, Asia, Africa, and America. -- And in the
twenty-fifth of this reign, an act was passed, laying duties in the colonies on
sugar, tobacco, cotton-wool, indigo, ginger, logwood, etc. So far were these
Parliaments from doubting their authority over America. But as this reign is
spoken of by some of the people here, with no great esteem, I will leave it,
and look into the reign of King William and Queen Mary, after the glorious
Revolution; a reign which is generally spoken of, with the highest approbation
in America. -- In the seventh and eighth of this reign, we find it enacted,
that every seaman, in every of the ships belonging either to his Majesty, or
any of his subjects, in any of his dominions, shall give sixpence per year out
of their wages, to the revenue of Greenwich Hospital; which tax has been ever
since, and now is, levied in the colonies, by virtue of this act. -- In the act
"for preventing frauds and regulating abuses in the plantations," which passed
the same year, all former acts respecting the colonies are renewed and
enforced, and the ships in the colonies are subjected to the same regulations
as the ships in the ports of England, and the revenue-officers have the same
powers to to visit and search ships, as the officers of the customs in England,
and the like assistance is given to them, with power to give this or other
custom acts in evidence, and the judges to allow thereof. -- Owners of land
too, are by this act, prohibitted from selling them without license from his
Majesty, to any other person than a natural born subject. -- But the main
matter expressive of the authority of Parliament in all cases, is the ninth
section of this act, which says, All laws, bylaws, usages or customs, at this
time, or which hereafter shall be in practice, or endeavored or pretended to
be in force or practice, in any of the said plantations, which are in any wise
repugnant to the before mentioned laws or any of them, so far as they do relate
to the said plantations, or any of them; or which are any ways repugnant to
this present act, or to any other law hereafter to be made in this kingdom, so
far as such law shall relate to, and mention the said plantations, are illegal,
null and void, to all intents and purposes whatsoever. -- So far was this
highly and justly esteemed Prince, and the other branches of his Parliament,
from doubting their authority over the colonies. -- I might mention other acts,
in this, and every subsequent reign: among others, the act for establishing the
post office, which is expressly declared to be for the purpose of raising a
revenue in America, and which, notwithstanding, met with high approbation here:
-- The acts laying duties on wine, sugar, molasses, etc. which also met with no
opposition. -- In short, there is scarce a session of Parliament since William
and Mary's reign, to the present time, but what contains more or less of the
supreme authority over the colonies; but I forbear saying any more of the acts
or opinions of the Parliament, and shall next consider the opinions of the
colonies, so lately as the year 1755. -- The colonies were at this time, under
the most direful apprehensions of being destroyed by the French. -- The
Assembly of the Massachusetts Bay, in a message to Governor Shirley, the fourth
of January, 1754, say (among other things) that the French have made such
encroachments, and taken such measures, as threaten great danger, and perhaps
in time, even the entire destruction of this province, (without the
interposition of his Majesty) notwithstanding any provision we can make to
prevent it. -- The Assembly of Virginia too, in the same year, address his
Majesty, informing him, that they have raised ten thousand pounds; -- that that
sum is not sufficient, but that they are unable to raise more, and therefore
pray his Majesty to extend his royal beneficence.

Here we see the inability of America to defend herself against the French and
Canadians (exclusive of the seacoasts* which must be defended by fleets) and
now let me ask, how could his Majesty give them any assistance, without his
Parliament? And would it not be the highest injustice, for the Parliament to
take our money, and give it to the King, for your use, provided you was not a
part of us, and equally with us, under their authority and protection?

The Massachusetts Assembly in another message to Governor Shirley, in April
1754, say, It evidently appears, that the French are far advanced in the
execution of a plan which has been laid more than fifty years, for extending
their settlements, etc. and for subjecting the whole continent to the crown of
France. -- That the French have but one interest, and keep one point in view.
-- That the English governments have different interests, are disunited, some
of them have their frontiers covered by their neighboring governments, and not
being immediately affected, seem unconcerned.

The Congress, from the several colonies which met at Albany, in July 1754,
among other things say, That the said colonies being in a divided disunited
state, there has never been any joint exertion of their forces or councils to
repel or defeat the measures of the French, and particular colonies are unable,
and unwilling to maintain the cause of the whole.

I have not time to transcribe these pieces at large, but I would humbly
recommend my readers to procure and peruse them.

Here we see an example of the absolute necessity of there being in every
empire, a supreme power that shall command the whole; but the main matter which
I shall mention, as declaratory of the opinions of the colonies, with respect
not only of the authority of parliament to bind you, but also of the necessity
of putting that authority in execution, we shall find in the proceedings of the
convention of Committees from the several provinces, who met at Albany in the
year 1755. Governor Shirley (who was held in the highest esteem, not only by
his province of Massachusetts Bay, but by the other colonies also) presented a
plan to these Committees, proposing a proportionable assessment on their
several colonies, and in order to compel all the colonies to comply, he
proposed as part of his plan, that application should be made to parliament,
for an act to empower the Committees of the several colonies, to tax the whole,
according to their respective proportions; and to this the Committees agreed.
And I find in the journals of the New York Assembly, March 27, 1755. When this
plan was laid before a Committee of each of their houses, they resolved, that
governor Shirley's scheme was well conceited, and that (if his Majesty's
general should approve thereof) that colony joined therein; and when the
Committee reported it to the house, the house resolved the same, Nemine
Contradicente. So far were these Committees, and this Assembly, at that time,
from supposing that they were out of the authority of parliament.

Thus my fellow subjects have I considered the grounds, on which the parliament
founded those assertions, which you so much dislike: I have shown the absolute
necessity of there being a supreme power to bind the whole empire; not only on
doctrinal principles, but also by giving a proof of it, in a matter, which has
within your own memory, happened among yourselves; and which in all probability
may happen again, and often: I have shown also, that that supreme power must be
in the British parliament, so long as you are a part of the British empire: I
have also shown, that the parliament ever claimed it, from the first settlement
of the colonies until now, and that they have ever exercised it, in some point
or other; and I have also shown, that you were of the same opinion with them,
even so lately as the late war; from whence your claim of exemption is but of a
very short date. I must therefore conclude, that their declarations can by no
means be considered as "heresies in English politics."

Though I so firmly assert the authority of parliament, yet I persuade myself,
that when the heats and prejudices of the present times abate, you will not
accuse me of being an enemy to America. I could heartily wish to see (as I said
before) an equal representation of the commons of the whole empire in
parliament. I should be happy in seeing representatives from Birmingham,
Sheffield and Manchester, etc. and the old depopulated boroughs cease to send.
I could also wish to see members from America, in both houses of parliament, so
that America might have its share in the general legislature, which revolving
often into the hands of the electors here, would give you the same security for
your liberties, as your fellow subjects in England have; but your unhappy case
in 1754-5, was there nothing else to be considered, would be sufficient to
convince one of the absurdity of being without a supreme legislature to command
the whole.

After this equal representation, I should even then, be far from wishing the
parliament to exercise her authority in internal taxation. If I might wish it,
they should only regulate the state, and (appoint Committees if they were not
sufficiently acquainted themselves,) to ascertain the proportion which each
colony ought to pay, and make laws, compelling the several Assemblies to raise
it, and on failure thereof (but not otherwise) to empower officers to assess
it, in some certain manner which they should judge most meet, according to the
second plan which governor Shirley in the year 1755, proposed for that purpose;
and then the Assemblies should raise it in any manner they should think best.
My reasons for this, is, that the parliament could not (at least would not be
so likely to) know on what to lay an internal tax, so as that it might be the
least burden possible on those who are to pay it; which is the most essential
thing to be considered in laying a tax. -- But with respect to commercial
duties, these cannot be laid with judgment, by any other than the general or
supreme legislature, because no other can see how to regulate commerce in such
an extensive commercial empire, so that it shall on the whole, produce the
greatest trade and advantages; which is also the most essential thing to be
considered in laying those duties.

Though the latter end of the late war, conducted under the able Earl of
Chatham, was exceedingly victorious, yet I cannot conceive the peace to have
been so inglorious a one, as some may imagine. It might perhaps have been made
more beneficial to this empire, if the war had been continued longer; but the
fate of war is so uncertain, that there was a perhaps also, that it might have
turned out otherwise. You well know that the war was extremely expensive and
long, and the burdens of it began to be very sensibly felt.

I have made diligent search for the plan, which you say was at this time
formed for enslaving America, but I have not been able to find, that it ever
had any existence, but in ungenerous imaginations.

Prior to this Era, it is true, nothing but small duties on merchandise, had
been laid in America, but as the riches of any part of the empire increases, so
also ought their taxes to increase, that all parts may pay toward the common
security, in proportion to their wealth.

I remember your loyalty in the last war, and if you will take the trouble to
read the pieces I before alluded to, you will find, that you then declared,
that all the strength of this vast continent (as you now express it,) was
insufficient to protect your own frontiers, let alone your coasts! -- You
prayed Britain to assist you, and to remove your enemy from your backs* She,
like a tender and affectionate parent, heard your complaints, and granted your
requests. She protected your coasts. She sent you part of her fleets and armies
to join your strength, and to remove your enemy. Nor was she sparing in her
assistance, but finally they were, and are removed.

Many (though not all) of your provinces, (I say it with respect) exerted
themselves with that loyalty which did them honor, and though their strength
was small, yet it was sufficient to show their willingness.

When the war was ended, and the enemy removed, notwithstanding the sums you
had contributed, were but a small part of the expense which attended your own
security and protection, yet seeing that you had advanced more than what was
proportionable to your abilities, with respect to ours; the parliament
considering you as a part of us, and equally under their protection and
authority, refunded the overplus of your proportions, as you frankly
acknowledge. This, my fellow subjects, I conceive to be proof, and that too, a
very high one, of the principles, the equity, and the honor of that nation, and
its legislature, which you now treat with the utmost ingratitude and contempt.

I have already given it as my opinion, that it would be most proper that the
Assemblies of the several provinces, should lay their internal taxes
themselves. Among these the Stamp Act might be reckoned; but though I shall not
be an advocate for the Stamp Act, but on the other hand, shall acknowledge that
the execution of it, might have been prejudicial to the new settlers in your
interior countries, who, from their situation, could not have opportunity of
getting stamps, without hurting themselves much more than the tax could do the
crown good; yet, give me leave to observe, that an act like that within proper
restrictions, might be a means of much service to many parts of America, by
contributing to lessen a most vile destructive spirit of litigation, under the
oppression of which, the New England governments fairly groan.

The Stamp Act, however was repealed, and that too (I believe) upon the
principle of its being likely to be prejudicial to particular parts, which
Doctor Franklin explained to the house of commons.

The duty on Paint, Glass, etc. was perfectly consistent with Doctor Franklin's
own arguments, while he was soliciting the repeal of the Stamp Act. The Doctor
(whom I much esteem on many accounts, though I cannot agree with him in all
things) at that time, declared to the house of commons, that the parliament had
an equitable and just right to lay a duty on the merchandise, which was carried
across the seas, because (as he told them) it was their fleets, at their
expense, which kept the seas clear of Pirates, and maintained the safety of the
carriage. For the truth of this, I refer you to Doctor Franklin's examination
before the house of commons, published about the time of the repeal of the
Stamp Act.

Another main argument used by Doctor Franklin, and by most people in America,
to wit that no man should pay a tax to which he does not consent, either in his
own person, or by his representative; would remain in its fullest force,
without the least infringement, by this mode of raising a revenue (unless
indeed the duties should be laid on the absolute necessaries of life;) because
every man is left to his own choice whether he will purchase the dutiable
articles or not, and consequently cannot pay the duty without his own consent
in person. Did not this fully prove that the grand legislature of the empire
was willing, nay was desirous, and determined, to adopt such measures only, as
they had the greatest reasons (from the mouth of your agent) to believe, would
not be disagreeable to your own sentiments? And this was no all, they repealed
this act too, so far as it related to what may be called conveniences, viz.
Paint, Glass, etc. and left unrepealed in this act, only a very small duty on
tea, which is surely one of the superfluities of life. So far were these their
proceedings from deserving those aspersions, which you so ungenerously throw
out against them, of being unjust, unconstitutional, etc. that they were
perfectly agreeable with every of your then arguments.

How inconsistent then, how repugnant to your former words and declarations,
has your late ungrateful conduct been! -- Surely a spirited nation cannot put
up with such insults. But behold you now make new arguments, which were not at
that time thought of, and which have nothing but absurdity for their
foundation. Unhappy! extremely unhappy indeed, should we all be, if the
legislature were like you, so continually changing with the wind!

How any of the revenues here are applied, I know not, but thus much I know,
that your trade is still protected from Pirates by the British fleets, and
these must be supported from somewhere, nor have I any reason to doubt, but
these revenues are applied for that or some similar purpose.

Though I am ready to believe that you have generally raised money for the
support of your particular, internal governments, yet I must take the liberty
of observing, that your declaration is not true in all respects. The
Massachusetts assembly refused to make the necessary provision for the support
of their fortress, notwithstanding they esteemed it both their interest and
their duty, and were urged to do it very strongly by many of their members;) or
else Castle William in the bay of Boston, would not (in all probability) have
been taken into the hands of the King; neither do they allege any thing for
their reason, but the exercise of what they themselves acknowledge to have been
the legal prerogative of the governor, in adjourning the assembly to Cambridge.
I could mention other failures, but it is unnecessary. How much you would do
for the state (if left to yourselves) is uncertain, your own affairs in 1754-5,
pretty evidently show, that you would not agree in it, be the exigences ever so
great.

The laws respecting the revenue are much the same (I suppose) as they are in
England; be they what they may, the fair trader is not endangered by them; but
many of our towns are so addicted to smuggling, that they shrink not at
violating the most sacred obligations, to answer selfish purposes; and the
inward conviction of your guilt, I take to be the only reason why you so highly
dread the rod. Your other laws too, I suppose, are much the same as ours.

The carrying offenders from here to England for trial, would doubtless be
extremely bad, was it to be used as a general practice; but surely you will
allow that there may be cases wherein it may be necessary; and the acts you
complain of expressly restrict the exercise of it to such cases only. If you
say, that you are out of the realm, there is a law for it as ancient as the
reign of King Henry VIII; and if you say, that you are not out of the realm,
you must allow the validity (at least) of the late acts; so that, be you within
or without the the realm, it is not against law: And where people are in a
violent heat with party prejudices, every one will grant that a fair trial
cannot be expected; therefore, in such cases, it is not against reason. That
this is now the case in particular parts of America, I can assert of my own
certain knowledge, and therefore I shall not condemn the act; but if it should
be made use of, where there is no danger of a fair trial, then, and not till
then, will I condemn the exercise of it.

An English Jury will never be actuated by the face of a neighbor, or the
appearance of a stranger, neither will they be moved by party prejudice, nor
national resentment, nor will the wealth or the poverty of the offender,
contribute in the least to his acquittal or condemnation at their tribunal.

I am surprised, exceedingly surprised indeed, that you should offer to palm
upon us for truth, so notorious an absurdity, as that your refusal and
destruction of the tea, was to prevent a president of taxation. The
Post Office, the duties on Wine, Sugar, Molasses, etc. were surely presidents
of the self same nature. These you continued to pay; and this same duty on tea
too, you had heretofore paid. How false! how ridiculous then, are your
pretensions! The true reason (I have been assured by a reformed smuggler, who
now reflects on it with horror) was this, the smugglers knowing that the
India-Company's tea, would have supplied the country, so much better and
cheaper than they were heretofore supplied; and knowing of consequence, that
their exorbitant profits (produced by perjury and false swearing) must
inevitably fall, unless they could blind and deceive the people; they therefore
endeavored to mislead and inflame the minds of the populace against the tea,
and succeeded in their base design.

I cannot but drop the tear of pity for such as are innocently suffering in the
town of Boston, and I hope they will have compassion shown them. But as his
Majesty's ports, are like his highways, free for all his subjects; when that
freedom is with impunity destroyed, it (in my opinion) becomes the
indispensible duty of the legislature to pronounce, that till it can be free
for all, it shall not be free for any. The main out cry now is, that they were
condemned unheard, but it is granted by most people, that the positive
information and complaint of the destruction of the tea, and of the inhuman
treatment of the Person of the King's officer, was sufficient to shut the
Custom-house (and consequently the port) till the town should be heard in their
defense. If therefore, the act had ordered, that the port should have been
opened again, when their innocence should have appeared on fair trial; or as
soon as they had made satisfaction, provided they should be found guilty, then
this objection would have been obviated; and let me humbly ask the people of
Boston, who best know the circumstances, what benefit would have accrued to
them from that clause, more than as the act now stands. However, I wish the
former part had been inserted in the act, if that would have made them easier.
But though it was not, I shall not conclude that justice and humanity are fled,
nor can I persuade myself that these proceedings were so irreconcilable to the
genius and temper of our laws and constitution, as the proceedings of the
Congress were, to the title by which they call themselves his Majesty's dutiful
and loyal subjects.

When the populace in any country so far misinterpret and misuse their form of
government, as to collect and assemble together, the Tailors, and the Cobblers,
and the Ploughmen, and the Shepherds, and there treat and resolve, about
matters of the highest importance of state, -- matter which can never be
acquired but with the greatest study and expense, and which they, from the very
nature of things must be ignorant of, as of the languages of the East; when
these things, I say, are carried so far as, to break out in open defiance to
both law and justice, so that neither person nor property can be protected from
the hands of violence, nor the offenders brought to punishment; which if
permitted to rage long must inevitably breed a general disorder in the state,
if not in time overturn the whole empire; it is surely high time that the form
of government should be changed, to such an one as cannot be so destructively
misinterpreted, and abused. This (I am very sure) has for a considerable time
been the case in the Massachusetts Bay, notwithstanding you would endeavor to
deceive my brethren in the parent country, by saying it was only because a
trespass had been committed on some merchandise in one of their towns.

Your wicked governors, and I cannot say much about; I might have given you
some credit as to this, seeing I am not acquainted with it, had I not found
other ungenerous and false aspersions; but to be honest with you, as the case
stands, I doubt much whether this may not be like some of the rest.

You strangely betray your geographical understandings if you conceive the
dominions of Canada, to be extended beyond its ancient limits! The present
province of Quebec is far, far smaller than what that government always claimed
by the name of Canada. Neither is the laws which you speak of, near so
unfavourable for the subject, as the laws of every of your colonies were in
their infancy. Pray turn your eyes to the Floridas and see what those new
colonies now are. Look into the Virginia charter, which comprehended all the
country between Carolina and Nova Scotia, (under which charter New England
first settled,) and you will find that the officers of that government, were
appointed by a council of proprietors residing in England, and had by the
charter, full and absolute power and authority, to correct, punish, and pardon,
govern and rule, etc. according to such orders, ordinances, constitutions,
directions, and instructions, as by our said council as aforesaid, shall be
established; and in defect thereof, in case of necessity, according to the good
discretion of the said governor, and officers respectively, as well in cases
capital as civil, both maritime and others. This, my fellow subjects, was your
constitution once, but happily (since your circumstances are altered) this as
well as the Massachusetts charter is abolished. Is not the present government
of Quebec ten thousand times more secure for the subject than this was? nor is
there any reason to doubt, but as soon as a constitution can be more properly
adapted to the nature and circumstances of those people, than the present is,
the mode of government in the province of Quebec will be altered also.

You pretend to complain of the French laws, but give me leave humbly to ask,
how you could try the French titles by the laws of England? -- The English
titles are not affected. -- And the French estates are released from all that
is disagreeable in the French tenure, to wit, the owner has power to give them
by will to whom he pleases. -- The criminal law is that of England, both in the
description and quality of the offense, and in the method of prosecution and
trial. Have they not the benefit of their Habeas Corpus then in criminal cases?
And what reason have we to suppose that they have not their Habeas Corpus in
civil cases? Many of you enjoy it only by virtue of his Majesty's instructions
to his Governors, and may not Governor Carlton have those instructions as well
as the other Governors?

I am astonished that you should conceive that any other than the church of
England, established in the first year of Queen Elizabeth, was the established
church of any part of the empire! -- How is the church of Rome established in
Quebec? Let us read the clause in the act -- And for the more perfect security
and ease of the minds of the inhabitants of the said province, it is hereby
declared, that his Majesty's subjects professing the religion of the church of
Rome, of and in the said province of Quebec, may have, hold and enjoy, the free
exercise of the religion of the church of Rome, subject to the King's supremacy
declared and established by an act made in the first year of the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, over all the dominions and countries, which then did, or hereafter
should belong to the imperial crown of this realm. -- Does this establish the
church of Rome? Nay, does it not declare, that the established church of the
whole empire is that of which the King is supreme head, which was established
in the first year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth; but let us read on, and that
the clergy of the said church may hold, receive and enjoy, their accustomed
dues and rights, with respect to such persons ONLY, as shall profess the said
religion. -- Is it this part of the clause that establishes the church of Rome?
This surely not only leaves every individual who now professes that religion,
at his liberty to turn Protestant, but declares, that that moment the church of
Rome shall lose that part of her revenue. -- So that this gives the individuals
of the laity themselves, full power and authority either to continue in the
profession of that religion, or totally to extinguish both it and its revenues,
just as they shall think proper. -- How, and on what foundation then, in the
name of common sense, is the church of Rome established? -- This kind of
ESTABLISHING is so much like being a part of the empire, lying out of the
jurisdiction of the imperial legislature, that common sense itself is affronted
at the expression. -- Will you say this act made provision for the clergy of
that church? I deny it. -- The provision was made long before. -- But you will
perhaps say, this act does not take it away from them; no, -- it takes it away
from them no faster, than the laity renounce that church, -- but it does just
so fast though; and that too, to enable his Majesty to provide another church for
them, as the act expresses it. -- But previous to the passing of this act,
every Protestant who held an estate, which was heretofore granted under France,
was liable to the payment of the revenues to the church of Rome; nor could any
thing less than an act of Parliament exempt them from it. -- Yet you say, by
this act the church of Rome is established! O shame! Shame to your
understandings! rather (I should suppose) shame for your endeavors to mislead
the ignorant! -- Had these revenues been taken away sooner, what should have
been done with it in the opinions of these good Christians? Should it have been
applied to the laity? Why to them more than to anybody else? It was always
reserved for the support of religion. -- Should it have been given to the
Protestant Clergy? But let us see how this rule would work in New England:
Suppose the provision for the maintenance of their clergy, was to be given to
the church of England, -- what would they say? They would immediately say it
was arbitrary, unjust, etc. etc. etc. many hard names they would give it. -- It
is a bad rule that will not work both ways, -- surely then the Canadians might
have said so had it been their case.

I am still more astonished at what you tell us of the fruits of their
religion. -- Religion of all kinds ought to bring forth good fruit. -- Far be
it from me to be so uncharitable as to dislike any person or body of people on
account of their religious sentiments, if they will not impose their opinions
on others. -- My opinion in religious matters is this, -- That seeing all men
are answerable to their God, and to their God only, for their religious
opinions; so all men ought to enjoy them, and to have the liberty of
worshipping their God in what manner they themselves shall think best; provided
they molest no other person or body of people, whose opinions are different
from theirs. -- But, if the actions of the different sects in religion are
enquired into, we shall find, by turning over the sad historic page, that it
was the -- sect (I forget what they call them, I mean the sect which is still
most numerous in New England, and not the sect which they so much despise) that
in the last century deluged our island in blood! That even shed the blood of
the sovereign, and dispersed impiety, bigotry, superstition, hypocrisy,
persecution, murder and rebellion through every part of the empire! -- Neither
would that sect, during a series of years, in which they held the power they
had usurped, so much as suffer the members of the established church of
England, to call upon their God in their usual manner! -- Yet notwithstanding
this treatment, the established church when (after the restoration) it
reassumed its former power, and shone forth again in its former luster, it gave
this very sect immediate toleration!

Moreover, we find, thet even long after the restoration, the Massachusetts not
only persecuted the industrious sons of quietness and peace called Quakers,
unto death; but neither would they suffer any person to celebrate a day in
commemoration of the birth of our blessed Redeemer; but by an act of Assembly
of that province, any person who should presume to keep Christmas Day, was
fined in an excessive sum! And in some parts of New England, even to this day,
the members of the established church of England, who reside among them (even
if there be no church of England within an hundred miles) are not allowed the
benefits of the sacraments, either of baptism, or the supper of the Lord,
although they are largely fined if they omit constant attendance on their
sermons! -- They are also to this day, both in Massachusetts and Connecticut
(whether residents or strangers) prohibited (under a pretense of purity and
piety) from walking or riding out, to view the sacred and adorable works of the
great Creator on Sunday! Though that most assuredly contains as much real
religion as the hearing of the sacred word: And an impertinent tything man or
constable, is empowered to interrogate, and (in Connecticut especially) either
with or without a precept, to seize and imprison any Gentleman who does not
yield immediate obedience to his tyrannical commands! Is this, my fellow
subjects, I say, is this liberty and religion? Surely not. -- It is vile
tyranny and superstition, bigotry, uncharitableness, persecution, and
hypocrisy; (let us remember what is said by the Prophet Isaiah, in a similar
circumstance) -- It is an abomination unto me, says the Lord, I cannot away
with it.

This, my fellow subjects, is a strange kind of liberty indeed! But it is no
more strange than true, that these high and mighty sons of liberty, will allow
no liberty either civil or religious, to any but themselves.

But let not the history of the actions of this sect, create too extensive a
prejudice in the minds of my readers, against the people or religion of
New England. -- Let no man be disrespected for the country in which he lives,
or from whence he came; nor for the religion which he professes; -- men may be
a disgrace to their country, or to their religion; but country or religion,
can, in my opinion, disgrace no man. -- If the person himself be an upright
man, that is sufficient, whether his country or religion be the same as mine,
or whether it be not. And I have found many individuals in New England, both of
the clergy and laity, professing this religion, who are as good men as any on
the earth; -- are free from bigotry and uncharitableness, -- allow members of
the church of England to partake with them in their sacraments, and as highly
despise the actions which I have mentioned, as any people in the world. --
Neither is there any that wish more heartily than some of them do, to see such
hypocrisy, superstition, bigotry and uncharitableness, totally rooted out from
among them. -- Let therefore, the rigid alone take the effects of their bigotry
to themselves, and let the free and charitable of them, be treated with that
respect and esteem which upright men of every sect are worthy of.

Behold! my fellow subjects! while you are telling us, that your liberties are
endangered by the religion of the Canadians, you in your address to them say
quite the contrary, and bring swift arguments to prove it! -- O ye dissemblers!
Both Britain and Quebec must be blind indeed, if they do not see your double
dealing at the very first glance! Surely, that virtue, justice and public
spirit of the nation, to which you appeal, will treat such deceitful chicane
with the contempt it deserves. But I hope the guilty alone will receive it; I
am a little acquainted with some of the New York Delegates, and am pretty well
persuaded that it sprung not from them.

Our union we esteem as well as you, neither do we want that you should be less
free than ourselves; we want not that you should be either hewers of wood, or
drawers of water; we want only that you should behave like fellow subjects; but
seeing your riches are increasing, and that you can already afford a little,
you may not expect that we shall bear all the burden of protecting you, that
we did previous to the late war.

Your association of non-importation, etc. will just be sufficient to show your
perverse temper. It appears to have been calculated with the sole view of
exciting a general spirit of rebellion throughout the empire! but you may rely
on it, you will lose your diabolical aim. Your former non-importation scheme
was scarcely felt in England, though it reduced many of yourselves almost to
poverty. And the few laborers in England, who may perhaps, (and perhaps not)
be out of their usual employ by this association can still be employed to great
profit, in cutting canals to improve our internal navigation, and save the
heavy expense of land-carriage. In short, if your trade with us was ten times
as large as it is, all the laborers who would be out of their usual employ,
till we sought out other markets for our manufactures, might be employed this
way to very great advantage.

When you were painting out to us, the disputes to which the town of Boston was
reduced, by removing the sea only a few miles from her; you should have
considered that your association, will reduce all your ports into a much worse
situation; nor will it be felt by the ports only, but by every industrious
farmer, in the country, who, for want of markets, for their produce, must be
bereft of their farms, to pay such debts as necessity itself will oblige them
to contract. Neither will the farms themselves under these circumstances, sell
for a quarter of their value. There will be therefore innumerably more
sufferers by your association, than were punished innocently in the town of
Boston; thousands of whom (to my certain knowledge) hold your association in
the highest detestation and abhorrence. Your proceedings, therefore, are much
more tyrannical and unjust than those you complain of! yet, they are to be
enforced by your committee! who in the name of common sense, among the
thousands that are averse to your association, will conceive it any less
arbitrary, to have the ports blocked up by your committees, than by a man of
war?

I promise you, that was I a resident in America, and your committees should
offer to impose your tyrannical association on me, they should have good luck
to get off whole.

I doubt not but the magnanimity of the nation has by this time, furnished a
parliament of such wisdom, independence, and public spirit, as will cool your
fiery dispositions, and restore harmony throughout the empire. Perhaps they may
oblige you to keep your word with respect to your association, though you would
not keep your words (delivered by Doctor Franklin) with respect to duties on
merchandise, which crossed the sea.

The main end of government in every society, is to produce security to its
members: For, without security no man can be happy in the enjoyment of any
thing which he possesses. -- We cannot be secure from foreign depredations,
unless we keep for our protection, a military and a naval force, similar to the
military and naval force of the inimical nations: Our known enemies continually
keep a standing army, and a standing navy, we therefore are obliged by the
principle of self-preservation to do the like. These cannot be supported
without taxation; and if you add, that taxation may not be made without
representation, and at the same time refuse a representation in the British
parliament, you must (in my opinion) seek for your protection, where you place
your representation and taxation.

If you take but the trouble to look round you, you cannot but know, that
without being under some state or other, you cannot be defended or secured.
Look into every nation in the world, you will find Britain the most able
effectually to protect you. And though you dislike your situation with her, as
the constitution now stands; see if you can find any other on the globe that is
half as good? But if you will say that all this may be true (as most assuredly
it is,) and yet, that you will not be bound by the laws of the British
legislature, -- Consider well the consequences, and be not too hasty in
determining to resist her authority, for that can do naught but make bad worse:
Your fiery resolutions, and warlike preparations in New England, for resisting
by force of arms, can only make a laughing stock for the world: Rather request
an alteration in the present constitution, and let the present prejudices
entirely vanish, before you make your application, and there is no doubt but
you will be heard.

An Englishman.


