Dr. LANGDON's SERMON Preached before the CONGRESS.

Government corrupted by Vice, and recovered by Righteousness.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE HONORABLE CONGRESS Of the Colony Of the
Massachusetts Bay IN NEW ENGLAND, Assembled at WATERTOWN, On Wednesday the 31st
Day of May, 1775.

Being the Anniversary fixed by CHARTER For the Election of COUNSELORS.

By SAMUEL LANGDON, D. D. President of Harvard College in CAMBRIDGE.

As a rearing Lion and a ranging Bear, so is a wicked Ruler over the poor
People.

Prove. 28.15. WATERTOWN: Printed and Sold by BENJAMIN EDES, MDCCLXXV.

IN PROVINCIAL CONGRESS, Watertown, May 31, P. M. 1775.
ORDERED, That Mr. Gill, Dr. Whiting, Mr. Pitts, Mr. Iewet, and Col. Lincoln,
be a Committee to return the Thanks of this CONGRESS to the Rev. Dr. LANGDON,
for his excellent Sermon delivered to the CONGRESS in the Forenoon, and to
request a Copy of it for the Press.

A true Extract from the Minutes, SAMUEL FREEMAN, Sec'ry*

A SERMON.
ISAIAH 1.26. And I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy
Counselors as at the beginning: afterward thou shall be called the City of
Righteousness, the faithful City.


SHALL we rejoice, my Fathers and Brethren, or shall we weep together, on the
return of this Anniversary, which from the first settlement of this Colony has
been sacred to Liberty, to perpetuate that invaluable privilege of choosing,
from among ourselves, wise men, fearing God, and hating covetousness, to be
honorable Counselors, to constitute one essential branch of that happy
government which was established on the faith of royal Charters?

On this day, the people have from year to year assembled, from all our towns,
in a vast congregation, with gladness and festivity, with every ensign of joy
displayed in our Metropolis* (...) now, alas! is made a garrison of mercenary
troops, the strong hold of despotism. But how shall I now address you from this
Desk, remote from the Capital, and remind you of the important business which
distinguished this day in our Calendar, without spreading a gloom over this
assembly, by exhibiting the melancholy change made in the face of our public
affairs?

We have lived to see the time when British Liberty is just ready to expire; --
when that constitution of government which has so long been the glory and
strength of the English nation, is deeply undermined and ready to tumble into
ruins; -- when America is threatened with cruel oppression, and the arm of power
is stretched out against New England, and especially against this Colony, to
compel us to submit to the arbitrary acts of legislators who are not our
representatives, and who will not themselves bear the least part of the burdens
which, without mercy, they are laying upon us. The most formal and solemn
grants of Kings to our ancestors are deemed by our oppressors as of little
value; and they have mutilated the Charter of this Colony in the most essential
parts, upon false representations* and new invented maxims of policy, without
the least regard to any legal process. We are no longer permited to fix our
eyes on the faithful of the land, and trust in the wisdom of their counsels,
and the equity of their judgment; but men in whom we can have no confidence, --
whose principles are subversive of our liberties, -- whose aim is to exercise
lordship over us, and share among themselves the public wealth: -- men who are
ready to serve any master, and execute the most unrighteous decrees for high
wages, -- whose faces we never saw before, and whose interests and connexions
may be far divided from us by the wide atlantic, -- are to be set over us as
counselors and judges, at the pleasure of those who have the riches and power
of the nation in their hands, and whose noblest plan is to subjugate the
Colonies first, and then the whole nation to their will.

That we might not have it in our power to refuse the most absolute submission
to their unlimited claims of authority, they have not only endeavored to
terrify us with fleets and armies sent to our Capital, and distressed and put
an end to our trade, particularly that important branch of it, the fishery; but
at length attempted, by a sudden march of a body of troops in the night, to
seize and destroy one of our magazines, formed by the people merely for their
own security; if, after such formidable military preparations on the other
side, matters should be pushed to an extremity. By this, as might well be
expected, a skirmish was brought on; and it is most evident, from a variety of
concurring circumstances, as well as numerous depositions both of the prisoners
taken by us at that time, and our own men then on the spot only as spectators,
that the fire began first on the side of the King's troops. At least five or
six of our inhabitants were murderously killed by the Regulars at Lexington,
before any man attempted to return the fire, and when they were actually
complying with the command to disperse: and two more of our brethren were
likewise killed at Concord-Bridge by a fire from the King's soldiers, before
the engagement began on our side. But whatever credit falsehoods transmited to
Great Britain, from the other side, may gain, the matter may be rested entirely
on this, -- that he that arms himself to commit a robbery, and demands the
traveller's purse, by the terror of Instant death, is the first aggressor,
though the other should take the advantage of discharging his pistol first and
killing the robber.

The alarm was sudden; but in a very short time spread far and wide: the
nearest neighbors in haste ran together, to assist their brethren, and save
their country. Not more than three or four hundred met in season and bravely
attacked and repulsed the enemies of liberty, who retreated with great
precipitation. But by the help of a strong reinforcement, notwithstanding a
close pursuit, and continual loss on their side, they acted the part of Robbers
and Savages, by burning, plundering, and damaging almost every house in their
way, to the utmost of their power, murdering the unarmed and helpless, and not
regarding the weaknesses of the tender sex* until they had secured themselves
beyond the reach of our terrifying arms. Near the Meeting house in Menotomy two
aged helpless men who had not been out in the action, and were found unarmed in
a house where the Regulars entered, were murdered without mercy. In another
house in that neighborhood a woman in bed with a new born infant, about a week
old, was forced by the threats of the soldiery, to escape, almost naked, to an
open outhouse; her house was then set on fire, but soon extinguished by one of
the children which had laid concealed till the enemy was gone. In Cambridge a
man of weak mental powers, who went out to gaze at the regular army as they
passed, without arms, or thought of danger, was wantonly shot at and killed by
those inhuman butchers, as he sat on a fence.


That ever memorable day, the nineteenth of April, is the date of an unhappy
war openly begun, by the Ministers of the King of Great Britain, against his
good subjects in this Colony, and implicitly against all the colonies. -- But
for what? -- Because they have made a noble stand for their natural and
constitutional rights, in opposition to the machinations of wicked men, who are
betraying their Royal Master, establishing popery in the British dominions, and
aiming to enslave and ruin the whole nation, that they may enrich themselves
and their vile dependents with the public treasures, and the spoils of America.

We have used our utmost endeavors, by repeated humble petitions and
remonstrances, -- by a series of unanswerable reasonings published from the
Press, in which the dispute has been fairly stated, and the justice of our
opposition clearly demonstrated, -- and by the mediation of some of the noblest
and most faithful friends of the British constitution, who have powerfully
plead our cause in Parliament, -- to prevent such measures as may soon reduce
the body politic to a miserable, dismembered, dying trunk, though lately the
terror of all Europe. But our King, as if impelled by some strange fatality, is
resolved to reason with us only by the roar of his Cannon, and the pointed
arguments of muskets and bayonets. Because we refuse submission to the
despotic power of a ministerial Parliament, our own Sovereign, to whom we have
been always ready to swear true allegiance, -- whose authority we never meant
to cast off, -- who might have continued happy in the cheerful obedience of as
faithful subjects as any in his dominions, -- has given us up to the rage of
his Ministers, to be seized at sea by the rapacious commanders of every little
sloop of war and piratical cutter, and to be plundered and massacred by land by
mercenary troops, who know no distinction betwixt an enemy and a brother,
between right and wrong; but only, like brutal pursuers, to hunt and seize the
prey pointed out by their masters.

We must keep our eyes fixed on the supreme government of the ETERNAL KING, as
directing all events, setting up or pulling down the Kings of the earth at his
pleasure, suffering the best forms of human government to degenerate and go to
ruin by corruption; or restoring the decayed constitutions of kingdoms and
states, by reviving public virtue and religion, and granting the favorable
interpositions of his providence. To this our text leads us; and though I hope
to be excused on this occasion from a formal discourse on the words in a
doctrinal way, yet I must not wholly pass over the religious instruction
contained in them.

Let us consider -- That for the sins of a people God may suffer the best
government to be corrupted, or entirely dissolved; and that nothing but a
general reformation can give good ground to hope that the public happiness will
be restored, by the recovery of the strength and perfection of the state, and
that divine providence will interpose to fill every department with wise and
good men.

Isaiah prophesied about the time of the captivity of the ten tribes of Israel,
and about a century before the captivity of Judah. The kingdom of Israel was
brought to destruction, because its iniquities were full; its counselors and
judges were wholly taken away, because there remained no hope of reformation.
But the scepter did not entirely depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between
his feet, till the Messiah came: yet greater and greater changes took place in
their political affairs; their government degenerated in proportion as their
vices increased, till few faithful men were left in any public offices; and at
length, when they were delivered up for seventy years into the hands of the
king of Babylon, scarce any remains of their original excellent civil polity
appeared among them.

The Jewish government, according to the original constitution which was
divinely established, if considered merely in a civil view, was a perfect
Republic. The heads of their tribes, and elders of their cities, were their
counselors and judges. They called the people together in more general or
particular assemblies, took their opinions, gave advice, and managed the public
affairs according to the general voice. Counselors and judges comprehend all
the powers of that government; for there was no such thing as legislative
authority belonging to it, their complete code of laws being given immediately
from God by the hand of Moses. And let them who cry up the divine right of
Kings consider, that the only form of government which had a proper claim to a
divine establishment was so far from including the idea of a King, that it was
a high crime for Israel to ask to be in this respect like other nations; and
when they were gratified, it was rather as a just punishment of their folly,
that they might feel the burdens of court pageantry, of which they were warned
by a very striking description, than as a divine recommendation of kingly
authority.

Every nation, when able and agreed, has a right to set up over themselves any
form of government which to them may appear most conducive to their common
welfare. The civil Polity of Israel is doubtless an excellent general model,
allowing for some peculiarities; at least some principal laws and orders of it
may be copied, to great advantage, in more modern establishments.

When a government is in it is prime, the public good engages the attention of
the whole; the strictest regard is paid to the qualifications of those who hold
the offices of the state; virtue prevails; every thing is managed with justice,
prudence, and frugality; the laws are founded on principles of equity rather
than mere policy; and all the people are happy. But vice will increase with the
riches and glory of an empire; and this gradually tends to corrupt the
constitution, and in time bring on it is dissolution. This may be considered not
only as the natural effect of vice, but a righteous judgment of heaven,
especially upon a nation which has been favored with the blessings of religion
and liberty, and is guilty of undervaluing them, and eagerly going into the
gratification of every lust.

In this chapter the prophet describes the very corrupt state of Judah in his
day, both as to religion and common morality; and looks forward to that
increase of wickedness which would bring on their desolation and captivity.
They were a sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers,
children that were corrupters, who had forsaken the Lord, and provoked the holy
One of Israel to anger. The whole body of the nation, from head to foot, was
full of moral and political disorders without any remaining soundness. Their
religion was all mere ceremony and hypocrisy, and even the laws of common
justice and humanity were disregarded in their public courts. They had
Counselors and Judges, but very different from those at the beginning of the
common wealth. Their Princes were rebellious against God, and the constitution
of their country, and companions of thieves, giving countenance to every
artifice for seizing the property of the subjects into their own hands, and
robbing the public treasury. Every one loved gifts and followed after rewards;
they regarded the perquisites more than the duties of their office; the general
aim was at profitable places and pensions; they were influenced in every thing
by bribery; and their avarice and luxury were never satisfied, but hurried them
on to all kinds of oppression and violence, so that they even justified and
encouraged the murder of innocent persons to support their lawless power, and
increase their wealth. And God in righteous judgment left them to run into all
this excess of vice to their own destruction, because they had forsaken him,
and were guilty of wilful inattention to the most essential parts of that
religion which had been given them by a well attested Revelation from heaven.

The Jewish nation could not but see and feel the unhappy consequences of so
great corruption of the state. Doubtless they complained much of men in power,
and very heartily and liberally reproached them for their notorious misconduct.
The public greatly suffered and the people groaned, and wished for better
rulers and better management. But in vain they hoped for a change of men and
measures and better times, when the spirit of religion was gone, and the
infection of vice was become universal. The whole body being so corrupted,
there could be no rational prospect of any great reformation in the state, but
rather of its ruin; which accordingly came on in Jeremiah's time. Yet if a
general reformation of religion and morals had taken place, and they had turned
to God from all their sins; if they had again recovered the true spirit of
their religion; God, by the gracious interpositions of his providence, would
soon have found out methods to restore the former virtue of the state, and
again have given them men of wisdom and integrity, according to their utmost
wish, to be Counselors and Judges. This was verified in fact, after the nation
had been purged by a long captivity, and returned to their own land humbled,
and filled with zeal for God and his law.

By all this we may be led to consider the true cause of the present remarkable
troubles which are come upon Great Britain and these Colonies; and the only
effectual remedy.

We have rebelled against God. We have lost the true spirit of christianity,
though we retain the outward profession and form of it. We have neglected and let
light by the glorious gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his holy commands
and institutions. The worship of many is but mere compliment to the Deity,
while their hearts are far from him. By many the gospel is corrupted into a
superficial system of moral philosophy, little better than ancient Platonism.
And after all the pretended refinements of Moderns in the theory of
christianity, very little of the pure practice of it is to be found among those
who once stood foremost in the profession of the Gospel. In a general view of
the present moral state of Great Britain it may be said -- There is no truth,
nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land. By swearing, and lying, and
killing, and stealing, and commiting adultery, their wickedness breaks out; and
one murder after another is committed, under the connivance and encouragement
even of that authority by which such crimes ought to be punished, that the
purposes of oppression and despotism may be answered. As they have increased,
so have they sinned; therefore God is changing their glory into shame. The
general prevalence of vice has changed the whole face of things in the British
government.

The excellency of the constitution has been the boast of Great Britain, and
the envy of neighboring nations. In former times the great departments of the
state, and the various places of trust and authority, were filled with men of
wisdom, honestly, and religion, who employed all their powers, and were ready
to risque their fortunes, and their lives for the public good. They were
faithful counselors to Kings; directed their authority and majesty to the
happiness of the nation; and opposed every step by which despotism endeavored
to advance. They were Fathers of the people, and sought the welfare and
prosperity of the whole body. They did not exhaust the national wealth by
luxury and bribery, or convert it to their own private benefit, or the
maintenance of idle useless officers and dependents; but improved it faithfully
for the proper purposes, for the necessary support of government, and defense
of the kingdom. Their laws was dictated by wisdom and equity; and justice was
administered with impartiality. Religion discovered it is general influence among
all ranks, and kept out great corruptions from places of power.

But in what does the British nation now glory? -- In a mere shadow of it is
ancient political system? -- In titles of dignity without virtue? -- In vast
public treasures continually lavished in corruption, till every fund is
exhausted, notwithstanding the mighty streams perpetually flowing in? -- In the
many artifices to stretch the prerogatives of the crown beyond all
constitutional bounds, and make the king an absolute monarch, while the people
are deluded with a mere phantom of liberty? What idea must we entertain of that
government, if such an one can be found, which pretends to have made an exact
counterbalance of power between the sovereign, the nobles and the commons, so
that the three branches shall be an effectual check upon each other, and the
united wisdom of the whole shall conspire to promote the national felicity; but
which, in reality, is reduced to such a situation that it may be managed at the
sole will of one court favorite? What difference is there betwixt one man's
choosing, at his own pleasure, by his single vote, the majority of those who
are to represent the people; and his purchasing in such a majority, according
to his own nomination, with money out of the public treasury, or other
effectual methods of influencing elections? -- And what shall we say, if in the
same manner, by places, pensions, and other bribes, a minister of state can at
any time gain over a nobler majority likewise, to be entirely subservient to
his purposes; and moreover persuade his royal master to resign himself up
wholly to the direction of his counsels? If this should be the case of any
nation from one seven years end to another, the bargain and sale being made
sure for such a period, would they still have reason to boast of their
excellent constitution? -- Ought they not rather to think it high time to
restore the corrupted dying state to its original perfection? -- I will apply
this to the Roman senate under Julius Caesar, which retained all its ancient
formalities, but voted always only as Caesar dictated. If the decrees of such a
senate were urged on the Romans as fraught with all the blessings of Roman
liberty, we must suppose them strangely deluded, if they were persuaded to
believe it.

The pretense for taxing America has been, that the nation contracted an
immense debt for the defense of the American Colonies; and that as they are now
able to contribute some proportion toward the discharge of this debt, and must
be considered as part of the nation, it is reasonable they should be taxed, and
the Parliament has a right to tax and govern them, in all cases whatever, by
it is own supreme authority. Enough has been already published on this grand
controversy, which now threatens a final separation of the Colonies from
Great Britain. -- But can the amazing national debt, be paid by a little
trifling sum, squeezed from year to year out of America, which is continually
drained of all its cash by a restricted trade with the parent country, and
which in this way is taxed to the government of Britain in a very large
proportion? Would it not be much superior wisdom, and sounder policy, for a
distressed kingdom to retrench the vast unnecessary expenses continually
incurred by its enormous vices? -- To stop the prodigious sums paid in
pensions, and to numberless officers, without the least advantage to the
public? -- to reduce the number of devouring servants in the Great Family? --
to turn their minds from the pursuit of pleasure, and the boundless luxuries of
life, to the important interests of their country, and the salvation of the
common wealth? -- Would not a reverend regard to the authority of divine
revelation, an hearty belief of the gospel of the grace of God, and a general
reformation of all those vices which bring misery and ruin upon individuals,
families and kingdoms, and which have provoked heaven to bring the nation into
such perplexed and dangerous circumstances, be the surest way to recover the
sinking state, and make it again rich and flourishing? Millions might annually
be saved, if the kingdom were generally and thoroughly reformed; and the public
debt, great as it is, might in a few years be cancelled by a growing revenue,
which now amounts to full ten millions per annum, without laying additional
burdens on any of the subjects. But the demands of corruption are constantly
increasing, and will forever exceed all the resources of wealth which the wit
of man can invent or tyranny impose.

Into what fatal policy has the nation been impelled by its public vices! To
wage a cruel war with its own children in these colonies, only to gratify the
lust of power, and the demands of extravagance! May God, in his great mercy
recover Great Britain from this fatal infatuation; show them their errors; and
give them a spirit of reformation, before it is too late to avert impending
destruction. May the eyes of the King be opened to see the ruinous tendency of
the measures into which he has been led, and his heart inclined to treat his
American Subjects with justice and clemency, instead of forcing them still
farther to the last extremities! God grant some method may be found out to
effect a happy reconciliation, so that the colonies may again enjoy the
protection of their Sovereign, with perfect security of all their natural
rights, and civil and religious liberties.

But, alas! have not the sins of America, and of New England in particular, had
a hand in bringing down upon us the righteous judgments of heaven? Wherefore is
all this evil come upon us? Is it not because we have forsaken the Lord? Can we
say we are innocent of crimes against God? No surely; it becomes us to humble
ourselves under his mighty hand, that he may exalt us in due time. However
unjustly and cruelly we have been treated by man, we certainly deserve, at the
hand of God, all the calamities in which we are now involved. Have we not lost
much of that spirit of genuine christianity, which so remarkably appeared in
our ancestors, for which God distinguished them with the signal favors of
providence when they fled from tyranny and persecution into this western
desert? Have we not departed from their virtues? Though I hope and am confident,
that as much true religion, agreeable to the purity and simplicity of the
gospel, remains among us, as among any people in the world; yet in the midst of
the present great apostasy of the nation's professing christianity, have not we
likewise been guilty of departing from the living God? Have we not made light
of the gospel of salvation, and too much affected the cold, formal, fashionable
religion of countries grown old in vice, and overspread with infidelity? Do not
our follies and iniquities testify against us? Have we not, especially in our
Seaports, gone much (...) far into the pride and luxuries of life? Is it not a
fact open to common observation, that profaness, intemperance, unchastity, the
love of pleasure, fraud, avarice, and other vices, are increasing among us from
year to year? And have not even these young governments been in some measure
infected with the corruptions of European Courts? -- Has there been no
flattery; no bribery; no artifices practiced, to get into places of honor and
profit, or carry a vote to serve a particular interest, without regard to right
or wrong? Have our Statesmen always acted with integrity? And every Judge with
impartiality, in the fear of God? In short, have all ranks of men showed regard
to the divine commands, and joined to promote the Redeemer's kingdom, and the
public welfare? I wish we could more fully justify ourselves in all these
respects. If such sins have not been so notorious among us as in older
countries, we must nevertholess remember, that the sins of a people who have
been remarkable for the profession of godliness, are more aggravated by all the
advantages and favors they have enjoyed, and will receive more speedy and
signal punishment; as God says of Israel -- You only have I known of all the
families of the earth, therefore will I punish you for all your iniquities.
Amos 3.2.


The judgments now come upon us are very heavy and distressing, and have fallen
with peculiar weight on our Capital; where, notwithstanding the plighted honor
of the chief Commander of the hostile troops, many of our brethren are still
detained as if they were captives; and those that have been released have left
the principal part of their substance, which is withheld by arbitrary orders,
contrary to an express treaty, to be plundered by the army. Soon after the
battle at Concord, General Gage stipulated with the Select Men of Boston, that
if the Inhabitants would deliver up their arms, to be deposited in
Fanueil-Hall, and returned when circumstances would permit, they should have
liberty to quit the town, and take with them all their effects. They readily
complied; but soon found themselves abused, With great difficulty, and very
slowly, they obtain passes; but are forbidden to carry out any thing besides
household furniture and wearing apparel. Merchants and Shopkeepers are obliged
to leave behind all their merchandise, and even their Cash is detained.
Mechanics are not allowed to bring out the most necessary tools for their work.
Not only their family stores of provisions are stopped; but it has been
repeatedly and credibly affirmed, that poor women and children have had the
very smallest articles of this kind taken from them, which were necessary for
their refreshment while they traveled a few miles to their friends; and that
even from young children* in their mothers arms* the cruel Soldiery have taken
the morsel of bread given to prevent their crying, and thrown it away. How much
better for the Inhabitants to have resolved, at all hazards, to defend
themselves by their arms against such an enemy, than suffer such shameful abuse!


Let me address you in the words of the prophet -- O Israel, return unto the
Lord thy God for thou have fallen by thine iniquity -- My brethren, let us
repent and implore the divine mercy. Let us amend our ways, and our doings;
reform every thing which has been provoking to the most high, and thus endeavor
to obtain the gracious interpositions of providence for our deliverance.

If true religion is revived by means of these public calamities, and again
prevails among us; if it appears in our religious assemblies, -- in the conduct
of our civil affairs, -- in our armies, -- in our families, -- in all our
business and conversation, -- we may hope for the direction and blessing of the
Most High, while we are using our best endeavors to preserve and restore the
civil government of this Colony, and defend America from slavery.

Our late happy government is changed into the terrors of military execution.
Our firm opposition to the establishment of an arbitrary system is called
Rebellion, and we are to expect no mercy but by yielding property and life at
discretion. This we are resolved at all events not to do; and therefore, we
have taken arms in our own defense, and all the Colonies are united in the
great cause of liberty.

But how shall we live while civil government is dissolved? What shall we do
without Counselors and Judges? A state of absolute anarchy is dreadful.
Submission to the tyrany of hundreds of imperious masters, firmly embodied
against us, and united in the same cruel design of disposing of our substance
and lives at their pleasure, and making their own will our law in all cases
whatever, is the vilest slavery, and worse than death.

Thanks be to God, that he has given us, as men* natural rights independent on
all human laws whatever; and that these rights are recognized by the grand
Charter of British Liberties. By the law of nature any body of people,
destitute of order and government, may form themselves into a civil society
according to their best prudence, and so provide for their common safety and
advantage. When one form is found, by the majority, not to answer the grand
purpose in any tolerable degree, they may by common consent put an end to it,
and set up another: only as all such great changes are attended with
difficulty, and danger of confusion, they ought not to be attempted without
urgent necessity, which will be determined always by the general voice of the
wisest and best members of the community.

If the great servants of the public forget their duty, betray their (...) and
fell their country, or make war against the most valuable rights and privileges
of the people; reason and justice require that they should be discarded, and
others appointed in their room, without any regard to formal resignations of
their forfeited power.

It must be ascribed to some supernatural influence on the minds of the main
body of the people through this extensive continent, that they have so
universally adopted the method of managing the important matters necessary to
preserve among them a free government, by corresponding committees and
congresses, consisting of the wisest and most disinterested patriots in
America, chosen by the unbiased suffrages of the people assembled for that
purpose, in their several towns, counties and provinces. So general agreement,
through so many provinces of so large a country, in one mode of self
preservation, is unexampled in any history: and the effect has exceeded our
most sanguine expectations. Universal tumults, and all the irregularities and
violence of mobish factions, naturally arise when legal authority ceases. But
how little of this has appeared in the midst of the late obstructions of civil
government! Nothing more than what has often happened in Great Britain and
Ireland, in the face of the civil powers in all their strength: nothing more
than what is frequently seen in the midst of the perfect regulations of the
great city of London: And, may I not add, nothing more than has been absolutely
necessary to carry into execution the spirited resolutions of a people too
sensible to deliver themselves up to oppression and slavery. The judgment and
advice of the Continental Assembly of Delegates have been as readily obeyed, as
if they were authentic acts of a long established parliament. And in every
colony, the votes of a congress have had equal effect with the laws of great
and general courts.

It is now ten months since this Colony has been deprived of the benefit of
that government which was so long enjoyed by charter They have had no general
assembly for matters of legislation, and the public revenue. The courts of
justice have been shut up; and almost the whole executive power has ceased to
act. Yet order among the people has been remarkably preserved; few crimes have
been committed punishable by the judge; even former contentions betwixt one
neighbor and another have ceased; nor have fraud and rapine taken advantage of
the imbecility of the civil powers.

The necessary preparations for the defense of our liberties required not only
the collected wisdom and strength of the colony, but an immediate cheerful
application of the wealth of individuals to the public service, in due
proportion; or a taxation which depended on general consent. Where was the
authority to vote, collect, or receive the large sums required, and make
provision for the utmost extremities? -- A Congress succeeded to the honors of
a General Assembly, as soon as the latter was crushed by the hand of power. It
gained all the confidence of the people. Wisdom and prudence secured all that
the laws of the former constitution could have given. And we now observe, with
astonishment, an army of many thousands of well disciplined troops suddenly
assembled, and abundantly furnished with all necessary supplies in defense of
the liberties of America.

But is it proper or safe for the colony to continue much longer in such
imperfect order? Must it not appear rational and necessary, to every man that
understands the various movements requisite to good government, that the many
parts should be properly settled, and every branch of the legislative and
executive authority restored to that order and vigor on which the life and
health of the body politic depend? To the honorable Gentlemen, now met in this
new Congress as the Fathers of the People, this weighty matter must be
referred. Who knows but in the midst of all the distresses of the present war
to defeat the attempts of arbitrary power, God may in mercy restore to us our
Judges as at the first, and our Counselors as at the beginning.

On your wisdom, religion, and public spirit, Honored Gentlemen, we depend, to
determine what may be done as to the important matter of reviving the form of
government, and settling all necessary affairs relating to it in the present
critical state of things, that we may again have law and justice, and avoid the
danger of anarchy and confusion. May GOD be with you, and by the influences of
his spirit direct all your counsels and resolutions for the glory of his name*
and the safety and happiness of this colony. We have great reason to
acknowledge with thankfulness the evident tokens of the divine presence with
the former congress; that they were led to foresee present exigencies, and make
such effectual provision for them. It is our earnest prayer to the Father of
Lights, that he would irradiate your minds, make all your way plain, and grant
you may be happy instruments of many and great blessings to the people by whom
you are constituted, to New England, and all the united Colonies.

Let us praise our God for the advantages already given us over the enemies of
Liberty; particularly, that they have been so dispirited by repeated experience
of the efficacy of our arms; and that in the late action at Chelsea* when
several hundreds of our soldiery, the greater part open to the fire of so many
cannon, swivels, and muskets from a battery advantageously situated, from two
armed cutters, and many barges full of marines, and from ships of the line in
the harbor, not one man on our side was killed, and but two or three wounded;
when, by the best intelligence, a great number were killed and wounded on the
other side, and one of their cutters was taken and burnt, the other narrowly
escaping with great damage. This action was in the night following the 27th
current, after our soldiery had been taking off the cattle from some islands in
Boston harbor. By the best information we have been able to procure, about 105
of the King's troops were killed, and 160 wounded in the engagement.


If God be for us, who can be against us? The enemy has reproached us for
calling on his name, and professing our trust in him. They have made a mock of
our solemn Fasts, and every appearance of serious christianity in the land. On
this account* by way of contempt, they call us saints; and that they themselves
may keep at the greatest distance from this character, their mouths are full of
horrid blasphemies, cursing and bitterness, and vent all the rage of malice,
and barbarity. And may we not be confident that the Most High, who regards
these things, will vindicate his own honor, and plead our righteous cause
against such enemies to his government as well as our liberties. O, may our
Camp be free from every accursed thing! May our Land be purged from all it is
sins! May we be truly a holy people, and all our towns cities of righteousness!
Then the Lord will be our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble;
and we shall have no reason to be afraid though thousands of enemies set
themselves against us round (...) -- though all nature should be thrown into
(...) and convulsions. He can command the (...) in their courses to fight his
battles, and all the elements to wage war with his enemies He can destroy them
with innumerable plagues, or send faintness into their hearts, so that the men
of (...) shall not find their hands. In a variety of (...) he can work
salvation for us, as he did for his people in ancient days, and according to
the many remarkable deliverances granted in former times to Great Britain and
New England, when Popish machinations threatened both countries with civil and
ecclesiastical tyranny. When we consider the late Canada Bill; which implies*
not merely a toleration of the Roman catholic religion* (which would be just
and liberal) but a firm establishment of it through that extensive province*
now greatly enlarged to serve political purposes; by which means multitudes of
people, subjects of Great Britain, which may hereafter settle that vast
country* will be tempted, by all the attachments arising from an establishment,
to profess that religion, or be discouraged from any endeavors to propagate
reformed principles; have we not great reason to suspect* that all the late
measures respecting the Colonies have originated from popish schemes of men who
would (...) restore the race of Stewart and who look on popery as a religion
most favorable to arbitrary power? It is plain fact* that Despotism has an
establishment in that province equally with the Roman-catholic Church. The
Governor, with a Council very much under his power, has by his commission
almost unlimited authority, free from the clog of Representatives of the
people. However agreeable this may be to the genius of the French, English
Subjects there will be discouraged from continuing in a country* where both
they and their posterity will be deprived of the greatest privileges of the
British constitution, and in many respects feel the effects of absolute
monarchy.

Lord Littleton in his defense of this detestable Statute, frankly concedes,
that it is an establishment of the Roman-catholic religion, and that part of
the policy of it was to provide a check upon the New England Colonies. And the
writer of an Address of the people of Great Britain to the inhabitants of
America, just published expresses himself with great precision when he says,
that Statute gave toleration to ENGLISH Subjects."




May the Lord hear us in this day of trouble, and the name of the God of Jacob
defend us; send us help from his sanctuary; and strengthen us out of Zion. We
will rejoice in his salvation, and in the name of our God we will set up our
banners; let us look to him to fulfill all our petitions.

FINIS.

