A NARRATIVE OF THE Indian Wars IN NEW ENGLAND, From the first Planting thereof
in the Year 1607, to the Year 1677.

CONTAINING A Relation of the OCCASION, RISE and PROGRESS of the WAR with the
Indians, in the Southern, Western, Eastern and Northern Parts of said COUNTRY.

BY WILLIAM HUBBARD, A. M. Minister of Ipswich.

And the Lord said unto Moses, write this for a Memorial in a Book.

EXODUS XVII. 14. Which we have heard and known, and our Fathers have told us.
That the Generation to come might know them, even the Children which should be
born: Who should arise and declare them to their Children.

PSALM. LXXVIII. 3, 6. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by JOHN BOIL in
Marlborough-Street. 1775.

The following Narrative of the Indian Wars, was published by Authority in the
Year 1677, as appears by the following Recommendation prefixed to the Edition
then published, Viz.
THE worthy AUTHOR of this Narrative (of whose fidelity we are well assured) by
his great pains and industry, in collecting and compiling the several
occurrences of this Indian War, from the relations of such as were present in
the particular actions, has faithfully, and truly performed the same, as far
as best information agreeing could be obtained, which is therefore judged meet
for public view; and we whose names are underwritten, deputed by the GOVERNOR
and COUNCIL of the Massachusetts Colony to peruse, and license the same, have,
and do accordingly order it to be imprinted, as being of public benefit, and
judge the AUTHOR to have deserved due acknowledgment and thanks for the same.

Boston, March 29, 1677. SIMON BRADSTREET, DANIEL DENNISON, JOSEPH DUDLEY.

PREFACE TO THIS EDITION.
THE gracious hand of Divine Providence in the preservation of the New England
Colonies in their infant state, gloriously appears, from the facts, briefly,
but faithfully transmitted down to us, by one of our venerable forefathers in
the following NARRATIVE of the Troubles with the Indians in New England, a very
numerous and barbarous people, dispersed through the wilderness in every part
of the land.

THESE Savages began a War with the first English Adventurers, while they were
few in number, yea very few, and strangers in the land. This rendered their
deliverance an event truly great and memorable.

THEY were saved indeed, as by fire: Their loss of men and substance, compared
with their numbers and ability, was very great, and long severely felt.

HEAVY as the public expenses were to support the War, these were but a very
inconsiderable part of the burdens and charges to which particular towns,
families and individuals were necessarily subjected, in guards, garrisons, and
watchings in their own defense.

THE whole Country was the seat of War, and every man procured his bread in
jeopardy of his life.

LIKE Nehemiah's builders, each one toiled with his weapon of war in one hand,
and his instrument of labor in the other; exposed every moment to death, from a
watchful unseen foe.

IN the frequent alarms which spread from town to town, some escaping from
danger, ran into greater; others met their own fate in their attempts to
relieve their neighbors in the same, or different scattered settlements.

THIS was the deplorable state of the New England colonies, a very few towns
excepted; a distress, more easily conceived than expressed, and indeed scarcely
conceivable by the greater part of the present generation, since the then
hideous wilderness is become a fruitful field, and well settled towns
overspread the land.

THE reader unacquainted with this country in its uncultivated state, may here
inquire, Why the first settlers thus exposed themselves, by making disjoined
and very distant settlements? Necessity led to this: The lands near the
seacoasts were generally less fertile, and found hard to subdue; therefore,
for present subsistence in their feeble condition, they were obliged to seek
the borders of rivers and streams, for the sake of intervals and meadows, both
on account of their fertility, and of their being open and prepared for
immediate improvement.

THEY were also encouraged in making these scattered settlements by the general
friendly disposition of the Natives, who freely sold their lands, for which a
valuable consideration was paid, without exception, where a claim was made.

THE Indians perceived their interest in admitting their English neighbors, as
they furnished them with means of much easier subsistence; and the utmost care
was taken by the several governments of the united coo^ies, to prevent every
occasion of distrust,

THE Pequod War was confined to the westerly parts of Connecticut. Not far from
New London.


PHILLIP'S War, as it is called, began in Plymouth Colony, His Headquarters
were at Mount-Hope, now Bristol.
but spread through the Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and province of Main, in
extent above 300 miles. And within the compass of one year, the numerous tribes
of Savages within the limits of New England, were drawn into this war against
us, a very few excepted.

SURELY we may say, had not the Lord been on our side, when men thus rose up
against us, they had quickly swallowed us up.

OUR Fathers, indeed, had come out of great tribulation, into this wilderness,
which, under Providence was a means of improving them in faith, fortitude and
patience, to endure hardships beyond a parallel, 'till they obtained
deliverance: And some of the first adventurers lived to see the wilderness
become a fruitful field.

BUT this was not their intended rest: They had sublimer views: They looked for
another and be^ter country, that is an heavenly. And however they may have been
misrepresented, by ignorant or ill-designing persons, they were men of whom the
world was not worthy.

THE cruel charges of peculiar bigotry, and a persecuting spirit, wantonly
alleged against them, are founded on facts not truly stated.

ACCORDING to the natural course of things in this depraved and mutable state,
their descendants at this day, as might be expected, have in a measure,
departed from that simplicity of manners, by which their renowned ancestors
were justly distinguished: But notwithstanding, it may with truth be asserted,
that no instance can be produced, in the present or any past age, among like
numbers, where good order has so universally prevailed, as in the New England
colonies, even in populous and opulent towns, especially our CAPITAL.

WE of this province, with inconsiderable intermissions, from that early
period, at unknown expense and loss, have been called to defend our lives and
properties against the incursions of more distant savages. Our trust has been
in the name of the Lord, our fathers God and Deliverer; and hitherto he has
delivered us. May we never be unmindful of his signal benefits!

WE are now, under the smiles of divine Providence, increased to a multitude of
people.

OUR many frontier settlements are continually exposed to savage invasion: And
though we trust not to our own bow; yet, as prudence directs, we are all armed
and prepared for a defensive War. And yet, having the wormwood and the gall
still in remembrance, no people more ardently wish and pray, that Wars may
forever cease, and peace on earth, and good will among men, universally prevail.

Boston, May 20, 1775.
A NARRATIVE OF THE INDIAN WARS IN NEW ENGLAND, FROM THE FIRST PLANTING THEREOF
IN THE YEAR MDCVII, TO THE YEAR MDCLXXVII.
KNOWN unto God are all his works from the foundation of the world, though
manifest to us, only by the events of time, that fruitful mother of all things,
which in the former age did bring forth, at least did bring to light the
knowledge of this western world, called America, that in all foregoing times
and ages, lay hid in this obscure and remote region, covered with a veil of
ignorance, and locked up from the knowledge of all the rest of the inhabitants
of the earth. To whom the honor of its investigation does of right more
properly belong, is sufficiently declared by the history and reports of such as
were eyewitnesses thereof, and not intended to be any part of the present
disquisition. The most considerable part of all the north side of America, is
called New England. In the fertility of the soil, salubriousness of the air,
and many other commodious advantages, most resembling the country from whence
it borrowed its appellation. For the knowledge thereof the world is most
beholding to the discoveries of the English, under the conduct of Sebastian
Cabot, a famous Portuguese, sent out under the commission of HENRY the VIIth,
about the year 1497, though since much perfected by the industry and travels of
Capt. Gosnold, Capt. Hudson, Capt. Smith, and others of the English nation.
North America, this posthumous birth of time, is as to its nativity, of the
same standing with her two elder sisters, Peru and Mexico, yet was suffered to
lie in its swadling-clothes, one whole century of years, nature having promised
no such dowry of rich mines of silver and gold to them that would espouse her
for their own, as she did unto the other two, which possibly was the reason why
she was not so hastily courted by her first discoverers, nor yet so early
secured by any of the Princes of Europe, lying wholly neglected as it were
until a small company of planters, under the command of Captain George Popham,
and Captain Gilbert, were sent over at the charge of Sir John Popham in the
year 1607, to begin a colony upon a tract of land about Sagadehoch, situate on
the south side of the river of Kennebeck, and about that called Shipscot-river,
and about twenty miles south-west from Pemmaquid, the most northerly bound of
all New England. But that design within two years expiring with its first
^ounder, soon after some honorable persons of the west of England, commonly
called the Council of Plymouth, being more certainly informed of several
navigable rivers and commodious havens, with other places fit either for
traffic or planting, newly discovered by many skilful navigators, obtained a
grant by patent, under the great seal from King JAMES, of all that part of
North America, called New England, from the 40 to the 48 degrees. of north
latitude. From which grand and original patent, all other charters and grants
of land from Pemmaquid to Delaware-Bay, along the seacoast, derive their
lineage and pedigree. Thus was that vast tract of land, after the year 1612,
cantoned and parcelled out into many lesser divisions and parcels, according as
adventurers presented, which said grants being founded upon uncertain, or false
descriptions, and reports of some that traveled thither, did many of them
interfere one upon another, to the great disturbance of the first planters, and
prejudice of the proprietors themselves, as is too well known by any that have
had occasion to ^^ay never so little amongst them, many of whom are yet
surviving. For notwithstanding the great charge and vast expenses the first
adventurers were at, the first proprietors of the whole Province of Main and
others, (reaching from the head of Casco Bay north-east, to the mouth of
Pascataqua river about sixty miles westward) and the hopes they might have
conceived of being the first founders of New Colonies, and of enlarging their
estates and inheritances by those new acquired possessions and lordships. there
was little profi^ reaped from thence, after the rich fleeces of beaver were
gleaned away, nor any great improvement made of those large portions of lands,
save the erecting of some few cottages for fishermen, and a few inconsiderable
buildings for the planters, which were on those occasions drawn over the sea,
to settle upon the most northerly parts of New England.

BUT whether it were by the imprudence of the first adventurers, or the
dissoluteness of the persons they sent over to manage their affairs, or whether
for want of faithfulness or skill to manage their trust, they were by degrees
in a manner quite deserted almost of law and government, and left to shift for
themselves; by which means at last they fell under the jurisdiction of the
Massachusetts-Colony, not by usurpation, as is by great mistake suggested to
his Majesty, but by necessity, and the earnest desire of the planters
themselves; to accept of whom, those of the Massachusetts-Colony were the more
easily induced; in that they apprehended the bounds of their own patent, by a
favorable interpretation of the words describing the northern line (three miles
beyond the most northerly branch of Merimack-river) do reach somewhat beyond
Pemmaquid, the most northerly place of all New England.

THIS was the first beginning of things in New England, at which time they were
not unlike the times of old, when the people of Judah ware said to be without a
teaching priest, and without law; and no wonder things were no more
successfully carried on

IN the year 1620, a company belonging to Mr. Robinson's church at Leyden in
Holland, although they had been courteously entertained by the Dutch, as
strangers sojourning amongst them, yet foreseeing many inconveniences like to
increase, and that they could not so well provide for the good of their
posterity, under the government of a foreign nation, they resolved to entreat
so much favor from their own sovereign Prince King JAMES, as to grant them
liberty under the shelter of his royal authority, to place themselves in some
part of New England, then newly discovered; wherefore having obtained some kind
of patent or grant, for some place about Hudson's-river, they set sail from
Plymouth in September, for the southern parts of New England, but as they
intended to bend their course thitherward, per vari^s casus, per tot discrimina
rerum, they were at last cast upon a bosom of the south cape of the
Massachusetts Bay called Cape-Cod, about the 11th of November, from whence the
winter so fast approaching, they had no opportunity to remove; and finding some
encouragement from the hopefulness of the soil, and courtesy of the heathen,
they resolved there to make their abode for the future, which they did, laying
the foundation of a new colony, which from the remembrance of the last town in
England, they sailed from, they called New-Plymouth; containing no very
considerable tract of land, scarce extending an hundred miles in length through
the whole cape, and scarce half so much in breadth where it is broadest. The
first founders of that colony aiming more at religion than earthly possessions,
aspiring not to any large dimension of land (...) their settling upon those
coasts.

AT Weymouth also was a plantation begun by Mr. Weston in the year 1622, but it
came to little.

THE north and south border of the Massachusetts Bay being thus planted, the
middle part was the more easy to be filled up, which was thus brought about.
Some gentlemen and others, observing how it fared with those of New-Plymouth,
were desirous upon the like ground to make the same attempt for themselves,
wherefore having by a considerable sum of money purchased of some gentlemen
that had a grant from the council of Plymouth all their right and interest in a
plantation begun in the Massachusetts Bay, and having attained a confirmation
thereof by patent from King CHARLES, in the year 1628, they sent over a
Governor with several other persons to lay some foundation of another colony in
the Massachusetts Bay: And in the year 1630, more of the persons interested in
the said patent (thence commonly called patentees) with several other persons,
intending to venture their lives and all with them, transported themselves and
their families into the said Massachusetts, who did in a short space of time by
the accession of many hundreds, who every year flocked after them, make such
increase, that in the space of five or six years, there were twenty
considerable towns built and peopled; and many of the towns first planted
became so filled with inhabitants, that like swarms of bees they were ready to
swarm, not only into new plantations, but into new colonies, insomuch that in
the year 1635, a new colony began to be planted upon Connecticut river, partly
by combination amongst themselves, removing from some towns about the
Massachusetts Bay, and partly by the interest of a patent purchased of that
honorable gentleman, Mr. Fenwick, agent for the Lord Say, and Lord Brook, the
Lords proprietors of the said river Connecticut, at the mouth of which river
they built a fort, (called after their own titles, Say-brook fort) commanding
the passage of the said river. Yea, such was the confluence of people making
over into those parts, that in the year 1637, a fourth colony began to be
planted, bearing the name of New Haven, from the first town erected therein,
seated near the midway betwixt Hudson's river and that of Connecticut. The sea
coast from the pitch of Cape-Cod, to the mouth of Connecticut river, inhabited
by several nations of Indians, Wampanoogs (the first authors of the present
rebellion) Narrhagansets, Pequods, Mohegins, as the more inland part of the
country by the Nipnets (a general name for all inland Indians betwixt the
Massachusetts and Connecticut river.) The seacoast south-west from Plymouth
was first possessed by some discontented with the government of the
Massachusetts colony, from which some being exiled, others of their friends
accompanying them, settled themselves upon a fair Island to the south-west of
Cape-Cod, now called Rhode Island; others settled upon the Main, at a place
called Providence, and so by degrees planting toward Narrhaganset-Bay, made
another plantation called Warwick, which places are since by patent conferred
upon the inhabitants of Rhode Island; the rest of the country from Pequod river
to the river of Connecticut, falling within the bounds of Connecticut colony
have since by patent also, been confirmed to the said colony. Things had been
very prosperously and successfully carried on in all the aforesaid colonies and
jurisdictions, from the year 1620, to the year 1636, at which time the war with
the Pequods began. The following account of this war was either left under the
hands of such as commanded in chief, or is taken from the mouths of faithful
witnesses, that were not only then present, but personally concerned and
engaged in the service.

THERE was a nation of the Indians in the southern parts of New England, called
Pequods, seated on a fair navigable river, twelve miles to the eastward of the
mouth of the great and famous river of Connecticut; who (as was commonly
reported about the time when New England was first planted by the English)
being a more fierce, cruel, and warlike people than the rest of the Indians,
came down out of the more inland parts of the continent, and by force seized
upon one of the goodliest places near the sea, and became a terror to all their
neighbors, on whom they had exercised several acts of inhuman cruelty; insomuch
that being flushed with victories over their fellow Indians, they began to
thirst after the blood of any foreigners, English or Dutch* that accidentally
came amongst them, in a way of trade, or upon other accounts.

IN the year 1634, they treacherously and cruelly murdered Capt. Stone, and
Capt. Norton, who ca^^ occasionally with a bark into the river to trade with
them. Not long after, within the compass of the next y^^^ they in like
treacherous manner, flew one Mr. Oldham (formerly belonging to New Plymouth,
but at that time an inhabitant of the Massachusetts) at Block-Island, a place
not far from the mouth of their harbor, as he was fairly trading with them:
Besides some other such like acts of perfidious cruelty toward some of the
Dutch, that had formerly been trading up Connecticut river: By which practices
perceiving that they began to stink in the nostrils of their neighbors, whose
revenge they now began to fear, and not willing to have to deal with too many
enemies at once, they imitated the subtlety of the children of Ammon, when they
began to stink before David; endeavoring to strengthen themselves with alliance
of some of those they had formerly provoked. that by their assistance they
might defend themselves against the rest, not doubting but to make their part
good with their foreign enemies, if they could be reconciled to their Indian
neighbors, the Narrhagansets, or other homebred enemies, and could but
fortify themselves by a league of friendship with any of their foreign
neighbors that were newly come to plant in these parts. To this end they sent
messengers with gifts to the Massachusetts in the latter end of the same year
1634; the first messengers were dismissed without an answer: But ^^ey being
sensible of their own danger, and of the great importance a peace with the
English of the Massachusetts might be, pursued the business very earnestly,
sending messengers a second time, who offered much Wampam (Indians money) and
beaver, with these second messengers: The Governor and Council of the
Massachusetts had much conference many days; and at last after the best advice
they could take amongst themselves, concluded a peace and friendship with them,
upon these conditions.

1. THAT they should deliver up to the English those persons amongst them that
were guilty of Capt. Stone's death, and the rest that were with him.

2. THAT if the English desired to plant in Connecticut they should give up
their right to them.

3. THAT the English should hence forward trade with them as their friends,
which was a chief thing aimed at; the said Pequods being at that time in war
with the Dutch, and the rest of their neighbors, on the reasons forementioned.
To these conditious they readily agreed, and also cunningly insinuated their
desire that their new confederates, the Massachusetts, should mediate a peace
for them with the Narrhagansets; intimating likewise their willingness that a
part of the present which they promised to send should be given to them,
standing so much upon their honor, that they would not be seen to give any
thing themselves; such was the pride and height of spirit lodged in this
company of treacherous villians, the dregs and lees of the earth, and the dross
of mankind.

AS for Capt. Stone's death they slily evaded the guilt of it, falsely adding,
that there were but two left that had any hand therein, and that it was a just
quarrel wherein he was slain: For, said they, he surprised some of our men, and
would by force have compelled them to show him the way up the river, whereupon
the said Stone coming ashore, with two more, was watched by nine of our men
(say they) who finding them asleep in the night, slew them to deliver our own
men, one of whom going afterward to the bark, it was suddenly blown up: Whereas
the truth of the matter was thus:

THE said Capt. Stone formerly belonging to Christ^phers in the West Indies,
occasionally coming to these parts, as he passed between this place and
Virginia put in at that river, where the Indians after they had been often on
board his vessel to trade with him, at the last came friendly on board as they
used to do, but finding the Capt. asleep in his cabin, took the opportunity to
murder him as he lay, casting a covering over him that he might not be
discerned by the rest whom they presently after dispatched one after another,
all but Captain Norton who made stout resistance, for a long time defending
himself in the cook-room of the bark, till the gunpowder which he had set in
an open vessel, to be more ready for his use, accidentally took fire, by which
fatal accident he was so burned and his eyes so blinded that he could not make
any longer resistance, but forthwith fell into the hands of these cruel and
blood-thirsty wretches, who after they had taken away his life made a prey of
all that was in the vessel.

AS for Mr. Oldham, he was murdered at an Island called by the Indians,
Manisses (since known by the name of Block-Island) but those that murdered him
(probably inhabitants of the said Island) fled presently to the Pequods, by
whom they were sheltered, and so became also guilty themselves of his blood.

IN the year 1636, the death of this Mr. Oldham The account of Mr. Oldham's
death is added to this edition from Mr. Hu^^ard's Mss. history of New England
from its beginning to 1680.
was so manifest, that it could neither be concealed nor excused, the discovery
whereof being remarkable, is here inserted.

ONE John Gallop, with one man more, and two boys, coming from Connecticut, and
intending to put in at Long Island, as he came from thence, being at the mouth
of the harbor, was forced by a sudden change of the wind to bear up for
Block-Island, or Fisher's Island, where, as they were sailing along, they met
with a Pinace, which they found to be John Oldham's, who had been sent to trade
with the Pequods, (to make trial of the reality of their pretended friendship
after the murder of Capt. Stone) they hailed the vessel, but had no answer,
although they saw the deck full of Indians (14 in all) and a little before that
had seen a canoe go from the vessel full of Indians likewise, and goods,
whereupon they suspected they had killed John Oldham, wh^ had only two boys and
two Narrhaganset Indians in his vessel besides himself, and the rather because
they let slip, and set up sail (being two miles from the shore, the wind and
tide coming off the shore of the Island whereby they drove toward the main land
of Narrhaganset) therefore they went a head of them, and having nothing but two
pieces, and two pistols, they bore up near the Indians, who stood on the deck
of the vessel ready armed with guns, swords and pikes; but John Gallop, a man
of stout courage, let fly among them and so galled them, that they got all down
under the hatches, and then they stood off again, and returning with a good
gale, they stemmed her upon the quarter, and almost overset her, which so
affrighted the Indians, as six of them leaped overboard, and were drowned, yet
they durst not board her, but stood off again, and fitted their anchor, so as
stemming her the second time, they bored her bow through with their anchor, and
sticking fast to her, they made diverse shot through the sides of her, and so
raked her fore and aft (being but inch board) as they must needs kill or hurt
some of the Indians; but seeing none of them come forth, they got loose from
her, and then stood off again: then four or five more of the Indians leaped
into the sea, and were likewise drowned: whereupon there being but four left in
her, they boarded her; when an Indian came up and yielded; him they bound, and
put into the hold: then another yielded; him they also bound, but Gallop, being
well acquainted with their skill to unloose one another, if they lay near
together, and having no place to keep them asunder, flung him bound into the
sea; then looking about they found John Oldham under an old sail stark naked,
having his head cleft to the brains; his hands and legs cut as if they had been
cutting them off, yet warm: so they put him into the sea: but could not well
tell how to come at the other two Indians (who were in a little room underneath
with their swords) so they took the goods which were left, and the sails, and
towed the boat away, but night coming on, and the wind rising, they were forced
to turn her off, and the wind carried her to the Narrhaganset shore, where they
left her.

ON the 26th of the said July, the two Indians which were with John Oldham, and
one other Indian, came from Canonicus (the chief Sachem of the Narrhagansets)
with a letter from Mr. Williams, to signify what had befallen John Oldham, and
how grievously they were offended: and that Miantonimo (the second Sachem of
the Narrhagansets) was gone with 17 canoes and 200 men to take revenge. But
upon examination of the other Indian, who was brought prisoner to them, they
found that all the Sachems of the Narrhagansets, except Canonicus and
Miantonimo, were contrivers of John Oldham's death, and the occasion was
because he went to make peace, and trade with the Pequods last year: The
prisoner said also that Oldham's two Indians were acquainted with it; but
because they were sent as messengers from Canonicus, they would not imprison
them: But the Governor wrote back to Mr. Williams to let the Narrhagansets
know, they expected they should send home John Oldham's two boys, and take
revenge upon the Islanders, and withal gave Mr. Williams caution to look to
himself, if there should be occasion to make war with the Narrhagansets (for
Block-Island was under them) and the next day he wrote to Canonicus, by one of
those Indians, that he had suspicion of him that was sent, and yet he had sent
him back, because he was a messenger: but did expect, if he should send for the
said two Indians, he should send them to him.

FOUR days after John Oldham's two boys were sent home by one of Miantonimo's
men, with a letter from Mr. Williams, that Miantonimo had caused the Sachem of
Niantick to send to Block-Island for them, and that he had near 100 fathom of
peag, and much other goods of Oldham's which should be reserved for them. And
three of the seven that were drowned were Sachems, and that one of the two
which was hired by the Niantick Sachem, was dead also. So they wrote back to
have the rest of those which were necessary to be sent, and the rest of the
goods, and that he should tell Canonicus and Miantonimo that they held them
innocent, but the six other Sachems were guilty.

LIEUT. Gibbons and Mr. Higginson were sent soon after with Cushamakin the
Sachem of the Massachusetts, to Canonicus, to treat with him about the murder
of John Oldham. They returned with acceptance and good success of their
business; observing in the Sachem much state, great command of his men, and
mavelous wisdom in his answers; and in the carriage of the whole treaty
clearing himself and his neighbors of the murder, and offering revenge of it,
yet upon very safe and wary conditions.

THE English of Massachusetts after the peace concluded with the Pequods, sent
a bark thither for trade, that trial might be made of the reality of their
friendship, but they found them treacherous and false, and that no advantage
was to be had by any commerce with them, insomuch as they took up a resolution
never more to have to do with them; which the said Indians perceiving, made no
account of the former peace, but took all advantage to do us mischief, not only
by harboring those who had murdered Mr. Oldham, but surprising many of the
English in the year 1636, when Connecticut river began first to be planted,
diverse of whom were killed (nine at one time in April, 1637) by them about
Wethersfield, when the plantation then first began, so as they could not pass
up and down the river without a guard, but they would be in danger of being cut
off or carried away, as two maids were said to be; thirty men have been killed
by them in all; those who fell into their hands alive, were cruelly tortured,
after a most barbarous manner, by insulting over their prisoners in a
blasphemous wise, when in their dying agonies, under the extremity of their
pains (their flesh being first flashed with knives, and then filled with
burning embers) they called upon God and Christ with gasping groans, resigning
up their souls into their hands; with which words these wretched caitifs used
to mock the English afterward, when they came within their hearing and view.

ABOUT the same time some agents sent over by the Lord Say, and the Lord Brook,
built a fort at the mouth of Connecticut river, wherein was placed one
Lieutenant Gardener, and a convenient number of soldiers to secure the place,
intended soon after to be planted, but all the winter following, being the end
of the year 1636, they were little better than besieged by the said savages,
not daring to stir out of command of the fort, but they were ready to be seized
by these their barbarous enemies: At one time the Lieutenant himself with ^en
or twelve of the soldiers, marching out of the fort, with intent to pass over a
neck of land, to burn the marshes; as soon as they had passed over the straight
of the neck, they espied a company of Indians making toward the said isthmus,
which if they could not recover, they see they must all perish; whereupon
returning back with all speed, they very narrowly escaped, and were two or
three of them killed notwithstanding, before they could get back into the fort,
which was presently surrounded with multitudes of them; but the discharging of
a piece of ordnance gave them warning to keep further from the walls. Sometimes
they came with their canoes into the river in view of the soldiers within the
fort, and when they apprehended themselves out of reach of their guns, they
would imitate the dying groans and invocations of the poor captive English,
which the English soldiers were forced with silent patience to bear, not being
then in a capacity to requite their insolent blasphemies. But they being by
these horrible outrages justly provoked to indignation, unanimously agreed to
join their forces together, to root them out of the earth, with God's
assistance.

THE Governor and Council having soon after assembled the rest of the
magistrates, and the ministers, to advise with them about doing justice for
Oldham's death, they all agreed that it should be done with all expedition; and
accordingly on the 25th of August following, 80 or 90 men were sent out under
the command of Capt. Endicot of Salem, who went to the Pequod country by water,
with commission to treat with the said Pequods, first offering terms of peace,
if they would surrender the murderers of the English, and forbear further acts
of hostility, or else fight them.

THE Captain aforesaid coming ashore with his company, by a message sent them
by an interpreter, obtained some little speech with a great number of them at a
distance; but after they understood what was propounded to them, first
cunningly getting behind a hill, they presently ran away into the woods and
swamps, where there was no pursuing of them: however, one discharging a gun
among them as they were taking their flight, stayed the course of one, which
was all that could be done against them at that time.

WINTER approaching, and no encouragement presenting further to pursue them at
that time, it was resolved better to return back for the present, and wait a
further season, when more forces could be gathered together to pursue the
quarrel to the utmost.

MIANTONIMO soon after sent a message to them with a letter from Mr. Williams,
to signify that they had taken one of the Indians, who had broken prison, and
had him safe for them, when they should send for him (as they had before sent
to him for that end) and that the other had stolen away (not knowing it seems
that he was their prisoner) and that according to their promise they would not
entertain any of that Island, which should come to them; but they conceived it
was rather in love to him whom they concealed, for he had been his servant
formerly, but when they sent for those two Indians, one was sent them, but the
other was said to be dead before the messenger came: But the Pequods harbored
those of Block-Island, and therefore justly brought the revenge of the English
upon them.

AMONGST those soldiers that were sent under Capt. Endicot, were twenty that
belonged to Saybrook-fort, and were appointed to stay there, to defend the
place against the Pequods: After the said Capt. and the rest were departed,
those twenty lay wind bound in the Pequod harbor, and in the mean while went
all of them ashore, with sacks to fetch some of the Pequods corn: and having
fetched each man one sack full to their boat, they returned for more, and
having loaded themselves the Indians set upon them, so they laid down their
corn, and gave fire upon the Indians, and the Indians shot their arrows against
them; the place was open about the distance of a musket shot; the Indians kept
the covert, save when they came forth one at a time and discharged their
arrows: The English put themselves in a single file, and ten only that had
pieces that could reach them, shot, the others stood ready to keep them from
breaking in. So they continued most part of the afternoon; the English, as they
supposed, killed diverse of them, and hurt others; and the Indians wounded but
one of the English, who was armed, all the rest being without: For they shot
their arrows compass-wise, so as they could easily see and avoid them standing
single, then always gathered up their arrows: At the last the Indians being
weary of the sport, gave the English leave to retire to their boat. -- This was
in October, 1636.

ABOUT two days after, five men of Saybrook went up the river about four miles
to fetch hay out of a meadow on the Pequod side: The grass was so high as some
Pequods hiding themselves in it, set upon the English before they were aware,
and took one that had hay on his back, the rest fled to their boat, one of them
had five arrows in him, yet recovered: He that was taken was a goodly young
man, whose name was Butterfield; whereupon the meadow was ever after called
Butterfield's meadow.

Icarus Icariis nomina dedit aquis. ABOUT fourteen days after, six of the
soldiers were sent out of the fort to keep an house which they had set up in a
corn-field, about two miles from the fort. Three of them went forth a fowling,
which the Lieutenant had strictly forbidden, two had pieces, and the third only
a sword, when suddenly about an hundred Indians came out of the covert and set
upon them, he who had the sword brake through, and received only two shot, and
those not dangerous, and so escaped to the house which was not above a bow shot
off, and persuaded the other two to follow, but they stayed still, 'till the
Indians came and took them, and carried them away with their pieces. Soon after
they beat down the said house, and outhouses, and hay stacks, and within a bow
shot of the fort, killed a cow, and shot diverse others, which came home with
arrows sticking in them.

AFTER Mr. Endicot's departure, the Pequods perceiving that they had by several
late injuries and outrages, drawn upon themselves the hatred of all the
English, as well as of their own people by former wrongs, and distrusting their
own ability to deal with them all at once, did at the last by all subtle
insinuations and persuasions, try to make their peace with the Narrhagansets,
using such arguments as to right reason seemed not only pregnant to the
purpose, but also (if revenge, that bewitching and pleasing passion of man's
mind had not blinded their eyes) most cogent and invincible: But they were, by
the good providence of God, withheld from embracing those counsels, which
might otherways have proved most pernicious to the design of the English, viz.
That the English were strangers, and began to overspread the country, the which
would soon be possessed by them to the depriving the ancient inhabitants of
their right, if they were not timely prevented; and that the Narrhagansets
would but make way for their own ruin, by helping to destroy the Pequods; for
after themselves were subdued, it would not be long ere the Narrhagansets
themselves, would in the next place be ^ooted out likewise: whereas if they
would but join together against the English they could demonstrate how the
English might easily either be destroyed or forced to leave the country, and
that without any danger to themselves: Telling them also that they never need
come to any open battles, they might destroy them only by firing their houses,
and killing their cattle, and lying in wait for them as they went about their
ordinary occasions; which course if it were pursued, they said their new and
unwelcome neighbors could not long subsist; but would either be starved with
hunger and cold, or forced to forsake the country.

MATCHIAVEL himself if he had sat in counsel with them could not have
insinuated stronger reasons to have persuaded them to a peace.

IT is said that so much reason was apprehended in these motives, that the
Narrhagansets were once wavering, and were almost persuaded to have granted an
ear to their advice and persuasion and joined all against the English; but when
they considered what an advantage they had put into their hands by the strength
and favor of the English, to take a full revenge of all their former injuries,
upon their inveterate enemies, the thought of that was so sweet, that it turned
the scale against all other considerations whatsoever.

SOON after this, Miantonimo Sachem of the Narrhagansets, came to Boston (being
sent for by theGovernor) with two of Canonicus's sons, and another Sachem, and
near twenty of their men, whom they call Sannaps. The Governor, having notice
by Cushamakin the Massachusetts Sachem, sent twenty musketeers to Roxbury to
meet them. They came to Boston about noon, where the Governor had called
together all the Magistrates and Ministers to give countenance to their
proceedings, and to advise about the terms of peace. After dinner, Miantonimo
declared what he had to say to them in several propositions, which were to this
effect, that they had always loved the English, and now desired a firm peace
with them, and that they would continue war with the Pequods, and their
confederates, till they were subdued, and desired the English would do so too:
Promising to deliver their enemies to them, or kill them, and two months after
to send them a present. The Governor told them they should have an answer the
next morning, which was done, upon articles subscribed by him, and they also
subscribed with him, wherein a firm peace was concluded, but because they could
not make them well understand the articles, they told them they would send a
copy of them to Mr. Williams, who could best interpret the same to them. So
after dinner they took leave, and were conveyed out of town by some musketeers,
and dismissed with a volley of shot.

The ARTICLES here follow.

I. A FIRM peace betwixt them and their friends on either part (if they
consent) and their confederates (if they will observe the articles) and their
posterity.

II. NEITHER part to make peace with the Pequods without the others consent.

III. NOT to harbor any of the Pequods.

IV. TO put to death, or deliver up any of the murderers of the English.

V. TO return fugitive servants.

VI. THE English to give them notice when they go out against the Pequods, and
the other to send them guides.

VII. FREE trade to be between them.

VIII. NONE of them to come near the English plantations during the war with
the Pequods, without some Englishman, or known Indian.

IX. TO continue to the posterity of both parts.

THESE Articles were indifferently well observed by the Narrhagansetts, till
the Pequods, their mortal enemies, were totally subdued; but then they began to
grow insolent and treacherous, especially this Miantonimo himself; as will
appear in the sequel.

CUSHAMAKIN also the Sachem of the Massachusetts subscribed those articles with
the English.

THE report of the unheard of cruelties forementioned, which had been
perpetrated by the Pequods filling the ears of the English throughout the
country; it was agreed by the joint consent of the English throughout the three
colonies to unite all their forces together, for the suppressing the common
enemy, early in the spring Anno 1637, who were also moved thereunto by their
own necessities as well as by the earnest request of their friend at
Connecticut.

THOSE of Plymouth being written unto by the Governor of the Massachusetts,
appeared very cordially willing thereunto, to which end they agreed to send
fifty men at their own charge, with as much speed as the matter required, with
sufficient leaders appointed, and a bark provided to carry them provisions, and
^end upon them on all occasions; but before they could be dispatched away the
next spring, news was brought that the enemy was wholly routed, so as their
journey wa^ stopped, and their good will accepted for the deed; a^ if they
really had been there to have borne their part in the service; their
nonappearance in time and place being not to be imputed to any backwardness in
their minds, but to their too late invitation to the service; the motion
fetching a large compass from Connecticut down to the Massachusetts; from whom
in the last place they were solicited thereunto. And for the other tw^
colonies, those of Connecticut being quickened on by the spur of necessity, and
present sense of the insolency daily acted at their very doors, were soonest
upon their march, and by the good hand of God upon them, had given the main
stroke before their friends of the Massachusetts could come up with them, yet
was there no repining for the want of the glory of the victory, nor was there
any cause, those that were the chief actors therein being forward to give God
the glory of the whole, and not willing to pocket up any thing thereof
themselves, acknowledging that they never saw more of God, or less of man in
any business of that nature, as may more fully be understood by particulars
ensuing.

THE colony of the Massachusetts determined to send an hundred and sixty, of
whom an hundred and twenty were ordered under the conduct of Capt. Patrick of
Watertown, and Capt. Trask of Salem, Capt. Stoughton of Dorchester being to
command in chief; with whom was sent that holy man of God, Mr. John Wilson,
(pastor of the church of Boston) the chariots and horsemen of our Israel, by
whose faith and prayer, as sometimes was said of Luther (in reference to
Germany) the country was preserved, so as it was confidently believed that no
enemy should break in upon a place whilst he survived, which as some have
observed accordingly came to pass.

THE matter requiring great expedition, and it being long before the whole
company could be dispatched away, Capt. Patrick with forty men were sent
beforehand, to be sure to meet with those of Connecticut in case they should be
in action, before the rest of our forces could get into a readiness, which
accordingly come to pass; for the main business in taking the fort was over,
even before the said Patrick could get thither. Capt. Underhill was sent by Mr.
Vane the Governor to Saybrook the winter before to strengthen the garrison
there. The assaulting and surprising of this Indian fort, being the most
remarkable piece of service in that whole expedition; take it as it was
delivered in writing by that valiant, faithful, and prudent commander, Capt.
Mason, chief in the action, who lived long after to reap the fruit of his
labor, and enjoy the benefit of that day's service, having an inheritance given
him in that part of the country, as a just reward of his faithful service on
that day as well as at other times. Wequash a Pequed by nation, but disgusted
by the Sachem, proved a good guide to the English, by whose direction they were
led to a fort near Mystic river, some miles nearer than Sassacous's fort,
which they first intended to assault.

ON the second Wednesday of May, being the tenth day of that month, we set sail
with ninety men of the English in one Pink, one Pinnace, and two Boats, toward
the Pequods, with seventy river Indians; having somewhat a long passage to
Saybrook fort, about forty of our Indians desired to go down by land on
Saturday, but on Monday they went forth from the fort, and meeting seven
Pequods and Nianticks, they slew five outright, took one prisoner, and brought
him into Saybrook fort, where he was executed by Capt. Underhill, the other
escaped.

ON Monday we all landed at Saybrook: fort, and stayed there 'till Tuesday;
Capt. Underhill joining nineteen men with himself to us: Whereupon we sent back
twenty of ours to strengthen our plantations; and so set sail on Thursday
toward Narrhaganset, and arrived there on Friday.

ON Saturday myself, with Capt. Underhill, and Lieut. Sealy, with our guard
marched to Canonicus by land, being about five miles distant, where we were
kindly entertained after their manner: Having had parley with him, we sent to
Miantonimo, who would give no present answer; and so our Sabbath being on the
morrow, we adjourned our meeting until Monday, at which time there assembled
Miantonimo with the chiefest of them about two hundred men; and being solemnly
set for consultation after their manner, told them we were now going, God
assisting, to revenge the wrong committed and bloodshed by their and our
enemies, upon our native countrymen, not any way desiring their aid, unless
they would voluntarily send, which they did exceedingly approve of: Moreover we
told them that the English and they had always been friends for ought we knew,
and so we were with the Indians that had not wronged Englishmen, the which
they acknowledged, and so made a large description of the Pequods country, and
told us they would send men with us; so we resolved there to keep our
rendezvous at Canonicus his plantation on the morrow night, being Tuesday; but
the wind being stiff, we could not land our men 'till five or six of the clock
in the afternoon, at which time I landed on Narrhaganset shore with thirty-two
men, and so marched to the place of rendezvous formerly appointed: Capt.
Underhill and my Lieut, landed the rest, and came up to me that night. About
two hours before day came an Indian with a letter from Capt. Patrick, being
then at Mr. Robert Williams's plantation with forty men, who desired us to stay
for his coming and joining us, not intimating when that would be: The which
being considered and debated, we thought it could not be our safest course to
wait for him, (though his present assistance was much desired) for these
reasons.

1. BECAUSE the day before when we had absolutely resolved to go, the Indians
plainly told us they though it we were but in jest, and also that Englishmen did
talk much, but not fight; nay, they concluded that they would not go on; and
besides if we should defer, we feared we should be discovered by reason of the
frequent recourse between them by certain Squaws (who have mutual intercourse)
whereupon we were constrained to set forward toward the Pequods, with
seventy-seven English, and about sixty river Indians, and as I suppose near
about two hundred Narrhagansets, and marched that night to the eastern
Nianticks, where we kept our rendezvous that night; the Sachem of the place
adding about an hundred of his men unto us.

WE set forward and marched about ten miles, where making an alta (or halt)
there we held a consultation with the Indians, who desired to know what we
intended? We told them that we resolved to assault Sassacous his fort, at which
they were all stricken, and (...) it were amazed with fear, as they plainly
confessed; after a long debate and pressing of them, taxing them with
cowardice, some of them resolved to go along with us, though I suppose they had
no such intent, as appeared afterward; some of them left us, to the number as I
suppose of an hundred or less; and marching on five miles further, we made
another alta, where they told us we had near a dozen miles to Sassacous his
fort, as we gathered by their relation: Being very weary in traveling with our
arms, ammunition and provision; we were constrained to alter our resolution,
and resolve to attempt that fort, the which they had formerly described to be
three or four miles nearer; and also one of Capt. Underhill's men failing put
it out of doubt. But whosoever says that Capt. Underhill had any falling out
about that or any thing else, does speak untruth; for we both resolved to
Sassacous his fort, as we concluded in our consultation at Narrhaganset; and so
continued our resolution 'till we received the former reasons as grounds
sufficient to persuade us to the contrary, and to prosecute that which was most
likely to be accomplished.

THEY drew a plot of the situation of the Pequods and described Sassacous his
fort to be the nearest, which was the chief cause we determined to assault that
first, and had no reason leading till our last alta, where, upon the reasons
formerly mentioned, we changed our resolution: This greatly pleased the Indians
that were with us, as it was what they much desired; for it was dreadful to
them to hear the name of Sassacous.

FROM thence we marched two or three miles where we kept our rendezvous,
supposing we had been within one mile of the fort: An Indian sent to discover
beforehand, brought us news that they were secure, having been fishing with
many canoes at sea, and diverse of them walking here and there.

ABOUT two hours before day we marched toward the fort, being weary and much
spent; many of us having slept nothing at all.

AND so we began to march toward the fort, the Lord being pleased wonderfully
to assist and encourage us, after a tedious march of three or four miles: About
break of day we came fair in view of the fort, standing on the top of an hill
not steep; the Indians all falling back, were suddenly vanished out of sight,
so we made an alta, and sent back for our guide, who had promised to go with us
to the fort, but his heart we saw much failed him; we asked him what they
intended who promised to wing us, and to surround the fort; he told us they
were much afraid; but he, seeing our resolution, went to them and prevailed
with diverse of them to come up to us; we told them their best course would be
to flank the fort on both sides, and having no time longer to confer, we
proceeded: Capt. Underhill to the western entrance with one division, myself
with the other to the eastern as silent as possibly we could; so it pleased God
we came up within two rod of the Palisado, before we were discovered; at which
time a dog began to bark, and an Indian cried out; but not being myself rightly
informed by the Indian guide, of the right entrance, though there was a little
postern door, the which I had thought to have attempted to break down with my
foot; but the Lord directed me otherwise for the better; for I then feared we
could not there enter with our arms, which proved true. So I suddenly hasted to
the Palisado, and putting in the muzzle of my piece, discharged upon them, and
so did the rest with all celerity; we then suddenly hastened on toward that
side which stood toward the water; where I concluded was an entrance, and
instantly fell upon it, being only barred with two great forked boughs, or
branches of some trees, and hasting over them I drew one after me; my
Lieutenant drawing the other outward. We suddenly fell upon the wigwams; the
Indians cried out in a most hideous manner, some issuing out of the wigwams,
shooting at us desperately, and so creeping under beds that they had. We had
resolved awhile not to have burned it, but being we could not come at them, I
resolved to set it on fire, after diverse of them were slain, and some of our
men sore wounded; so entering one of their wigwams, I took a firebrand (at
which time an Indian drawing an arrow had killed him, but one Davis his
Sergeant ^ut the bowstring with his ^utlass) and suddenly kindled a fire in the
matts wherewith they were covered, and fell to a retreat and surrounded the
fort; the fire increasing violently, insomuch as that they were constrained to
climb to the top of the Palisado; from whence they were soon fetched down, I
suppose to the number of an hundred and forty. Many of them issuing forth were
suddenly slain either by the English or Indians, who were in a ring without us;
all being dispatched and ended in the space of an hour, having two of our men
slain, and sixteen wounded.

BEING very hot and dry we could very hardly procure any water, we continued
there one hour not knowing what course to take or which way to go, our Pinnaces
not being come in, neither did we know how far, or which way to go to them, our
interpreter, being an Indian, we could hardly come to speak with him: When we
did, he knew nothing of what his countrymen intended, who were all hurried and
distracted with a few hurt men, but chiefly as I conceive with fear of the
enemy.

BUT the enemy approaching they began to cleave unto us, and I verily think
durst not leave us.

OUR Pinnaces then coming in view with a fair gale, being guided as it were to
serve our necessity by the good hand of God, which I think was never more
eminently seen in a matter of like moment and less of man in several passages.
Then we set our men in order and prepared for fight, and began to march toward
the harbor where the Pinnaces were to ride: The enemy approaching, Capt.
Underhill with diverse Indians and certain English issued out to encounter them,
but they would not stand to it, for the most part they lay behind rocks, trees
and bushes. We marched on, they still dodging of us; sometimes hazarding
themselves in open field, where some of them were slain in open view, and as we
hear many wounded: I was somewhat cautelous in bestowing many shot upon them
needlessly, because I expected a strong opposition; and thus they continued to
follow us till we came within two miles of our Pinnaces, where they wholly left
us, which was near six miles as I conceive, having then about two miles more to
the river.

FOUR of our wounded men we were forced to carry our selves, while at length we
hired the Indians to bear them, both in this and all the following enterprises
against the Pequods.

THIS service being thus happily accomplished by these few hands that came from
Connecticut; within a while after, the forces sent from the Massachusetts under
the conduct of Capt. Stoughton as commander in chief arrived there also, who
found a great part of the work done to their hands, in the surprizal of the
Pequods fort as aforesaid, which yet was but the breaking of the nest, and
unkennelling those savage wolves; for the body of them, with Sassacous the
chief Sachem (whose very name was a terror to all the Narrhagansets) were
dispersed abroad and scattered all over their country, yet so far were the rest
dismayed, that they never durst make any assault upon the English, who in
several parties were scattered about in pursuit of them.

IT was not long after Capt. Stoughton's soldiers came up before news was
brought of a great number of the enemy, that were discovered by the side of a
river up the country, being first trapanned by the Narrhagansets, under
pretense of securing them, but they were truly hemmed in by them, though at a
distance, yet so as they could not, or durst not stir from the place, by which
means our forces of the Massachusetts had an easy conquest of some hundreds of
them, who were there couped up as in a pound; not daring to fight, not able to
fly away, and so were all taken without any opposition: The men among them to
the number of 30, were turned presently into Charon's ferry-boat, under the
command of skipper Gallop, who dispatched them a little without the harbor;
the females and children were disposed of according to the will of the
conquerors, some being given to the Narrhagansets, and other Indians that
assisted in the service.

THE rest of the enemy being first fired out of their strong hold, were taken
and destroyed, a great number of them being seized in the places where they
intended to have hid themselves, the rest fled out of their own country over
Connecticut river, up toward the Dutch plantation. Our soldiers being resolved
by GOD'S assistance to make a final destruction of them, were minded to pursue
them which way soever they should think to make their escape, to which end in
the next place, our soldiers went by water toward New Haven, whither they
heard, and which in reason was most likely, they bent their course: Soon after
they were informed of a great number of them, that had betaken themselves to a
neighboring place not far off, whither they might hope it was not likely they
should be pursued; but upon search they found fifty or sixty wigwams, but
without any Indians in any of them, but heard that they had passed along toward
the Dutch plantation; whereupon our soldiers that were before, all embarked for
Quillepiack, afterward called New Haven, and being landed there, they had not
far to march unto the place where it was most probable they should either find
or hear of them; accordingly in their march they met here and there with sundry
of them, whom they all slew or took prisoners, amongst whom were two Sachems,
whom they presently beheaded; to a third that was either a Sachem or near akin
to one, they gave his life upon condition that he should go and enquire where
Sassacous was, and accordingly bring them word; this Indian, overlooking all
other national or natural obligations, in consideration of his life that was
received on that condition, proved very true and faithful to those that sent
him; his order was to have returned in three days, but not being able within so
short a time to make a full discovery of the business, and also find a handsome
way to escape, he made it eight days before he returned, in which something
fell out not a little remarkable; for those he was sent to discover, suspecting
at the last by his withdrawing himself, that he came for a spy, pursued after
him, so as he was forced to fly for his life, and getting down to the sea side
he accidentally met with a canoe a little before turned adrift, by which means
he paddled by some shift or other so far out of the harbor, that making a sign
he was discerned by some on board one of the vessels that attended on our
soldiers, by whom being taken up he made known what he had discovered: But
after he was gone, Sassacous suspecting (and not without just cause) what the
matter was, made his escape from the rest with 20 or 30 of his men to the
Mohawks, by whom himself and they that were with him, were all murdered
afterward, being hired thereunto by the Narrhagansets, as was confidently
affirmed and believed. Sassacous's scalp was sent down to the English Hubbard's
Mss. Hist.


THUS this treacherous and cruel villain with his companions, having against
his faith and promise, as well as contrary to the laws of nature and nations,
murdered several others, both of the Dutch and English nation, is in the same
manner himself, against the laws of hospitality murdered by those to whom he
fled for refuge. Vengeance is mine, says the Lord, I will repay it.

IT is worthy our observation, that this Sassacous the chief Sachem of the
Pequods, as afterward Phillip of Mount-Hope, (both of them in their several
times and places the contrivers of many bloody and cruel mischiefs, yet)
escaped the hands of those whom they had so many ways provoked to the utmost
degree of indignation, that so they might not too much gratify their own
spirits in taking revenge; but it must be brought about by those means, by
which the glory of divine vengeance and justice shall more eminently shine
forth, that it might be truly said of them as Adonibezek confessed of himself,
As I have done, so God has requited me.

BUT to return.

THE rest of the Pequods from whom Sassacous had made an escape, shifted every
one for himself, leaving but three or four behind them (when a party of our
soldiers according to the direction of him that was sent as a spy came upon the
place) who would not or could not tell them whither their company were fled;
but our soldiers ranging up and down as providence guided them, at the last,
July 13, 1637, they lighted upon a great number of them, they pursued them to a
small Indian town seated by the side of an hideous swamp (near the place where
Fairfield or Stratford now stand) into which they all slipped, as well Pequods as
natives of the place, before our men could make any shot upon them, having
placed a sentinel to give warning. Mr. Ludlow and Capt. Mason with half a score
of their men happened to discover this crew. Capt. Patrick and Capt. Trask with
about an hundred of the Massachusetts forces came in upon them presently after
the alarm was given; such commanders as first happened to be there gave special
orders that the swamp should be surrounded (being about a mile in compass) but
Lieut. Davenport belonging to Capt. Trask's company, not hearing the word of
command, with a dozen more of his company, in an over eager pursuit of the
enemy, rushed immediately into the swamp, where they were very rudely
entertained by those evening wolves that newly kennelled therein; for Lieut.
Davenport was sorely wounded in the body, John Wedgwood of Ipswich in the
belly, and was laid hold on by some of the Indians; Thomas Sherman of said
Ipswich in the neck; some of their neighbors that ventured in with them were
in danger of the enemy's arrows that flew very thick about them, others were in
as much hazard of being swallowed by the miry boggs of the swamp, wherein they
stuck so fast, that, if Sergeant Riggs of Roxbury had not rescued two or three
of them, they had fallen into the hands of the enemy; but such was the strength
and courage of those that came to their rescue, that some of the Indians being
slain with their swords, their friends were quickly relieved, and drawn out of
the mire and danger.

BUT the Indians of the place, who had for company sake run with their guests
the Pequods into the swamp, did not love their friendship so well as to be
killed with them also for company sake, wherefore they began to bethink
themselves that they had done no wrong to the English, and desired a parley,
which was granted, and they presently understood one another by the means of
Thomas Stanton an exact interpreter then at hand. Upon which the Sachem of the
place with several others and their wives and children, that liked better to
live quietly in their wigwams than to be buried in the swamp, came forth and
had their lives granted them: After some time of further parley with these, the
interpreter was sent in to offer the like terms to the rest, but they were
possessed with such a spirit of stupidity and sullenness that they resolved
rather to sell their lives for what they could get there; and to that end began
to let fly their arrows thick against him as intending to make his blood some
part of the price of their own; but through the goodness of God toward him, his
life was not to be sold on that account, he being presently fetched off.

BY this time night drawing on, our commanders perceiving on which side of the
swamp the enemies were lodged, gave orders to cut through the swamp with their
swords, that they might the better hem them round in one corner, which was
presently done, and so they were begirt in all night, the English in the
circumference plying them with shot all the time, by which means many of them
were killed and buried in the mire, as they found the next day. The swamp by
the forementioned device being reduced to so narrow a compass, that our
soldiers standing at twelve feet distance could surround it, the enemy was kept
in all the night; but a little before daybreak (by reason of the fogg that
uses to arise about that time, observed to be the darkest time of the night)
twenty or thirty of the lustiest of the enemy broke through the besiegers, and
escaped away into the woods, some by violence and some by stealth dropping
away, some of whom notwithstanding were killed in the pursuit; the rest were
lest to the mercy of the conquerors, of which many were killed in the swamp
like sullen dogs, that would rather in their self-willedness and madness sit
still to be shot through or cut in pieces, than receive their lives for asking
at the hand of those into whose power they were now fallen. Some that are yet
living and worthy of credit do affirm, that in the morning entering into the
swamp, they saw several heaps of them sitting close together, upon whom they
discharged their pieces laden with ten or twelve pistol bullets at a time,
putting the muzzels of their pieces under the boughs within a few yards of
them; so as besides those that were found dead (near twenty it was judged) many
more were killed and sunk into the mire and never were minded more by friend or
foe: Of those who were not so desperate or sullen to sell their lives for
nothing, but yielded in time, the male children were sent to the Bermudas, of
the females some were distributed to the English towns, some were disposed of
among the other Indians, to whom they were deadly enemies as well as to
ourselves.

THIS overthrow given to the Pequods struck such a terror into all the Indians
in those parts (some of whom had been ill-affected to the English before) that
they sought our friendship, and rendered themselves to be under our protection,
which they then obtained, and have never since forfeited it any of them till
this late rebellion of Philip the subject of the following discourse. Amongst
the rest of the prisoners special notice was taken of the wife of a noted
Indian called Mononotto, who with her children submitted herself, or by the
chance of the war fell into the hands of the English: it was known to (...) her
mediation that two English maids (that were taken from Wethersfield upon
Connecticut river) were saved from death, in requital of whose pity and
humanity, the life of herself and her children was not only granted her, but
she was in special recommended to the care of that honorable gentleman Mr. John
Winthrop, for that time being the worthy Governor of the Massachusetts; who
taking notice of her modest countenance and behavior, as well as of her only
request (not to suffer wrong either as to the honor of her body or fruit of her
womb) gave special charge concerning her, according to his noble and christian
disposition.

AFTER this slaughter at the swamp, the Pequods being upon every turn exposed
to the revenge of the Mohegins on one side, and the Narrhagansets on the other,
chose rather to submit themselves to the English, Seven hundred of them were
thought to be destroyed.
by whom they were put, some under the Mohegins and some under the
Narrhagansets, which at last proved the occasion of the present quarrel as is
conceived, through the ambition of Miantonimo, as will be hereafter related.

ON the 12th of July, 1637, one Aganemo, a Sachem of the Niantick Indians (who
were a branch of the Narhagansets) came to Boston with seventeen of his own
men; he made diverse propositions to the English, which they took into
consideration, and promised to give him an answer the next day: But finding
that he had rescued diverse of the Pequods, submitting to him since the last
defeat, they first demanded the delivery of them, which he sticking at, they
refused further conference with him: But the next morning he came and offered
what they desired. So the Governor referred him to the Captains at the Pequod
country, and writ instructions to them how to deal with him. So receiving his
ten fathom of wampam, they friendly dismissed him.

IN July 1638, Uncas the Sachem of the Mohegins, having entertained some of the
Pequods, came to the Governor at Boston with a present, and was much dejected
because it was not first accepted: But afterward the Governor and Council
being satisfied about his innocence, they accepted it, whereupon he promised to
submit to the order of the English, both touching the Pequods he had received,
and as concerning the differences be^wixt the Narrhagansets and himself, and
confirmed all with this compliment; this heart, said he, (laying his hand upon
his heart) is not mine but yours, command me any difficult service and I will
do it, I have no men but they are all yours, I will never believe any Indian
against the English any more; and so he continued for ever after, as may be
seen in the following transactions between the Indians and the English;
whereupon he was dismissed with some small reward, and went home very joyful
carrying a letter of approbation for himself and his men, through the English
plantations.

THIS was the issue of the Pequod war, which in the day of it here in
New England was as formidable to the country in general as the present war with
Philip; the experience of which, because it may administer much matter of
comfort and encouragement to the surviving generation, as well as of praise and
thanksgiving to Almighty God, from all those who have thus long quietly enjoyed
the benefit and reaped the frui^ of their labor and courage who engaged
therein, the more pains has been taken to search out the broken pieces of that
story and thus put them together, before the memory thereof was buried in the
ruins of time, and past the recove^ and knowledge of the present age.

AFTER subduing the Pequods in the year 1637, the Narrhagansets the most
numerous of the other Indians, either out of discontent, that the whole
sovereignty over the rest of the Indians was not adjudged to belong to them, or
out of envy, that Uncas the chief Sachem of the Mohegin Indians, had insinuated
further than themselves into the savor of the English, were observed to be
always contriving mischief against them, notwithstand-a firm agreement was made
between the English and the said Narrhagansets in the year 1637, when they had
helped to destroy the Pequods, and also notwithstanding the triple league
between the said Narrhagansets, the Mohegins and the English at Hartford (the
chief town of Connecticut) made in the year 1638, wherein the said Indians were
solemnly engaged, not to quarrel with the Mohegins or any other Indians, until
they had first asked the advice of the English, to whose determination, they
had likewise obliged themselves to stand, in all following differences among
them. They carried it subtly and underhand for some years, and were
pretending quarrels with the said Uncas, against whom they always had an
inveterate malice, ever since the agreement made about distributing the
Pequods, after the war with them was ended; expecting in all probability that
all should have been left to their sole arbitriment. The Mohegins on the other
side, though not so numerous, yet a more warlike people and more politic,
always made their recourse to the English, complaining of the insolences of
the Narrhagansets, contrary to their league, so as they would hardly be kept
from making open war against them, when they saw all other attempts to kill and
destroy Uncas the Mohegin Sachem, by treachery, poison, and sorcery, prove
ineffectual. Insomuch that at last the malice of Miantonimo and his
Narrhagansets grew to that height, that they began to plot against the English
themselves, for defending of Uncas.

THE Narrhagansets were animated by the haughty spirit and aspiring mind of
Miantonimo, the heir apparent of all the Narrhaganset people, after the decease
of the old Sachem, Canonicus, who was his uncle. This Miantonimo was a very
goodly personage, of tall stature, subtle and cunning in his contrivements, as
well as haughty in his designs. It was strongly suspected that in the year
1642, he had contrived to draw all the Indians throughout the country into a
general conspiracy against the English: For, the first of September, 1642,
letters came to Boston from the Court at Connecticut, and from two of the
Magistrates there, that the Indians had conspired to cut off the English all
over the country: Mr. Ludlow certified so much from the place where he lived
near the Dutch. The time appointed to be for the assault, was said to be after
harvest, the manner to be by several companies entering into the chief men's
houses, by way of trade, and then to kill them in their houses, and seize their
arms, and others should be a^ hand to prosecute the massacre: This was also
confirmed by three Indians that were said to reveal it in the same manner, and
at the same time, to Mr. Ludlow; and to the Governor of New Haven. It was added
also that another Indian should discover the same plot to Mr. Haines of
Connecticut, by some special circumstances, viz. that being much hurt by a cart
(which usually there are drawn with oxen) he should send for Mr. Haines and
tell him, that Englishman's God was angry with him, and sent Englishman's cow
(meaning the oxen in the cart, or wayne) to kill him, because he had concealed
a plot against the English, and so told him all as the other Indians had done.

UPON this, their advice from Connecticut was, that we should begin with them,
and enter upon a war presently, and that if the Massachusetts would send 120
men to Saybrook, at the river's mouth, they would meet them with a
proportionable number. This was a very probable story, and very likely it was,
that the Indians had been discoursing of some such business among themselves.
But the General Court of the Massachusetts when called together, did not think
those informations to be a sufficient ground whereon to begin a war. Although
the Governor and Magistrates as many as could convene together before the
Court, ordered that all the Indians within their jurisdiction should be
disarmed, which they willingly yielded unto: And upon all the enquiries and
examinations which were made by the Court when assembled together, they could
not find any such violent presumption of a conspiracy, as to be the ground of a
war. Besides, it was considered, that the reports of all Indians were found by
experience to be very uncertain, especially when it may well be supposed, that
they are or may be raised and carried by such as are at variance one with
another; who may be very like to accuse one another to ingratiate themselves
with the English. Miantonimo, Sachem of Narrhaganset, was sent unto, and by his
readiness to appear, satisfied the English that he was innocent as to any
present conspiracy; though his quarrel with the Mohegins (who bordered upon
Connecticut colony) might very probably, as was judged, render him the subject
of such a report, or an occasion of it.

THE said Miantonimo when he came before the Court peremptorily demanded that
his accusers might be bro'^ before him face to face, and if they could not
prove it, then to be made to suffer, what himself if he had been found guilty
had deserved, i. e. death, his reasons for which were very plausible. He urged
very much the prosecuting such a law against his accusers; alleging, that if
the English did not believe it, why did they disarm the Indians round about:
And if they did believe it, equity required, that they who accused him should
be punished according to the offense charged upon himself. He offered also to
make it good against Uncas, Sachem of the Mohegins, that the report was raised
either by him, or some of his people. The English answered, that diverse Indians
had robbed some of the English men's houses, which might be a sufficient ground
to disarm; and with that he was something satisfied. The Connecticut men were
hardly prevailed with to forbear the war against them, but at last they were
overcome with the allegations of the Massachusetts to lay it aside.

MIANTONIMO when he was at Boston was very deliberate in his answers, showing a
good understanding in the principles of justice and equity, as well as a
seeming ingenuity withal: But though his words were smoother than oil, yet, as
many conceived, in his heart were drawn swords. It was observed also, that he
would never speak but when some of his Counselors were present, that they
might, as he said, bear witness of all his speeches at their return home.

THEY spent two days in the treaty, wherein at last he gave them satisfaction
in all things, though he held off long about the Nianticks, of whom he said
they were as his own flesh, engaging on their behalf, that if they should do
any wrong, so as neither he nor they could satisfy without blood, then he would
leave them to the mercy of the English. At his departure he gave his hand to
the Governor, telling him, that was for the Magistrates that were absent.

WHILE he was at Boston one of his own followers had been a principal evidence
against him; he however promised to deliver him to the Mohegin Sachem whose
subject he was; notwithstanding which promise, going homeward he cut off his
head to prevent his telling more tales. And with great discontent as he was
going home said he would come no more to Boston, wherein he proved a truer
prophet than he himself believed when he uttered the words, for in the end of
the same year, 1643, making war upon Uncas, he was taken prisoner by him, and
soon after by the advice of the Commissioners of the four colonies (at that
time firmly united into a league offensive and defensive, on which account they
were after that time called the united colonies of New England; though since
that time they are reduced to but three colonies; that of New Haven and
Connecticut by the last patent being united in one) his head was cut off by
Uncas, it being justly feared, that there would never be any firm peace, either
betwixt the English and the Narrhagansets, or betwixt the Narrhagansets and the
Mohegins, while Miantonimo was left alive: However, the Narrhagansets have ever
since that time (...) implacable malice against Uncas, and all the Mohegins,
and for their sakes secretly against the English, so far as they durst discover
it.

IN the years 1645 and 1646, they grew so insolent, that the Commissioners of
the united colonies were compelled to raise forces to go against them, but when
they preceived that the English were in good earnest, they began to be afraid,
and sued for peace, and submitted to pay tribute to satisfy for the charge of
preparation for the war, but were always very backward to make payment until
the English were forced to demand it by new forces, so that it appeared they
were unwillingly willing to hold any friendly correspondence with the English,
yet durst they never make any open attempt upon them, until the present
rebellion, wherein they had no small hand, is too, too evident, notwithstanding
all their pretenses to the contrary, as will appear in the sequel of this
history.

THUS it is apparent upon what terms the English stood with the Narrhagansets,
ever since the cutting off Miantonimo, their chief Sachem's head by Uncas, it
being done with the advice and counsel of the English, Anno 1643. As for the
rest of the Indians, ever since the suppressing of the Pequods in the year
1637, until the year 1675, there was always in appearance amity and good
correspondence on all sides, scarce an Englishman was ever known to be
assaulted or hurt by any of them, until after the year 1671, when the son of
one Matoonas, who as was supposed, being vexed in his mind that the design
against the English, intended to begin 1671, did not take place, out of mere
malice and spite against them, slew an Englishman traveiling along the road,
the said Matoonas being a Nipnet Indian, which Nipnets were under the command
of the Sachem of Mount-Hope, the author of all the present mischiefs.

UPON a due enquiry into all preceding transactions between the Indians and
the English, from their first settling in these coasts, there will appear no
ground of quarrel that any of them had against the English, nor any provocation
upon one account or another; for when Plymouth colony was first planted, within
three months after their first landing, March 16, 1620, Massasoit, the chief
Sachem of all that side of the country, repaired to the English at Plymouth,
and entered into a solemn league upon sundry articles, (printed in
New-England's Memorial, 1669) which are as follows, viz.

1. THAT neither he nor any of his should injure or do hurt to any of their
people.

2. THAT if any of his did any hurt to any of theirs, he should send the
offender that they might punish him.

3. THAT if any thing were taken away from any of theirs, he should cause it to
be restored; and they should do the like to his.

4. THAT if any did unjustly war against him, they should aid him, and if any
did war against them, he should aid them.

5. THAT he should send to his neighbor confederates, to certify them of this,
that they might not wrong them, but might likewise be comprised in these
conditions of peace.

6. THAT when his men came to them upon any occasion, they should leave their
arms (which were then bows and arrows) behind them.

7. THAT so doing, their sovereign Lord King JAMES would esteem him as their
friend and ally.

THIS league the same Sachem, September 25, 1630, a little before his death,
coming with his eldest son, afterward called Alexander, did renew with the
English at the Court of Plymouth, for himself and his son, and their heirs and
successors: And after that he came to Mr. Brown's, who lived not far from
Mount-Hope, bringing his two sons, Alexander and Philip with him, desiring
there might be love and amity after his death, between his sons and them, as
there had been betwixt himself and them in former times: Yet it is very
remarkable, that this Massasoit, called also Woosamequen (how much soever he
affected the English, yet) was never in the least degree well affected to the
religion of the English, but would in his last treaty with his neighbors at
Plymouth, when they were with him about purchasing some land at Swanzey, have
had them engaged never to attempt to draw away any of his people from their old
pagan superstition, and devilish idolatry, to the christian religion, and did
much insist upon it till he saw the English were resolved ^ever to make any
treaty with him more upon that account, which when he discerned, he did not
further urge it: but that was a bad omen that notwithstanding whatever his
humanity were to the English, as they were strangers, (for indeed they had
repayed his former kindness to them, by protecting him afterward against the
insolences of the Narrhagansets) he manifested no small displacency of spirit
against them, as they were christians: which strain was evident more in his son
that succeeded him, and all his people, insomuch that some discerning persons
of that jurisdiction have feared that that nation of Indians would all be
rooted out, as is since come to pass. The like may be observed concerning the
Narrhagansets, who were always more civil and courteous to the English than any
of the other Indians, though never as yet received the least tincture of
christian religion, but have in a manner run the same fate with their
neighbors of Mount-Hope, there being very few of them now lest standing. Nor
is it unworthy the relation, what a person of quality amongst us has of late
affirmed, viz. One much conversant with the Indians about Merimack river, being
Anno 1660, invited by some Sagamores or Sachems to a great dance, (which
solemnities are the times they make use of to tell their stories, and convey
the knowledge of some past and most memorable things to posterity)
Passaconaway, the great Sachem of that part of the country, intending at that
time to make his last and farewell speech to his children and people, that were
then all gathered together, addressed himself to them in this manner:

I AM now going the way of all flesh, or ready to die, and not likely to see
you ever met together any more: I will now leave this word of counsel with you,
that you may take h^ed how you quarrel with the English, for though you may do
them much mischief, yet assuredly you will a^ be destroyed, and roo^ed off the
earth if you do; for, I was as much an enemy to the English, at their (...)
coming into th^se parts, as any one whatsoever, and did try all ways and means
possible to have destroyed them, at least to have prevented them sitting down
here, but I could no way effect it, therefore I advise you never to contend
with the English, nor make war with them: And accordingly his eldest son
Wonnalancet by name, as soon as he perceived that the Indians were up in arms,
withdrew himself into some remote place, that he might not be hurt by the
English, or the enemies, or be in danger by them.

THIS passage was thought sit to be inserted here, it having so near an
agreement with the former, intimating some secret awe of God upon the hearts of
some of the principal amongst them, that they durst not hurt the English,
although they bare no good affection to their religion, wherein they seem not a
little to imitate Balaam, who whatever he uttered, when he was under the awful
power of divine illumination, yet when left to himself, was as bad an enemy to
the Israel of God as ever before. But to return.

AFTER the death of this Woosamequen, or Massasoit, his eldest son succeeded
him about 20 years since, Alexander by name, who notwithstanding the league he
had entered into with the English, together with his father, in the year 1639,
had neither affection to the Englishmen's persons, nor yet to their religion,
but had been plotting with the Narrhagansets to rise against the English; of
which the Governor and Council of Plymouth being informed, they presently sent
for him, to bring him to the Court; the person to whom that service was
committed, was a prudent and resolute gentleman, the present Governor of the
said colony, who was neither afraid of danger, nor yet willing to delay in a
matter of that moment, he forthwith taking eight or ten stout men with him well
armed, intended to have gone to the said Alexander's dwelling, distant at least
forty miles from the Governor's house* but by a good providence, he found him
whom he went to seek at an hunting-house, within six miles of the English
towns, where the said Alexander with about eighty men were newly come in from
hunting, and had left their guns without doors, which Major Winslow with his
small company wisely seized, and conveyed away, and then went into the (...)
demanded Alexander to go along with him before the Governor, at which message
he was much appalled, but being told by the undaunted messenger, that if he
stirred or refused to go he was a dead man; he was by one of his chief
Counselors, in whose advice he most confided, persuaded to go along to the
Governor's house, but such was the pride and height of his spirit, that the
very surprizal of him, so raised his choler and indignation, that it put him
into a fever, which notwithstanding all possible means that could be used,
seemed mortal; whereupon entreating those that held him prisoner, that he might
have liberty to return home, promising to return again if he recovered, and to
send his son as hostage till he could so do; on that consideration he was
fairly dismissed, but died before he got half way home. Here let it be
observed, that, although some have taken up false reports, as if the English
had compelled him to go further or faster than he was able, and so he fell into
a fever, or as if he were not well used by the Physician that looked to him,
while he was with the English, all which are notoriously false; nor is it to be
imagined that a person of so noble a disposition as is that gentleman (at that
time employed to bring him) should himself, or suffer any else to be uncivil to
a person allied to them, by his own, as well as his father's league, as the
said Alexander also was; nor was any thing of that nature ever objected to the
English of Plymouth, by the said Alexander's brother, by name Philip, commonly
for his ambitious and haughty spirit nicknamed King Philip, when he came in
the year 1662, in his own person with Bavsam^n his Secretary and chief
Counselor to renew the former league that had been between his pred^^^sio^s
and the English of Plymouth: But there was as much correspondence betwixt them
for the next seven years as ever had been in any former times. What can
b^im^gi^ed therefore, beside, the instigation of Satan, that envied at the
prosperity of the church of God here seated, or else fearing lest the power of
the Lord Jesus, that had overthrown his kingdom in other parts of the world,
should do the like here, and so the stone taken out of the mountain without
hands, should become a great mountain itself, and fill the whole earth; no
cause of provocation being given by the English? For once before this, in the
year 1671, the devil, who was a murderer from the beginning, had so filled the
heart of this savage miscreant with envy and malice against the English, that
he was ready to break out in open war against the inhabitants of Plymouth,
pretending some trifling injuries done him in his planting land, but when the
matter of controversy came to be heard diverse of the Massachusetts Colony, yea,
when he himself came to Boston, as it were referring his case to the judgment
of that colony, nothing of that nature could be made to appear, whereupon in
way of submission, he was of necessity by that evident conviction forced to
acknowledge that it was the naughtiness of his own heart, that put him upon
that rebellion, and nothing of any provocation from the English; and to a
confession of this nature, with a solemn renewal of this covenant, declaring
his desire, that this his covenant might testify to the world against him, if
ever he should prove unfaithful to those of Plymouth, or any other of the
English colonies therein, himself with his chief Counselors subscribed in the
presence of some messengers sent on purpose to hear the difference between
Plymouth and the said Philip. But for further satisfaction of the reader, the
said agreement and submission shall here be published.

TAUNTON, April 10th, 1671.
WHEREAS my father, my brother and myself have formerly submitted ourselves and
our people unto the King's Majesty of England, and to this colony of
New Plymouth, by solemn covenant under our hand; but I having of late through
my indiscretion, and the naughtiness of my heart violated and broken this my
covenant with my friends, by taking up arms, with evil intent against them, and
that groundlesly; I being now deeply sensible of my unfaithfulness and folly,
do desire at this time solemnly to renew my covenant with my ancient friends,
and my father's friends above mentioned, and do desire this may testify to the
world against me if ever I shall again fail in my faithfulness toward them
(whom I have now and at all times found kind to me) or any other of the English
colonies; and as a real pledge of my true intentions, for the future to be
faithful and friendly, I do freely engage to resign up unto the government of
New Plymouth, all my English arms, to be kept by them for their security; so
long as they shall see reason. For true performance of the premises I have
hereunto set my hand together with the rest of my Council.

In presence of WILLIAM DAVIS, WILLIAM HUDSON, THOMAS BRATTLE. The Mark P. of
Phillip, chief Sachem of Pokanoket, The Mark V. of Tavoser, The Mark M. of
Capt. Wispoke, The Mark T. of Woonkaponchunt, The Mark 8. of Nimrod.


PHILIP also in the same year signed the following ARTICLES.

1. WE PHILIP and my Council and my subjects, do acknowledge ourselves subject
to his MAJESTY the King of England, and the government of New Plymouth, and to
their laws.

2. I AM willing and do promise to pay unto the government of Plymouth, one
hundred pounds in such things as I have: But I would entreat the favor that I
might have three years to pay it in, for as much as I cannot do it at present.

3. I DO promise to send unto the Governor, or whom he shall appoint, five
wolves heads, if I can get them: Or, as many as I can procure, until they come
to five wolves yearly.

4. IF any difference fall between the English and myself, and people, then I
do promise to repair to the Governor of Plymouth, to rectify the difference
amongst us.

5. I Do promise not to make war with any, but with the Governor's approbation
of Plymouth.

6. I PROMISE not to dispose of any of the lands that I have at present, but by
the approbation of the Governor of Plymouth.

FOR the true performance of the premises of the said Sachem, Philip of
Paukamakett, do hereby bind myself, and such of my Council, as are present,
ourselves, our heirs, our successors, faithfully, and do promise, in witness
thereof, we have hereunto subscribed our hands, the day and year above written.

In the presence of the Court and diverse of the Magistrates and other gentlemen
of the Massachusetts and Connecticut. The Mark P. of Philip, the Sachem of
Pokan^ket, The Mark [of Uncompaen. The Mark of Wocokom. The Mark ^ of Samkama."


To which, for the further clearing the justice of the present war, the result
of the debate of the Commissioners of the united colonies about the matter of
the war shall be here inserted.

At a meeting of the Commissioners of the united colonies held at Boston,
September 9th, 1675.
WE having received from the Commissioners of Plymouth a Narrative, showing the
rise and several steps of that colony, as to the present war with the Indians,
which had its beginning there, and its progress into the Massachusetts, by
their insolences and outrages, murdering many persons, and burning their
houses in sundry plantations in both colonies. And having duly considered the
same; do declare that the said war be both just and necessary, and its first
rise only a defensive war. And therefore we do agree and conclude that it ought
to be jointly prosecuted by all the united colonies; and the charges thereof to
be born and paid as is agreed in the articles of confederation.

JOHN WINTHROP, JAMES RICHARDS, THOMAS DANFORTH, WILLIAM STOUGHTON, JOSIAH
WINSLOW, THOMAS HINCKLEY.

BUT whatever his submission was before, or his subjecting himself and his
people to our King, or his engagement to pay a sum of money in part of the
charges then occasioned by him (and notwithstanding the English in or about
Plymouth, since, or before that time were never any ways injurious unto him, or
any of his people) all which are fully declared in a Narrative given by the
Commissioners of the colony of Plymouth, wherein they also signify that the
settlement and issue of the former controversy between Philip and them, was
obtained and made (principally) by the mediation, and interposed advice and
counsel of the other two confederate colonies, and also in a letter under the
Governor's hand, in the following words:

I THINK I can clearly say, that before these present troubles broke out, the
English did not possess one foot of land in this colony, but what was fairly
obtained by honest purchase of the Indian proprietors: Nay, because some of our
people are of a covetous disposition, and the Indians are in their straits
easily prevailed with to part with their lands, we first made a law, that none
should purchase or receive of gift, any land of the Indians without the
knowledge and allowance of our Court, and penalty of a fine, five pounds per
acre, for all that should be so bought or obtained. And lest yet they should be
straightened, we ordered that Mount-Hope, Pocasset, and several other necks of
the best land in the colony, because must suitable and convenient for them,
should never be bought out of their hands, or else they would have sold them
long since. And our neighbors at Rehoboth and Swanzey, although they bought
their lands fairly of this Philip and his father and brother, yet because of
their vicinity, that they might not trespass upon the Indians, did at their own
cost set up a very substantial fence quite across that great neck between the
English and the Indians, and paid due damage if at any time any unruly horse
or other beasts broke in and trespassed. And for diverse years last past (that
all occasion of offense in that respect might be prevented) the English agreed
with Philip and his, for a certain sum yearly to maintain the said fence, and
secure themselves. And if at any time they have brought complaints before us,
they have had justice impartial and speedily, so that our own people have
frequently complained, that we erred on the other hand in showing them over
much favor.

Marshfield, May 1, 1676. JOS. WINSLOW.


YET did this treacherous and perfidious caitiff still harbor the same or more
mischievous thoughts against the English than ever before, and has been since
that time plotting with all the Indians round about, to make a general
insurrection against the English in all the colonies; which, as some prisoners
lately brought in have confessed, should have been put in execution at once, by
all the Indians rising as one man, against all those plantations of English,
which were next to them. The Narrhagansets having promised, as was confessed,
to rise with four thousand fighting men in the spring of this present year,
1676. But by the occasion hereafter to be mentioned about Sausaman, Philip was
necessitated for the safety of his own life to begin his rebellion the year
before, when the design was not sully ripe. Yet some are ready to think, that
if his own life had not now been in jeopardy by the guilt of the murder of the
aforesaid Sausaman, his heart might have failed him, when it should have come
to be put in execution, as it did before in the year 1671, which made one of
his Captains, of far better courage and resolution than himself, when he saw
his cowardly temper and disposition, fling down his arms, calling him white
liver'd cur, or to that purpose, and saying, that he would never own him again,
or fight under him; and from that time has turned to the English, and has
continued to this day a faithful and resolute soldier in their quarrel.

THAT the Indians had a conspiracy amongst themselves to rise against the
English, is confirmed by some of the Indians about Hadley, although the plot
was not come to maturity when Philip began, the special providence of God
therein overruling the contrivers: For when the beginning of the troubles
first was reported from Mount-Hope, many of the Indians were in a kind of a
maze, not knowing well what to do, sometimes ready to stand for the English, as
formerly they had been wont to do; sometimes inclining to strike in with Philip
(which at the last they generally did) which if it had been foreseen, much of
that mischief might have been prevented that fell out in several places, more
by perfidious and treacherous dealing than any other ways; the English never
imagining that after so many obliging kindnesses received from them by the
Indians, besides their many engagements and protestations of friendship, as
formerly, they would have been so ungrateful, perfidiously false and cruel, as
they have since proved.

THE occasion of Philip's so sudden taking up arms the last year was this --
There was one John Sausaman a very cunning and plausible Indian well skilled in
the English language, and bred up in a profession of the christian religion,
employed as a schoolmaster at Natick, the Indian town, who upon some
misdemeanor fled from his place to Philip, by whom he was entertained in the
room and office of a Secretary, and his chief Counselor, whom he trusted with
all his affairs and secret counsels: But afterward, whether upon the sting of
his own conscience, or by the frequent solicitations of Mr. Eliot, that had
known him from a child, and instructed him in the principles of our religion,
who was often laying before him the heinous fin of his apostasy, and returning
back to his old vomit, he was at last prevailed with to forsake Philip, and
returned back to the christian Indians at Natick, where he was baptized,
manifesting public repentance for all his former offenses, and made a serious
profession of the christian religion: and did apply himself to preach to the
Indians, wherein he was better gifted than any other of the Indian nation; so
as he was observed to conform more to the English manners than any other
Indian: yet having occasion to go up with some others of his countrymen to
Namasket; (now Middleborough) whether for the advantage of fishing, or some
such occasion, it matters not; being there not far from Philip's country, he
had occasion to be much in the company of Philip's Indians, and of Philip
himself; by which means he discerned by several circumstances, that the Indians
were plotting anew against us; the which out of faithfulness to the English,
the said Sausaman informed the Governor of, adding also, that if it were known
that he revealed it, he knew they would presently kill him. There appearing so
many concurrent testimonies from others, making it the more probable, that
there was a certain truth in the information, some enquiry was made into the
business, by examining Philip himself, and several of his Indians, who although
they would own nothing, yet could not free themselves from just suspicion.
Philip therefore soon after contrived the said Sausaman's death, which was
strangely discovered, notwithstanding it was so cunningly effected, for they
that murdered him met him upon the ice on a great pond, and presently after
they had knocked him down, put him under the ice, yet leaving his gun and hat
upon the ice, that it might be thought he sell in accidentally through the ice
and was drowned: but being missed by his friends, who finding his hat and gun,
they were thereby led to the place, where his body was found under the ice.
When they took him up to bury him, some of his friends, particularly one David,
observed some bruises about his head, which made them suspect he was first
knocked down, before he was put into the water, however, they buried him near
about the place where he was found, without making any further enquiry at
present: nevertheless David his friend, reported these things to some English
at Taunton (a town not far from Namasket) which occasioned the Governor to
enquire further into the business, wisely considering, that as Sausaman had
told him, if it were known that he had revealed any of their plots, they would
murder him for his pains: wherefore, by special warrant the body of Sausaman
being dug again out of his grave, it was very apparent that he had been
killed and not drowned. And by a strange providence, an Indian was found, that
by accident standing unseen upon a hill, had seen them murdering the said
Sausaman, but durst never reveal it for fear of losing his own life likewise,
until he was called to the Court at Plymouth, or before the Governor, where he
plainly confessed what he had seen. The murderers being apprehended, were
convicted by his undeniable testimony, and other remarkable circumstances, and
so were all put to death, being three in number; the last of them confessed
immediately before his death, that his father (one of the Counselors and
special friends of Philip) was one of the two that murdered Sausaman, himself
only looking on. This was done at Plymouth Court, hold in June, 1675, insomuch
that Philip apprehending the danger his own head was in next, never used any
further means to clear himself from what was like to be laid to his charge,
either about his plotting against the English, nor yet about Sausaman's death;
but by keeping his men continually about him in arms, and gathering what
strangers he could to join with him, marching up and down constantly in arms,
both all the while the Court sat, as well as afterward. The English of
Plymouth hearing of all this, yet took no further notice, than only to order a
military watch in all the adjacent towns, hoping that Philip, finding himself
not likely to be arraigned by order of the said Court, the present cloud might
blow over, as some others of like nature had done before; but in conclusion,
the matter proved otherwise, for Philip finding his strength daily increasing
by the flocking of neighbor Indians unto him, and sending over their wives and
children to the Narrhagansets for security (as they use to do when they intend
war with any of their enemies) they immediately began to alarm the English at
Swanzey (the next town to Philip's country) as it were daring the English to
begin; at last their insolences grew to such an height, that they began not
only to use threatening words to the English, but also to kill their cattle and
rifle their houses; whereat an Englishman was so provoked, that he let fly a
gun at an Indian, but did only wound, not kill him; whereupon the Indians
immediately began to kill all the English they could, so as on the 24th of
June, 1675, was the alarm of war first sounded in Plymouth colony, when eight
or nine of the English were slain in and about Swanzey; they first making a
shot at a company of English as they returned from the assembly where they were
met in a way of humiliation on that day, whereby they killed one and wounded
others, and then likewise at the same time, they slew two men on the highway,
sent to call a surgeon; and the same day barbarously murdered six men in and
about a dwelling house in another part of the town; all which outrages were
committed so suddenly, that the English had no time to make any resistance: For
on the 14th day of the same month, besides endeavors used by Mr. Brown of
Swan^^^ (...) of the Magistrates of Plymouth jurisdiction, an (...) letter was
sent from the Council of Plymouth (...), showing their dislike of his
practices, and ad^^^ (...) him to dismiss his strange Indians, and not suffer
(...) to be abused by false reports, concerning them (...) intended him no
hurt; but no answer could be ob^^^^^, otherwise than threatening of war, which
it was hoped might have been prevented, as heretofore it had ^^en, when things
seemed to look with as bad a face as they then did. However, the Governor and
Council of Plymouth, understanding that Philip continued in his resolution, and
manifested no inclination to peace, they immediately sent up what forces they
could to secure the towns thereabouts, and make resistance as occasion might
be; and also dispatched away messengers to the Massachusetts Governor and
Council, letting them know the state of things about Mount-Hope, and desiring
their speedy assistance; upon which care was immediately taken with all
expedition to send such supplies as were desired: But in the mean time two
messengers were dispatched to Philip, to try whether he could not be diverted
from his bloody enterprise, so to have prevented the mischief since fallen out,
hoping, that as once before, viz. in the year 1671, by their mediation, a stop
was put to the like tragedy, so the present war might by the same means have
been now turned aside: For in the said year Philip had firmly engaged himself,
when he was at Boston, not to quarrel with Plymouth until he had first
addressed himself to the Massachusetts for advice and approbation: But the two
messengers aforesaid, finding the men slain in the road June 24, as they were
going for the surgeon, apprehended it not safe to proceed any further,
considering also, that a peace now could not honorably be concluded after such
barbarous outrages committed upon some of the neighbor colony: Wherefore
returning with all speed to Boston, the Massachusetts forces were dispatched
away with all imaginable haste, as the exigence of the matter did require, some
of them being then upon, or ready for their march, the rest were ordered to
follow after, as they could be raised. The sending forth of which, because it
was the first engagement in any warlike preparations against the Indians, shall
be more particularly related.

ON the 26th of June, a foot company under Captain Daniel Henchman, with a
troop under Captain Thomas Prentice, were sent out of Boston toward Mount-Hope:
It being late in the afternoon before they began to march, the central eclipse
of the moon in Capric. happened in the evening before they came up to Naponset
river, about twenty miles from Boston, which occasioned them to make a halt,
for a little repast, till the moon recovered her light again. Some melancholy
fancies would not be persuaded, but that the eclipse falling out at that
instant of time was ominous, conceiving also that in the center of the moon
they discerned an unusual black spot, not a little resembling the scalp of an
Indian: As others not long before, imagined they saw the form of an Indian bow,
accounting that likewise ominous (although the mischief following was done by
guns, and not by bows) both the one and the other, might rather have thought of
what Marcus Crassus the Roman General, going forth with an army against the
Parthians, once wisely replied to a private soldier, that would have dissuaded
him from marching that time, because of an eclipse of the moon in Capricorn,
that he was more afraid of Sagitarius than of Capricornus, meaning the arrows
of the Parthians (accounted very good archers) from whom as things then fell
out, was his greatest danger. But after the moon had waded through the dark
shadow of the earth, and borrowed her light again, by the help thereof, the two
companies marched on toward Woodcock's house, thirty miles from Boston, where
they arrived next morning; and there retarded their motion till the afternoon,
in hope of being overtaken by a company of volunteers, under the command of
Captain Samuel Mosely, which accordingly came to pass, so as on June 28th, they
all arrived at Swanzy, where by the advice of Capt. Cudworth, the commander in
chief of Plymouth forces, they were removed to the headquarters, which for
that time were appointed at Mr. Miles's house, the Minister of Swanzy, within a
quarter of a mile of the bridge, leading into Philip's lands. They arriving
there some little time before night, twelve of the troop unwilling to lose time
passed over the bridge, for discovery into the enemies territories, where they
found the rude welcome of eight or ten Indian, firing upon them out of the
bushes, killing one William Hammond, wounding Corporal Belcher, his horse being
also shot down under him; the rest of the said troopers having discharged upon
those Indians that run away ^f^r their first shot, carried off their two dead
and wounded companions, and so retired to the main guard for that night,
pitching in a barricado about Mr. Miles's house. The enemy thought to have
braved it out by a bold assault or two at the first; but their hearts soon
began to fail them when they perceived the Massachusetts and Plymouth forces
both engaged against them: For the next morning they shouted twice or thrice,
at half a mile's distance, and nine or ten of them showing themselves on this
side the bridge, our horsemen with the whole body of the volunteers under
Capt. Mosely, not at all daunted by such kind of alarms, nor willing so to lose
the bridge, ran violently down upon them over the said bridge, pursuing them a
mile and a quarter on the other side: Ensign Savage, that young martial spark,
scarce twenty years of age, had at that time one bullet lodged in his thigh,
another shot through the brim of his hat, by ten or twelve of the enemy
discharging upon him together, while he boldly held up his colors in the front
of his company: But the weather not suffering any further action at that time,
those that were thus far advanced, were compelled to retreat back to the main
guard, having first made a shot upon the Indians as they ran away into a swamp
near by, whereby they killed five or six of them, as was understood soon after
at Narrhaganset: This resolute charge of the English forces upon the enemy made
them quit their place on Mount-Hope that very night where Philip was never seen
after; till the next year, when he was by a divine mandate sent back; there to
receive the reward of his wickedness where he first began his mischief: The
next day Major Savage that was to command in chief over the Massachusetts
forces, being come up with other supplies, about six of clock over night the
whole body intended to march into Mount-Hope, and there beat up the enemy's
quarters, or give him battle, if he durst abide it: But the weather being
doubtful, our forces did not march till near noon, about which time they set
out, with a troop of horse in each wing, to prevent the danger of the enemy's
ambuscadoes; after they had marched about a mile and a half, they passed by
some houses newly burned: Not far off one of them, they found a bible newly
torn, and the leaves scattered about by the enemy, in hatred of our religion
therein revealed; two or three miles further they came up with some heads,
scalps, and hands cut off from the bodies of some of the English, and stuck
upon poles near the highway, in that barbarous and inhuman manner bidding us
defiance; the commander in chief giving order that those monuments of the
enemy's cruelty should be taken down, and buried: The whole body of the forces
still marched on two miles further, where they found diverse wigwams of the
enemy, among which were many things scattered up and down, arguing the hasty
flight of the owners; half a mile further, as they passed on through many
fields of stately corn, they found Philip's own wigwam; every place giving them
to perceive the enemy's hasty departure from thence; after they had marched two
miles further they came to the seaside, yet in all this time meeting with no
Indians, nor any sign of them, unless of their flight to some other places. The
season being like to prove very tempestuous, and rainy, Capt. Cudworth with
some of the men of Plymouth passed over to Rhode Island. The forces under Major
Savage were forced to abide all night in the open field, without any shelter,
notwithstanding the abundance of rain that fall, and in the morning, despairing
to meet with any enemy on Mount-Hope, they retreated back to their
headquarters at Swanzy, in the way meeting with many Indian dogs, that seemed
to have lost their masters. That night Capt. Prentice's troop for convenience
of quarters, as also for discovery, was dismissed to lodge at Seaconke or
Rehoboth, a town within six miles of Swanzy. As they returned back in the
morning. Capt. Prentice divided his troop, delivering one half to Lieut. Oaks,
and keeping the other himself, who as they rode along, espied a company of
Indians burning an house; but could not pursue them by reason of several
fences, that they could not go over till the Indians had escaped into a swamp.
Those with Lieut. Oaks had the like discovery, but with better success, as to
the advantage of the ground, so as pursuing of them upon a plain, they flew
four or five of them in the chase, whereof one was known to be Thebe a Sachem
of Mount-Hope, another of them was a chief Counselor of Philip's; yet in this
attempt the Lieutenant lost one of his company, John Druce by name, who was
mortally wounded in his bowels, whereof he soon after died, to the great grief
of his companions. After the said troop came up to headquarters at Swanzy,
they understood from Capt. Cadworth that the enemy were discovered upon
Pocasset, The main land over against the easterly end of Rhode Island, where is
now Tiverton, etc. was called Pocasset.
another neck of land lying over an arm of the sea, more toward Cape-God:
However it was resolved that a more narrow search should be made after them,
both upon Mount-Hope and upon the ground between Swanzy and Rehoboth to scour
the swamps, and assault them if they could find where they were entrenched.
Capt. Henchman and Capt. Prentice were ordered to search the swamps, while
Capt. Mosely and Capt. Paige with his dragoons attending on Major Cavage,
should return back into Mount-Hope, that they might be sure to leave none of
the enemy behind them, when they should remove to pursue them elsewhere.

ABOUT ten o'clock the next morning, July 4th, Capt. Henchman, after a long and
tedious march, came to the headquarters, and informed that he came upon a
place where the enemy had newly been that night, but were escaped out of his
reach: But the following night, before they were determined of any other
motion, Captain Hutchinson came up from Boston with new orders for them to pass
into Narrhaganset, to treat with the Sachems there, and if it might be, to
prevent their joining with Philip. Capt. Cudworth by this time was come up to
the headquarters, having left a garrison of 40 men upon Mount-Hope neck. The
next morning was spent in consultation how to carry on the treaty; it was then
resolved, that they should go to make a peace with a sword in their hands,
having no small ground of suspicion that the said Narrhagansets might join with
the enemy, wherefore they thought it necessary to carry all the Massachusetts
forces over into the Narrhaganset country, to fight them if there should be
need; Capt. Mosely passed over by water to attend Capt. Hutchinson in his
dispatch; the other companies with the troopers riding round about. As they
passed they found the Indians in Pomham's country (next adjoining to Philip's
borders) all fled, and their wigwams without any people in them.

AFTER they came to the Narrhaganset Sachems, three or four days were spent in
a treaty, after which a peace was concluded with them by the messengers of
Connecticut colony (who were ordered to meet with those of the Massachusetts)
and the commanders of the forces sent against Philip: Hostages were also given
by the said Narrhagansets for the performance of the agreement. A copy of the
said agreement, and the articles on which a peace was concluded, here follow.
It being always understood, that Plymouth colony was included in the said
agreement, although their forces were not then present, but remained at home
near the enemies borders, to secure their owns, and oppose Philip as there
might be occasion, if he offered to make any new attempt in the mean time.

ARTICLES, covenant and agreements had, made and concluded by, and between
Major Thomas Savage, Captain Edward Hutchinson, and Mr. Joseph Dudley, in
behalf of the government of the Massachusetts colony, and Major Wait Winthrop
and Mr. Richard Smith on behalf of Connecticut colony, on the one party, and
Agamaug, Wampsh alias Corman, Taitson, Tawageson, Counselors and Attorneys to
Canonicus, Ninigret, Matataog, old Queen Quaiapen, Quananshit and Pomham, the
six present Sachems of the whole Narrhaganset country on the other party,
referring to several differences and troubles lately risen between them; and
for a final conclusion of settled peace and amity between the said Sachems,
their heirs and successors for ever, and the Governors of the said
Massachusetts and Connecticut, and their successors in the said governments for
ever.

I. THAT all and every of the said Sachems shall from time to time carefully
seize, and living or (...) deliver unto one or other of the abovesaid
government^^ all and every of Sachem Philip's (...) shall come, or be found
within the precincts of any of their lands, and that with greatest diligence
and faithfulness.

II. THAT they shall with their utmost ability use all acts of hostility
against the said Philip and his subjects, entering his lands or any other lands
of the English, to kill and destroy the said enemy, until a cessation from war
with the said enemy be concluded by both the abovesaid colonies.

III. THAT the said Sachems, by themselves and their agents, shall carefully
search out and deliver all stolen goods whatsoever taken by any of their
subjects from any of the English, whether formerly or lately, and shall make
full satisfaction for all wrongs or in^uries done to the estate of any of the
subjects of the several colonies, according to the judgment of indifferent men,
in case of dissatisfaction between the offenders and the offended parties, or
deliver the offenders.

IV. THAT all preparations for war, or acts of hostility against any of the
English subjects, shall for ever for the future cease; together with all manner
of thefts, pilferings, killing of cattle, or any manner of breach of peace
whatsoever shall with utmost care be prevented, and instead thereof their
strength to be used as a guard round about the Narrhaganset country, for the
English inhabitants safety and security.

V. IN token of the abovesaid Sachems reality in this treaty and conclusion,
and for the security of the several English governments and subjects, they do
freely deliver unto the abovesaid gentlemen, in the behalf of the abovesaid
colonies, John Wobequob, Weowthim, Pewkes, Weenew, four of their near kinsmen
and choice friends, to be and remain as hostages in several places of the
English jurisdictions, at the appointment of the honorable Governors of the
abovesaid colonies, there to be civilly treated, not as prisoners, but
otherwise at their honors discretion, until the abovesaid articles are fully
accomplished to the satisfaction of the several governments, the departure of
any of them in the mean time to be accounted breach of the peace, and of these
present articles.

VI. THE said gentlemen in the behalf of the governments to which they do
belong, do engage to every the said Sachems and their subjects, that if they or
any of them shall seize and bring into either the abovesaid English
governments, or to Mr. Smith inhabitant of Narrhaganset, Philip Sachem alive,
he or they so delivering, shall receive for their pains, forty trucking cloth
coats, in case they bring his head they shall have twenty like good coats paid
them: For every living subject of said Philip's so delivered, the deliverer
shall receive two coats, and for every head one coat, as a gratuity for their
service herein, making it appear to satisfaction, that the heads or persons are
belonging to the enemy, and that they are of their seizure.

VII. THE said Sachems do renew and confirm unto the English inhabitants or
others, all former grants, sales, bargains or conveyances of lands, meadows,
timber, grass, stones, or whatever else the English have heretofore bought or
quietly possessed and enjoyed, to be unto them, and their heirs, and assigns
for ever; as also all former articles made with the confederate colonies.

Lastly, THE said counselors and attorneys do premeditately, seriously, and
upon good advice, covenant, conclude and agree all abovesaid solemnly, and call
God to witness they are, and shall remain true friends to the English
governments, and perform the abovesaid articles punctually, using their utmost
endeavor, care and faithfulness therein: In witness whereof they have set their
hands and seals. Petaquamscot, July 15, 1675.

Signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of us underwritten, being
carefully interpreted to the said Indians before Sealing.

DANIEL HENCHMAN, THOMAS PRENTICE, NICHOLAS PAIGE, JOSEPH STANTON, Interp.
HENRY HAWLAWS, PECOE BUKOW, JOB NEFF.
Tawageson, his C Mark. Taytson, his D Mark. Agamaug, his T Mark. Wampsh, alias
Corman, his X Mark.
DURING this treaty of peace with the Narrhagansets, Capt. Cudworth with the
forces from Plymouth, under his command, found something to do nearer home,
though of another nature as it proved, sst. to make war whilst the other were (as
they thought) making peace: In the first place therefore he dispatched Capt.
Fuller (joining Lieut. Church together with him in commission) with fifty in
his company to Pocasset, on the same account, as the other went to
Narrhaganset; either to conclude a peace with them, if they would continue
friends, and give hostages for the confirmation thereof, or fight them if they
should declare themselves enemies, and join with Philip; himself intending to
draw d^wn his forces to Rehoboth, to be ready for a speedy march to Taunton,
and so down into the other sale of the country, upon the news that some of the
enemy were burning and spoiling of Middleborough and Dartmouth, two small
villages lying in the way betwixt Pocasset and Plymouth. Upon Thursday July 7,
Capt. Fuller with Lieut. Church went into Pocasset to seek after the enemy, or
else as occasion might serve, to treat with those Indians at Pocasset, with
whom Mr. Church was very well acquainted, always holding good correspondence
with them. After they had spent that day and most of the night, in traversing
the said Pocasset neck, and watching all night in a house which they found
there, they could hear no tidings of any Indians; insomuch that Capt. Fuller
began to be weary of his design: Mr. Church in the mean while assuring him that
they should find Indians before it were long: yet for greater expedition they
divided their company, Capt. Fuller taking down toward the seaside, where it
seems, after some little skirmishing with them wherein one man only received a
small wound, he either saw or heard too many Indians for himself and his
company to deal with, which made him and them betake themselves to a house near
the waterside, from whence they were fetched off by a sloop before night to
Rhode Island. Capt. Church (for so he may well be styled after this time)
marched further into the neck, imagining that if there were Indians in the
neck, they should find them about a pease field not far off. As soon as they
came near the said field he espied two Indians among the peace, who also had at
the same time espied him; and presently making some kind of shout, a great
number of Indians came about the field, pursuing the said Capt. Church and his
men in great numbers to the sea side: there being not above fifteen with
Church, yet seven or eight score of the Indians pursuing after them. Now was a
fit time for this young Captain and his small company to handsel their valor
upon this great rout of Indians, just ready to devour them: But victory stands
no more in the number of soldiers, than verity in the plurality of voices: And
although some of these fifteen had scarce courage enough for themselves, yet
their Captain had enough for himself, and some to spare for his friends, which
he there had an opportunity of improving to the full. When he saw the hearts of
any of his followers to fail, he would bid them be of good courage and fight
stoutly, and (possibly by some divine impression upon his heart) assured them
not a bullet of the enemy should hurt any one of them; which one of the
company, more dismayed than the rest, could hardly believe, till he saw the
proof of it in his own person, for the Captain perceiving the man was not able
to fight, made him gather rocks together for a kind of shelter and baricado for
the rest, that must either of necessity fight or fall by the enemies. It
chanced as this faint-hearted soldier had a flat stone in his arms, and was
carrying it to the shelter that he was making upon the bank, a bullet of the
enemy was thus warded from his body, by which he must else have perished, which
experience put new life into him, so as he followed his business very manfully
afterward, insomuch that they defended themselves under a small shelter hastily
made up, all that afternoon, not one being either slain or wounded, yet it was
certainly known that they killed at least fifteen of their enemies: And at the
last, when they had spent all their ammunition, and made their guns
unserviceable by often firing, they were fetched all off by Capt. Golding's
sloop and carried safe to Rhode Island in spite of all their enemies; yea, such
was the bold and undaunted courage of this champion, Capt. Church, that, not
willing to leave any token behind of their flying for want of courage, he went
back in the face of his enemies to fe^^h his hat, which he had left at a
spring, whither the extreme heat of the weather, and his labor in fighting had
caused him to repair for the quenching of his thirst an hour or two before. It
seems in the former part of the same day, five men coming from Rhode Island, to
look up their cattle upon Pocasset-Neck, were assaulted by the same Indians,
one of the five was Capt. Church's servant, who had his leg broke in the
skirmish, the rest hardly escaping with their lives: This was the first time
that ever any mischief was done by the Indians upon Pocasset-Neck. Those of
Rhode Island were hereby alarmed to look to themselves, as well as the rest of
the English of Plymouth, or the Massachusetts colony.

THIS assault rather heightened and increased than daunted the courage of Capt.
Church; for not making a cowardly flight, but a fair retreat, which providence
offered him by the sloop aforesaid, after his ammunition was spent, he did not
stay long at Rhode Island, but hasted over to the Massachusetts forces, and
borrowing three files of men of Capt. Henchman with his Lieutenant; Mr. Church
and he returned again to Pocasset, where they had another skirmish with the
enemy, wherein some few of them (fourteen or fifteen) were slain, which struck
such a terror into Philip, that he betook himself to the swamps about Pocasset,
where he lay hid till the return of the rest of the forces from the
Narrhagansets, like a wild boar kept at a bay by this small party till more
hands came up.

THUS were the Plymouth forces busied, during the time of the treaty with the
Narrhagansets, which being issued as it was:

ON Friday July 15, our forces marched for, and arrived at Rehoboth, where
having no intelligence of the enemy nearer than a great swamp on Pocasset,
eighteen miles from Taunton; they marched next day twelve miles to an house at
Metapoiset (a small neck of land in the bottom of Taunton-Bay, in the midway
between Mount-Hope and Pocasset-Neck) from whence they marched for Taunton,
July 17, whither after a tedious march of 20 miles they came in the evening,
and found the people generally gathered into eight garrison-houses.

ON Monday July 18, they marched eighteen miles before they could reach the
swamp where the enemy was lodged: As soon as they came to the place, Plymouth
forces being now joined with them, our soldiers resolutely entered in amongst
the enemies, who took the advantage of the thick under-wood, to make a shot at
them that first entered, whereby five were killed outright, seven more wounded,
some of whose wounds proved mortal: After the first shot, the enemy presently
retired deeper into the swamp, deserting their wigwams (about an 100 in all)
newly made of green bark, so as they would not burn: In one of them they found
an old man, who confessed that Philip had been lately there. Having spent some
time in searching the swamp, and tired themselves to no purpose (yet it was
said one half hour more would have at that time utterly subdued Philip and all
his power) the commander in chief, night drawing on a pace, not thinking it
safe to tarry longer in so dangerous a place, where every one was in as much
danger of his fellows as of his foes, being ready to fire upon every bush they
saw move supposing lndians were there, ordered a retreat to be sounded, that
they might have time to dispose of their dead and wounded men, which
accordingly was attended: The English lost fifteen men in this expedition,
Hutchinson.
Plymouth forces who had entered in the rear, retreating in the front. It was
judged that the enemy being by this means brought into a pound, it would be no
hard matter to deal with them, and that it would be needless charge to keep so
many companies of soldiers together to wait upon such an inconsiderable enemy,
now almost as good as taken: Whereupon most of the companies belonging to the
Massachusetts were drawn off, only Capt. Henchman with an 100 foot being left
there, together with Plymouth forces, to attend the enemies motion, being
judged sufficient for that end. Major Savage, Capt. Paige with Capt. Mosely and
their companies returned to Boston: Capt. Prentice with his troop were ordered
toward Mendham, where it seems, about the middle of July, some Indians, wishing
well to Philip's design, had made an assault upon some of the inhabitants, as
they were at their labor in the field, killing five or fix of them; as soon as
they had done, flying away into the woods, so as they could not easily be
pursued. The inhabitants of the same village, lying in the heart of the enemy's
country began to be discouraged, so as within a little time after they forsook
the place, abandoning their houses to the fury of the enemy, which by them were
soon after turned into ashes. But to return to King Philip, who was now lodged
in the great swamp upon Pocasset-Neck, of seven miles long: Capt. Henchman and
the Plymouth forces kept a diligent eye upon the enemy, but were not willing to
run into the mire and dirt after them in a dark swamp, being taught by late
experience how dangerous it is to fight in such dismal woods, when their eyes
were muffled with the leaves, and their arms pinnioned with the thick boughs of
the trees, as their feet were continually shackled with the roots spreading
every way in those boggy woods. It is ill fighting with a wild beast in his own
den. They resolved therefore to starve them out of the swamp, where they knew
full well they could not long subsist: To that end they began to build a fort,
as it were to beleaguer the enemy, and prevent his escape out of the place,
where they thought they had him fast enough. Philip in the mean time was not
ignorant of what was doing without, and was ready therein to read his owndoom
if he tarried much longer there, he knew he should fall into their hands from
whom he could expect no mercy: The case being therefore desperate, he resolved
with an hundred or two of his best fighting men to make an escape by the water,
all passages by the land being sufficiently guarded by the English forces. The
swamp where they were lodged being not-far from an arm of the fen, coming up to
Taunton, they taking the advantage of a low tide, either waded over one night
in the end of July, or else wasted themselves over upon small rafts of timber
very early before break of day, by which means the greatest part of his company
escaped away into the woods, leading into the Nipmuck country, altogether
unknown to the English forces, that lay encamped on the other side of the
swamp. About an 100 or more of the women and children, which were like to be
rather burdensome than serviceable, were left behind, who soon after resigned
up themselves to the mercy of the English. Philip's escape thus from Pocasset
could not long be concealed after the day appeared, there being much champaign
land through which he was to pass, so as being discovered to some of Rehoboth,
the inhabitants presently followed him, together with a party of the Mohegins,
that a little before came to Boston, offering their service against Philip, and
were sent up into those parts to be ordered by Captain Henchman, but before
they came to him were easily persuaded to go along with any of the English that
were engaged in the pursuit of Philip. News also thereof was carried to Capt.
Henchman, who, as soon as he could get over with six files of men (rowing hard
all or most part of the day, to get to Providence) followed after the enemy.
The Mohegins with the men of Rehoboth, and some of Providence came upon their
rear over night, slew about 30 of them, took much plunder from them, without
any considerable loss to the English. Captain Henchman came not up to them
(pursuing them only by the track) till the skirmish was over, and having
marched 22 miles that day was not well able to go any further that night; on
the other hand, the forces that came from Rehoboth and that belonged to
Plymouth, having left their horses three miles off, could not go back to fetch
them without much loss of time, and therefore looking at it altogether bootless
to go after them in the morning, returned back the next day, leaving Captain
Henchman with his six files, and the Mohegins to pursue the chase to
Nipsatchet, which he did the next morning. Capt. Henchman, that he might the
better engage the Mohegins to march with him 30 miles, gave them half his
provision, and was himself recruited again by the care of Capt. Edmunds of
Providence, and Lieut. Brown who brought provision after him to the Nipmuck
forts. Mr. Newman, the Minister of Rehoboth, deserved not a little commendation
for exciting his neighbors and friends to pursue thus far after Philip,
animating of them by his own example and presence: But what the reason was why
Philip was followed no further, it is better to suspend, than too critically to
enquire. This is now the third time when a good opportunity of suppressing the
rebellion of the Indians, was put into the hands of the English; but time and
chance happens to all men. so that the most likely means are often frustrated
of their desired end. All human endeavors shall arrive at no other success,
than the counsel of God has pre-ordained, that no flesh might glory in their
own wisdom, but give unto God the praise of all their successes, and quietly
bear whatever miscarriages he has ordered to befall them. It appears by the
issue of these things, that although this wound was not incurable, yet much
more blood must be taken away before it could be healed. But by this means
Philip escaped away to the westward, kindling the flame of war in all the
western plantations of the Massachusetts colony wherever he came, so that by
this fatal accident, the fire that was in a likely way to be extinguished, as
soon almost as it began, did on a sudden break out through the whole
jurisdiction of the Massachusetts, both eastward and westward, endangering also
the neighbor colony of Connecticut, which has also suffered somewhat by the
fury of this flame, though not considerable to what the other colonies have
undergone.

WHILE things after this manner proceeded in and about the colony of Plymouth,
the Commissioners of the rest of the colonies were consulting and advising what
was to be done for preventing the mischief threatened from spreading any
further, fearing (as indeed there was too much cause) that although Philip only
appeared to make the first attempt, yet more either already were, or soon might
be persuaded to join with him in acting this bloody tragedy.

IF has been already declared what has been done for the securing of the
Narrhagansets, those that were sent as messengers on that errand, always
reported that the elder people were in appearance, not only inclinable to
peace, but seemed very desirous thereof, insomuch as their two eldest Sachems
expressed much joy when it was concluded; but as since has appeared, all this
was but to gain time, and cover their treacherous intents and purposes, that
they might in the next spring fall upon the English plantations all at once, as
some prisoners lately brought in have owned and confessed; nor have any of
those Indians with whom the present war has been, ever regarded any agreements
of peace made with the English, further than out of necessity and slavish fear
they were compelled thereunto, as may be seen by the records of the united
colonies from the year 1643 to the present time, notwithstanding all their fair
pretenses; for Ninigret, the old Sachem of the Narrhagansets, who alone of all
the rest of that country Sachems disowned the present war, and refused to have
any hand therein, had threatened, as was proved to his face before the
commissioners, in the years 1646 and 1647, that they would carry on the war
against the Mohegins, whatever were the mind of the Commissioners, and that
they would kill the English cattle, and heap them up as high as their wigwams,
and that an Englishman should not stir out of his doors to piss, but they would
kill him; all which he could not deny, yet this old fox made many promises of
peace, when the dread of the English ever since the Pequod war moved him
thereunto; foreseeing as he is said to have told his neighbors, that they
would all be ruined if they made war with the English, as is since come to
pass. However the good hand of God was seen in so ordering things, that the
Narrhagansets were for the present restrained from breaking out into open
hostility against the English, at that time when Philip began; which if they
had then done, according to the eye of reason, it would have been very
difficult, if possible, for the English to have saved any of their inland
plantations from being destroyed. Thus, although God has in his wisdom suffered
so much of the rage of the heathen to be let loose against his people here, as
sorely to scourge them, that by the wrath of men, praise might be yielded to
his holy name, yet has he in his abundant goodness restrained the remainder
that it should not consume.

THE next thing in order to be related, is the calamity that befell the village
of Brookfield, which notwithstanding all the care that was taken, fell into the
hands of the perfidious Nipnet Indians, as shall here in the next place be
declared; only, as we pass along, to remind the reader in a sew words, what was
the issue of Captain Henchman's pursuit of Philip. The Plymouth forces being
returned home, as was said before, Capt. Henchman with his six files of men,
and the Mohegin Indians, having continued in the pursuit of Philip till they
had spent all their provision, and tired themselves, yet never coming within
sight of him, the Mohegin Indians in their company directed them to Mendham,
and then leaving them, returned also to their own country. Captain Henchman in
his march toward Mendham, or at Mendham, met with Capt. Mosely coming up to
bring him provision, and advertising him of what success he had met with in the
pursuit, they altered their course, for Capt. Henchman was sent down to the
Governor and Council, to know what they should do: They presently remanded him
to Pocasset, and ordered him to stay there if there was need, or else to draw
off, surrendering the fort he had been building to Plymouth forces, which last
was chosen by those of Plymouth, whereupon Capt. Henchman returning to Boston,
was ordered to disband his men. Capt. Mosely was ordered to march to Quabaog or
Brookfield, where he continued a while, with the other Captains sent up for the
relief of the people there, and to seek after the enemy in those woods; but
after some time spent in ranging the country thereabouts, not meeting with any
of the infidels, he with his company came downwards, searching the woods
betwixt Lancaster (where a man and his wife with two children were slain on
Lord's Day, Aug. 22) and Marlborough, where also a lad keeping sheep was shot
at by an Indian that wore a sign, as if he had been a friend: the Indian was
supposed to belong to the Hassanemesit Indians, at that time confined to
Marlborough, where they had liberty to dwell in a kind of a fort. The next day
the inhabitants sent to demand their guns, Capt. Mosely acquainted therewith,
marched to the fort and found much suspicion against eleven of them, for
singing and dancing, and having bullets and slugs, and much powder hid in their
baskets; insomuch that eleven of them were sent down prisoners to Boston, upon
suspicion that they had an hand in killing the four at Lancaster, and shooting
at the Marlborough shepherd: But upon trial, the said prisoners were all of
them acquitted of the fact, and were either released, or else were with others
of that fort, sent for better security, and for preventing future trouble in
the like kind to some of the islands below Boston toward Nantosket.

ABOUT this time Capt. Mosely was sent with a company of soldiers to some
Indian plantations up Merrimack river, as high as Pennycook, but they found no
Indians there; those that belonged to the place having withdrawn themselves
from their native place, that they might not meddle in the present quarrel, as
is confidently believed that Woonalonset the Sachem of that country had so
resolved. That coast being clear of the enemies, Capt. Mosely soon after was
sent up with his men to the towns westward about Hadley, if it might be, to
subdue the enemy, who a little before, and at that time, was doing all the
mischief he could in those western plantations, both by fire and sword.

BUT to return and pursue the rebellious Indians, and keep pace with them in
our history, though our forces as yet could never overtake them in the woods.
The Governor and Council of the Massachusetts were sensible of as much danger
from the Nipnet Indians, as from the former; they being the inland part of the
country betwixt the sea coast and Connecticut river westward, and the towns
about the Massachusetts Bay eastward, whereupon some persons that used to trade
with the said Nipnets, were sent to sound them, and find how they stood
affected, for which also there was the more reason, because they were always in
subjection to the Sachem of Mount-Hope, and so were the more like to engage in
the present quarrel; of which there had been sufficient proof already; when on
the 14th of July, some of the Nipnet Indians next bordering on Philip's
country, set upon some of Mendham, A town situate northward from Mount Hope,
within 30 mile, of bosi^^^.
where they killed four or five persons, which was the first mischief done upon
any of the inhabitants within the jurisdiction of the Massachusetts, acted as
was said by one Matoonas, who was father to him that had committed a murder
soon after Philip's first rebellion, Anno 1671. The messenger that was sent thy
her, brought word back that they found the said Indians wavering; the young men
very surly and insolent, the elder ones showing some inclination to maintain
the wonted peace. Soon after, July 28, 1675. Capt. Wheeler was sent to assist
Capt. Hutchinson with a party of 20 horse to treat further about the peace, who
going first to Quabaog or Brookfield, (a town situate about 60 or 70 miles from
Boston, in the road of Connecticut, lying about 25 miles from the said river,
and not far distant from the chief seat of the Nipnet Indians) the inhabitants
of the said Brookfield had been so deluded by those treacherous villains, that
fearing no danger, they obtained of those Nipnets, the promise of a treaty upon
the 2d of August; whereupon some of the chief of the town rode along unarmed
with the said Wheeler and Hutchinson, with their party of horse until they came
to the place appointed; but finding no Indians, so secure were they, that they
ventured along further, to find the infidels at their chief town, never
suspecting the least danger, but when they had rode four or five miles that
way, they fell into an ambush, of two or three hundred Indians, said in such a
narrow passage, betwixt a steep hill on the one hand, and an hideous swamp on
the other, that it was scarce possible for any of them to escape, eight of them
being shot down upon the place (whereof three were of Brookfield) and three
mortally wounded, whereof Capt. Hutchinson was one; Capt. Wheeler also was near
losing his life, whose horse was shot down under him, and himself shot through
the body, so that all manner of hopes to escape had been removed from him, had
it not been for his son, who was (by God's good providence) near or next unto
him, this son, being a man of undaunted courage, (notwithstanding his own arm
was broken with a bullet) with great nimbleness and agility of body, dismounted
himself, and speedily mounted his father upon his own horse, himself getting
upon another, whose master was killed, by which means they both escaped, and
were afterward cured. Much ado had those that were left alive to recover
Brookfield, which in all probability they never had done (the common road being
way laid with Indians on every side as was afterward known) had it not been
for one well acquainted with those woods, who led them in a by path, by which
means they got thither a little before the Indians, who quickly came flocking
into the town, with full intent to destroy it with fire and sword. But by
special providence the inhabitants were all gathered to the principal house of
the village (there being scarce zo in the town) before the barbarous miscreants
came upon them, immediately setting fire upon all the dwelling houses, with
most of the other buildings in the town, save that one into which the
inhabitants were retired, the which they several times attempted to burn, but
were almost miraculously defeated of their purpose by the immediate hand of
God. In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen. For when they had for two days
assaulted that poor handful of helpless people, both night and day pouring in
shot upon them incessantly with guns, and also thrusting poles with fire
brands, and rags dipped in brimstone tied to the ends of them to fire the house;
at last they used this devilish stratagem, to fill a cart with hemp, flux and
other combustible matter, and so thrusting it backward with poles spliced
together a great length, after they had kindled it; but as soon as it had begun
to take fire, a storm of rain unexpectedly falling, put out the fire, or else
all the poor people, about 70 souls, would either have been consumed by
merciless flames, or else have fallen into the hands of their cruel enemies,
like wolves continually yelling and gaping for their prey.

THUS was that distressed company strangely delivered, who have for ever cause
to say with the Psalmist, Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us a prey to
their teeth, our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers, the
snare is broken and we are escaped. For the next night Major Willard, by
accident hearing of the danger the people were in, came with forty eight
dragoons to their relief. The occasion which brought Major Willard, and Capt.
Parker of Groton with forty-six more, so timely to their relief was this; Major
Willard in pursuance of his commission from the Governor and Council, was upon
Wednesday August 4th, in the morning, marching out after some Indians to the
westward, to secure them: just as they were setting forth, some of Marlborough,
who had intelligence (by those that were going to Connecticut, and forced to
return) what distress Brookfield was in, and knowing of Major Willard's purpose
to go out that morning from Lancaster, sent a post to acquaint him therewith,
which though it did not find him in the town, yet overtook him before he had
gone above four or five miles from the place: whereupon, conceiving it more
needful to succor Brookfield in so eminent danger, than to proceed further
upon his intended design, he altered his course and marched directly thither,
being about 30 miles distant when the tidings were brought him; so he arrived
there that night very seasonably, about an hour after it was dark, or else in
probability they had all perished before the relief sent up from Boston could
have reached them, which was not till three days after. The providence of God
likewise in bringing in the said Major so safely, as well as seasonably to
their relief, was very remarkable: For the Indians had subtly contrived to
cut off all relief sent, before it could come at them, by laying ambushes, and
placing their scouts at two or three miles distance round the town: About an
hundred of them were lodged at an house not far off in the way toward Boston,
to cut off any succor that might come from thence: but it is supposed they
were so intense upon the project they were about for firing the house,
concluding it would without fail take place, that either they did not mind
their business of watching, or made such a noise for joy thereof, that they did
not hear their sentinels when they shot off their guns, at two miles distance.
It is said that another party of the Indians let the Major and his company
purposely pass by them, without any opposition, waiting for the blow to be
given at their first approach near the house, purposing then to have themselves
fallen upon their rear, and so to have cut them all off, before the besieged
understood any thing thereof. But it pleased God so to order things in
providence, that no notice was taken of them by the besiegers, nor were they at
all discerned by them, till they had made themselves known to their friends;
and were admitted within the court of guard; which when the enemy had notice
of, they poured in their shot abundantly upon them; but they were now sheltered
from the danger thereof; only it seems their horses were exposed to their fury,
as many of them were maimed and killed, as were most of the cattle belonging to
the inhabitants of the place soon after. This honored person, Major Willard,
continued at Brookfield, after this famous exploit for the preservation of the
poor besieged there, diverse weeks, to order such compani^s as were sent up that
way for the securing the plantations on that side of the country; and not long
after he went himself also to Hadley upon the like service of the country in
the present war: but after some time spent in those parts, he returned back to
his own place, to order the affairs of his own regiment, much needing his
presence, and leaving the forces about Hadley under the command of the Major of
that regiment.

BUT to return to what was in hand before. After the Indians understood that
succors were come in to the besieged, they fired all that they had left
standing for their own shelter while they had besieged the place before
mentioned, and ran all away into their own dens, in the neighboring woods:
however it was confessed by one of themselves, that the enemy had 80 of their
men killed and wounded in this business. But are we pass any further in pursuit
of the history of these matters, it will not be amiss to let the reader
understand the horrible perfidious and treacherous dealing of these Nipnet
Indians, who, although of all other they had the least reason as to any
pretense of injury, yet did most deceitfully and barbarously join with Philip
and his Indians, after they had been several times sent unto by the Governor
and Council of the Massachusetts, by the advice of Plymouth, to have prevented
their rising, as well as the rising of the Narrhagansets, and also had
faithfully promised not to meddle in the quarrel, as may more fully appear by
the engagement under the hands of their Sachems, some time before Capt.
Hutchinson and Capt. Wheeler were sent up to them, which by reason of the haste
and unskilfulness of the messengers on that behalf sent, is not so fit for
public view: but the account of it from their return, was under their hand and
oath, July 24, 1675, when Lieut. Ephraim Curtice spoke with five of the Nipnet
Sachems, four too many to govern so small a people, but lying upon the head of
the principal Indian territories, they were divided into so many small parties,
two of whom, viz. Sam, Sachem of Weshacum, and Netaump were executed together
afterward at Boston. All of them did at that time solemnly renew their covenant
and promise under their hands to come to Boston to speak further with the
Governor, instead of which, what they perfidiously did against Capt. Hutchinson
and others, has already been declared.

UPON the report of this sad disaster that befell the inhabitants of Brookfield,
forces were sent up under the command of Capt. Lothrop and others, to pursue
after those Indians, harboring about those places, and if it might be, to
prevent them from joining with the Indians upon Connecticut river, who as yet
had not discovered themselves as willing to espouse Philip's interest, hut
rather made some semblance to the contrary. There was much time spent by Major
Willard, and several companies of soldiers left under his command, about the
Nipnet country, but all to no purpose, for partly by the treachery of some of
the Indians that came to their assistance, that seemed to favor the English,
but rather acted in behalf of the enemy, partly by the subtleties of the
enemies themselves, who could easily by their scouts discern the approach of
our soldiers, and by the nimbleness of their feet escape them, our soldiers
could never meet with any of them, but only by that means driving them further
westward, they gathered all the Indians they could to their party about
Pecomptuck, alias Deerfield, Swamscot, and Squakeag, where were some
plantations of the English newly began, whom they assaulted in the next place,
and did what mischief they could upon them.

IT is here to be noted, that although that worthy patriot and experienced
soldier, Major Willard, hearing of the distress of Brookfield by some that were
traveling to Connecticut, was the first that relieved the distressed people of
Quabaog or Brookfield, yet Major Pynchon of Springfield also by accident
hearing of their calamity, had not only sent word thereof to Hartford, (from
whom he received a supply of 25 or 30 soldiers under Capt. Wats) but did also
send a band of men under Lieut. Cooper, (afterward villainously slain by
Springfield Indians) who with those sent from Hartford, and some Indians
belonging to Springfield (seemingly forward to help the English) made up
fourscore or thereabouts: these marched down to Brookfield the same day that
Capt. Lothrop and Capt. Beers came up from the Massachusetts, who having spent
some time in searching the woods about Springfield, and finding none of the
Indians, did the next day march up to a place called Meminimisset by the
Indians, where Capt. Hutchinson and Capt. Wheeler were assaulted, and finding
no sign of any Indians amongst those woods and swamps, the company that came
from Springfield, left the other soldiers (who returned to their quarters at
Brookfield) and went up themselves further northward at least 20 miles from the
said Brookfield, and finding no track of Indians in all those woods, they
returned back to Springfield, leaving enough to defend the people of
Brookfield, and the garrison there.

BY this it appears, that the Indians by this occasion were driven more
westward into the woods between Hadley and Squakbeag, Northfield, 50 miles up
the river from Hadley.
where they soon effected their design, viz. to leaven the Indians on that side
the country with the same prejudice and malice against the English. with which
they themselves were (though without cause) imbittered; for in a few days the
device took place amongst Hadley and Deerfield Indians, and was presently put
in execution by the said Indians, withdrawing from the English and assisting
Philip and the Nipnets to spoil and destroy all the towns westward, as soon
after came to pass: yet at the first some of the Hadley Indians pretended real
friendship to the English, and offered themselves to fight against Philip, but
the Mohegin Indians that came afterward from Martford began to suspect the
treachery of the other, and told the English plainly, that no good would be
done, while any of that company went along with them in pursuit of the enemy,
for as was said, they would always give some shout when they came near the
enemy, as if they should thereby wish them to look to themselves; insomuch that
the said Hadley Indians sell into great suspicion with the English, and for a
proof of their fidelity, they were required to bring in their arms to the
English, but upon that motion they delayed a little, but that very night they
fled away from their dwellings, which was in a wooden fortification, within a
mile of Hatfield, whereby they plainly discovered that they had secretly
plotted to join with Philip's party, as far as they had an opportunity to do
them any eminent service. Some think the English failed in point of prudence,
not managing that business so warily as they might, which if they had done,
their defection had been prevented, but it is most probable that Philip had
hired them to own his quarrel, by sending them gifts in the spring: and that
the body of the said Indians were most readily inclined thereunto: but the
Sachems and the elder ones of them, seemed loath at first to engage against the
English. In conclusion, when they had so falsely left their dwellings, and were
running after Phillip and the Nipnet Indians (^t that time harbored in those
woods) the English were so provoked that were under the Capts. Lothrop and
Beers, that they pursued after them very early the next morning, and overtook
them about ten miles above Hatfield, at a place called Sugarloaf^hill, and had
a small skirmish with them, wherein there were nine or ten of the English
slain, and about 26 Indians: Yet the rest escaped, and so joined with Phillip
and his company; presently after which accident, they were so emboldened, that
upon the first of Sept. about seven days after, they set upon Deerfield, killed
one man, and laid most of the houses in ashes. About two or three days after
they fell upon Squakeag, another new plantation, fifteen miles higher up the
river, above Deerfield, where they killed nine or ten of the people, the rest
hardly escaped into the garrison house.

The next day, this disaster not being known, Capt. Beers, for fear of the
worst, with 36 men, was sent up to the said Squakeag, with supplies both of men
and provision to secure the small garrison there, but before they came very
near to the town, they were set upon by many hundreds of Indians out of the
bushes by a swamp side. By this sudden surprizal Capt. Beers (who was known to
fight valiantly to the very last) with about 20 of his men, were slain, the
rest flying back to Hadley. Here the barbarous villians showed their insolent
rage and cruelty, more than ever before, cutting off the heads of some of the
slain, and fixing them upon poles near the highway, and not only so, but one
(if not more) was found with a chain hooked into his under jaw, and so hung up
on the bough of a tree, ('it is seared he was hung up alive) by which means they
thought to daunt and discourage any that might come to their relief, and also
to terrify those that should be spectators with the beholding so sad an object:
Insomuch that Major Treat with his company, going up two days after to fetch
off the residue of the garrison, were solemnly affected with that doleful
sight, which made them make the more haste to bring down the garrison, not
waiting for any opportunity to take revenge upon the enemy, having but an 100
with him, too sew for such a purpose. Capt. Appleton going up after him, met
him coming down, and would willingly have persuaded them to have turned back,
to see if they could have made any spoil upon the enemy, but the greatest part
advised to the contrary, so that they were all forced to return with what they
could carry away, leaving the rest for a booty to the enemy, who shall are long
pay a sad reckoning for their robberies and cruelties, in the time appointed:
But the sufferings of the English were not as yet come to their height, for
after they were come to Hadley, the commander in chief taking counsel with the
officers of the soldiers, ordered them that were then present to garrison the
towns about; some to be at Northampton, Hatfield and Deerfield, and some to
remain at Hadley, where were the headquarters of the English. But perceiving
that little good was to be done upon the enemy in those pares, it was agreed
that what corn was left at Deerfield, (...) ^h^^shed out as well as they could
in those tumulus (about 3000 bushels was supposed to be there standing in
stacks) should be brought to Hadley, and to wait further time to fight the
enemy. It came to Capt. Lothrop's turn, or rather it was his choice with about
So men to guard several carts laden with corn, and other goods. The company
under Capt. Mosely then quartering at Deerfield intended that day to pursue
after the enemy. But upon Sept. 18, that most fatal day, the saddest that ever
befell New England, as the company under Capt. Lothrop were marching along with
the carts (it may be too securely) never apprehending danger so near, they were
suddenly set upon, and almost all cut off, (90 killed, teamsters included) not
above 7 or 8 escaping: Which great defeat came to pass by the unadvised
proceedings of the Captain (who was himself slain in the first assault)
although he wanted neither courage nor skill to lead his soldiers; but having
taken up a wrong notion about the best way and manner of fighting with the
Indians (which he was always wont to argue for) viz. that it were best to deal
with the Indians in their own way, soil by skulking behind trees, and taking
their aim at single por^^^s. which is the usual manner of the Indians fighting
one with another; but herein was his great mistake, in not considering the
great disadvantage a smaller company would have in dealing that way with a
greater multitude: For if five have to deal with one, they may surround him,
and every one take his a^m at him, while he can level but at one of his enemies
at a time: Which gross mistake of his, was the ruin of a choice company of
young men, the very flower of the county of Essex. all culled out of the towns
belonging to that county, none of which were ashamed to speak with the enemy in
the gate; their dear relations at home mourning for them, like Rachel for her
children, and would not be comforted, not only because they were not, but
because they were so miserably lost. The like mistake was conceived to be the
reason of the loss of the former persons slain with the said Lothrop, pursuing
the Indians that ran away from Hadley, and of the 20 slain with Capt. Beers's
men, who betook themselves at first to the trees, and at the last a few got to
their horses soon after their Captain was shot down. For had he ordered his men
to march in a body, as some of his follow-commanders advised, either backward
or forward, in reason they had not lost a quarter of the number of them that
fell that day by the edge of the sword. For the Indians, notwithstanding their
subtilty and cruelty, durst not look an Englishman in the face in the open
field, nor ever yet were known to kill any man with their guns, unless when
they could lie in wait for him in an ambush, or behind some shelter, taking aim
undiscovered, so that although it was judged by those that escaped, that there
were 7 or 800 Indians at least that encountered that company of 80 English, yet
if they had kept together in a body, and fought marching, they might have
escaped the numbers of the enemy, with little loss in comparison of what they
sustained. For the valiant and successful Capt. Mosely, and his Lieutenant,
coming (though too late) to their rescue, marched through and through that
great body of Indians, and yet came off with little or no loss in comparison of
the other. And having fought all those Indians for five or six hours upon a
march, lost not above two men all that while. nor received other damage except
that 8 or 9 were wounded, who were carried to their quarters at night at
Ha^field, whereas if these had proceeded in the same way of fighting as Capt
Lothrop did in the morning, they might have been surrounded, and so have been
served as the former were: But God had otherwise determined in his secret
counsel, and therefore that was hid from the one, which was a means to preserve
the other company.

OTHER relief also was seasonably sent in, viz. a company of English and
Mohegin or Pequod Indians under the command of Major Treat, who was in the
morning marching another way, viz. up toward Squakeag to seek after the enemy
that way, with about 100 soldiers, Indians and English, upon whose approach the
enemy, pretty well acquainted by this last encounter with the valor of the
English, immediately went clear away, giving Major Treat and Capt. Mosely, who
returned to Deerfield that night, an opportunity to bury the slain the next
day. As Capt. Mosely came upon the Indians in the morning, he found them
stripping of the slain, amongst whom was one Robert Dutch of Ipswich, having
been sorely wounded by a bullet that rased to his skull, and then mauled by the
Indian-hatchets, was left for dead by the savages, and stripped by them of all
but his skin, yet when Capt. Mosely came near, be almost miraculously as one
raised from the dead, came toward the English, to their no small amazement, by
whom being received and clothed, he was carried off to the next garrison, and
is living and is in perfect health at this day. May he be to the friends and
relations of the rest of the slain, an emblem of their more perfect
resurrection at the last day, to receive their crowns among the rest of the
martyrs that have laid down or ventured their lives, as a testimony to the
truth of their religion, as well as love to their country.

THIS sore defeat of Capt. Lothrop and his men, was the more to be lamented, in
that (falling out so soon after two other of the like nature) it so emboldened
the enemy, that they durst soon after adventure upon considerable towns, though
well garrisoned with soldiers, and gave them occasion of the most insolent
braving the garrison at Deerfield the next day, hanging up the garments of the
English in sight of the soldiers, yet on the other side of the river. However,
it pleased God, who is always wont to remember his people in their low estate,
to put such a restraint upon them, that when they passed very near the
garrison-house at Deerfield, (wherein where not left above 27 soldiers) their
Captain using this stratagem, to cause his trumpet to sound as if he had
another troop near by to be called together, they turned another way and made
no attempt upon the house where that small number was, which if they had done
with any ordinary resolution, so small a handful of men could hardly have
withstood the force of so many hundreds as were then gathered together.

WHAT loss the enemy sustained by the resistance of Capt. Lothrop and his men,
(who no doubt being all resolute young men, and seeing they should be forced by
the hard law of the sword to forego their liver, held them at as high a rate as
they could) is not certainly known. It has since been confessed by some of the
Indians themselves, that they lost 96 of their man that day. Capt. Mosely's men
coming suddenly upon them when they were pillaging of the dead, sell upon them
with such a smart assault, that they drove them p^^^^ntly into a swamp,
following them so close, that for seven miles together they fought them upon a
march, charging them through and through. Periz Savage and Mr. Pickering, his
Lieutenants, deserving no little part of the honor of that day's service, being
sometimes called to lead the company in the front, while Capt. Mosely took a
little breath, who was almost melted with laboring, commanding, and leading
his men through the midst of the enemy.

The Indians gathered together in those parts, app^^^ing so numerous, and, as
might justly be supposed, growing more confident by some of their late
successes, and the number of our men being after this sad rate diminished,
recruits also not being suddenly to be expected, at so great a distance as an
hundred miles from all supplies, the commander in chief with the officers, law
a necessity of fighting that garrison at Deerfield, employing the forces they
had to secure and streng then the three next towns below upon Connecticut
river. And it was well that counsel was thought upon; for now those wretched
caitiffs begin to talk of great matters, hoping that by degrees they might
destroy all the towns thereabouts, as they had already begun: Their hopes no
doubt, were not a little heightened by the accession of the Springfield Indians
to their party, who had in appearance all this time stood the firmest to the
interest of the English of all the rest in those parts: But they all hanging
together, like serpents eggs, were easily persuaded to join with those of
Hadley (there being so near alliance between them, for the Sachem of the
Springfield Indians was father of Hadley Sachem) not only by the success of
their treacherous an^ blood thirsty companions, but by the same (...) and
antipathy against the English manners and religion.

THE inhabitants of Springfield were not it sensible of their danger, and
therefore had upon the first breaking (...) of these troubles been t^^^ting
with their Indians, and (...) received from them the firmed assurance and (...)
of their ^^ithfulness (...) that could be imagined or desired, both by
covenant, promises, and hostages given for security, so as no doubt was left in
any of their minds: Yet did these faithless and ungrateful monsters plot with
Philip's Indians to burn and destroy all Springfield, as they had done
Brookfield before. To that end they sent cunningly and enticed away the
hostages from Hartford, where they were, perhaps too securely watched over, a
day or two before: Then receiving above 300 of Philip's Indians into their
sort, privately in the night time, so as they were neither discerned nor
suspected. Yea so confident were such of the inhabitants as were most
conversant with the Indians at their fort, that they would not believe there
was any such plot in hand, when it was strangely revealed by one Toto an Indian
at Windsor, better affected to the English, (about 18 or 20 miles below
Springfield, upon the same river) and so by post tidings thereof brought to
Springfield the night before, insomuch that the Lieutenant of the town, Cooper
by name, was so far from believing the stratagem, that in the morning himself
with another would venture to ride up to the fort, to see whether things were
so or no. The fort was about a mile from the town; when he came within a little
thereof, he met these bloody and deceitful monsters, newly issued out of their
Eqnus Trojanus to act their intended mischief; they presently fired upon him,
diverse of them, and shot him in several places through the body, yet being a
man of stout courage, he kept his horse, till he recovered the next garrison
house, his companion they shot dead upon the place; by this means giving a sad
alarm to the town of their intended mischief, which was instantly fired in all
places where there were no garrisons. The poor people having never an officer
to lead them, being like sheep ready for the slaughter, and no doubt the whose
town had been totally dearoved, but that a report of the plot being carried
about over night, Major Treat came from W^^field same enough in a manner for
their (...), but wanting boats to transport his men, could not (...). Major
(...) pleton and what forces they could bring along with them, 32 houses being
first consumed, preserved the rest of the town from being turned to ashes, in
which the over credulous inhabitants might now see (what before they would not
believe at the burning Major Pynchon's barns and stables a few, days before, to
a very great damage of the owner) the faithless and deceitful friendship
amongst those perfidious, cruel and hellish monsters.

AMONGST the ruins of the said dwellings, the sadest to behold was the house of
Mr. Pelatiah Glover, minister of the town, furnished with a brave library,
which he had but newly brought back from a garrison wherein it had been for
some time before secured, but as if the danger had been over with them, the
said minister, a great student, and an belluo librorum, being impatient for
want of his books, brought them back to his great sorrow, fit for a bonfire for
the proud insulting enemy. Of all the mis^^iefs done by the said enemy before
that day, the burning of this town of Springfield did more than any other
discover the said actors to be the children of the devil, full of all subtilty
and malice, there having been for above 40 years so good correspondence betwixt
the English of that town and the neighboring Indians: But in them is made good
what is said in the Psalm. That though their words were smoother than oil, yet
were they drawn swords.

AFTER some little time spent in garrisoning the place, and helping the
inhabitants to secure what they had left. the English soldiers most of them
returned back to Hadley, their headquarters, and Major Pynchon being so full
of encumbrances, by reason of the late spoils done to himself, and his
neighbors at Springfield, could not any longer attend the service of
commanding in chief as he had done before, wherefore being according to his
earnest request of the Council eased of that burden; Capt. Samuel Appleton was
ordered to succeed in taking the charge of the soldiers left in those upper
towns, by whose industry, ^^ill and courage, those towns were preserved from
running the same sat with the rest, wholly or in part so lately turned into
ashes. For the enemy growing very confident by the late successes, came with
all their fury the 19th of October following upon Hatfield, hoping no less than
to do the like mischief to them, they had newly done to Springfield: But
according to the good providence of Almighty God, Major Treat was newly
returned to North-Hampton, Captain Mosely and Captain Pools were then
garrisoning the said Hatfield, and Capt. Appleton for the like end quartering
at Hadley, when on a sudden 7 or 800 of the enemy came upon the town in all
quarters, having first killed or taken two or three of the scouts belonging to
the town, and seven more belonging to Capt. Mosely's company: But they were so
well entertained on all hands where they attempted to break in upon the town,
that they found it too hot for them. Major Appleton with great courage
defending one end of the town, and Capt. Mosely as stoutly maintaining the
middle, and Captain Poole the other end; that they were by the resolution of
the English instantly beaten off, without doing much harm. Capt. Appleton's
sergeant was mortally wounded just by his side, another bullet passing through
his own hair, by that whisper telling him that death was very new, but did him
no other harm. Night coming on, it could not be discerned what loss the enemy
sustained, diverse were seen to fall, some run through a small river, others
cast their guns into the water, it being their manner to venture as much to
recover the dead bodies of their friends, as to defend them when alive.

AT last after the burning of some few baras, with some other buildings, the
enemy hasted away as fast as they came on, leaving the English to bless God who
had so mercifully delivered them from the fury of their merciless foes, who had
in conceit without doubt, devoured them all: But this resolute and valiant
repulse, put such a check upon the pride of the enemy, that they made no
further attempt upon any of those towns for the present, but winter drawing on,
they retired all of them to their general rendezvous at Narrhaganset, where we
shall leave them for the present plotting their general design of accomplishing
their intended mischief against the English the next Spring.

OUR western plantations upon Connecticut river, where the stage whereon were
acted the most remarkable passages of this barbarous war hitherto, which was
soon after removed into many other places of the country in the winter and
spring following, whither our discourse must in the next place pursue it. There
was not any great matter acted by the enemy amongst the plantations upon the
great river during the winter, after the assault made upon Hatfield October
19th. It is evident that the body of them returned to Narrhaganset upon the
approach of the winter, which set in more early than it used in other years.
Where Philip did bestow himself in the winter season is not so certain, some
say that he repaired further westward, to try his fortune with those Indians
that lie toward Albany, near the Dutch river: Others more probably conceive
that he lay hid in some part of the Narrhaganset country; for though he was not
certainly known to be about the fort at Narrhaganset, when it was taken by our
forces in the winter, yet as soon as ever they were driven out of the country
in February, he was found amongst them that did the mischief at Lancaster in
that month.

SOME straggling parties of them remained about North-Hampton, Westfield and
Springfield some time after their defeat at Hatfield: Seven or eight of the
inhabitants of North-Hampton in the end of October, venturing to fetch in some
of their harvest, that was lest somewhere out of town, were in danger of being
surprised, having laid their arms under their cart, so as being destitute of
means to make their defense, they were glad to fly away with the horses out of
their carts, leaving what they were about to the pleasure of the Indians that
assaulted them. Major Treat upon hearing the alarm, presently repaired thither,
but could not come time enough to destroy any of the enemy, nor yet to prevent
their burning of four or five houses, with two or three barns that stood
somewhat out of the town. Within a little time after they killed three of the
same town, as they were at work in a meadow not far from the town: They
intended also to have burned the mill, but it was too well guarded by two files
of musketeers lodged there for the purpose, who put them beside their intent.
Six or seven of Springfield soon after going to the mill at Westfield (that
which belonged to their own town being burned October 5th) and venturing
without arms, three of them were killed by some of the enemy, who took the
advantage also to burn four or five houses that belonged to the said Westfield:
But by the end of November the coast was pretty clear of them, unless some few
of them that lay lurking in the swamps thereabouts all the winter, doing some
small mischief upon some out-dwellings of Springfield.

THE expedition into the Narrhaganset country follows in order in the next
place to be related; but before we come thither, a little notice must be taken
by the way, of an unsuccessful attempt upon the Indians about Hassanemesit
Sometimes called Hossanamisco, now Grafton.
and Poppachuog, whither Capt. Henchman was sent in the beginning of November;
where also Capt. Still was ordered to meet him with another company from
Cambridge, with intent to have beat up the Indian quarters in those parts: They
being known to have had an hand in the outrages committed upon those that
belonged to Marlborough and Mendham, cutting off the scalp of a miller's boy,
who is yet alive.

NOVEMBER 1st, 1675, Capt. Henchman marched out of Boston, inter ding to visit
the Indians about Hassanemesit: The third day they saw some fires of the
Indians, yet could not meet with them that made them: The 4th day they marched
to some part of the Indian plantations called Hassanemesit: The Captain would
have taken up his quarters a mile on this side, but some of his officers
overruled him, to whose importunity he gave way, and marched a mile further
toward the enemy, and by that means saved the miller's youth, taken the week
before from Marlborough; for in the morning very early, as the scouts were
looking out, they spyed a wigwam, where some Indians that had carried away the
youth, had lodged all night, or in some wigwam near by. When the Indians saw
our soldiers, they hasted away, and left the Marlborough youth behind them, who
by that means escaped their hands. Our men under Capt. Henchman marched on to
Poppachuog, and finding the Indians all fled, (although they perceived by a
messenger accidentally sent back, that the Indians followed them all that way
they marched) they came back to Mendham to settle things in that town. Some of
the inhabitants informed them of some Indian wigwams about ten miles off: The
Captain with Philip Curtice, his Lieutenant, resolved to give them a camisado
in their wigwams that night: To that and they mounted 22 upon horses, riding up
ten miles into the woods, and when they came rear the wigwams, they dismounted,
and intended presently to march up, and give an assau^t upon them, after they
had first made a shout to fright the enemy: They ordered one half to follow the
Lieutenant, the other to follow the Captain, when they came within a quarter of
a mile of the place, their dogs began to bark, at which they stopped, and by
marching again, intended presently to fire in upon them, but the Captain's foot
slipping, he could hardly recover himself, when suddenly looking behind him, he
say, no man following of him: The Lieutenant had five behind him, who with
those five resolutely filed on that side he was appointed to make the assault
upon; but they were repulsed by the Indians, who firing out of their dens, shot
down the Lieutenant and another, the rest presently ran away to a fence: The
Captain with all vehemence urged them to stay, they replied, they went back
only to (...) means, together (...), so sad a loss befell the company, as could
not easily he repaired: However, the enemy presently deserted the wigwam and
gave our men the next day an opporunity to fetch off their two dead men, and
bury them, and so with grief and shame were constrained to return to their
quarters at Mendham, to whose inhabitants they gave notice of 200 bushels of
corn belonging to the Indians, that might have been preserved, which for want
of hands was lost by the fire, that the enemy might not be benefited thereby.
It appears by the foregoing passage, that the time of our deliverance was not
yet come, and that God had further ^^ials to acquaint us with before he would
turn his hand upon our enemies. But it pleased the Lord in mercy so to order
things, that they themselves fell into that pit they were digging for others,
as shall appear more fully in what follows.

THE English plantations about Hadley being for the present set a little at
liberty by the Indians drawing off, like seamen after a storm, counted it their
best course to repair their tackling against another that may be next coming,
wherefore the inhabitants concluded it the safer way to make a kind of
barricado about their towns, by setting up pallizadoes or cleft wood, about
eight foot long, as it were to break the force of any sudden assault which the
Indians might make upon them; which counsel proved very successful; for
although it be an inconsiderable defense against a warlike enemy, that has
strength enough, and confidence to besiege a place, yet it is sufficient to
prevent any sudden assault of such a timorous and barbarous enemy as these
were, for although they did afterward in the spring break through those
pallizadoes at North Hampton, yet as soon as ever they began to be repulsed,
they saw themselves like wolves in a pound, that they could not fly away at
their pleasure, so as they never adventured to break through afterward upon any
of the towns so secured.

AS for those of Springfield they were now and then alarmed with a few skulking
Indians lurking about in the adjacent woods; as once at the Long Meadow, where
half a score of them were seen about an house remote from the town, who were
pursued by a party of the English toward Windsor, and so escaped, after the
English had made one shot upon them, not knowing certainly how many they
killed. So at another time, a sew of those barbarous wretches killed a poor man
belonging to Springfield, as he was going to his house to look after his corn,
on the other side of the river, and after they had killed the man, they burnt
down his house; yet attempted no further mischief upon that part of the town
that had escaped the fury of the flames, October 5. By which it is evident,
that all the number of Indians that had assaulted them before, had withdrawn
themselves now to their winter quarters, some to the Dutch River, but the
greatest number of them to besure were found in the winter at the Narrhaganset
fort, where we shall leave them for the present till the forces of the united
colonies shall fire them out of their nests.

THE soldiers continuing some time at Hatfield after this victory, as we may
well call it (for it seems to have given the first check to the rage of the
heathen within the jurisdiction of the united colonies, they have been observed
ever since to have been on the loosing hand, seldom or ever daring to meet our
soldiers in the open field, unless when they have very great advantage as to
their numbers, or covert of the woods and bushes: Although like some ranging
beasts they have done much mischief several times since, when they were ready
to expire, or when the pangs of death were coming upon them) our forces were
all called home, save some left for garrisoning the towns thereabouts.

THE Commissioners of the united colonies taking into serious consideration the
present state of things, viz. that there were before this time so many hundreds
gathered together into one body, and that there was great reason to fear, if
they were let alone till the next spring they might all rise together as one
man round about us, and that one town after another might easily be destroyed,
before any help could be dispatched to them. On the one hand, the sharpness of
the winter in these parts was well weighed, so extreme that it might hazard the
loss of a thousand men in one night, if they were forced to lodge abroad in the
open field; as also the difficulty, if not impossibility of sending any relief
to them at any distance, the depth of snow usually making the ways unpassable
for diverse months together.

ON the other hand, it was considered, that if the enemy were let alone till
the next summer, it would be impossible to deal with them, or find them any
where, but they might waste one company of soldiers after another, as was seen
by the experience of the former year. Considering also that the Narrhagansets,
the most numerous of all the rest, and the best provided of provision of all
the other Indians, had now declared themselves our enemies, who if they were
let alone till the winter was over, we should be unable to deal with so many
enemies at once, that could on a sudden on any occasion spread themselves like
grasshoppers all over the country.

IT was therefore finally agreed upon by the general consent of all, to fall
upon the winter quarters of our enemies, by a more considerable army (if I may
so call it) gathered out of all the three colonies, and that with all
expedition, at farthest not to exceed the 10th of December, before they should
have a thousand men in arms, ready for the design.

AS for the late league made or rather renewed with the Narrhaghansets, it was
sufficiently evident and known, that they had all along from the first day when
it was confirmed, broken every article of it, especially in not delivering up
the enemies, which had sheltered themselves with them all this while, which
though they did not positively deny, yet did nothing but find excuses, to defer
it one week after another, till at the last they would be excused till the next
spring, upon pretense that they could not before that time get them together.
And besides, the favoring of those that fled to them, and supplying the whole
body of the enemy with victuals, upon all occasions. It was likewise strongly
suspected that in all the late proceedings of the enemy, many of their young
men were known to be actually in arms against us, many of whom were found
either wounded amongst them in their wigwams, or elsewhere occasionally seen
returning back, after exploits abroad, to be healed of their wounds at home.
Also some of our men's guns that were lost at Deerfield, were found in the fort
when it was fined. Therefore all scruples as to the justness and necessity of
the war being removed, the only question was, whether it were feasible and
expedient in the winter. The exigent was very great, and the choice very hard:
But as David when he was streightened with many difficulties at once, chose
rather to fall into the hands of God whose mercies were great, though he might
be provoked to cause his jealousy to smoke against those of his own heritage
for a time; so in this exigent it was generally conceived to be most expedient
for the country, to cast themselves upon the providence of a merciful and
gracious God, rather than by delays to expose themselves to the treachery and
cruelty of a perfidious enemy.

A WAR therefore speedily to be carried on in the very depth of winter. being
agreed upon, care was taken for supplies, as the difficulty of such an affairs
so circumstanced did require, though possibly not with so much necessary care,
and so suitable provision, as had been desired, if what came afterward to pass
could have been foreseen (which peradventure might be the reason things went on
so heavily for want of well oiling the wheels) in the mean time a small army of
a a thousand fighting men, well appointed, were ordered by the Commissioners to
be gathered by proportion out of all the colonies, of which number the share of
the Massachusetts was to be 527, the rest were to be supplied out of Plymouth
and Connecticut colonies: All other supplies were taken care for, as well as
the suddenness of the expedition, and difficulty of the season would allow. The
said thousand men, beside some volunteers of Indian friends, were by the time
and place appointed as near as could be had, called together, and a commission
granted to the honorable Josiah Winslow, Esquire the present Governor of Plymouth
colony, a man of known ability and integrity, every way so well qualified with
courage and resolution, as well as prudence and discretion, as might have
preferred him to the conduct of a far greater army than ever is like to be
gathered together in this part of the world, in this or in following
generations. And indeed as he was the first Governor over any of the united
colonies in New England, of them that were born in the place, so may he well
pass for a pattern of any of the succeeding race, that may come after.

UNDER him as Commander in Chief, were ordered six companies from the
Massachusetts, under the command of Major Appleton, Capt. Mosely, Capt.
Gardener, Capt. Davenport, Capt. Oliver, Capt. Johnson; five companies from
Connecticut under Major Treat, Capt. Siely, Capt. Gallop, Capt. Mason, Capt.
Watts, and Capt. Marshall; two companies from Plymouth, under Major Bradford,
and Capt. Goram.

UNDER the Governor of Plymouth, as Commander in Chief in this expedition, were
sent as Majors of the forces belonging to each colony; Major Robert Treat, for
the forces belonging to Connecticut, and Major Bradford, for those of the
colony of Plymouth, and Major Samuel Appleton, for those of the Massachusetts,
to whom by the honorable Major General of the colony, were six companies of
foot, delivered at Dedham, December the 9th, 1675, containing in number 465
fighting men, besides a troop of horse, under the command of Capt. Thomas
Prentice, attending upon them. That night they marched to Woodcock's, about 27
miles from Dedham. The next night they arrived at Seaconck, Capt. Mosely and
his company went from thence with Mr. Smith by water, the rest fersied over the
water to Providence.

THE next day, December the 12th, they passed over Patuxet river, and then
marching through Pomham's country; at night they met with Capt. Mosely and his
company, at Mr. Smith's in Wickford, the place intended for their
headquarters. Capt. Mosely in his way thither had happily surprised 36
Indians, one of whom he took along with him as a guide, Peter by name, that was
at that time under some disgust with his countrymen, or his Sachem, which made
him prove the more real friend to our forces in that service, wherein he
faithfully performed what he promised, and without his assistance our men would
have been much at a loss to have found the enemy, until it had been too late to
have fought them.

Two days after, December 14th, five files of men sent out under sergeant
Bonnet, and another, upon the scout, killed one man and one woman, and brought
in four more by one of the clock: The whole company marched after into some of
the Sachem's country, where they burnt an 150 wigwams, killed 7 of the enemy,
and brought in 8 prisoners when they returned at night.

THE next day an Indian called Stone wall John, pretended to come from the
Sachems, intimating their willingness to have peace with the English, yet could
the messenger hardly for bear threatening, vapouring of their numbers and
strength, adding wichal that the English durst not fight them: Whatever were
pretend by this treacherous fellow, some of his crew as he want home met with
some of Capt. Gardner's men, that were straggling about their own business,
contrary to order, and slew his sergeant with one or two more. Two also of
Capt. Oliver's men were killed in like manner; a solemn warning for soldiers
not to be too venterous in an enemy's country. For preventing the like mischief
upon other companies, more care was taken as they passed to the headquarters,
some of the companies being lodged three miles therefrom. Capt. Mosely's, Capt.
Dapenport's, and Capt. Oliver's Companies being also sent about that time to
bring Major. Appleton's to the general quarters, a few desperate Indians
creeping under a stone wall near the place, fired twenty or thirty guns at
Mosely in particular, a commander well known amongst them, but the rest of the
company running down upon them, killed one of them, and scattered the rest.

THE next day Capt. Prentice with his troop, being sent to Pettyquamscot,
returned with the sad news of burning Jerry Bull's garrison house, and killing
10 English men and five women and children, but two escaped in all. This is the
chance of war which they who undertake, must prepare to undergo.

THE next day brought from the same place a little better news, though not
enough to balance the sorrow of the former, viz. that Connecticut forces were
come thither with three hundred English, and an hundred and fifty Mohegins,
ready fixed to war on the behalf of the English against the Narrhagansets,
their mortal enemies; and by the way meeting a party of the enemy, they slew 5
or 6 of them and took as many prisoners. The whole number of all our forces
being now come, the want of provision with the sharpness of the cold, minded
them of expedition, wherefore the very next day, the whole body of the
Massachusetts and Plymouth forces marched away to Pettyquamscot intending to
engage the enemy upon the first opportunity that next offered itself: To the
which resolution those of Connecticut presently consented, as soon as they met
together, which was about five o'clock in the afternoon: Bull's house intended
for their general rendezvous, being unhappily burnt down two or three days
before, there was no shelter left either for officers or private soldiers, so
as they were necessitated to march on toward the enemy through the snow, in a
cold stormy evening, finding no other defense all that night, save the open
air, nor any other covering than a cold and moist fleece of snow. Through all
these difficulties they marched from the break of the next day, December 19th,
till one of the clock in the afternoon, without either fire to warm them, or
respite to take any food, save what they could chew in their march. Thus having
waded fourteen or fifteen miles through the country of the old Queen, or Sunk
Squaw of Narrhaganset, they came at one o'clock upon the edge of the swamp
where their guide assured them they should find Indians enough before night.

OUR forces chopping thus upon the seat of the enemy, upon the sudden, they had
no time either to draw up in any order or form of battle, nor yet opportunity
to consult where or how to assault. As they marched Capt. Mosely and Capt.
Davenport led the van, Major Appleton and Capt. Oliver brought up the rear of
the Massachusetts forces; General Winslow with the Plymouth forces marched in
the center; those of Connecticut came up in the rear of the whole body: But the
frontiers discerning Indians in the edge of the swamp, fired immediately upon
them, who answering our men in the same language, retired presently into the
swamp, our men followed them in amain, without staying for the word of command,
as if every one were ambitious who should go first, never making any stand till
they came to the sides of the fort, into which the Indians that first fired
upon them betook themselves.

IT seems that there was but one entrance into the fort, though the enemy found
many ways to come out, but neither the English or their guide well knew on
which side the entrance lay; nor was it easy to have made another; wherefore
the good providence of Almighty God is the more to be acknowledged, who as he
led Israel sometimes by the pillar of fire, and the cloud of his presence, a
right way through the wilderness, so did he now direct our forces upon that side
of the fort, where they might only enter through not without utmost danger and
hazard. The fort was raised upon a kind of island of five or six acres of
rising land in the midst of a swamp; the sides of it were made of palizadoes,
set upright, the which was compassed about with an hedge of almost a rod
thickness, through which there was no passing, unless they could have fired a
way through, which then they had no time to do. The place where the Indians
used ordinarily to enter themselves, was upon a long tree over a place of
water, where but one man could enter at a time, and which was so waylaid that
they would have been cut off that had ventured there: But at one corner there
was a cap made up only with a long tree, about four or five foot from the
ground, over which men might easily pass: But they had placed a kind of a
block-house right over against the said tree, from whence they sorely galled
our men that first entered, some being shot dead upon the tree, as Capt.
Johnson; and some as soon as they entered, as was Capt. Davenport; so as they
that first entered were forced presently to retire, and fall upon their bellies
till the fury of the enemy's shot was pretty well spent, which some companies
that did not discern the danger, not observing, lost sundry of their men, but
at the last two companies being brought up, besides the four that first marched
up, they animated one another, to make another assault, one of the commanders
crying out, they run, they run, which did so encourage the soldiers that they
presently entered amain. After a considerable number were well entered, they
presently beat the enemy out of a flanker on the left hand, which did a little
shelter our men from the enemy's shot, till more company came up, and so by
degrees made up higher, first into the middle, and then into the upper end of
the fort, till at last they made the enemy all retire from their sconces, and
fortified places, leaving multitudes of their dead bodies upon the place.
Connecticut soldiers marching up in the rear, being not aware of the dangerous
passage over the tree, in command of the enemy's block-house, were at their
first entrance many of them shot down, although they came on with as gallant
resolution as any of the rest, under the conduct of their wise and valiant
leader, Major Treat.

THE brunt of the battle, or danger that day lay most upon the commanders whose
part it was to lead on their several companies in the very face of death, or
else all had been lost; so as all of them with great valor and resolution of
mind, as not at all afraid to die in so good a cause, bravely ^ed on their men
in that desperate assault; leaving their lives in the place as the best
testimony of their valor, and of love to the cause of God and their country:
No less than fix brave Captains fell that day in the assault, viz. Capt.
Davenport, Capt. Gardner, Capt. Johnson, of the Massachusetts, besides
Lieutenant Upham, who died some months after of his wounds received at that
time. Capt. Gallop also, and Capt. Siely, and Capt. Marshall were slain of
those belonging to Connecticut colony. It is usually seen that the valor of
the soldiers is much wrapped up in the lives of their Commanders, yet was it
found here, that the soldiers were rather enraged than discouraged by the loss
of their Commanders, which made them redouble their courage, and not give back
after they were entered the second time, till they had driven out their
enemies: So after much blood and many wounds dealt on both sides; the English
seeing their advantage, began to fire the wigwams, where was supposed to be
many of the enemies women and children destroyed, by the firing of at least
five or six hundred of their smoaky cells.

IT is reported by them that first entered the Indians fort, that our soldiers
came upon them when they were ready to dress their dinner, but our sudden and
unexpected assault put them beside that work, making their cook-rooms too hot
for them at that time, when they and their mitchin fried together: And probably
some of them eat their suppers in a colder place that night: Most of their
provision as well as their huts being then consumed with fire, and those that
were left alive forced to hide themselves in a cedar swamp, not far off, where
they had nothing to defend them from the cold but bought of spruce and pine
trees: For after two or three hours fight, the English became makers of the
place, but not judging it tenable, after they had burned all they could set
fire upon, they were forced to retreat, after the day light was almost quite
spent, and were necessitated to retire to their quarters, full fifteen or
sixteen miles off, some say more, whither with their dead and wounded men they
were to march, a difficulty scarce to be believed, as not to be paralleld
almost in any former age.

IT is hard to say who acquitted themselves best in that day's service, either
the soldiers for their manlike valor in fighting, or the Commanders for their
wisdom and courage, leading on in the very face of death. There might one have
seen the whole body of that little regimental army, as busy as bees in a hive,
some bravely fighting with the enemy, others hauling off, and carrying away the
dead and wounded men (which I rather note) that none may want the due testimony
of their valor and faithfulness, though all ought to say, not unto us, but
unto thy name, O Lord, etc.

FOR though there might not be above three or four hundred at any time within
the fort at once, yet the rest in their turns came up to do what the exigence
of the service required in bringing off the dead and wounded men: Massachusetts
regiment, together with Captain Mosely, was very serviceable, for by that means
the fort being clear of the dead bodies, it struck a greater terror into the
enemy, to see but eight or ten dead bodies of the English left, than to meet
with so many hundreds of their own slain and wounded carcases. The number of
the slain was not then known on the enemy's side, because our men were forced
to leave them on the ground: But our victory was found afterward to be much
more considerable than at the first was apprehended; for although our loss was
very great, not only because of the desperateness of the attempt itself (in
such a season of the year, and at such a distance from our quarters, whereby
many of our wounded men perished, which might otherwise have been preserved, if
they had not been forced to march so many miles in a cold snowy night, before
they could be dressed) yet the enemy lost so many of their principal fighting
men, their provision also was by the burning of their wigwams, so much of it
spoiled, at the taking of their fort, and by surprising so much of their corn
about that time also; that it was the occasion of their total ruin afterward:
They being at that time driven away from their habitations, and put by from
planting for the next year, as well as deprived of what they had in store for
the present winter. What numbers of the enemy were slain is uncertain, it was
confessed by one Poteck, a great Councellor amongst them, afterward taken at
Rhode Island, and put to death at Boston, that the Indians lost 700 fighting
men that day, besides 300 that died of their wounds, the most of them: The
number of old men, women and childen, that perished either by fire, or that
were starved with hunger and cold, none of them could tell. There was above 80
of the English slain, and and 150 wounded, that recovered afterward.

THERE were several circumstances in this victory very remarkable.

First, The meeting with one Peter a fugitive Indian, that upon some
discontent, flying from the Narrhagansets, offered himself to the service of
the English, and did faithfully perform what he promised, viz. to lead them to
the swamp where the Indians had seated themselves within a fort raised upon an
island of firm earth, in the midst of a swamp, whither none of the English
could have piloted them without his assistance, the place being near eighteen
miles from the place where they were quartered.

Secondly, Their being by a special providence directed just to a place where
they found so easy entrance, which if they had missed they could never have
made a way through the hedge, with which they had surrounded the pallizadoes of
the fort in half a day's time.

AND Thirdly, If they had entered by the way left by the Indians for passage,
they might have been cut off, before they could have come near their
fortification.

Lastly, In directing their motion to begin the assault just at the day they
did, for if they had deferred but a day longer, there fell such a storm of snow
the next day, that they could not have passed through it in diverse weeks after:
And on a sudden there fell such a thaw, that melted away both ice and snow, so
that if they had deferred till that time, they could have found no passage into
their fortified place.

ALL which considerations put together, make it a signal favor of God to carry
them through so many difficulties to accomplish their desired end. For after
they were retired to their quarters, but sixteen miles from that place, there
was so great want of provision, the vessels being frozen in at the harbor
about Cape-Cod, that should have brought them relief, and the frost and snow
set in so violently, that it was not possible for them, with all the force they
could make (so many of their ablest soldiers being slain and wounded) to have
made another onset: But the goodness of Almighty God was most of all to be
admired, that notwithstanding all the hardships they endured that winter, in
very cold lodgings, hard marches, scarcity of provision, yet not one man was
known to die by any disease or bodily distemper, save them that perished of
their wounds.

OUR forces being compelled by the aforesaid occasions, to lie still some weeks
after, hoped also that the enemy so sorely broken, would gladly have sued for
peace: But as was said of old, God hardened their hearts to their own ruin and
destruction afterward. For us soon as our soldiers were able to march, finding
that all the enemy's overtures of peace, and prolonging of treaties, was only
to gain time, that they might get away into the woods; they pursued after them,
and sometimes came upon their rear, but then they would immediately fly an
hundred ways at once into swamp^, so as our men could not follow them, or if
they did, could not see two of them together; so that now there was little good
like to be done, unless they could take them at some advantage. At length
having spent all their provision, and tiring themselves in pursuing of them
sixty or seventy miles, up through the woods toward Marlborough and Lancaster,
towns that lie on the road to Connecticut, having killed and taken near 70 of
them, our soldiers were ordered to return toward Boston, to recruit
themselves, supposing that the Narrbagansets, and those with them were so
enfeebled that they would have no mind suddenly to assault any of the English
towns.

IF any desire a more particular account of the loss which we sustained at the
taking of the Narrhaganset fort, December 19th, 1675, they may take it as here
it follows:

BESIDES the six Captains mentioned before, that either were slain in the
assault, or died afterward of their wounds, to whom may be reckoned Lieutenant
Upham, that died lately at Boston, of the wounds he then received:

THERE were out of the company belonging to killed. wounded. Major Appleton, 3
22 Capt. Mosely, 9 10 Capt. Oliver, 5 10 Capt. Gardner, 7 11 Capt. Johnson, 3
11 Capt. Davenport, 4 15 in all, 31 in all, 79

THERE were slain and wounded of New. Haven company, 20 Capt. Siely's company,
20 Capt. Watt's company, 17 Capt. Marshall's company, 14 Plymouth company under
Major Bradford and Capt. Goram. 20 in all, 91

IF there had not been so great a distance between the place of the fight and
their quarters, and so much cold attending them in their retiring thereunto,
some better account might have been given of that expedition, than now they
were able to do. For a march of sixteen or eighteen miles is too much to
breathe a fresh soldier, unless he were well mounted; but enough to kill the
heart of them that have been wearied with a long and tedious fight. As for the
coldness of the weather, although it be a good besom to sweep the chamber of
the air (which might be the reason there was no more diseases amongst them) yet
it is an unwelcome companion to wearied, especially to wounded men, in so long
a retreat.

BUT the want of provision falling in, in conjunction with the unseasonableness
of the weather, and length of the way, hindered our forces from any new attempt
upon the enemy, which if they could have attended, it was thought it might have
put an end to our troubles; but he that holds the scales of victory in his
hand, turpeth them to which side; and by what degrees pleases him best.

THE rest of the winter was spent in fruitless treaties about a peace; both
sides being well wearied with the late desperate fight, were willing to refresh
themselves the remaining part of the winter, with the short slumber of a
pretended peace, at least with a talk or dream thereof: Our Commasiders aim
therein was christian and good, if it had proceeded, sc. to have prevented the
shedding of more blood: And possibly some of the elder and wiser of the enemy,
did really desire what was pretended by them all (for they had now full proof
of the valor and resolution of the English, which some of them upon former
successes might be ready to question) and they could not but see their
destruction already begun, in the loss of their dwellings, and all their
provisions, as well as the slaughter of the best part of their fighting men;
but through consciousness of their barbarous treachery and falsehood, they
could not trust others, and so were willing to run the utmost hazard, as people
hardened to their own destruction. The particular passages of the treaty being
carried on by the enemy only in pretense, and by our men (that soon discerned
their fraud) rather out of necessity, to conceal their incapacity of engaging
them anew, than any real expectation of a good effect, are not worthy the
relating. However, though the foot were unable to do any service in the depth
of the snow, and sharpness of the cold, the troop was sent out upon all
occasions to scout about the country, who brought in daily much of the enemy's
corn and beans, which they had hid in barns under the ground, or at least kept
them from making use of their own provision, or spoiling the English cattle;
now and then also bringing in prisoners from their quarters, as they were
straggling about to get victuals.

ON the 27th of December, Capt. Prentice was sent into Pomham's country, where
he burnt near an hundred wigwams, but found never an Indian in any of them.

ON the 28th of December, a squaw was sent to them, who had been taken in the
fight, with a proffer of peace, if they would submit to such terms as were
propounded; the principal of which was, the delivering up all Philip's Indians
that were with them; the squaw returned, not pretending that she was lame and
unable to come again; but the 30th of December, an Indian came from the
Sachems, with seeming thanks for the peace proffered, yet complained we made
war upon them, and gave them no notice; but his mouth was soon stopped, by the
answer they made him: He owned, as the squaw had said before, that they lost
300 of their best fighting men, and so did two prisoners of theirs, taken
January the 4th, whereof one being of Philip's company, was put to death. The
messenger that was sent was fairly dismissed, with the express mention of what
terms they must expect, if they desired a peace.

January 4th, there came two messengers from them, as they said to make way for
a treaty of peace; who laid the blame upon Canouchet, that came to Boston in
October last, to confirm the peace with the Commissioners of the united
colonies, as if he had misinformed them, viz. that they were not by the former
treaty to have delivered up the Wompanoogs, or Philip's Indians, until the said
Canonchet's brother, one of the hostages at Hartford, was released. This was
but a mere pretense, for he and they too, better understood the particulars of
the agreement: For by chance the articles which they had of the peace concluded
with them, were found open (whether purposely or accidentally was not known) in
a wigwam in the fort, when it was taken, so as they could not be ignorant of
the articles of the agreement.

January 5th, an English child of about three or four years old, taken from
Warwick, was sent in to put the better pretense upon the treaty mentioned.

January 8th, the messengers were sent back, and told what they must trust to.
In the afternoon a messenger came from Ninigret, the old Sachem of
Narrbaganset, who brought a letter from Mr. Stanton, the interpreter,
signifying the reality of the said Ninigret, his friendship to the English, and
the streights of the enemy, that corn was two shillings a pint with them. Yet
notwithstanding all their difficulties, they rather delayed the time till they
could get away, than really endeavored the making a peace, as was soon
manifest: For that young insolent Sachem, Canonchet, and Panoquin, said they
would fight it out to the last man, rather than they would become servants to
the English.

January 10th, fresh supplies of soldiers came up from Boston, wading through a
sharp storm of snow, that bit some of them by the heels with the frost. The
next day one that came with them, going out with the scouts, fell amongst the
Indians barns, in one of which, as he was groping to find corn for the relief
of his horse, he catched hold of an Indian's hair, under the leaves, who
presently held up his hands, when the soldier was drawing his sword, to spare
his life, which was granted, but after he was brought to the headquarters, he
would own nothing but what was forced out of his mouth, by the woolding of his
head with a cord, wherefore he was presently judged to die as a Wompanoog.

January 12th, another messenger came from Canonicus, desiring the space of a
month longer, wherein to issue the treaty, which so provoked the Commander of
our forces, that they resolved to have no more treaties with the enemy, but
prepare to assault them, with God's assistance, as soon as ever the season
would permit, and it was high time to take up that resolution, for within a few
day's after, they understood by some that were taken prisoners, that the enemy
were gone, or going into the Nipmuck country.

WITHIN a few days after, about the 16th of January, the scouts brought in one
Joshua Tift, a renegado Englishman, of Providence, that upon some discontent
amongst his neighbors, had turned Indian, married one of the Indian squaws,
renounced his religion, nation, and natural parents, all at once, fighting
(...) them. He was taken by Capt. Fenner, of Providence, who with some of his
neighbors were pursuing some Indians that had driven away their cattle. This
Tift being one of the company, was wounded in the knee, and so was seized by
the English; he had in his habit conformed himself to them amongst whom he
lived. After examination, he was condemned to die the death of a traitor. As to
his religion he was found as ignorant as an heathen, which no doubt caused the
fewer tears to be shed at his funeral, standers-by being unwilling to lavish
pity upon him that had divested himself of nature itself, as well as religion,
in a time when so much pity was needed elsewhere, and nothing left besides
wherewith to relieve the sufferers.

January 21st. Capt. Prentice's troop being abroad, met with a party of the
enemy, of whom they took two prisoners, and killed nine; in which exploit,
something happened very remarkable, for one W. Dodge, of Salem, riding in
company with another friend, they happened to meet with two Indians, the said
Dodge being better horsed than his friend, made after the foremost, leaving his
friend to deal with the hindmost, but his pistol missed firing, whereupon the
Indian taking him by the leg, turned him off his horse, and getting upon him,
was about killing him with his knife, which W. Dodge by chance espied, and came
time enough to rescue his friend, and dispatch the Indian lying upon him, and
yet overtook the first Indian he was pursuing, time enough to do his business
also: By that means he did three good offices at once, saved the life of one
friend, and slew two of his enemies. But within two or three days after, the
weather much altering from what it was, induced our forces to take the first
opportunity to pursue the enemy, who as they understood by messengers from
Providence, were now upon their flight into the Nipmuck country: But so many
difficulties were cast in their way, that they could not be ready time enough
to prevent the mischief they did at Warwick, as they took their farewell of
their country. For,

January 27th they (...) Mr. Carpenter of two hundred sheep, and fifty head of
neat cattle, and fifteen horses; all which they drove along with them, and were
gone too far to be rescued before our forces set out. Two that belonged to the
said Carpenter were wounded, and one of the enemy's slain. As they marched
after the enemy, they found a good house burned, with a barn belonging to it.
They perceived also that the enemy dealt much in horseflesh, meeting with no
less than sixty horses heads in one place, which they had left behind them. Our
soldiers in their pursuit, came upon their rear, killed and took about seventy
of them, yet never could come to charge them, for they would presently betake
themselves into swamps, and not two of them run together, so as they saw it was
an endless work to proceed further in the chase of such an enemy; but our
forces having pursued them into the woods, between Marlborough and Brookfield,
in the road toward Connecticut, were constrained to turn down to Boston, in the
beginning of February, for want of provision, both for themselves and their
horses, which gave an occasion to the loss of those lesser towns that were
destroyed by the Nipnet Indians, who presently joined with the Narrhagansets,
upon their first approach, as shall be related afterward.

ABOUT the 10th of February after, some hundreds of the Indians, whether
Nipnets or Nashaway men (is uncertain) belonging to him they call Sagamore Sam,
and possibly some of the stoutest of the Narrhagansets that had escaped the
winter brunt, fell upon Lancaster, a small village, of about fifty or sixty
families, and did much mischief, burning most of the houses that were not
garrisoned: And which is most sad and awful to consider, the house of Mr.
Rowlandson, minister of the said Lancaster, which was garrisoned with a
competent number of the inhabitants; yet the fortification of the house being
on the back side, closed up with firewood, the Indians got so near as to fire
a leanter, which burning the house immediately to the ground, all the persons
therein were put to the hard choice, either to perish by the flames, with the
house, or to yield themselves into the hands of those cruel savages, which last
(considering that a living dog is better than a dead lion) they chose, and so
were forty-two persons surprised by the Indians, above twenty of the women and
children they carried away captive, a rueful spectacle to behold; the rest
being men, they killed in the place, or reserved for further misery: And many
that were not slain in fighting, were killed in attempting to escape. The
minister himself was occasionally absent, to seek help from the Governor and
Council to defend that place, who returning, was entertained with the tragical
news of his wife and children surprised, and being carried away by the enemy,
and his house turned into ashes, yet it pleased God so to uphold his heart,
comforting himself in his God, as David at Ziklag, that he would always say, he
believed he should see his wife and children again, which did in like manner
soon come to pass within five or six months after; all, save the youngest,
which being wounded at the first, died soon after among the Indians. A
particular account of the sufferings and captivity of Mrs. Rowlandson, written
by herself, may be had of the publisher hereof. Price 6 s.


AND such was the goodness of God to those poor captive women and children,
that they found so much favor in the fight of their enemies, that they offered
no wrong to any of their persons, save what they could not help, being in many
wants themselves. Neither did they offer any uncivil carriage to any of the
females, nor ever attempted the chastity of any of them, either being
restrained of God, as was Abimeleck of old, or by some other accidental cause
which withheld them from doing any wrong in that kind.

UPON the report of this disaster, Capt. Wadsworth, then at Marlborough, with
about forty resolute men, adventuring the rescuing of the town that was
remaining: And having recovered a bridge, they got over safe, though the planks
were pulled off by the enemy, and being led up in a way, not discovered by
them, they forced the Indians for the present to quit the place, after hey had
burnt and destroyed the better half of it. Yet afterward it not being judged
tenable, it was abandoned to the pleasure of the insulting foe.

Ten days after they were so flushed with this success, that two or three
hundred of them came wheeling down to Medfield, a town twenty miles from
Boston, westward from Dedham, which they surprised very earl in the morning
(and though there were one hundred and sixty soldiers in it, or more, besides
the inhabitants) they burnt near one half of the town, killing about twenty
persons, but by the resistance of the soldiers, as soon as they could be
rallied together (it being at or before break of day, none in the least
suspecting such an assault so early) they were quickly forced to forsake the
place, and so (not without some loss) took their way to Plymouth colony.

THE western towns above Connecticut were the chief seat of the war, and felt
most of the mischiefs thereof, in the end of the year 1675; but the scene is
now to be changed; and the other towns and villages that lie eastward, nearer
Boston, must bear their part in the like tragedies: For as was said before, the
Narrhagansets having been driven out of the country, fled through Nipnet
plantations, toward Watchuset hills, meeting with all the Indians that had
harbored all winter in those woods about Nashaway, they all cambined against
the English, yet divided their numbers, and one half of them were observed to
bend their course toward Plymouth, taking Medfield in their way, which they
endeavored to burn and spoil, February 21st, 1675, as their fellows had done
Lancaster ten days before.

THE surprisal of this Medfield, in regard of some remarkable circumstances it
was attended with, is not unworthy a more particular relating as to the manner
thereof: The loss of Lancaster had sufficiently awakened and alarmed the
neighboring villages, all to stand upon their guard; and some had obtained
garrisoned soldiers for their greater security, as was the ^^se with the town
of Medfield, within twenty-two miles of Boston. And at that time were lodged
therein several garrison soldiers, besides the inhabitants; yet being billeted
up and down in all quarters of the town, could not be gathered together till a
great part of the town was set on fire, and many of the inhabitants slain,
which how it could be effected is strange to believe: But most of those inland
plantations being overrun with young wood (the inhabitants being very apt to
engross more land into their hands than they were able to subdue) as if they
were seated in the midst of a heap of bushes: Their enemies took the advantage
thereof, and secretly over night, conveyed themselves round about the town,
some getting under the sides of their barns, and fences of their orchards, as
is supposed, where they lay hid under that covert, till break of day, when they
suddenly set upon sundry houses, shooting them that came first out of their
doors, and then fired their houses, especially those houses where the
inhabitants were repaired to garrisons, were fit for the purpose: Some were
killed as they attempted to fly to their neighbors for shelter: Some were only
wounded, and some taken alive and carried captive: In some houses the husband
running away with one child, the wife with another, of whom the one was killed,
the other escaped. They began at the east end of the town, where they fired the
house of one Samuel Morse, that seems ^o have been a signal to the rest, to
fall in on other parts: Mo^^ of the houses in the west, or southwest and of the
town, were soon burnt down: And generally when they burnt any outhouses, the
cattle in them were burnt also. Two mills belonging to the town, were burnt
also: A poor old man of near an hundred years old, was burnt in one of the
houses that were consumed by fire. The Lieutenant of the town, Adams by name,
was shot down by (...) own door, and his wife normally wounded by a gun fired
afterward accidentally into the house. After the burning of forty or fifty
nouses and barns, the Cannibals were frighted away out of the town. over a
bridge that lies upon Charles-River, by the sh^^^ing off a ^^ece of ordnance
two or three times: When they had passed over the bridge, they fired one end
thereof, to hinder our men from pursuing them, they were thought to be above
five hundred; there were slain and mortally wounded, seventeen or eighteen
persons, besides others dangerously hurt. The loss sustained by the inhabitants
amounted to above two thousand pounds. This mercy was observed in this sad
providence, that never a garrison house was lost in this surprisal; nor any of
the principal dwellings, so as the chiefest and best of their buildings escaped
the fury of the enemy, who as they passed the bridge, left a writing behind
them, expressing something to this purpose. that we had provoked them to wrath,
and that they would fight with us these twenty years (but they fell short of
their expectation by nineteen) adding also, that they had nothing to loose,
whereas we had houses, barns, and corn: These were some of the bold threats
used by the barbarous crew, but their rage shall proceed no further than the
counsel of God had determined. The week before was heard a very hideous cry of
a kennel of wolves round the town, which raised some of the inhabitants, and
was looked upon by diverse persons, as an ominous presaging of the following
calamity.

ANOTHER assault was feared, but as soon as the soldiers could be gathered
together, they turned their backs, as if they never intended to visit them
more: whither these Indians went when they left Medfield, is not so certainly
known; the soldiers in the town not having opportunity to pursue them over the
river, by reason that the bridge was part of it burned: But it is most probable
that they took their way toward Plymouth, and continued about that side of the
country for the future, waiting opportunities to do what mischief they could to
the English in those parts: For within a month after this ^^^ult of Medfield,
there was near fix hundred of them ^^en about Pautuxet and Providence, where
Capt. Pierce, with about fifty of his men were lost, though with no great
advantage to the enemy, who at that time lost above double that number: Our
worthy Captains in this and other exploits, being called so imitate Sampton,
who was content to die with his enemies, that he might overthrow them thereby:
It having so fallen out with many of our choice Commanders and soldiers a^
Deerfield, Narrhaganset, Pautuxet, and likewise not long after at Sudbury.

THE Governor and Council of Plymouth perceiving by the report of these
outrages committed upon the towns of the Massachusetts, that they were like to
be visited this spring by their old neighbors, sent out Capt. Pierce, of
Situate, about the latter end of March, with about fifty English, and twenty
of their christian Indians, about Cape-Cod, who proved none of his worst
soldiers, as the sequal of this his last expedition will declare.

CAPT. Pierce, as is said before, being sent out to pursue the enemy, marched
toward Pautuxet, where he understood the Indians were many of them gathered
together: He being a man of resolute courage, was willing to engage them though
upon never at so great disadvantage: Some say the Indians by counterfeiting,
drilled him into a kind of ambush; possibly more of them discovered themselves
after he began to engage than he was aware of; and being got over the river in
pursuit of them, where he discovered so great a number of them, he drew down
toward the side of the river, hoping the better by that means to prevent their
surrounding of him; but that proved his overthrow which he intended as his
greatest advantage: For the Indians getting over the river so galled him from
thence, that he was not able to defend himself; thus assaulted on all sides,
and himself not being able to travel much a foot, was thereby hindered from
retiring to any better place in time, so as he saw himself constrained to fight
it out to the last, which he did with most undaunted courage, and as is said,
to the slaughter of an hundred and forty of his enemies, before himself and his
company were cut off. It is said also, that being apprehensive of the danger he
was in, by the great numbers of the enemy like to overpower him with their
multitude, he seat a messenger timely enough to Providence, for relief, but as
Solomon faith, a faithful messenger is as snow in harvest, another is as smoke
to the eyes, and vinegar to the teeth. (Whether through sloth or cowardice, is
not much material) this message was not delivered to them to whom it was
immediately sent; by accident only some of Rehoboth understanding of the
danger, after the evening exercise (it being on the Lord's day, March 26th,
1676) repaired to the place, but then it was too ^ate to bring help, unless it
were to be spectators of the dead carcases of their friends, and to perform the
last office of love to them.

IT is worth the noting, what faithfulness and courage some of the christian
Indians, with the said Capt. Pierce, showed in the fight: One of them, whose
name was Amos, after the Captain was shot in his leg or thigh, so as he was not
able to stand any longer, would not leave him, but charging his gun several
times, fired stoutly upon the enemy, till he saw that there was no possibility
for him to do any further good to Capt. Pierce, nor yet to save himself, if he
stayed any longer; therefore he used this policy, perceiving the enemy had all
blacked their faces, he also stooping down, pulled out some blacking out of a
pouch be carried with him, discolored his face therewith, and so making
himself look as like Hohamackco, as any of his enemies, he ran amongst them a
little while, and was taken for one of them, as if he had been searching for
the English, until he had an opportunity to escape away among the bushes;
therein imitating the cuttle fish, which when it is pursued, or in danger,
cas^eth out of its body a thick humor, as black as ink, through which it
passes away unseen by the pursuer.

IT is reported of another of these Cape Indians (friends to the English of
Plymouth) that being pursued by one of the enemy, he betook himself to a great
rock, where (...) sh^^^ered himself for a while, at last pe^^e^ving that his
enemy lay ^cady with his gun on the other side, to discharge upon him, as soon
as he stired never so little away from the place where he stood: In the issue
he thought of this politic stratagem to save himself, and destroy his enemy
(for as Solomon said of old, wisdom is better than weapons of war) he took a
stick, and hung his hat upon it, and then by degrees gently listed it up, till
he thought it would be seen, and so become a fit mark for the other that
watched to take aim at him: The other taking it to be his head, fired a gun and
shot through the hat; which ou^ christian Indian perceiving, boldly held up his
head and discharged his own gun upon the real head, not the hat, of his
adversary, whereby he shot him dead upon the place, and so had liberty to march
away with the spoils of his enemy.

THE like subtle device was used by another of the Cape Indians at the same
time, being one of them that went out with Capt Pierce; for being in like
manner pursued by one of Philip's Indians, as the former was, he nimbly got
behind the butt end of a tree, newly turned up by the roots, which carried a
considerable breadth of the surface of the earth along with it (as is very
usual in these parts, where the roots of the trees lie deep in the ground)
which stood above the Indian'^ height, in form of a large shield, only it was
somewhat too heavy to be easily removed; the enemy Indian lay with his gun
ready to shoot him down upon his first deserting his station; but a subtle wit
taught our christian Netop a better device, for boring a little hole through
this his broad shield, he discerned his enemy, who could not so easily discern
him; a good musketier need never desire a fairer mark to shoot at, whereupon
discharging his gun, he shot him down: What can be more just than that he
should be killed, who lay in wait to kill another man? neque erim lex justior
ulla est, quam necis artifices art perire sua.

INSTANCES of this nature show the subtlety and dexterousness of these natives,
if they were improved in seats of arms: And possibly if some of the English had
not been too shy in making use of such of them as were well affected to their
interest, they need never have suffered so much from their enemies; it having
been found upon late experience, that many of them have proved not only
faithful, but very serviceable and helpful to the English; they usually proving
good seconds, though they have not ordinarily confidence enough to make the
first onset But to return to the proceedings of the Indians toward Plymouth.

February 25th, they assaulted Weymouth, and burnt seven or eight houses and
barns there, which Weymouth is a town lying toward Plymouth colony.

March 12th, following, they assaulted the house of one Mr. Clarke, in
Plymouth, cruelly murdering eleven persons that belonged to two families that
lodged therein, and then fired the house. The cruelty toward these persons was
the more remarkable, in that they had often received much kindness from the
said Clarke. It is the usual custom of such debtors, to use them worst, of whom
they have taken up much kindness upon trust before hand.

March 17th, another party of them fell upon Warwick, a place beyond Philip's
land, toward the Narrbaganset country, where they burnt down to the ground all
but a few houses, which they left standing as a monument of their barbarous
fury. The like mischief was acted by them upon the houses of the English
remaining in the Narrhaganset country.

THIS 26th day of March, being the first day of the week, as the first of the
year after our Julian account, seemed ominous at the first, on sundry accounts,
threatening a gloomy time, yet proved in the issue, but as a lowering morning
before a lightsome day.

FOR besides the burning of Marlborough, at least a great part of it, on the
same day, a very sad accident fell out the same time at Springfield, as shall
be specified hereafter; besides that which befell Captain Pierce, which is
already related, with whom fell so many of his soldiers on the same day also;
yet had the enemy no cause to beast, being forced by the valor of the English,
to give so many of their own lives in exchange: Some few made their escape, as
is said, by subtle devices: Besides the three forementioned, another by a like
shift, not only saved himself, but helped an Englishman to escape also, whom he
ran after, with his hatchet in his hand, as if he were about to kill him;
whereby both of them made a shift to get away; the rest were all lost (the
unfaithfulness of the messenger being as was intimated before, the cause of
their slaughter) unto a few that hardly escaped by the advantage of the bushes,
giving them opportunity to pass unseen, yet was it confessed by a prisoner of
the enemy, taken afterward by the English, that they lost an hundred and forty
in that encounter: And had not the said English by wading after the enemy over
a river, made their ammunition useless, there had not half so many of them been
cut off. From thence they turned back toward Rehoboth, near Swanzy, where on
March 28th, they burnt thirty barns, and near upon forty dwelling-houses,
thereby as it were threatening the utter desolation of that poor town; and so
proceeding on that side the country, they burnt the very next day about thirty
houses in Providence, in their way toward Narrhaganset.

BUT it was now full sea with Philip's affairs, for soon after the tide of his
successes began to turn about the sea coast, which made way for the falling of
the water up higher in the country. For about this time news came to Boston
that our neighbors and friends of Connecticut colony, hearing of the attempts
of the enemy on that side of the country, sent a party of their soldiers, under
the command of Capt. George Denison, with some friendly Indians, part Mohegins
and Pequods, part Nianticks, belonging to Ninigret, a Narrhaganset Sachem, who
never engaged in this quarrel against the English; who in pursuit of the enemy,
meeting with a considerable part of them about the Narrhaganset country, killed
and took forty-five of them, without the loss of one of their own men. This
victory was the more considerable, in that several of the chief Captains of the
enemy were at this time killed or taken; amongst whom was Canonchet (who came
down to get seed corn to plant at Squakbeag) he was the chief Sachem of all the
Narrhagansets, the son of Miantonimoh, and the heir of all his father's pride
and insolence, as well as of his malice against the English, a most perfidious
villian, who had the last October been at Boston, pretending to make a firm
peace with the English, but never intending to keep one article thereof:
Therefore, as a just reward of his wickedness he was adjudged by those that
took him, to die, which was accordingly put in execution at Stonington, whither
he was carried; there his head being cut off, was carried to Hartford: The
Mohegins and Pequods that had the honor to take him prisoner, having the honor
likewise of doing justice upon him, and that by the prudent advice of the
English Commanders, thereby the more firmly to engage the said Indians against
the treacherous Narrhagansets. There are diff^^ing reports about the manner of
his taking, and by whom, whether the Indians or the English first took him;
however, it was sufficient matter of rejoicing to all the colonies of the
English, that the ringleader of almost all this mischief, and great incendiary
betwixt the Narrhagansets and us, died himself by that sword of war which he
had drawn against others.

CONCERNING the Narrhagansets, this is further to be added here, that Mr.
Thomas Stanton, and his son Robert, who have a long time lived amongst them,
and best acquainted with their language and manners of any in New England, do
affirm, that to their knowledge, the Narrhaganset Sachems before the late
troubles, had two thousand fighting men under them, and nine hundred arms, yet
they are at this day so broken and scattered, that there is none of them left
on that side of the country, unless some few, not exceeding seventy in number,
that have sheltered themselves under the inhabitants of Rhode Island, as a
merchant of that place, worthy of credit, lately affirmed to the writer hereof.
It is considerable by what degrees they have been consumed and destroyed.

THE first week in April, 1676, Canonchet, their chief Sachem, having with this
people been driven out of his own country, by the sword of the English, the
winter before, breathed still nothing but rage and cruelty against them,
bearing himself upon his great numbers: Yet as appeared in the issue, himself
and they that escaped with him, were not so much preserved from the present
calamity that befell the rest in their fort, as reserved to another and more
ignominious death. For the whole body of the Indians to the westward, trusting
under the shadow of that aspiring bramble; he took a kind of care of them upon
himself: wherefore foreseeing so many hundreds could not well subsist without
planting, he propounded it in his council, that all the west plantations upon
Connecticut river, taken from the English, should this last summer be planted
with Indian corn; which was indeed in itself a very prudent consideration: To
that end he resolved to venture himself with but thirty men (the rest declining
it) to fetch seed-corn from Seaconk, the next town to Mount-hope, leaving a
body of men, not fewer than fifteen hundred to follow him, or meet him about
Seaconk the week after. This adventure brought him into the snare, from whence
he could not escape: For Capt. George Denison, of Stonington, and Capt. Avery,
of New London, having raised forty-seven English, the most part volunteers,
with eighty Indians, twenty of which were Narrhagansets, belonging to Ninigret,
commanded by one called Catapazet; the rest Pequods, under Casasinamon, and
Mohegins under Oneco, son to Uncas, being now abroad upon their third
expedition, which they began March 27th, 1676, and ended on the 10th of April
following: They met with a stout Indian of the enemy's whom they presently
slew, and two old squaws, that confessed Nanunttenoo, alias Canonchet (those
chief Sachems usually changing their names at every great dance, and by that
name of Nanunttenoo was he then known) was not far off; which welcome news put
new life into the wearied soldiers, that had traveled hard many days, and met
with no booty till now; especially when it was confirmed by intelligence the
same instant, brought in by their scouts, that they met with new tracks, which
brought them in view of some wigwams, not far from Pautuket, by some called
Blackstone's river, in one of which the said Sachem was at that moment
diverting himself with the recital of Capt. Pierce's slaughter, surprised by
his men a few days before, but the alarm of the English at that time heard by
himself, put by that discourse, apalled with the suddeness thereof, as if he
had been informed by secret item from Heaven, that now his own turn was come;
so as having but 7 men about him, he sent up two of them to the top of the
hill, to see what the matter was, but they affrighted with the near approach of
the English, at that time with great speed mounting over a fair champagna on
the other side of the hill, ran by, as if they wanted time to tell what they
saw; presently he sent a third, who did the like; then sending two more on the
same errand, one of these last endued with more courage, or a better sense of
his duty, informed him in great haste that all the English army was upon him;
whereupon, having no time to consult, and but little to attempt an escape, and
no means to defend himself; he began to dodge with his pursuers, running round
the hill on the contrary side; but as he was running so hastily by, Catapazat,
with twenty of his followers, and a few of the English, lightest of foot,
guessed by the swiftness of his motion, that he fled as if an enemy, which made
them immediately take the chase after him, as for their lives; he that was the
swifter pursuer put him so hard to it, that he cast off first his blanket, then
his silver laced coat (given him at Boston, as a pledge of their friendship,
upon the renewal of his league in October before) and belt of peag, which made
Catapazat conclude it was the right bird, which made them pursue as eagerly as
the other fled; so as they forced him to take to the water, through which as he
over hastily plunged; his foot slipping upon a stone, it made him fall into the
water so deep, as it wet his gun, upon which accident, he confessed soon after,
that his heart and his bowels turned within him, so as he became like a rotten
stick, void of strength; insomuch as one Monopoide, a Pequod, swiftest of foot,
laid hold of him within thirty rod of the river side, without his making any
resistance; though he was a very proper man, of goodly stature, and great
courage of mind, as well as strength of body; one of the first English that
came up with him, was Robert Stanton, a young man that scarce had reached the
twenty-second year of his age, yet adventuring to ask him a question or two, to
whom this manly Sachem looking with a little neglect upon his youthful face,
replied in broken English, you much child, no understand matters of war; let
your brother, or your chief come, him I will answer, and was as good as his
word; acting herein, as if by a Pythagorean metempsychosis, some old Roman
ghost had possessed the body of this western Pagan; and like Attilius Regulus,
he would not accept of his own life, when it was tendered him, upon that (in
his account) low condition of compliance with the English, refusing to send an
old Counselor of his to make any motion that way, saying he knew the Indians
would not yield; but more probably he was not willing they should, choosing
rather to sacrifice his own, and his peoples lives, to his private humor of
revenge, than timely to provide for his own, and their safety, by entertaining
the counsels of a peace, so necessary for the general good of all: He
continuing in the same obstinate resolution, was carried soon after to
Stonington, where he was shot to death, by some of his own quality, sc. the
young Sachem of the Mohegins, and two of the Pequods, of like quality. This was
the confusion of a damned wretch, that had often opened his mouth to blaspheme
the name of the living God, and those that make profession thereof. He was told
at large of his breach of faith, and how he boasted he would not deliver up a
Wampanoog, or the paring of a Wampanoog's nail, that he would burn the English
alive in their houses; to which he replied, others were as forward for the war
as himself; and that he desired to hear no more thereof. And when he was told
his sentence was to die, he said, he liked it well, that he should die before
his heart was soft, or had spoken any thing unworthy of himself. He told the
English before they put him to death, that the killing him would not end the
war; but it was a considerable step thereunto, nor did it live much longer
after his death, at least, not in those parts; for after Sudbury fight, when
the sun of their hopes was at its highest; April the 18th following, it visibly
declined, till it set in a night of obscure and utter darkness upon them all,
as is to be feared.

THE inhabitants of New London, Norwich, and Stonington, apprehensive of their
danger, by reason of the near bordering of the enemy, and upon other prudent
considerations, voluntarily listed themselves under some able gentlemen, and
resolute soldiers, amongst themselves, Major Palms, Capt. George Denison,
Capt. Avery, with whom, or under whom, within the compass of the year 1676,
they made ten or more several expeditions, in all which, at those several
times, they killed and took two hundred and thirty-nine of the enemy, by the
help and assistance of the Pequods, Mohegins, and a few friendly Narrhagansets;
besides thirty taken in the long march homeward, after the fort fight, December
19th, 1675; and besides sixteen captivated in the second expedition, not
reckoned within the compass of the said number; together with fifty guns, and
spoiling the enemy of an hundred bushels of corn.

IN January they went again in pursuit, and took five men and a boy. Certain
Nipnets intended to have sheltered themselves under Uncas; but he perceiving it
would be distasteful to the English, soon shabbed them off, so as they were in
the beginning of the winter brought into Boston, many of them by Peter Ephraim,
and Andrew Pityme, with their fellows.

IN all which exploits, neither they, nor any of their followers sustained any
loss by the sword of the enemy, or sickness; as is expressly declared by the
Reverend Minister of Stonington, Mr. James Noyee, which is a matter very
admirable to consider, engaging all that were any way concerned in such signal
testimonies of divine favor, to be ^^ady to pay their vows to the Most High,
who alone teaches the hands of his people to war, and their fingers to fight.

NOT long after Capt. George Denison, of Stonington, with sixty-six-volunteers,
and an hundred and twelve Pequods, killed and took seventy-six of the enemy,
amongst whom were two Narrhaganset Sachems, one of which was the grandchild of
Pomham (who is accounted the most warlike, and the best soldier of all the
Narrhaganset Sachems) taking at the same time 160 bushels of the enemy's corn,
no small damage to our enemies at that time, and all this without the loss of
one man of the said Captain's followers.

The greatest mischief which after this time was done by the enemy in Plymouth
colony, was by burning of houses and barns, which they might easily do, the
inhabitants in most of those towns being repaired to garrison houses for their
greater security: For about the 20th of April, fifty of the enemy burnt about
nineteen houses and barns at Situate, but were so resolutely encountered by a
few of the inhabitants, that they were driven away, and thereby prevented from
doing of further mischief.

NOT long after, May 8th, they burnt about seventeen houses and barns in
Bridgewater, a small town in Plymouth colony, twelve miles on this side
Taunton; but it pleased God just at the time to send a thundershower, which put
out the fire, or else it might have prevailed much further.

IT is very remarkable, that the inhabitants of the said Bridgewater, never yet
lost one person by the sword of the enemy, though the town is situate within
Plymouth colony, yet they have helped to destroy many of the enemy. None knows
either love or hatred by all that is before them in things of this nature; nor
ought standers-by that may escape, think themselves less sinners than those
that so perish by the sword of the enemy: Yet about this time four of the
inhabitants of Taunton were killed as they were at their work in the field,
whereby it is said, thirty children were made fatherless: So unsearchable are
the judgments of the Almighty, and his ways past finding out.

DURING these calamities, God's dispensations have been very various, as well
in reference unto towns and villages, as unto persons: As if some places had
been by special providence marked out to preservation, as others unto
destruction; of which no other reason can be rendered according unto man, than
the good pleasure of God so to order and dispose of events, which sometimes, as
Solomon says, are all one to the good, and to the clean, and to the unclean.

AND because special notice is taken of the town of Bridgewater, the which
although it is seared, as it were, in the midst of danger, and has been often
assaulted by considerable numbers of the enemy, yet never lost any one of their
inhabitants, young or old; a particular account shall here be given of the most
remarkable passages of divine providence relating to that plantation since the
war began. June 26th, 1675, when Philip's malice against the English, mixed
with a particular prejudice against Governor Winslow, began to boil up to the
height of an open rebellion; the people of Swanzy being like to be distressed
by the Indians, a post was instantly sent to the Governor of Plymouth, the way
lying through Bridgewater; the said post returned the next day, and about 9 or
10 of the clock, as he passed through the town, left an order from the Governor
for the raising of twenty men, well armed, and furnished with horses, to be
forthwith dispatched away for the relief of Swanzy; seventeen were all that
could be raised on the sudden, who were sent thither that night, and were the
first that were upon their march in all the country; and possibly they fared
not the worse for their forwardness: As Deborah the prophetess blessed God for
them that offered themselves willingly among the people: These seventeen of
Bridgewater, were June 21st, ordered by Capt. Bradford (...) Metapoiset, a
place at twelve miles distance from Swanzy, to strengthen the garrison at one
Bourn's (...), wherein were seventy persons, amongst whom w^^^ only found
sixteen men. After they had marched five miles of their way, having Mr. Brown's
son for their pilot, they met with some Swanzy people, newly turned out of
their houses (by which they were to pass) who having not as yet resisted unto
blood, yet ma^e doleful lamentations, wringing of their hands, and bewailing of
their lesses, very much also persuading Bridgewater men to turn back, because
of the danger, but they having so clear a call, had also more courage than
cowardly to desert the cause of God and his people, lest they should thereby
betray the lives of so many of their friends into the enemy's hands; and so by
the good hand of God toward them, came safe to Metapoiset that night.

THE next day in the morning, a part of them went to guard Mr. Brown, their
pilot, back to his quarters; in their return they came suddenly upon a party of
Indians, about thirty in all; they were within shot of one another, but the
English having no commission to fight till they were assaulted, and not being
impended in their passage, they returned safe to their garrison at Metapoiset:
The Indians presently drawing off, and firing three guns (though not with
intent to do them any hurt, as was conceived) gave a shout, and so le^t them.
When this party of the English drew near to their garrison, they met with a
company of carts going to fetch corn from an house deserted near by, about a
quarter of a mile off from Mr. Bourn's house, the soldiers gave them notice of
the Indians which they discovered, and withal advised them by no means to
venture any more, because of the danger; but they were resolved notwithstanding
these earnest persuasions of the soldiers to have another turn, which they soon
found to be to the peril of their own lives, six of them being presently after
killed right out, or mortally wounded, as soon as they came to the barn where
was the corn; these six are said to be the first that were slain in this
quarrel. The soldiers at the garrison hearing the guns, made what haste they
could to the place, but being most of them in that interim gone to look their
horses, they could not come time enough to the relief of their friends, yet
upon their approach, they who had done the mischief presently fled away: One
Jones hard pursued by two Indians, was by their coming delivered from the
extent of the enemy's cruelty, but having received his mortal wound, had only
that favor thereby, to die in the arms of his friends, though by the wounds
received from his enemies.

THE next week, fifteen of those soldiers looking after their horses, fell into
an ambush of twenty of the Indians, but being prepared for the encounter, they
discharged their guns upon each other; but our men received no hurt, some of
them felt the wind of the bullets passing by their faces; what damage the enemy
received is uncertain, yet some of the English report they found some of their
enemies dead bodies in the place afterward.

THUS were they not only preserved in many perils themselves, but became
instrumental also for the preservation of most of that garrison, who with their
goods, by their means, with the help of a small party of Plymouth forces, sent
thither after the six were killed (as is mentioned before) were soon after
transported safely to Read-Island.

MANY outrages were that summer committed upon their neighbors at Taunton and
Namasket, yet it pleased God to protect this poor town of Bridgewater from any
other hurt, till the beginning of April following, when themselves, with their
neighbors of Taunton and Rehoboth, were strongly solicited to desert their
dwellings, and repair down to the towns by the sea side, but God encouraged
them to keep their stations, notwithstanding the extreme danger then presented.
It is reported that Philip gave orders that Taunton and Bridgewater should not
be destroyed till the last, which is all the favor to be expected from an
enemy, but these things are only in the hands of God, and not to be determined
by man.

April 9th, being Lord's day, a small party of the enemy came down upon the
said Bridgewater, burnt an out house and barn, broke up and rifled several
other houses in the same quarter of the town, which are notwithstanding yet
remaining; they sent out a party of their men to pursue them that night, and
many days after, but could not hear of them.

May 7th, the Lord's day also (no doubt but the betterness of the day, will
increase the badness of their deed attempted thereon) they had intelligence of
a great body of Indians dispersed that way, with intent to have fallen upon the
town that very day, but were casually prevented by a great deal of rain that
fell the night before; however, they were resolved not to miss the opportunity,
wherefore on the next day ( May 8th) about three hundred of them, one Tisguogen
being their chief leader, at 8 or 9 in the morning made an assault upon the
ecast end of the town, on the south side of the river: Many of the inhabitants
stayed at home that morning, because of the intelligence the day before, and so
were the more ready to entertain them; some that not taking that warning,
ventured into the field about their occasions, were in danger of surprizal, but
by the special favor of God escaped, and came time enough to help defend their
own and their neighbors dwellings, being shot at, and hard pursued a
considerable way.

THE Indians presently began to fire the town, but it pleased God so to spirit
and encourage several of the inhabitants, issuing out of their garrison houses,
that they fell upon them with great resolution, and beat them off; at the same
instant of time, the Lord of Hosts also fighting for them from Heaven, by
sending a storm of thunder and rain very seasonably, which prevented the
burning of the houses which were fired: The soldiers also fighting under the
banner of God's special protection, were so successful in repelling the enemy,
that they neither had any of the inhabitants killed or taken, and but one
wounded. The Indians by this stout resistance, being beaten off to the skirts
of the town, made a fresh onset upon another quarter thereof, on the north side
of the river, where they had done much more mischief, but that God stirred up
sundry of the people to venture out of their fortified houses, who fired upon
the enemy, and beat them from their dwellings, so as in the evening they drew
off to an outhouse, three miles distant from the town: The next day the
inhabitants expected another assault, but the enemy having burnt the house and
barn were they kept their rendezvous over night, and one house more not far
distant, they marched all clear away for that time.

THUS it pleased God so to order his dispensations toward this small town, as a
brand plucked out of the fire, that they did but just taste of this bitter cup,
which others drank deeper of; yet had they not such mercy, as these had, mixed
therewith: Under God, the courage of the inhabitants was a great means of their
preservation, for they fired so stoutly upon the enemy, that they durst not
come very near any of the garrisoned houses, saluting them only at a distance.
God was eminently seen upholding the spirits of all sorts, men and women, so as
no consternation of mind was seen upon any of them, during the whole time of
the dispute.

IN this assault they lost but thirteen dwelling houses, whereof five only were
in the town (the rest being outhouses, and deserted for the present,) with some
few ^^rns, and some of their cattle; all which was a very inconsiderable loss,
in comparison of what befell others, and themselves might have endured, if God
had not by his special favor prevented.

July 14th and 15th, another party of Indians came down upon the north-west
side of the town, but with no better success; for they had no commission from
the Lord of Hosts to touch any of the persons of the inhabitants, their power
reaching only to the slaying of their cattle at this time.

July 18th, 19th, and 20th, they sent our parties after the enemy to pursue
them by their track, who fell upon some of them. On the 20th they took sixteen,
whereof two were men: On this day they had to assist them, it seems, some of
the Bay Indians, sent them from Capt. Brattle; some of the captives informed
that there were but seventy or eighty in the company, and but ten or twelve men
amongst them: But within a few days these Bridgewater men shall find better
success in pursuit of their enemies, when Philip himself shall hardly escape
their hands, as shall be seen afterward.

WHILE one party of the enemy thus acted their part in and and about Plymouth
colony, toward the seacoast, other parties of them were not idle in the
Massachusetts colony, where they assaulted many places, doing what mischief they
could by firing of houses, and killing several persons in the inland
plantations.

March 2d, they assaulted Groton; the next day over night Major Willard, with
seventy horse came into the town; forty foot also came up to their relief from
Watertown, but the Indians were all fled, having first burnt all the houses in
the town, save four that were garrisoned, the meeting house being the second
house they fired; soon after Capt. Sill was sent with a small party of
dragoons, of eight files, to fetch off the inhabitants of Groton, and what was
left from the spoil of the enemy, having under his conduct about sixty carts,
being in depth from front to rear above two miles, when a party of Indians
lying in ambush, at a place of eminent advantage, fired upon the front and
mortally wounded two of the first carriers, who both died the next night; and
might (had God permitted) have done eminent damage to the whole body, it being
a full hour before the whole body could be drawn up, which was done with care
and courage; but the Indians after a few more shot made, without doing harm,
retired, and made no further assault upon them, being the same party of Indians
which the day before had burnt some part of Chelmsford. Soon after this village
was deserted and destroyed by the enemy; yet it was a special providence, that
though the carts were guarded with so slender a convoy, yet there was not any
considerable loss sustained.

THE surprizal of Groton was after this manner: On March 2d, the Indians came
in the night and rifled eight or nine houses, and carried away some cattle, and
alarmed the town.

ON March 9th, about ten in the morning, a parcel of Indians (having two days
lurked in the town, and taken possession of three outhouses, and feasted
themselves with corn, diverse swine and poultry, which they there seized) laid
an ambush for two carts, which went from their garrison to fetch in some hay,
attended with four men, two of which espying the enemy, made a difficult
escape, the other two were set upon, and one of them slain, stripped naked, his
body mangled, and dragged into the highway, and laid on his back in a most
shameful manner: The other taken captive, and after sentenced to death; but the
enemy not concurring in the manner of it, execution was deferred, and he by the
providence of God escaped by a bold attempt the night before he was designed to
have been slaughtered, and fled to the garrison at Lancaster, the cattle in
both towns wounded, and five of them slain.

March 13th was the day when the enemy came in a full dody, by their own
account four hundred, and thought by the inhabitants to be not many less. The
town was at this time (having been put into a fright by the sad catastrophe of
Lancaster, the next bordering town) gathered into five garrisons, four of which
were so near together, as to be able to command from one to the other, between
which were the cattle belonging to those families, driven into pastures, which
afterward proved their preservation; the other was near a mile distant from
the rest.

THIS morning the Indians (having in the night placed themselves in several
parts of the town) made their onset; which began near the four garrisons; for a
body of them having placed themselves in ambuscado, behind a hill, near one of
the garrisons, two of them made discovery of themselves, as if they had stood
upon discovery. At this time diverse of the people, not suspecting any such
matter (for the day before, many had been upon discovery many miles, and found
no signs of an enemy being so near) were attending their occasions, some
foddering their cattle, some milking their cows, of whom the enemy might easily
have made a seizure, but God prevented; they having another design in hand, as
soon after appeared: These two Indians were at length espied, and the alarm
given; whereupon the most of the men in the next garrison, and some also in the
second (which was about eight or nine pole distant) drew out and went to
surprise those two Indians, who kept their station till our men reached the
brow of the hill, then arose the ambush and discharged a volley upon them,
which caused a disorderly retreat, or rather a rout, in which one was slain,
and three others wounded: Mean while another ambush had risen, and come upon
the back side of the garrison so deserted of men, and pulled down the
pallizadoes: The soldiery in this rout, retreated not to their own, but passed
by to the next garrison, the women and children mean while exposed to hazard,
but by the goodness of God made a safe escape to the other fortified house,
without any harm, leaving their substance to the enemy, who made a prey of it,
and spent the residue of the day in removing the corn and household stuff (in
which loss five families were impoverished) and firing upon the other garrison:
Here also they took some cattle. No sooner was the signal given by the first
volley of shot, but immediately in several parts of the town at once, did the
smoke arise, they firing the houses.

IN the afternoon they used a stratagem not unlike the other, to have surprised
the single garrison, but God prevented. An old Indian, if an Indian passed
along the street with a black sheep on his back, with a slow pace, as one
decrepid; they made several shot at him, but missed him, at which several
issued out to have taken him alive, but the watchman seasonably ^^pying an
ambush behind the house, gave the signal, whereby they were prevented.

THE night following the enemy lodged in the town, some of them in the garrison
they had surprised, but the body of them in an adjacent valley, where they made
themselves merry after their savage manner. The next morning they gave two or
three volleys at Capt. Parker's garrison, and so marched off, fearing as was
thought, that supply might be nigh at hand. This assault of theirs was managed
with their wonted subtlety and barbarous cruelty; for they stripped the body of
him whom they had slain in the first onset, and then cutting off his head,
fixed it upon a pole, looking toward his own land. The corpse of the man slain
the week before, they dug up out of his grave, they cut off his head and one
leg, and set them upon poles, and stripped off his winding sheet. An infant which
they found dead, in the house first surprised, they cut in pieces, which
afterward they cast to the swine. There were about forty dwelling houses burnt
at that time, besides other buildings. This desolation was followed with the
breaking up of the town, and scattering of the inhabitants, and removal of the
candlestick after it had been there seated above twelve years.

CONCERNING the surprising of Groton, March 13, there was not any thing much
more material than what is already mentioned, save only the insolency of John
Monoco, or one eyed John, the chief Captain of the Indians in that design; who
having by a sudden surprizal, early in the morning, seized upon a garrison
house in one end of the town, continued in it, plundering what was there ready
at hand, all that day; and at night did very familiarly in appearance, call out
to Capt. Parker, that was lodged in another garrison house, and entertained a
great deal of discourse with him, whom he called his old neighbor; dilating
upon the cause of the war, and putting an end to it by a friendly peace; yet
often mixing bitter sarcasams, with several blasphemous scoffs and taunts, at
their praying and worshipping God in the meeting house, which he deridingly said
he had burnt. Among other things which he boastingly uttered that night, he
said he burnt Medfield, (though it be not known whether he was there personally
present or no) Lancaster, and that now he would burn that town of Groton, and
the next time he would burn Chelmsford, Concord, Watertown, Cambridge,
Charlostown, Roxbury, Boston, adding at last in their dialect, what me will, me
do: Not much unlike the proud Assyrian (if his power had been equal to his
pride) sometimes threatened against Jerusalem, but was by the remarkable
providence of God, so confounded within a few months after, that he was bereft
of his four hundred and fourscore (of which he now boasted) and only with a few
more braggadocio's like himself, Sagamore Sam, old Jethro, and the Sagamore of
Quobaog, were taken by the English, and was seen (not long before the writing
of this) marching toward the gallows (through Boston streets, which he
threatened to burn at his pleasure) with an halter about his neck, with which
he was hanged at the town's end, September 26th, in this present year, 1676. So
let thine enemies perish O Lord, and such contempt be poured on all them that
open their mouths to blaspheme thy holy name.

THINGS looked with a disagreable face about those parts, at this time, yet
though the righteous fall seven times, let not their enemies rejoice, for the
righteous shall rise again, but their wicked enemies shall fall into mischief,
and rise no more. It was ebbing water with New England at this time, and a
while after; but God shall turn the stream before it be long, and bring down
their enemies to lick the dust before them.

AETER this, April 17th, Capt. Sill being appointed to keep garrison at Groton,
some Indians coming to hunt for swine, three Indians drew near the
garrison-house, supposing it to have been deserted, were two of them slain by
one single shot, made by the Captain's own hands, and the third, by another
shot made from the garrison.

THE danger which these inland towns were like to be exposed unto from the
enemy, after they were driven out of the Narrhaganset country, was foreseen by
the Council of the Massachusetts, yea they had some intimation thereof from the
enemy themselves; but they were not well able to prevent it in that
unseasonable time of the year; no way fit for marching of soldiers, and
transporting of provisions (the winter then beginning to break up in this
country) for while our forces were up in the Narrhaganset country in the
winter, a couple of christan Indians were sent as spies into the Nipnet and
Narrhaganset country, through the woods, in the depth of winter, when the ways
were impassable for any other sort of people: These two, James and Job, ordered
their business so prudently, as that they were admitted into those Indian
habitations as friends, and had free liberty of discourse with them; they were
at the first a little jealous of them, but by the means of one-eyed John (a
great Captain of the Indians, that afterward led them that spoiled Groton, who
having been a companion of one of the said spies, both in hunting, and in
fighting against the Mohawks formerly; so esteemed of him, that he would not
suffer any of the rest to touch him) they passed through all the Indian towns
lying thirty miles distant from Quobaog, and twenty miles northward of the road
to Connecticut. One of the said spies returned about January 24th, informing
those that sent him, what he had observed, both the number of the Indians
(about three hundred in all) also their several towns, and what provision they
had; plenty of venison, much pork from the Englishmen's hogs which they had
taken; they confessed likewise that he and some of his party had killed the
people at Nashaway, the last year, suspected to have been done by the Indians
of Marlborough: He told them also they intended to burn Lancaster within three
weeks after that time, which accordingly they did, much about the same time;
adding moreover, that some Frenchmen were with them at Pocomptuck, encouraging
of them to go on with their designs, promising them assistance, which made some
ready to think the Indians were stirred up by the French to do all this
mischief, but more of this afterward. What might be gathered from the foresaid
premises is easy to conceive; whereupon new forces with as much speed as the
season would allow, were raised and sent up into those parts, under the command
of Major Savage in chief: They were dispatched away the beginning of March, and
appointed to meet with such as should be sent from Connecticut colony, which
they did about Quabaog, and so intended to march directly up to those Indian
towns about Watchuset-Hill, to the northwest; but the Indians were gone, and
our forces in the pursuit of them taking the wrong path, missed of them, yet
ranging through those woods, they were at one time suddenly assaulted by a
small party of Indians firing upon them, wounding Mr. Cershom Bulkly, by a shot
in his thigh, and killing one of their soldiers; after which as they marched
along, they accidentally fell upon another small party of the enemy, of whom
they slew some, and took others, to the number of sixteen, yet could not meet
with the main body of the enemy, who it seems had passed over a great river by
rafts, so our men could follow them no further, wherefore turning down toward
Hadley and Northampton, whither it was supposed the Indians intended to pass,
they came very seasonably to the relief of the said towns, which else had been
in danger of being lost. For,

March 14th, the enemy fell upon Northampton, and in three places broke through
the fortification of palizadoes, set up round about the town a little before
for their better security; but the town being at that time full of soldiers,
they were quickly repulsed, after they had killed four men and two women, and
fired four or five dwelling houses, and as many barns, with the loss of many of
their lives, as was supposed.

WHILE our forces under Major Savage continued on that side of the country, a
sad accident fell out at Springfield, the certainty of which it is judged meet
here to relate to prevent mistakes; the matter having through a great oversight
been otherwise represented than indeed it was, not only to the prejudice of
truth, but to the disadvantage of some persons concerned therein. While the
soldiers were quartered amongst the several towns upon Connecticut river, a
party of the troop were quartered at a place belonging to Springfield, called
the Long-Meadow, three miles from the town below, toward Windsor; several of
the inhabitants having most of the winter kept from the public meeting on the
Lord's days for fear of the enemy, were encouraged to adventure to the
assembly, on the 26th of March, riding in the company of the troopers; but
having heard of no Indians thereabouts a good while, were more secure than they
had cause; for riding some of them with women behind them, and some with their
children in their arms, yet not so careful as to keep in the middle, but rather
in the rear, and at some distance straggling from the rest of the company, a
party of Indians lying in the bushes, as they rode along, fired upon the
hindmost, and killed two, and wounded others: Those in the front having also
women and maids behind some of them, were at a stand to know what to do,
fearing they might expose those women they had in their company, if they should
ride back (in that winding road making through a woody place for near a mile or
two together) to look after them that were behind; at the last, one that came
riding up, told the foremost company there was no hurt, and that they were all
coming: They that were before, rode away with all speed to the end of the town,
where setting down the women, the troopers returned back, but too late to
recover two poor women, and two children, who upon the first assault were
thrown off their horses, and immediately hauled into the bushes, and through a
swamp on the other side of a steep bank, so as they could not be heard of all
that afternoon, nor the next day till toward night, although they were
diligently searched after by all the troopers in and about the town; at last
when they were discried just by a swamp side, the cruel wretches endeavored to
have killed them all, but in haste only wounded them with their hatchets, yet
so as one of ^he poor creatures recovered; the other, with the children, died
of their wounds before they were brought home, or within a little time after.
They did not complain of any incivility toward them while they were in their
power; but by the farewell given them at their parting, they found it true by
their own experience, that the tender mercies of the wicked are cruelty.

THERE happened no other matter of moment worthy the reporting while our forces
tarried in those parts, and the commanders observing that the enemy was turned
back again through the woods, toward the Massachusets-Bay, after a month's
time retired back, yet could never meet with the enemy in their return through
the woods, although while they were at the towns aforesaid, they understood of
several attempts made upon Sudbury and Marlborough, the most part of which last
they destroyed March 26th, which made the inhabitants forsake their dwellings,
leaving only a few houses garrisoned with soldiers, the better to secure a
passage to the towns westward upon Connecticut river.

THE inhabitants of Sudbury, with the soldiers under Lieut. Jacobs, of
Marlborough, sufficiently alarmed by the late mischief done about those towns,
resolved to try what work they could make with the enemy in the night;
whereupon going forth March 27th, toward morning, they discerned where the
enemy lay by their fires, (near three hundred of them) and that within half a
mile of a garrison-house, near the place where they had done so much mischief
the day before. Such was the courage and resolution of the English, though but
forty in number, townsmen and soldiers, that they adventured to discharge upon
them as they lay by their fires, when it was so dark that an Indian could
hardly be discerned from a better man; yet God so directing, they discharged
several times upon them, wounded thirty, fourteen of whom either died of their
wounds the same day, or soon after, which had been chief agents in this present
mischief against the English. Such was the success of this skirmish that the
assailants came off without the loss of one man.

AFTER this time the enemy began to scatter about in small parties, doing what
mischief they could about the Massachusetts, killing a man at Weymouth, another
at Hingham, as they lay skulking up and down in swamps and holes, to assault
any that occasionally looked never so little into the woods; sometimes alarming
the towns about Boston, by discharging guns upon particular persons at
Billerica, Braintree, and at Wrentham, near to which place, in the road to
Rehobot, they assaulted one Woodcock's house, killed one man, and one of his
sons, wounded another, and burnt his son's house.

NOTWITHSTANDING the little success of former attempts, Philip and his men have
one prize more to play in the Massachusetts colony, before they go off the
stage, and then we shall soon see their power visibly declining every where,
until their final overthrow come upon them. There were several small parties of
them scattered up and down all over the country, yet the main body of them was
still lurking up and down in those woods that lie between Brockfield,
Marlborough, and Connecticut river. Possibly they had some hopes of driving all
the country before them to the towns upon the seacoast; for having burnt the
deserted houses at Marlborough April 17th, the next day they set upon Sudbury
with all their might (hoping it is like) to do there as they had done at the
towns next beyond it. They did at the first prevail so far as to consume
several houses and barns, and kill several persons, ten or twelve of the
English, that came from Concord to assist their neighbors at Sudbury, a town
distant five miles from them, at the first hearing of the alarm, who unawares
were surprised near a garrison, in hopes of getting some advantage upon a small
party of the enemy that presented themselves in a meadow; a great number of
Indians that lay unseen in the bushes, suddenly lose up, and intercepting the
passage to the gargison house, killed and took them all:

BUT our sorrows and losses that day are not yet come to their height; for in
the after part of the same day, that resolute stout-hearted soldier, Capt.
Wadsworth (who had not long before, with not above forty men, rescued
Lancaster, when it was in danger to have been all lost at once) being sent from
Boston with fifty soldiers to relieve Marlborough, having marched twenty-five
miles, and then understanding the enemy was gone through the woods toward
Sudbury: This unwearied company, before ever they had taken any considerable
rest, marched immediately back toward Sudbury (that lies ten miles nearer
Boston) and being come within a mile of the town, they espied a party of
Indians not far from them, about an hundred, not more, as they conceived, these
they might easily deal with; who retiring back a while, drew Capt. Wadsworth
and his company above a mile into the woods, when on a sudden a great body of
the enemy appeared, about five hundred as was thought, who compassing them
around, forced them to the top of an hill, where they made very stout
resistance a considerable while; but the night drawing on, and some of the
company beginning to scatter from the rest, their fellows were forced to follow
them, so as the enemy taking the chase, pursued them on every side, as they
made too hasty a retreat, by which accident, being so much overpowered by the
enemy's numbers, they were most of them lost: The Captain himself, with one
Capt. Brocklebank (a choice spirited man, much lamented by the town of Rowley,
to which he belonged) and some others that fell into his company as he marched
along, scarce twenty escaping in all; so as another Captain His son, the late
President of Harvard College, e^ected a decent monument over his grave, which
is now to be seen near the road in Sudbury.
and his fifty men perished at that time, as brave soldiers as any ever
employed in the present service.

THUS as in former attempts of like nature too much courage and eagerness in
pursuit of the enemy, has added another fatal blow to this poor country.

THE same day another party of the English coming from Brookfield, whither they
were sent as a convoy with provision for the garrison, were in danger likewise
of falling in the hands of the same Indians, yet riding upon a good speed, and
keeping their guns always ready presented against them they met, they never
durst fire at them; only three or four having unadvisedly first discharged
their guns against the enemy, and falling too much in the rear of their
company, were cut off and lost. It is reported by some that afterward escaped,
how they cruelly tortured five or six of the English that night: Yet whatever
their success was this day, it was observed by some (at that time their
prisoners, and since released) that they seemed very pensive after they came to
their quarters, showing no such signs of rejoicing as they usually were wont to
do in like cases; whether for the loss of some of their own company in that
day's enterprise (said to be an hundred an^ twenty) or whether it were the
Devil in whom they trusted, that deceived them, and to whom they made their
address the day before, by sundry conjurations of their powawes? Or whether it
were by any dread that the Almighty sent upon their spirits, upon their
execrable blasphemies, which it is said they used in the torturing of some of
their poor captives (bidding Jesus come and deliver them out of their hands
from death, if he could) we leave as uncertain, though some have so reported,
yet sure it is that after this day, they never prospered in any attempt they
made against the English, but were continually scattered and broken, till they
were in a manner all consumed. After this time, however they had braved it
before, they seemed to apprehend that it was scarce feasible for them to
withstand the power of the English, and therefore seemed more inclinable to a
peace, by several overtures made by them, if they knew how to have brought it
about. For during these encounters they were willing to admit of some kind of
treaty with the English, about the releasing of sundry of their captives, which
they took at Lancaster in February last, and elsewhere: To this end sundry
attempts were made by help of several of the praying Indians (as they were
called) about the redemption of some of the women and children, which were at
that time in their possession, and by degrees something was effected that way;
possibly their own present sufferings and wants that were upon them, might
induce them thereunto: For by this time the spring of the year came on, their
provision was all spent, and they forced to live wholly upon ground nuts, and
upon the flesh of the English creatures, both horse and near cattle, which they
daily plundered. The ground nuts running up to seed in the summer, begin to
grow so sticky, as they were scarce eatable; the flesh also of the English
cattle proving unwholesome for their bodies, filling them with sundry diseases:
One of them having eaten much horse-fiesh, complained that he had before eaten
horse, and now horse began to eat him, meaning some deadly disease growing upon
his eating such rank flesh, unwholesome for their bodies, especially without
falt, as their usual manner is. The fishing season also began now to come in,
wherein they use to take abundance of all sorts, with which those great rivers
up the country are abundantly stored; they used to take thereof, and drying it
in the smoke, make provision thereof for the greatest part of the year; and if
the war continued, they could not but see they should utterly be cut off
therefrom; and that if the planting season also were lost, they should be in
great want of summer fruits, sc. beans and squashes (besides their corn) with
which they were wont to live all the latter part of the summer. Upon all
considerations they seemed pretty inclinable to hearken to a peace, though some
were apt to think they would never have kept it, further than would stand with
their own advantage, and that their present desire thereof was only to gain
time.

A PERSON formerly acquainted with the Indians about Lancaster, did adventure
upon the forementioned overtures, to go amongst them to try if he could not
prevail with them for the redemption of the minister's wife, taken captive in
February last, from Lancaster, and through the favor of him who having the
hearts of all in his hand, inclines them as he pleases, obtained the desired
end upon an inconsiderable sum, which gave encouragement to the council to send
two messengers on the like errand the same week, to procure the redemption of
others, not without success: The former, viz. Mrs. Rowlandson being brought to
Boston upon the election day, May 3d, it was generally looked at as a smile of
providence, and doubtless was a return of prayer, and answer of faith, with
which her husband had been upheld, and supported from the day of her captivity;
his two children also were returned back not long after, more by the
overruling hand of God ( that turns the captivity of his people as the streams
of the south; and sometimes inclining them to pity his servants, that are of
themselves more cruel than the sea monsters) than by any other contrivance of
man's policy.

AND yet notwithstanding motions of this nature about the redemption of some of
our prisoners still in their hands, there was no cessation of arms between us.

ABOUT this time letters were sent down from Connecticut colony, informing the
general court then assembled at Boston, that some of the Mohawks (a sort of
fierce and savage Indians, yet mortal enemies to these we were at war with) had
fallen upon some of Philip's party, and destroyed many of them: Likewise that
many of them were destroyed by fevers and fluxes, with other distempers falling
amongst them, which was some reviving to our hopes, that the foot of our enemy
should slide in due time, and that destruction was hastening upon them, though
still they were permitted to do mischief in sundry particular places of the
country, which must be minded as we pass along.

THOSE Indians that were our professed enemies, after they had been beaten out
of the Narrhaganset country, February 1st, tarried a while at Winimazeag, a
place two day's journey north of Quabaog, where they divided themselves into
two companies, one of them tarried on that side the county, the other made
toward Plymouth colony, taking Medfield in their way, from whence as they
marched along they met with a notable repulse at Boggiston, a small hamlet, or
company of farms not far from the said Medfield, where they attempted a
garrison, but meeting with stout resistance, they left the enterprise, and kept
on their way toward Plymouth colony, where they scattered themselves up and
down, waiting for opportunities to spoil and destroy the English plantations on
that side of the country.

BESIDES what is already mentioned, on May 11th, a party of them assaulted the
town of Plymouth, burnt eleven houses, and five barns belonging thereunto: On
the other side, a small party of the English scouting about in pursuit of the
Indians, fell upon a party of them that lay waiting in ambush, but being
discerned by an Indian in the company of our men, that gave timely notice, our
soldiers had an opportunity thereby to make the first shot, and thereby not
only prevented a mischief to themselves, but killed also some of the enemy (one
of whom was observed to be of more note than his fellows, by his attire) the
rest fled away from them that pursued, though but a small company; so that
there were daily reciprocal acts of hostility in those parts.

WITHIN a few days after this, seven houses and two barns more were burnt by
the enemy in and about Plymouth; who did the like mischief about the same time
to the remaining houses of Namasket or Middleborough.

ABOUT this time another fort of Indians that belonged ^o Wamesit, a place near
Chelmsford, bordering upon Merrimack (who had been provoked by the rash,
unadvised, cruel act of some of the English, about October 27th, and November
4th, had fired upon them several g^^s, both at Chelmsford and Woburn, to the
killing of some, and wounding of others, upon suspicion that the said Indians
were guilty of burning a barn, and hay-stack not far off) suddenly turned our
enemies, after the winter was over; having first withdrawn themselves from the
place assigned them, and where they had been relieved all the winter (some of
them after a former revolt) and took their opportunity to fire Mr. Falconer's
house in Andover town, early that spring, and wounded one Roger Marks, and
killed his horse. Two more houses about Shawskin, beyond the said Andover, were
burnt about March 10th: Also they killed a young man of the said town, April
8th, the son of George Abbot; and another son of his also was carried away the
same day, who notwithstanding was returned some few months after, almost pined
to death with hunger.

AT the same time they killed some of their cattle, cutting out only the
tongues of some of them for haste, being shot at by several of the inhabitants
from their garrisons.

March 10th, at Concord two men going for hay, one of them was killed. At
Chelmsford, the said Wamesit Indians, about March 18th before, fell upon some
houses on the north side of the river; burnt down three or four that belonged
to the family of Edward Colburn: The said Colburn, with Samuel Varnham, his
neighbor, being pursued, as they passed over the river to look after their
cattle on that side of the river; and making several shote against them, who
returned the like again upon the said Indians, (judged to be about forty) what
success they had upon the enemy, was best known to themselves; but two of
Varnham's sons were slain by the enemy's shot before they could recover the
other side of the river. April 15th also, were fourteen or fifteen houses burnt
there.

NOT long before this, February 1st, 1676, Thomas Eames that kept a farm at
Sudbury, whose dwelling was three or four miles out of town, had his house
assaulted and fired, his wife killed, and his children carried captive among
the Indians.

ALSO two men were killed at a farm about Concord, Isaac and Jacob Shepard by
name, about the middle of February, and a young maid that was set to watch upon
a hill, of about fifteen years of age, was carried captive, who strangely
escaped away upon an horse that the Indians had taken from Lancaster a little
before. In the like strange manner did one of Eames's children escape away
about May 3d last, traveling thirty miles alone in the woods, without any
relief till he came to an English town. Eames's house was assaulted when he was
from home, by an Indian called Netus (not long after slain at Marlborough)
which had been very familiar with the English, with nine or ten more of his
company, as perfidious and barbarous as himself. They burned all the dwellings
that belonged to the farm, corn, hay and cattle, besides the dwelling house
with what was therein; it is probable those at Concord were killed by the same
hands about a fortnight after.

MANY suchlike remarkable instances of special providence might be mentioned,
if it were convenient to insert such particular passages into the general
narrative of the late troubles with our barbarous enemies.

ON May 3d a party of them killed a man at Haverhill, upon the edge of
Merrimack-River, and passing over the said River to Bradford, spoiled another
family, killing one Thomas Kimball, and carrying his wife and five children
captive, forty miles up in the woods; although it was questioned whether this
last mischief was done by any of Philip's party, but rather by some that
belonged to the Eastward Indians, of which there may be occasion, God willing,
to speak more of afterward.

FOR the suppressing of these insolences several companies of fresh soldiers
both horse and foot were raised in the Massachusetts by the governor and council
of that colony, and sent out to suppress the common enemy; the foot under the
command of the Captains Sill, Cutler and Holbrook; the horse under the command
of the Captains Brattle, Prentice and Henchman, the last of which was commander
in chief. These several companies modelled as aforesaid, were sent out April
27th, 1676, to range the woods toward Hassanemesit.

THE 6th of May they met with a considerable party of the enemy; they were
first discovered by the Natick scouts pursuing a bear, and at the first not
discerning that the Natick Indian scouts belonged to our men, it gave some
advantage to our forces; our horsemen falling upon them before they were aware,
killed and took of the enemy about 16, which they took no notice of at the
present, although it was confessed by themselves that they lost 20 in that
encounter. It was reported that the sounding of a trumpet without order did
much hurt, but the commander in chief affirms that it was no disadvantage to
the service in hand, it neither being heard by our own foot, nor yet by the
enemy. If any error was committed by the English companies, it was that the
horse did not timely enough draw down from the top of the hill, whereby they
came to be discovered by the enemy, who thereupon made the more haste to
escape; however, it was no small loss to the enemy, some of the slain being
known to be considerable persons; and it struck such a terror into them that
they never durst face our men afterward; for although after our men returned
to their quarters at Medfield, they saw 200 fires in the night, yet they could
never come near them again to fight any company of them; but the season proving
rainy hindered any further pursuit of them at that time. And soon after this the
soldiers being visited with sickly distempers by reason of an epidemical cold
at that time prevailing through the country, they were for the present released
for the recovery of their health, with intent to be called together again at a
more convenient time; this was done the 10th of May.

DURING this interval of time, upon a report that a party of the enemy that
were discovered about Rehoboth, busy in fishing in a river thereabouts, Captain
Brattle was sent up about the 23d of May, who with the help of some of the
inhabitants, killed 11 or 12 of them, without the loss of but one of our men.
Had they not discovered some of our's on. the opposite shore, it was conceived
a greater spoil might have been made amongst them.

BUT in the next place we must take notice of the proceedings of the enemy
about Connecticut. The greatest body of them made toward Plymouth colony early
in the spring, as was said before, where we shall leave them for the present,
and observe what the remaining part of them did westward.

SOME scattering parties were skulking about Springfield and those lower towns,
upon a small number of whom Capt. Holyoke (newly chosen Captain of Springfield
in the room of his father lately deceased) handselled his office early in the
spring; for having notice of some of them in those woods, he marched after them
with 10 or 12 resolute young men, and waiting his opportunity, surprised them
near the great river, so as two or three of them were left dead upon the place,
another mortally wounded got on an island in the river, where it was concluded
he took his last night's lodging. The other being sorely wounded was taken
alive and brought home to Springfield, where he confessed many things to one of
the Inhabitants that understood their language, owning the truth in many things
against his own company, and soon after died of his wounds.

THIS was but a preparative to an higher piece of service which Capt. Holyoke
was soon after engaged in, and wherein he acquitted himself beyond expectation,
and taking more pains than ordinary in making his retreat, he got a surfeit,
which ended his days the September following, near Boston.

ABOUT the beginning of April likewise, some of the inhabitants about Hadley,
attending their tillage at Hockanum, within three miles of the town, and having
a guard of soldiers with them, yet three of the company were casually slain by
a party of the enemy that lay in wait for such an opportunity. One of them was
Mr. Goodman, a deacon of the church, that went a little beyond the command of
the soldiers that came to guard them, to view the fence of his own land, and
two others, that contrary to express orders would venture upon the top of an
high hill near by, to take a needless and unseasonable view of the country,
were shot down by the enemy before they could recover their corps-du-guard.

BUT the great company of the enemy that stayed on that side of the country,
and about Watchuset-hills, when the rest went toward Plymouth, though they had
been disappointed in their planting by the death of Canonchet, were 10th to
lose the advantage of the fishing season then coming in; wherefore, having
seated themselves near the upper falls of Connecticut river, not far from
Deerfield, and perceiving that the English forces were now drawn off from the
lower towns of Hadley and Northampton now and then took advantages to plunder
them of their cattle, and not searing any assault from our soldiers, grew a
little secure, while they were upon their fishing design, insomuch that a
couple of English lads lately taken captive by the enemy, and making their
escape, acquainted their friends at home how secure they lay in those places,
which so animated the inhabitants of Hadley, Hatfield and Northampton, that
they being willing to be revenged for the loss of their cattle, besides other
preceding mischiefs, took up a resolution with what strength they could raise
among themselves (partly out of garrison soldiers, and partly of the
inhabitants) to make an assault upon them, which if it had been done with a
little more deliberation, waiting for the coming of supplies, expected from
Hartford, might have proved a fatal business to all the said Indians; yet was
the victory obtained more considerable than at first was apprehended; for not
having much above an hundred and fifty fighting men in their company, they
marched above twenty miles silently in the dead of the night, May 18th, and
came upon the said Indians a little before break of day, whom they found almost
in a dead sleep, without any scouts abroad, or watching about their wigwams at
home; for in the evening they had made themselves merry with new milk and roast
beef, having lately driven away many of their milch cows, as an English woman
confessed, that was made to milk-them.

WHEN they came near the Indians rendezvous, they alighted off their horses,
and tied them to some young trees at a quarter of a miles distance, so marching
up, they fired briskly into their wigwams, killing many upon the place, and
frighting others with the sudden alarm of their guns, and made them run into
the river, where the swiftness of the stream carrying them down a steep full,
they perished in the waters, some getting into canoes (small boats made of the
barks of birchen trees) which proved to them a Charon's boat, being sunk, or
overset by the shooting of our men, delivered them into the like danger of the
waters, giving them thereby a pasport into the other world; Others of them
creeping for shelter under the banks of the great river, were espied by our men
and killed with their swords; Capt. Holyoke killing five, young and old, with
his own hands, from under a bank. When the Indians were first awakened with the
thunder of their guns, they cried out Mohawks, Mohawks, as if their own native
enemies had been upon them; but the dawning of the light soon notified their
error, though it could not prevent the danger.

SUCH as came back spoke sparingly of the number slain; some say there could
not in reason be less than two or three hundred of them that must necessarily
perish in the midst of so many instruments of destruction managed against them
with such disadvantages to themselves. Some of their prisoners afterward owned
that they lost above 300 in that camisado, some whereof were principal men
Sachems, and some of their best fighting men that were left, which made the
victory more considerable than else it would have been; nor did they seem ever
to have recovered themselves after this defeat, but their ruin immediately
followed upon it. There was but one of our men killed in the engagement; their
loss following was owing to the report of a captive taken, who said Philip was
near with 1000 men; word was then given for every man to shift for himself; a
panic seized the men, who instantly fled in confusion.
Yet such was the awful hand of Providence in the close of this victory, mixing
much bitter with the sweet, that it might well be called a costly victory to
the conquerors, that so no flesh should glory in itself.

THE Indians that lay scattering on both sides of the river, after they
recovered themselves and discovered the small number of them that assailed
them, turned head upon the English, who in their retreat were a little
disordered for want of the help of the eldest Captain that was so enfeebled by
sickness before he set out, that he was no way able for want of bodily strength
(not any way defective for want of skill or courage) to assist or direct in
making the retreat: For some of the enemy fell upon the guards that kept the
horses, others pursued them in the rear, so as our men sustained very much
damage as they retired, missing after their return thirty-eight of their men;
and if Capt Holyoke had not played the man at a more than ordinary rate,
sometimes in the front, sometimes in the slank and rear, at all times
encouraging the soldiers, it might have proved a fatal business to the
assailants. The said Capt. Holycke's horse was shot down under him, and himself
ready to be assaulted by many of the Indians, just coming upon him, but
discharging his pistols upon one or two of them, whom he presently dispatched,
and a friend coming up to his rescue, he was saved, and so carried off the
soldiers without any further loss. It is confidently reported by some that were
there present at this engagement, that one told above an hundred Indians left
dead upon the place; and another affirmed that he told near an hundred and
forty swimming down the falls, none of which were observed to get alive to the
shore, save one. The loss that befell our men in the retreat was occasioned
principally by the bodily weakness of Capt. Turner, unable to manage his charge
any longer, yet some say they wanted powder, which forced them to retire as
fast as they could by Capt. Turner's order. It is also said by one present at
the fight, that seven or eight in the rear of the English, through haste,
missed their way, it being a cloudy dark morning, and were never heard of
again; and without doubt fell into the Indians hands, and it is feared some of
them were tortured. About seven days after this they had a mind to try the
chance of war again, and see if they could not recover their loss by returning
the like upon the English: For,

May 30th, a great number of them (supposed to be six or seven hundred)
appeared before Hatfield, fired about twelve houses and barns without the
fortification of the town; a number of houses in the center of the town were
surrounded with palisadoes; these were attacked in the day time, when the men
were all out in the fields, except one aged man; they drove away multitudes of
their cattle and sheep, spreading themselves in the meadow near the town; which
bravado so raised the courage of their neighbors at Hadley, that twenty-five
resolute young men ventured over the river to relieve Hatfield in this
distress, who charged the enemy with such undaunted courage and resolution (
Audaces fortuna juvat) that they beat down five or six at the first shot they
made; so making way through the thickest of their enemies, that lay ready to
take aim at them behind every tree as they passed by; yet they escaped all
their shot till they came within a little of the town they came to relieve,
where they lost five of their number.

THE enemy being amazed at the resolution of our men, being but so small a
handful, that they fled immediately from the town; having lost twenty-five of
their men in the enterprise. The council of the Massachusetts gathering by these
proceedings of the Indians, that their desire of peace was only to gain time,
ordered that the forces raised before April 27th, and for a time released,
should be hastened out again to range the woods toward Hadley, and those
parts, made an agreement with Hartford colony to send forces from thence to
meet them about Brookfield, and so to scour along on both sides Connecticut, to
disrest the enemy what they could, and keep them from fishing in those waters,
their hope of planting being now almost over. To this end, about May 30th,
1676, the forces under Capt. Henchman were called together again, and sent to
Brookfield, to meet with those expected from Hartford colony; in the way, our's
by the direction of Tom Doublet (a Natick Indian, who was a little before
employed in the redemption of captives) following tracks of Indians, came upon
a party of the enemy fishing in Weshacom ponds, toward Lancaster, of whom they
killed seven, and took twenty-nine, mostly women and children; yet belonging to
considerable persons, it made the success the more to be valued. Our forces
being by this means retarded, could not meet with those of Connecticut at
Brookfield, but followed them the week after; having first returned from
Weshacom to Marlborough, to supply themselves with ammunition, and so marched
directly toward Hadley, where they met with Connecticut forces; and from
thence according to mutual agreement, our's marched on the east side of the
river, and Connecticut forces on the west, up toward Squakbeag (now Northfield)
coming to Deerfield, and the great^^^lls thereabouts, they sent up their
scouts, but not hearing of the enemy, they marched up no higher, being in no
good capacity to have gone further if there had been occasion, by reason of a
tedious storm of rain, which occasioned much damage in their ammunition and
provision. While our forces lay about Deerfield, some of our soldiers ranging,
lighted upon the body of Capt. Turner, about Green's river, in passing of which
stream he was supposed to have received his mortal wounds.

WHILE our forces continued thereabouts, they did the enemy some little spoil,
in seizing much of their fish, and goods stolen from the English, and hid in
their barns under ground; conjecturing also that they found four or five places
where some of the English had been tortured to death by cruel burning, after
they had been fastened between stakes set in the ground; but not meeting with
any of the enemy, they all returned home, conceiving that having been forced
from their quarters in those parts, they were drawn down lower toward the
English plantations eastward, viz. Plymouth and the Massachusetts. What success
Capt. Henchman's forces had in their retiring homeward, and what they observed
of the motion of the Indians, may be^^een in a letter of his dated June 30th:
"Our scouts brought intelligence that all the Indians were to a continual
motion, some toward Narrhaganset, others toward Watchuset, shifting gradually,
and taking up each others quarters, and lay not above a night in a place. The
twenty-seven scouts brought in two squaws, a boy, and a girl, giving account of
five slain. Yesterday they brought in an old fellow brother to a Sachem, six
squaws and children having killed five men, and wounded others, if not killed
them, as they supposed by the blood found in the way, and an hat shot through.
These and the other inform that Philip and the Narrhagansets were gone several
days before to their own places, Philip's purpose being to do what mischief he
could to the English. By advice I drew out a commanded party under the conduct
(...) pt. Sill, viz. sixteen files of English, all my troop, and the Indians,
excepting one file, being all we could make provision for, for what with the
failing short of the bread promised us, and a great deal of that we had proving
moldy, the rest of the forces had but one bis^et a man to bring them to this
place: This party was ordered toward Watchuset, and so to Nashaway and the
Washakem ponds, where we have notice Indians were, and so to return unto this
place; whereby your Honors letter that came to me yesterday morning, I
understood that provision was ordered (...) and which we found to our great
relief, which we met with last night coming hither weary and hungry. The
commanded party we left at Quonsiquomon, where they intended to stay a while
for the last scouts we sent out: Eleven prisoners we had in all, two of the
eldest by council we put to death, the other nine the Commissary is ordered to
convey to Boston, with the baggage, horses, and some of their attendants not
fit for the service. DANIEL HENCHMAN."

IT plainly appears by the contents of the said letter, as well as by many
other testimonies, that about this time the Indians, our enemies, who hitherto
had been li^ked together as brethren in iniquity and cruelty, w^^e now
strangely divided and separated the one from the other; some impute it to an
assault made upon them by the Mohawks, who falling upon Philip with the inland
Indians, slew about 50 of them; whereupon those of Philip's company resolved to
return to their own country, and do what mischief they could to the English
thereabouts. This was reported by an Indian brought to Seaconk, June 29, 1676,
taken at Providence. Others are ready to think that it was upon some quarrel
amongst themselves, occasioned by an evil spirit sent from God upon them, that
thereby they might, being scattered, the more easily be taken and ruined by the
English, now that the time of vengeance was come, when they shall be called to
an account for all their former outrages and cruelties; for now is the snare
hastening upon them wherein they shall be hampered in their own devices, so to
be taken and destroyed. It cannot but be acknowledged as a very remarkable
providence, that Capt. Henchman in his late expedition to Hadley, killed and
took about 84 of the enemy, without the loss of any one of his own men; the
like favorable success happened to Major Talcot in his passage from Norwich to
Quabaog, as was said before, and soon after his return.

BUT by that time our forces were returned home as far as Sudbury; they were
ordered upon the solicitation of the Governor of Plymouth, two companies of
them at least, to march away immediately to Dedham, and so to Seaconk or
Rehoboth, to join Major Bradford in the pursuit of Philip, who was it seems
with many hundreds of his barbarous followers fallen upon the English
plantations thereabouts, and whither also a little before, Capt. Brattle with a
troop of horse, and Capt. Mosely with a company of foot, were sent up from
Boston to pursue after them, now flocking in great numbers in those woods.
There was at this time no small hopes of surprising Philip; several reports
being brought that he was seen in this and that place, not having above 20 or
30 men attending on him; but his time was not yet fully come, nor had he as yet
fully accomplished all that mischief he was like to be suffered to do: For on
the 1st of July, 1676, a party of his Indians committed a horrid and barbarous
murder upon Mr. Hezekiab Willet, of Swanzey, an hopeful young gentleman as any
in those parts. They used frequently to keep a sentinel on the top of their
house from a watch-house built thereon, whence they could discover any Indians
before they came near the house, but not hearing of the enemy in those parts
for a considerable time, that necessary piece of circumspection was omitted
that day, whereby that deserving person was betrayed into their cruel hands;
for within a quarter of an hour after he went out of his own door, within fight
of his house, he was shot at by three of them at once, from every one of whom
he received a mortal wound; they after their barbarous manner took off his
head, and carried it away with them (which however was soon after recovered)
leaving the trunk of his body behind, as a sad monument of their inhuman
cruelty. The same Indians, not being above 30 in number, took away a negro
belonging to the same family, who being faithful to his master's and the
country's interest, ventured his life to make his escape, which was the
preservation of many others; for the said negro being a little acquainted with
their language, discovered to the English after his escape, Philip's purpose to
seize such and such places: In the first place to assault Taunton, which in all
probability had been in great danger, if their treacherous plots and purposes
had not so wonderfully been made known beforehand. The said negro affirmed,
that there was near a thousand of them; for he observed that although they had
killed 20 head of neat cattle over night, yet there was not any part of them
left the next day at eight o'clock in the morning. By this special providence
the enemy was defeated of their purpose, and never after had an opportunity of
doing any considerable damage to the English in that part of the country. So,
after this day, we may truly date the time of our deliverance, and beginning
of revenges upon the enemy; now is their own turn come, when it shall be done
unto them as they have done unto us; they that before led others into
captivity, must henceforth go into captivity themselves; and they that killed
with the sword, must themselves be killed with the sword, as in the sequel of
this narrative will abundantly be manifest; the history of which before we
shall any further pursue, we must a little while wait upon our friends, (those
forces sent from Connecticut) in their return back into their own colony, which
before it be done, some things should be premised concerning the occasion of
their coming, and the success that did attend them in their march thither.

OUR friends and brethren of that colony, although they had never actually felt
half of those miseries that befell the people of the other two, yet never denied
their assistance to the suppressing of the common enemy, yea, sometimes they
did afford it, before it was expressly desired, according to the tenor of the
articles of confederation and rules of common prudence; considering that if the
fire of this war was not timely extinguished it would endanger their own
sabrick; therefore according to agreement, the council of that colony ordered
their successful commander, Major Talcot, to meet our forces at Quabaog, or
Brookfield, in order to the pursuing of the enemy in those parts. In the way as
they were marching from Norwich thither, divine Providence so far smiled upon
the enterprise, as to give them an opportunity to surprise 51 of the enemy,
(...) whom 19 were slain, without the loss of any one of their own company,
which could not but much enhance the price of the victory to the conquerors.

THE like success had their friends which they left behind (the volunteers
gathered out of the three towns by the seaside, New London, Stonington and
Norwich) and who were some of them released by Major Talcot, when he first
began his march, that they might the better in the absence of the army guard
their own towns; for before the return of the forces under Maj. Talcot to that
side of the country, they had made two expeditions against their enemies, the
Narrhagansets, that were skulking up and down on that side of the country, in
one of which they killed and took above 30, the most of which being men, are
said to have been slain by them. In the other 45, the most of which probably
were women and children, but being all young serpents of the same brood, the
subduing or taking so many, ought to be acknowledged as another signal victory
and pledge of divine favor to the English. But to return, It was not without
the special direction of Providence that those Hartford forces were sent to
those western towns a week before those of the Massachusetts could get thither;
for otherwise one or more of those towns might have been lost; seeing that on
the 12th of June, soon after if not the next day after they arrived there, the
enemy, as if resolved to try the utmost of their power, violently assaulted the
town of Hadley, with a body of about 700 men, at five or six o'clock in the
morning, laying an ambush at one end of the town, while the greater part of
them were alarming the other; but the Connecticut forces being at that time
quartered in the towns thereabous, (who were English, and friendly Indians.
Pequods and Mohegins, about 500 in all) that were ready at hand, besides those
that had been quartered there ever since March, who had been left by Major
Savage when he left those parts, under the command and charge of Capt. Turner,
slain at the great falls, as is noted before, but since commanded by Capt.
Swain. These by their joint and ready assistance, wherein the fence of
palisadoes surrounding the town was no little advantage, gave the Indians such
a smart repulse, that they found the place too hot for them to abide it; for
the soldiers or townsmen within, firing a piece of ordnance, so affrighted the
savages, or a party of them against whom it was discharged, that although they
had just before surprised and possessed an house at the north part of the town,
yet they instantly fled, leaving some of their dead upon the place; nor did
they any considerable mischief with all their numbers, save firing a barn about
that end of the town, and killing two or three of the soldiers, or too daring
inhabitants, who would against express order, venture to go without the
fortification.

IT was accounted by some that were present near the time of that assault, a
great oversight, that having so fair an opportunity to chase the enemy upon so
considerable advantage, it was let slip, and not improved, for Connecticut
soldiers being all, or most of them furnished with horses, they might have been
soon overtaken, and many of them destroyed, but God hid it from their eyes. The
commander in chief, it is said, quartered at one end of the towns ( Hatfield
was then within the limits of Hadley) on the west side of the river, and did
not apprehend the advantage till the season was over; hor was any such thing as
an assault expected from the enemy so early in the morning; it being a general
observation heretofore, that they seldom or ever used to make any attempts in
the night; part of which could not but be improved in way of preparation for
such a design. But the Lord of Hosts who is wise in council, and wonderful in
working, will find some other way to destroy our enemies, wherein the hand of
his providence should more remarkably be seen, that so no flesh should glory in
its own wisdom or strength, but that salvation might appear to be from the Lord
alone. The rest of this month was spent without any other matter of moment
happening therein.

THE Governor and Council of the Massachusetts, taking into serious
consideration the many merciful occurrences that had been returned upon us,
notwithstanding the mixing of many dispensations of a contrary nature, thought
themselves bound to make some public acknowledgment thereof, to him whose name
alone is worthy to be praised. The 29th of June was set apart as a day of
public thanksgiving to God, who had remembered his people thus in their low
estate. And that matter of thanksgiving might not be wanting at the day
appointed, the very day before were most of our English captives brought back
from the Indians, and many more soon after, to the number of sixteen, whose
mouths might then well be filled with laughter, and their tong^^s with singing,
both of themselves, and all that were any way concerned in their welfare.

AND as this day appointed for solemn and public thanksgiving, was ushered in
by several special mercies, so also was it followed with many remarkable
benefits. For besides the preserving the town of Northampton, March the 14th,
and Hadley, June the 12th, by the timely sending of our forces the very night
before they were assaulted; the saving the people of Marlborough from being cut
off, was very observable; when Mr. Graves by occasionally going from the sermon
with the extremity of the toothache, March 26th, discovered the Indians ready
to assault the town, and the people might have been cut off, had not that
accident happened. It is certain that after the end of this month, the power of
the enemy began every where to fail; for the body of the enemy that had lurked
about Connecticut river all this spring, being visited with sundry diseases,
disappointed of their fishing, and put by their planting, began to be at
variance amongst themselves; the Hadley and Pocumtuck (now Deerfield) Indians
quarreling with Philip for bringing all this mischief about, and occasioning
the English and them to fall out, with whom they had always good
correspondence, and lived lovingly together, but now they were like to be
runied by the war. This quarrel proceeded to that height, that from that time
forward, those several Indians that had for so long time been combined
together, resolved now to part, and every one to shift for themselves, and
return to their own homes; Philip to Mount-Hope, and the Narrhagansets to their
own country again; the Nipnet's and the river Indians bending their course
westward, others northward, toward Pennicock, upon Merrimack, intending to
shift for themselves as well as they could for the future; all which is like to
be the real and true state of the case with the Indians which were our enemies;
for the next news we heard of Philip, was that he had returned back to
Mount-Hope, now like to become Mount-Misery unto him and his vagabond crew, and
that his friends and allies that had hitherto stood as neuters, waiting only
which way the scale of success and victory would turn, began now to sue for
mercy at the hands of the English: The Massachusetts government having
understood something of this nature, put forth a declaration, that whatsoever
Indians should within fourteen days next ensuing, come in to the English, might
hope for mercy. Amongst sundry that came in, there was one named James, the
printer, the supperadded title distinguishing him from others of that name; who
being a notorious apostate, that had learned so much of the English as not only
to read and write, but had attained likewise some skill in printing, and might
have attained more (had he not like a false villian ran away from his master
before his time was out) he having seen and read the said declaration of the
English, did venture himself upon the faith thereof, and came to sue for his
life; he affirmed, with others that came along with him, that more Indians had
died since this war began, of diseases (such as at other times they used not to
be acquainted with) than by the sword of the English.

NOT long after many of them came and offered themselves, to the number of near
two hundred, men, women, and children; and many more would have done the like,
but their consciousness of guilt made them conclude that their cruelties and
barbarous murders could never be forgiven by the English. But what occurrences
happened next shall be declared in their order. About the end of June news was
brought to Boston that Philip with a small party of his men lurked about
Swanzey or Rehoboth, and that he might easily be taken; an Indian offering to
bring them to the place where they might find him; whereupon soldiers were
instantly sent away from Boston, who spent some time in scarching all the woods
on that side of the country, but at last were forced to return, having missed
of what they aimed at. Plymouth colony likewise sent out soldiers upon the same
account, under Major Bradford, who by the help of some Indians of Cape-God,
always true to the English interest, not only escaped an ambush laid for them,
whereby most of them might have been cut off, but slew many of those that laid
in wait for them, without any loss to themselves; yea further, a squaw Sachem
of Seaconet, one of Philip's allies, having first sent three messengers to the
Governor of Plymouth, to sue for life and liberty, promissing submission to
their government on that condition; but understanding that Plymouth forces were
abroad, before her messengers returned, she with her people, about ninety in
number, rendered themselves up to Major Bradford, so that above one hundred and
ten, on a moderate computation, were killed that day.

THE Connecticut forces had the like success when sent into Narrhaganset
country, under the command of the wonderfully successful Major Talcot, Capt.
George Denison, and Capt. Newbury, with other worthy commanders of the said
forces: For, on the 2d of July, 1676, as the said commanders with the forces
under them were pursuing the enemy in and about the Narrhaganset country
toward Mount-Hope, hearing that Philip with his black regiment of Wampanoogs
was thereabouts, their Indian scouts from the top of an hill discovered a great
number of the enemy that had newly pitched their station within the semicircle
of a swamp. The English soldiers were all mounted on horseback, to the number
of three hundred; wherefore the commanders ordered the Indians to be ready at
the top of a hill, upon a signal given to run down rapidly upon the enemy, who
were securely lodged in the hallow of a swamp just opposite them, while the
horsemen being divided into two squadrons, to ride round the hill, so that at
the same instant both the horsemen upon the two wings, and the Indians a foot
rushing down suddenly upon the enemy, put them into a terrible fright, making a
lamentable outcry, some getting into the swamp, the rest that were prevented by
the horsemen and the friendly Indians coming so suddenly upon them, were all
taken prisoners; Capt. Newbury with his troop alighting from their horses ran
into the swamp after them, where they killed at least an hundred, as was judged
by some then present, taking also many prisoners out of those habitations of
darkness, the enemy scarce daring to make any resistance; for none of the
English, and but one or two of the Mohegins and Pequods were hurt in the
assault: yet it was affirmed by a captain present on the place, that with those
they killed and took at Warwick neck in their return home, (which were not
above sixty) that they killed and took of the enemy at that time above 300
young and old. At the same time was taken the old squaw of Narrhaganset,
commonly called the old queen.

THEY were necessitated with this booty to return homewards to gratify the
Mohegin and Pequod Indians that cccompanied them, who had done them very good
service in the pursuit, having lost one or two of their men in the chase; but
their return home was, as it proved in the issue, more beneficial than their
longer stay might have been, to have made a fruitless pursuit after Philip,
(whose time was not yet come, although hastening apace) for in their return
they met 60 of the enemy, all of whom they slew and took, so as their sword
returned not empty.

AMONG the prisoners then taken was a sprightly young fellow, seized by the
Mohegins, who desired of the English commanders that he might be delivered into
their hands, that they might put him to death in their own way, and sacrifice
him to their cruel genius of revenge, in which brutish and devilish passion
they most of all delighted in. The English, though not delighted in blood, yet at
this time were not unwilling to gratify their humor, lest by a denial they
might disoblige their Indian friends, of whom they lately made so much use;
partly also that they might have an occular demonstration of the savage
barbarous cruelty of the heathen. And indeed, of all the enemies that have been
the subjects of the preceding narrative, this villain did most deserve to
become an object of justice and severity; for he boldly told them that he had
with his gun dispatched 19 English, and that he had charged it for the 20th,
but not meeting with another, and unwilling to lose a fair shot, he let fly at
a Moghegin and killed him; with which having completed his number he was fully
satisfied. But, as is usually said, justice vindictive has iron hands, though
leaden feet; this cruel monster is fallen into the hands of those that will
repay him seven fold. In the first place therefore, making a great circle, they
placed him in the middle that all their eyes might at the same time be pleased
with utmost revenge upon him; they first cut one of his fingers round in the
joint, at the trunk of his hand with a sharp knife, and then broke it off, as
was formerly the custom to do with a slaughtered beast before he is uncased;
then they cut off another, and another after that, till they had finally
dismembered one hand of all its digits, the blood sometimes spirting out in
streams a yard from his hand; which barbarous and unheard of cruelty the
English were not able to bear, it forcing tears from their eyes; yet did not
the unhappy victim ever relent, or show any signs of anguish; for, being asked
by his tormentors how he liked the war? he replied, he liked it very well, and
found it as sweet as Englishmen did their sugar. In this frame he continued
till his executioners had dealt with the toes of his feet as they had done with
the fingers of his hands before; all the time making him dance round the
circle, and sing till he had wearied both himself and them At last they broke
the bones of his legs, after which he was forced to sit down, which it is said
he silently did, till they knocked out his brains.

WITHIN a few days after, 200 of the enemy within Plymouth jurisdiction being
distressed with famine and fear of danger, came and submitted themselves to the
government there; but three of the company were presently detected of a cruel
murder, and villainous assault upon one Mr. Clarke's house of Plymouth, by a
well-minded squaw that was among them (hoping that possibly such a discovery
would be pleasing to the English) and accordingly adjudged forthwith to undergo
condign punishment, which the rest that surrendered themselves, did not in the
least resent; such kind of villains being always exempted from acts of favor
and mercy. Those 200 that had newly surrendered themselves, that they might
give full proof of their fidelity, offered to lead a party of the English to a
place not far off, where 20 more of the enemy might be surprised, amongst whom
also was one known to be a bloody murderer of an Englishman the year before;
accordingly 8 Englishmen took 14 of the said Indians, and the next day brought
in all the aforesaid 20 of the enemy, together with the said murderer, who was
presently after executed, and the rest taken into favor.

IT is affirmed also that five or six Sachems of Cape-Cod, toward the eastern
part of it, came with 300 Indians to make peace with the English, on the 6th of
July, one of the said Sachems earnestly desiring the English that none of them
might be suffered to sell any strong liquors to the Indians, the trading of
which, possibly ^ath in a measure contributed to the present mischiefs.

THE next day, July 7th, a small party of ours, with a few friendly or
christian Indians with them, killed and took seven of the enemy in the woods
not far from Dedham, one of which was a Narrhaganset Sachem, who either himself
informed, or by some other at that time certain intelligence was brought to
Boston, that some of our enemy Indians had got to Albany, informing people
there, that they might the more easily get powder and ammunition, that the
English and they were now at peace. One of the said Indians was the Sachem of
Springfield, a bloody and deceitful villian; it is hoped that he is now taken
in the snare from whence he shall not be suffered to escape.

PHILIP by this time could not but think his ruin was near at hand; yet that he
might, in imitation of him that stirred up all this mischief, express the more
wrath because he knew his time was but short, intended if possible to destroy
one more town before his overthrow came; wherefore, on the 11th of July, with
all the force he could get, or that he had left, he intended to set upon
Taunten, having as was conceived, many hundreds in his company; but his design
being strangely discovered by a negro whom they had taken captive a little
before, that having lived near the Indians before, understood much of their
language, who making his escape from them, acquainted the inhabitants with the
plot; who having timely notice, furnished themselves with soldiers, whereby
they were able to repulse the enemy upon his first approach; so as he only
fired two houses, and then fled away: Except the Lord keeps the city the
watchman watches but in vain.

THE 22d of this month of July, as is hinted before, the companies sent from
Concord May 30th, up toward Hadley, having spent much time and pains in
pursuit of Philip all the country over (whom they could not yet overtake)
having tired themselves with many long and tedious marches through the desert
woods, before they returned home, some of them were sent toward Mount-Hope, yet
their labor was well improved, and followed with good success at the last: For
in ranging those woods in Plymouth colony, they killed and took (by the help of
Capt. Mosely's company, and Capt. Brattle's troop joining with Major Bradford's
company of Plymouth colony) an hundred and fifty Indians, without the loss of a
man.

IT was feared that Philip and his company would have returned into the Nipnet
country, to prevent which; several horsemen were sent to guard the passage; but
he ^^^ked about his own country in swamps and other secret places, where he was
as yet hid from the fight of the enemy, although many times they happened to
lodge very near him, insomuch as an Indian captive promised in two hours time
to bring our soldiers to the very place where he was; but they not being able
to pass the nearest way, came a little too late; for they being so closely
pursued, hasted away, leaving much of their treasure behind them; their kettles
boiling over the fire, their dead unburried, and 20 of their party were
overtaken, that fell into the English hands: Philip himself, and some few of
his straggling followers making their escape by a raft over an arm of the sea,
into another neck of land on Pocasset side, not daring to trust himself any
longer in Metapoiset woods, so full of our English soldiers, as well those of
Plymouth, as of the Massachusetts colony, who almost every day meeting with some
of his party, much lessened his number. Capt. Church, that active and unwearied
commander of Plymouth colony, was at this time as well as long before, out upon
the chase with but 18 English, and 22 Indians that were friends, had four
several engagements with Philip's party, wherein he spoiled 76 of the enemy,
without the loss of one of his own men. In several of these skirmishes those
Indians that upon submission had their lives given them, have done notable
service in hunting out the enemy in all their lurking places.

AT another time they took Philip's squaw, and one of his chief counselors;
and about the same time another Sachem about Pocasset, with 40 Indians
submitted himself to the government of Plymouth, on promise of life and
liberty. It seemed that now the time of our deliverance was come, and the time
also for the destruction of our enemies: For the last week in July the
Massachusetts understanding that some Indians were seen roving up and down the
woods about Dedham, almost starved for want of victuals, sent a small company
of 26, with about 9 or 10 christian Indians, who pursued and took 50 of the
enemy, without any loss to the English; at which time also a great quantity of
wampampeag and powder were taken from the enemy. That which increased this
victory was the slaughter of Pomham, who was one of the stoutest and most
valiant Sachems that belonged to the Narrhagansets, whose courage and strength
was so great, that after he had been mortally wounded in the fight so as he
could not stand, yet catching hold of an Englishman that by accident came near
him, had done him an injury if he had not been presently rescued by one of his
neighbors. Amongst the rest of the captives at that time, was one of the said
Pomham's sons, a very likely youth, and one whose countenance would have
bespoke favor for him, had he not belonged to so bloody and barbarous an Indian
as his father was.

THESE successes being daily spread abroad among the Indians, put many of them
into a trembling condition, not knowing well how to dispose of themselves. Some
that had been less active in these tragedies, and were rather led by others,
than any wise inclined to mischief themselves, ventured to submit themselves,
of which number was one of Nipnet Sachems, called Sagamore John, who July 27th
came to surrender himself to the Governor and Council of the Massachusetts at
Boston, bringing along with him 180 of the enemy Indians. This John, that he
might the more ingratiate himself with the English, whose friendship he was now
willing to seek after, did by a wile get into his hands one Matoonas, an old
malicious villian, who was the first that did any mischief within the
Massachnsets colony, July 14th, 1675; bearing an old grudge against them as is
thought, for justice that was done upon one of his sons 1671, whose head ever
since hangs upon a pole near the gibbet where he was hanged up: The bringing in
of this malicious caitif was an hopeful presage that it would not be long
before Philip himself, the grand villian, would in like manner receive a just
reward of his wickedness and murders.

SAGAMORE John, who came in the 27th of July, affirmed that he had never
intended any mischief to the English at Brookfield the last year (near which
village it seems his place was) but that Philip coming over night amongst them,
he was forced, for fear of his own life, to join with them against the English.
Matoonas also when he was brought before the Council, and asked what he had to
say for himself, confessed that he had rightly deserved death, and could expect
no other, adding withal, that if he had followed their counsel, he had not come
to this; for he had seemed to favor the praying Indians, and the christian
religion, but like Simon Magus, by his practice afterward discovered quickly
that he had no part nor portion in that matter.

ABOUT this time several parties of English within Plymouth jurisdiction, were
willing to have a hand in so good a matter as catching of Philip would be, who
perceiving that he was now going down the wind, were willing to hasten his
fall. Amongst others, a small party went out of Bridgewater, July 31st, upon
discovery, and by providence were directed to fall upon a company of Indians
where Philip was; they came up with them, and killed some of his particular
friends; Philip himself was next to his uncle that was shot down, and had the
soldier that had his choice which to shoot at, known which had been the right
bird, he might as well have taken him as his uncle; but it is said that he had
not long cut off his hair that he might not be known: The party that did this
exploit were few in number, and therefore not being able to keep together close
in the rear, that cunning fox escaped away through bushes undiscerned in the
rear of the English: That which was most remarkable in this design, was that
trembling fear appeared to be upon the Indians at this time, insomuch that one
of them having a gun in his hand, well loaded, yet was not able to fire it off,
but suffered an English soldier to come close up to his breast, and so shot him
down, the other not being able to make any resistance; nor were any of the
English hurt at this time.

THE like terror was seen in others at that time, for within two days after
Capt. Church, the terror of the Indians in Plymouth colony, marching in pursuit
of Philip, with about 30 Englishmen and 20 reconciled Indians, took 23 of the
enemy, and the next day following them by their tracks, fell upon their head
quarters, and killed and took about 130 of them, losing only one man. In this
engagement God did appear in a more than ordinary manner to fight for the
English, for the Indians by their number, and other advantages of the place,
were so conveniently provided, that they might have made the first shot at the
English and done them much damage, but one of their own countrymen in Capt.
Church's company espying them, called aloud unto them in their own language,
telling them that if they shot a gun they were all dead men; with which they
were so amazed, that they durst not once offer to fire at the English, which
made the victory the more remarkable. Philip made a very narrow escape at that
time, being forced to leave his treasures, his beloved wife and only son, to
the mercy of the English. Skin for skin, all that a man bath will be give for
his life. His ruin being thus gradually carried on, his misery was not
prevented but augmented thereby; being himself made acquainted with the sense
and experimental feeling of the captivity of his children, loss of friends,
slaughter of his subjects, bereavement of all family relations, and being
stripped of all outward comforts, before his own life should be taken away.
Such a sentence passed upon Gain, made him cry out, that his punishment was
greater than be could bear. This bloody wretch has one week more to live an
object of pity, but a spectacle of divine vengeance, his own followers
beginning now to plot against his life, that they might make the better terms
for their own; as they did also seek to betray squaw Sachem of Pocasset,
Philip's near kinswoman and confederate. For,

August 6th, an Indian willing to shift for himself, fled to Taunton, offering
to lead any of the English that would follow him, to a party of Indians, which
they might easily apprehend, which 20 persons attempted, and accordingly seized
the whole company, 26 in number, all but the squaw Sachem herself, who
intending to make an escape from the danger, attempted to get over the river,
or arm of the sea near by, upon a raft or some pieces of broken wood; but
whether tired and spent with swimming, or starved with cold and hunger, she was
stark naked in Metapoiset, not far from the water side, which made some think
that she was first half-drowned, and so ended her wretched life just in that
place where the year before she had helped Philip to make his escape; her head
being cut off and set upon a pole in Taunton, was known by some Indians then
prisoners, which set them into an horrible lamentation; but such was the
righteous hand of God in bringing at last that mischief upon themselves, which
they had without cause long acted against others.

PHILIP, like a savage wild beast, having been hunted by the English forces
through the woods above an hundred miles backward and forward, at last was driven
to his own den upon Mount-Hope, where he retired with a few of his best friends
into a swamp, which proved but a prison to keep him fast till the messengers of
death came by divine permission to execute vengeance upon him, which was thus
accomplished.

SUCH had been his inveterate malice and wickedness against the English, that
despairing of mercy from them, he could not bear that any thing should be
suggested to him about a peace, insomuch that he caused one of his confederates
to be killed for propounding an expedient of peace; which so provoked some of
his company, not altogether so desperate as himself, that one of them (a
relation to him that was killed) fled to Rhode Island, whither the brave
Captain Church was newly retired to recruit his men for a little time, being
much tired with hard marches all that week, informing them that Philip was fled
to a swamp in Mount-Hope, whither he would undertake to lead them that would
pursue him. This was welcome news, and the best cordial for such martial
spirits; whereupon he immediately, with a small company of men, part English
and part Indians, beg in another march, which shall prove fatal to Philip, and
end that controversy be-between the English and him: For coming very early to
the side of the swamp, his soldiers began to surround it, and (whether the
devil appeared to him in a dream that night, as he did unto Saul, foreboding
his tragical end, it matters not) as he was endeavoring to make his escape out
of the swamp, he was shot through the heart by an Indian of his own nation, as
it is said, that had all this while preserved a neutrality until this time,
but now had the casting vote in his power, by which he determined the quarrel
that had been so long in suspense. In him is fulfilled what was said in the
prophet, Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled, and dealest
treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee; when thou shall
cease to spoil thou shall he spoiled, and when thou shall make an end to deal
treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.

WITH Philip at this time fell five of his trustiest followers, of whom one was
said to be the son of his chief captain, that had shot the first gun at the
English the year before. This was done the 12th day of August, 1676, a
remarkable testimony of divine favor to the colony of Plimouh, who had for
their former successes, appointed the 17th day of August following, to be kept
as a day of solemn thanksgiving to Almighty God. There having been so strange a
turn of providence observed in the late successes obtained in and about
Plymouth colony, it may not be amiss here to enquire into the occasions that
did lead thereunto, and also into the progress and continuance thereof, after
the slaughter of Philip that grand REBEL.

IN the preceding narration frequent mention has been made of one Captain
Church, whom God has made an instrument of signal victories over the Indians
in that colony, and of great advantage in that respect to that whole
jurisdiction. It happened that the said Capt. Church some time in June, of this
present year 1676, passing over in a canoe from Pocasset to Rhode Island, as he
used frequently to do, (having had much employment upon the said neck of land
so called) several Indians whom he had known before at Lakenham, a village near
Plymouth, beckoned to him, as if they had a mind to speak with him; he having
had so much experience as well as others of their treachery, was not willing to
adventure too hastily to come near them; but when they seemed to urge very
much, and made signs to him, and at last laid down their guns in his fight, he
began to think with himself there might be something in the matter more than
ordinary, therefore he resolved to go a little nearer to the shore, and then he
perceived they had a great mind to speak with him, using much importunity for
that end, insomuch that he ventured to go ashore amongst them, having but one
Englishman and two Indians with him; he directed them to keep off the canoe
while he discoursed with the Indians on shore. As soon as he came among them,
they told him they were weary of fighting, and that they had fought so long by
Philip's instigation, but they could not tell for what end, and therefore were
resolved they would fight no longer, and all they desired of him was, that he
would make way for them to the Governor, that they might live quietly amongst
the English as they had done before, and that they would deliver up their arms,
or would go out with them if he pleased to accept of them, and fight for him;
to that end they desired a time to parley with him further about that business,
at what time and place he would appoint: He told them he would meet them two
days after at Seaconet, a place up higher upon the said neck, about 12 o'clock;
accordingly he came to the said place, and found the same Indians, with some
others, and their Sunk Squaw, or chief woman of that plantation, there ready
to meet him.

AFTER they had fallen into discourse about the beginning of the war, as well
as the success and mischief of it, they would have put the blame off from
themselves, and laid it upon the English: But he presently convinced them by an
undeniable evidence, that they first began the war: For said he, upon this
Pocasset, July 7th, 1675, you first fought with some of Rhode Island, whereof
one was my own servant, whose leg you broke, and the same day you shot at
myself and company, before ever we meddled with you. They were so fully
convinced herewith, that they found nothing to reply, but fell into other
discourse about a peace, which they seemed very desirous to obtain upon any
equal terms, as was said before. There were about fifteen of the Indians
present, besides their Sunk Squaw (which is with us their Governess or Lady)
in conclusion they engaged forever after to leave Philip, and to go out with
him; which they did forthwith, as soon as he had obtained a peace for them with
the Governor.

IT is here to be observed, that these were not properly Philip's Indians, but
belonged to the Seaconet Squaw, who was nearly ^^lated to Philip, and her
subjects had hitherto fought in Philip's quarrel, till they saw nothing but
misery and mischief like to be the issue of it to themselves, as well as their
neighbors. About 20 or 30 of these Seaconet Indians have constantly gone out
with Capt. Church ever since, and not only been faithful and serviceable to
him, but very successful in every enterprise they have gone about, nor has he
lost any of them in any skirmish with the other Indians: And it is said that
this act of these Indians broke Philip's heart as soon as ever he understood
it, so as he never rejoiced after, or had any success in any of his designs,
but lost his men one time after another, till himself at last fell into the
hands of those under Capt. Church's command: For at the swamp when Philip was
slain, Capt. Church appointed an Englishman and an Indian to stand at such a
place of the swamp, where it happened Philip was breaking away; the morning
being wet and rainy, the Englishman's gun would not fire; the Indian having an
old musket with a large touchhole, it took fire the more readily, with which
Philip was dispatched, the bullet passing directly through his heart, where
Joab thrust his darts into rebellious Absalom.

THUS did divine vengeance retaliate on this notorious traitor, that had
against his league and covenant risen up against the government of Plymouth, to
raise up against him one of his own people, or one that was in league with him,
as he was with the English: The Indian that did this execution was called
Alderman, of Seaconet, that had never done any act of hostility against the
English. By these passages it is manifest, that as the hearts of all are in the
hard of God, so he turns them as he pleases, either to savor his people, or to
hate and deal subtly with his servants, as seems good to him. Since this
engagement with the Seaconet Indians (to leave Philip, and to go with Capt.
Church) it is credibly affirmed, that such has been their success, that since
June aforesaid, to the end of October following, there have been 700 Indians
subdued, either by killing or taking captive, by means of Capt. Church and his
company, part Indians and part English, besides 300 that have come in
voluntarily to submit themselves to the government of Plymouth. It appears thus
by the sequel of things, that after the Lord has accomplished his work upon
his people, and he is beginning to call his enemies to an account, and punish
them for the price of their hearts, and for all their treachery and cruelty
against his servants. Philip's Captains have run the same fate with himself,
some before and some since his own fall.

IN June last one Tioshq, a great Captain of his, his wife and child, or
children being taken, though he escaped himself at first, yet came since and
surrendered himself. The next noted Captain of Philip's Indians that was
brought in after Philip's death, was called Tespiquin, a notorious villain,
next to Philip, he was called the black Sachem's son: It was this Tespiquin
that burnt so many houses in Plymouth lately. Capt. Church with his company
were in pursuit of him in September last, two days before they could get near
him, at the last, on the third day, they found the track made by the said
Tespiquin's party, as they went to fetch apples from the English orchards: This
was something of a blind track, therefore they were forced to take up their
quarters that night without discovering any place of their rendezvous. The next
morning about 9 o'clock they came to their first rendezvous, from which they
were just gone: At 1 o'clock they came to the second, and missing them there,
they soon after came to the third track, wherein after they had marched a
while, they perceived they grew very near them, by the crying of a child which
they heard: The place was near Lakenham, upon Pocasset neck, so full of bushes
that a man could not see a rod before him: Capt. Church ordered his men to
march up together in one rank, because he discovered the Indians were laid in
one range by several fires, so that by that time they all came up into an even
rank very near together, within a few yards of them, as he had appointed, they
all suddenly rushed together in upon them, and catched hold of them, not
suffering any to escape, there being about fifty of them in all: Tespiquin's
wife and children were there, but he was absent, as also one Jacob, and a girl
that belonged to that company. The Captain's haste would not admit of his
tarrying till they came in, (though the Indians said they might come that
night) wherefore he thought upon this project, to leave two old Squaws upon the
place, with victuals, and bid them tell Tespiquin that he should be his Captain
over his Indians if he was found so stout a man as they reported him to be; for
the Indians had said that Tespiquin could not be pierced by a bullet, for said
they, he was shot twice, but the bullets glanced by him and could not hurt him.
Thus the Captain marched away with his booty, leaving this trap behind him to
take the rest: The next morning he came to see what his trap had catched, there
he found Jacob aforesaid (a notorious wretch) and the girl he missed before,
but not Tespiquin: But within a day or two after the said Tespiquin, upon the
hopes of being made a Captain under Capt. Church, came after some of the
company, and submitted himself in the Captain's absence, and was sent to
Plymouth, but upon trial (which was the condition on which his being promised a
Captain's commission under Capt. Church did depend) he was found penetrable by
the English guns, for he fell down at the first shot, and thereby received the
just reward of his former wickedness. About a fortnight after the surprising of
Tespiquin, was one Toteson's company taken, wherein were above 50 persons; but
Toteson escaped, and is still out in rebellion, unless vengeance has overtaken
him since.

THE next that was seized was one Annawan, a very subtle, politic fellow, and
one of Philip's chief counselors; he had about twelve men, and as many women
and children in his company, who were discovered by their shooting at the
English horses, and cattle; some of whom being taken, they made known the rest.
Capt. Church at that time had but five Englishmen, and twenty Indians. The
place where this Annawan had betaken himself, was a ledge of rocks inaccessible
but at one place, which by a few hands might easily have been defended against
a great number of assailants: But Capt Church by direction got up to their
wigwams before they were aware of it; and presently told Annawan that he came
to sup with him that night; whereupon the said Annawan (who had fallen flat
upon the earth, expecting to have his head cut off) looked up and cried taubut,
in their language, thank you, as one being much affected with the generosity of
our English Captain; they found some of the English beef boiling in their
kettles: After supper he had much discourse with the said Annawan, they lay
down to sleep together in the wigwam; Capt. Church laying one of his legs upon
Annawan, and the other upon his son, that he might have notice if any of them
offered to stir: After midnight Annawan rose up, and Capt. Church was presently
awake, and intended to watch after his prisoner: He thought at first he might
have gone forth upon some necessary occasion; but not long after he returned
again, having fetched out of a swamp hard by, two horns of powder, and a large
belt of peag, supposed to be Philip's belt, all which he delivered to Capt.
Church, in a way of thankful acknowledgement of his courtesy. Amongst other
discourse that passed between them concerning the occasion of the war, and
carrying of it on, the Indian would fain have excused Philip, and laid the
blame upon the praying Indians (as they are distinguished from others by that
character) and others of the younger sort of his followe^, who coming with
their several tales (which he likened to sticks laid on a heap) till by the
multitude of them, a great fire came to be kindled: They make much use of
parabolical expressions; for so said Solomon, where no wood is, there the fire
goes out; so where there is no talebearer the strife cease, Prove. 26.20.
But Philip had had large and long experience of the gentleness and kindness of
the English, both to himself and to his people, so as unless he had borne an
evil and malicious mind against the English, he would never have hearkened to
those stories, contrary to his faithful promise and allegiance.

THE said Annawan confessed also that he did believe by all those late
occurrences that there was a great God that overruled all; and that he had
found that whatever he had done to any or those, whether Indians or English,
the same was brought upon himself in after time. He confessed also that he had
put to death several of the English, that they had taken alive, ten in one day,
and could not deny but that some of them had been tortured, and now he could
not but see the justice of the great God upon himself, with many other things
of a like nature. But whatever his confessions of this nature were, being
forced from him by the power of conscience, after he was delivered up to
authority, he was put to death, as he justly had deserved.

IT is said that Philip when he first began his rebellion, had about 300
fighting men under him, besides those that belonged to his kinswoman Wetamoe,
drowned about Taunton, that had almost as many under her; and one Quenopin, a
Narrhaganset Sachem that lived near him, and j^ined with him in his quarrel
with the English: But it is certain that there are scarce any that are now
left, that belonged to either of them: So a though the Almighty has made use
of them to be a scourge to his people, he has now turned his hand against them
to their utter destruction, and extirpation from off the face of the earth,
peradventure to make room for others of his people to come in their stead.

As for the rest of the Narrhagansets that joined in Philip's quarrel, it is
already declared what end they were come unto. As for the rest of the Indians,
whether Nipnet, Nashaway, Pacomtuck, Hadley, or Springfield Indians, it is not
so certain what is become of them; but after their separation one from the
other about July last, it was observed by all the tracks in those woods, they
went still westward; and about the middle of August last, a great party of them
were observed to pass by Westfield, a small town to the west of Springfield,
and were judged to be about 200: News thereof being brought to Major Talcot, he
with the soldiers of Connecticut colony under his command, both Indians and
English, pursued after them as far as Ausotunnoog river (in the middle way
betwixt Westfield and the Dutch river, and Fort Albany) where he overtook them,
and fought with them; killing and taking 45 prisoners, 25 whereof were fighting
men, without the loss of any one of his company save a Mohegin Indian ^ Many of
the rest were badly wounded, as appeared by the bushes being much besmeared
with blood, as was observed by them that followed them a little further.

IT is written since from Albany, that there were sundry lost besides the 45
aforementioned, to the number of threescore in all; and also that an 120 of
them are since dead of sickness; so that vengeance seems to be pursuing of them
as well as the rest. Several of their friends that belonged to Nashaway, and
the places adjoining, repaired to Pasca aqua, hoping to shroud themselves under
the wings of some honester Indians about Quechecho, under pretense of a
declaration sent out by the Governor and council of the Massachusetts in the
beginning of July last: But some of our forces under Capt. Hathorne and Capt.
Sill, with the help of Major Walden, Capt. Frost, and others residing in those
parts, being then in readiness, separated the vile and wicked from the rest,
and sent them down to the Governor at Boston, where 8 or 9 of (...)
^ing-leaders, such as one eyed John, Sagamore Sam, of Nashaway, chief actors of
the late outrages and bloody mischiefs, had justice done upon them soon after.
As for the massacres and calamities that befell the English further eastward,
they shall in the second part of this narrative be declared.

THE Indians being thus dispersed several ways, were strangely confounded and
destroyed one parcel after another, until there was none left in the western or
southern parts, that durst make any opposition all the following part of the
year. As for those that fled westward toward Albany, we shall there leave them
for the present, wishing we may never hear any more of them: A person of
quality informs, that at Hartford in September last, he was present at the
examination of one Choes, an Indian, formerly of Connecticut, but one of the
Narrhaganset fort the last winter, who confessed that he was one of that
company of Indians that went westward the month before, toward Hudson's river;
but after the fight at Ausotunnoog, he said he returned back to Connecticut for
fear of the Mohawks; and that he lay hid about Farmington, till he was almost
starved; and then he went to the seaside to make use of the oyster-bank at
Stratford for his relief, where he was espied by the Indians, and so brought to
Hartford.

HE affirmed that there were above 250 fighting men amongst those Indians that
fled westward, besides women and children; and that near 200 of them passed the
great river below Albany, and were sheltered by the Indians of that place,
called Moheganders; but about 80 of them tarried on the hither side of that
river, near a Dutch village. But he being convicted of fighting against the
English, was condemned to die, and executed about the same time. Some few of
the rest were skulking about the Narrhaganset country the last fall, hoping to
shelter themselves under Uncas, but he not willing to give them countenance
against the mind of his friends at Connecticut, has since abandoned them to
shift for themselves, who have been most of them taken and brought in prisoners
to the English this winter.

ABOUT the month of October last, Mr. Stanton chanced to come from Seaconk with
3 Indians in his company, Pequods or Mohegins, they hearing by a captive at one
of the next towns, that there was a number of the enemy not far off, presently
left Mr. Stanton and pursued after them, whom they soon after overtook, and
made them all prisoners: Amongst them was an old man, not able to go their
pace, but promising to come after them, they spared his life: But as soon as
the men returned at night from hunting, the old man told them what had befell
their women and children, whereupon the next morning they presently following
after them, overtook them, and so recovered the prisoners, and slew one of the
three that carried them away; the other two hardly escaped; one of them is
called Major Simon, being part a Pequod and part a Narrhaganset, but of
extraordinary strength and courage; he perceiving the danger they were in,
challenged to fight hand to hand with any five of them with their hatchets; but
they unwilling to hang their success upon the hazard of a single combat, came
all toward him at once, whereupon first discharging his gun amongst the whole
company, he broke through them all by force, and so escaped their hands, with
one of his companions. This Simon has been very active in killing and taking
many of the enemy; some say that he with his own hands has taken and killed
above threescore; and either out of hatred to the enemy, or love to the
English, is this last week gone with the soldiers to the eastward, in pursuit
of our quarrel against them in those parts.

AT another time not long before, when he was out against the enemy, he came
suddenly upon a great number of them as they were spread under a steep bank,
from whence leaping down into the midst of them, he killed some and took
others. Fighting it seems is a recreation to him, for he is seldom at home
above four or five days together. Some say that in one of his former
expeditions, being much wearied and spent he laid himself down to sleep, but
toward morning he fell into a dream, wherein he apprehended the Indians were
upon him, when suddenly rising up he espied the Indians coming toward him, but
suddenly presenting his guns against them, he so frighted them, that they gave
him an opportunity to make an escape from a multitude of them.

SINCE the beginning of December last, news coming down to Boston that mischief
was done about Seaconk and Rehoboth, by some remaining Indians thereabouts,
killing their swine and horses, several persons of Medfield went out after
them, and pursuing them by their track, came upon a small party, of whom they
took three, one of which escaped while some of the company were going after the
rest. Those that were taken confessed there was about 60 that were lurking up
and down in those woods. The said two Indians were brought into Boston the 8th
of January.

A commission was formerly granted to Peter Ephraim, an Indian of Natick, to go
out in pursuit of them, with 29 of his company; a few of the English from
Medfield went with him, who being soon tired with marching in the snow,
returned. The Indians kept on in their design, and came across a considerable
party of the enemy, having traced them till they found where they lodged over
night; they surrounded them early in the morning, as their manner is, and then
offered them quarter if they would yield; eight resolute fellows refused, who
were instantly shot, the rest were all seized. the whole number was 42. This
was done about the middle of January, since which several such exploits have
been done by them. January 23d, the same company of Indians took 22 of the
enemy, among whom ^ere five able men, and five arms; they sent the prisoners
home by five of their company, the rest went further in the chase.

January 26th, another parcel of the enemy were brought in, eight in number, of
whom five were men, amongst whom was the Indian called Cornelius, who three
years since was indicted for killing an Englishman's cow; upon which he is said
to have uttered several threatening speeches that he would kill Englishmen and
their cows too; which was now remembered against him, when he was in particular
called to account for having a hand in killing some of the English and Indians
also in league with us, for which he was sentenced to die, and was accordingly
executed the 15th of February following.

CONCERNING the rest of the Indians either in the colony of Plymouth,
Connecticut, or the Massachusetts, there is no occurrence more of moment come
to light since the end of August last, save what is last mentioned before; yet
it is very remarkable, that although terms of peace were offered to all that
would come in and surrender themselves (as appears by a declaration put out in
July last) and that a Nipnet Sachem called John, did thereupon with a number of
his company come in and offer themselves, and were accordingly secured of their
lives and other concernments; yet did that treacherous villain make an escape
this winter from Capt. Prentice's house (under whose charge he was put, about
Cambridge village) and with above 20 more fled away into the woods to shift for
himself amongst the rest of his bloody companions; they were soon after
pursued, but had gone too fast and ^oo far to be overtaken. Whether it were
consciousness of their own guilt, that having had a hand in the blood of the
English they feared vengeance hung over their heads; or whether they liked not
the English manners so well as to be confined thereunto: Wild creatures
ordinarily love the liberty of the woods better than the (...) of a cage. They
made none acquainted with their design before they went away; and as yet little
account can be given of them, only it is known that one or two of their number
have since been killed, and that one or two of their families are entertained
by Uncas, but what is become of the rest is uncertain; there were but seven of
the company men, so they are not capable of doing much mischief. Some of late
have traveled through the woods to Connecticut, but have met with no Indians,
nor did they hear of any in their passing between this place and that.

AND because in the present narrative there has been frequent mention made of
Uncas the Mohegin The tribe, though greatly diminished, remains to this day.
Sachem, and of his faithfulness to the interest of the English, I add in this
place, that it is suspected by them that knew him best, that in his heart he is
no better affected to the English or their religion, than the rest of his
countrymen, and that it has been his own advantage that has led him to be
thus true to them who have upheld him as formerly against the Pequods, so of
late against the Narrhagansets; yet has he not long since been convinced of
the truth of our religion, and vanity of his own, as himself has solemnly
confessed; which will evidently appear by the passage that follows, which I
shall here represent just as it was from under the hand of that reverend person
it relates unto, namely, Mr. Fitch, pastor of the church at Norwich, near unto
which Uncas's place is. There was a great drought the last summer, but as it
seems, it was more extr^^^e in those parts than with us about the Masachusets;
and although probably the English might have prayed for rain themselves without
any motion from the Indians, yet their address to the said Mr. Fitch on such an
account, with the consequences thereof, is very remarkable, which take in his
own words:

"CONCERNING the drought, etc. the true narrative of that providence is this.
In August last such was the want of rain, that the Indian corn was not only
(...) and parched up, but the apple trees withered, the fruit and leaves fell
off as in autumn, and some trees seemed to be dead with that drought: the
Indians came into town and did lament their want of rain, and that their
powawes could get none in their way of worship, desiring me that I would seek
to God for rain: I appointed a fast day for that purpose; the day being come,
it proved clear, without any clouds until son setting, when we came from the
meeting, and then some clouds arose; the next day remained cloudy; then Uncas
with many Indians came to my house, Uncas lamented there was such want of rain;
I asked whether if God should send us rain he would not attribute it to their
powawes; he answered no, for they had done their uttermost and all in vain; I
replied, if you will declare it before all these Indians, you shall see what
God will do for us; for although this year he has shown his anger against the
English, and not only against the Indians, yet he has begun to save us, and I
have found by experience twice in the like case, when we sought him by fasting
and prayer, he has given us rain, and never denied us. Then Uncas made a great
speech to the Indians (which were many) confessing that if God should then send
rain, it could not be ascribed to their powawing, but must be acknowledged to
be an answer of our prayers. This day the clouds spread more and more, and the
next day there was such plenty of rain, that our river rose more than two foot
in height."

BY all that is recorded in the foregoing narrative, there are none into whose
hands it shall come, but will be sensible that the present time has been a day
of great rebuke and trouble to the poor people sojourning in this wilderness,
upon whom sundry calamities have broke in at once this last, as well as in the
former years: In many places they have been visited with sickness and
mortality, more than in many years before, depriving them of many worthy and
useful persons; amongst others the loss of Mr. John Winthrop, the late worthy
Governor of the colony of Connecticut, is as it ought to be, much lamented by
all, who died at Boston, the 5th of April, 1676, in the 73d year of his (...),
whither he was occasionally called the last winter, to sit with the rest of the
Commissioners of the united colonies, to consult about the great affairs of
them, now newly engaged in these troubles from the Heathen. He was the eldest
son of the famous Governor of the Massachusetts, deceased March 26, 1649, Proles
similima parenti. The memory of the father, though he died so long ago, yet
still lives in the minds of the surviving generation, and is like to continue
much longer by the remembrance of the many eminent virtues found in this the
eldest of his offspring, who being ^ot long after, or about that time called to
take up his residence in that colony, was by the importunity of the people
there, prevailed with to accept of the Governor's place, which for a long time
after he sustained in that colony, though annually chosen thereunto; being so
well furnished with many excellent endowments, as well moral as political and
philosophical, which rendered him most fit to be an healer of that people.
Though we are dealing in another subject, yet shall not we pass by his tomb as
we go along, without paying the homage due to the memory of so honorable a
gentleman.

AFTER all the aforementioned calamities and troubles, it pleased God to alarm
the town of Boston, and in that the whole country. by a sad fire, accidentally
kindled by the carelessness of an apprentice that set up too late over night, as
was conceived; which began an hour before day, continuing three or four days,
in which time it burned down to the ground 46 dwelling houses, besides other
buildings, together with a large meetinghouse. Some mercy was observed mixed
with the judgment; for if a great rain had not continued all the time (the
roofs and walls of their ordinary buildings consisting of such combustible
matter) that whole end of the town had at that time been consumed. Whereby we
see that God by his providence can turn our dwellings into ashes, without the
help of either foreign or domestic enemies. Which consideration may awaken all
from security and confidence in these uncertain and unstable possessions, that
have no firmer foundation, that may so soon after their first erection be eaten
up by the flames of fire, before the iron teeth of time have had leisure to
devour and feed upon them.

GOD grant that by the fire of all these judgments, we may be purged from our
dross, and become a more refined people, as vessels fitted for our master's use.

A NARRATIVE OF THE INDIAN WARS IN NEW ENGLAND FROM PISCATAQUA TO PEMMAQUID.
THE occasion, rise and progress of the war with the Indians in the southen and
western parts of New England, together with the issue and success thereof, has
in the former part of this narrative been already declared. Before an entrance
be made into a relation of those troubles that befell the eastern and northern
parts of the said country from the Indians inhabiting those parts, it will be
requisite to give some general description of the place, as being less
frequented, and so more unknown than the other, like Herald's that used to
blazon the field before they meddle with the charge, as an historian once said,
that so the reader may not miss the truth in a story, by being unacquainted
with the places connected with the discourse. Briefly therefore, that more cost
and pains be not spent in the surveying a barren and rocky country, than will
quit cost (the list or border here being known to be worth more than the whole
cloth) that whole track of land being of little worth, unless it were for the
borders thereof upon the sea coast, and some spots and skirts of more desirable
land upon the banks of some rivers, how much soever it be valued by them that
know nothing thereof, but by the uncertain and fallible reports of such as have
only sailed by the country, or viewed some of the rivers and havens, but never
passed through the heart of the continent. The whole being scarce worth half
those men's lives that have been lost these two last years in hopes to save it.

THIS north part of New England, did first, like Zarah, put forth its hand,
thereby inviting the adventurers to twist the scarlet thread of their hopes
about the same; by that auspicious beginning they were ready to promise
themselves great prosperity in having that advantage before others to plant and
people that part of the country. But that fair opportunity was almost quite
lost by some fatal and mischievous accidents happening soon after that noble
enterprise was first set on foot, as has been already in part, and may
hereafter be more fully declared.

THE first place that ever was possessed by the English, in hopes of making a
plantation in those parts, was a tract of land on the west side of the river
Kennebeck, then called Sagatawock, since Sagadahock Other places adjoining were
soon after seized and improved for trading and fishing. The more remote and
furthest northward at this time belonging to the English ( Penobscot forty
years since being surprised by the French, and by them held to this day) is
called Pemmaquid, distant seven or eight leagues from Kennebeck, and is the
utmost boundary of New England, being about forty leagues distant from the
mouth of Piscataqua river. Pemmaquid is a very commodious haven for ships, and
has been found very advantageous to such as used to come upon these coasts to
make fishing voyages; south-west or south-east from whence about six or seven
leagues, lies an island called Monhiggon, of much use on the same account for
fishing, it lying three or four leagues into the sea from Damaril's cove, a
place of like advantage for the stages of fishermen in former times. There have
been for a long time seven or eight considerable dwellings about Pemmaquid,
which are well accomodated with pasture land about the haven for feeding
cattle, and some fields also for tillage; all the land improvable for such uses
being already taken up by such a number of inhabitants as is already mentioned.

IN the mouth of the river Kennebeck lies a considerable island called
Arowsick, some years since purchased by Major Clarke and Capt. Lake, two
merchants of Boston, on which they built several large dwellings, with a watch
use and many other edifices near the water side, it being intended by the
owners for a place of trading as well as planting; there being many of late
seated there sit to carry on each design; where also was built a fort, which if
it had been carefully defended, might have proved the defense and security of
all that side af the country, as it used to be their magazine. Up higher beyond
the river Kennebeck, four leagues eastward tow^^ Pemmaquid, is another
considerable river called ^^^pscot, upon the banks of which were many scattered
planters, who lately flying from their dwellings for fear of the Indians, left
as was judged, a thousand head of neat cattle for the use of the Indians that
made the late insurrection against the inhabitants of those parts, besides
their fields and barns full of corn. There is another river that issues into
Kennebeck a little higher up into the country, called Pegypscot, that comes
down from behind Casco-Bay. This Pegypscot is the seat of the Amoscogging
Indians, who have had a great, if not a principal hand in the late mischiefs.

SOME few leagues to the south of Kennebeck lies the famous and spacious haven
called Casco-Bay, the north east cape of which is made by an island called
Saguin; the southern or opposite point of land is called Cape-Elizabeth. Within
the bosom of this bay, being about eight or nine leagues over at the mouth of
it, are a great number of small islands, many of them being inhabited by
fishermen and others; one of the principal of those is called Jewels-Island.
There are many places about this bay sit to make commodious habitations, and on
the south side of it is a small village called Falmouth; all, or most of it
lately destroyed by the Indians.

NOT far from Casco, to the southward or south-west, still is a river called
Spurwick, over against which lies Richmond-island, not far from the main land,
being divided therefrom by a small channel, fordable at low water; it has for
a long time been the seat of Mr. Jordan, in right of Mr. Winter, the former if
not the first proprietor thereof, whose daughter (...) married.

THE next plantation southward is called Scarborough, a small village seated
upon Black Point, over against which is another point, for distinction from the
former, called Blue-Point. This Black-Point was lately the feat of Mr.
Josselin, being a parcel of the province of Maine, or falling within the
precincts thereof, and was formerly by patent granted (...) said Josselin or
his predecessors, since purchased by (...). Scotto, of Boston.

SACO river lies next in order to Piscataqua, a navigable river, where Major
Phillips had a commodious ^tuation lately; at the mouth of which river lies
Winter-Harbour, encompassed on one side by a neck of land, formerly the
property of one Mr. Winter, whose name it still retains, but lately purchased
by Major Pendleton, where he enjoyed a very comfortable seat and habitation.

THERE is another harbor lying a little southward of Saco, made by that which
is called Cape-Porpuise; a convenient seat for fishermen, as are most of the
other places abovenamed. Between Cape-Porpuise and Piscataqua there are but
two small towns more, (though ambitions of great names) the one called Wells, and
the other York. Wells is seated upon a small river or creek, affording a small
harbor sit only for barks and smaller vessels; on each side of which town lies
a small river, the first called Kennebunk, the second Maguncuck. The other town
is York, formerly known by the name of Agamenticus, from a high hill of that
name not (...) therefrom. The point of land which lies between the said towns,
is called Cope-Nidduck, making a small harbor likewise, into which issues
another pretty river, on the banks of which is situate the town of York. All or
most of the forementioned towns and plantations are seated upon and near some
greater or lesser river, whose streams are principally improved for driving of
saw-mills, those late inventions so useful for the destruction of wood and
timber, especially of firrtrees, which do so abound in those coasts, that there
is scarce a river or creek in those parts that has not some of those engines
erected upon them.

THE upper branches of the famous river of Piscataqua being also employed all
of them that way, namely, Sturgeon Creek, Salmon Falls, Newechewannick,
Quechecho, Oyster River, Swamscot, Greenland, Lamprey-Eele River, together with
the towns of Exeter and Dover, seated upon or near some of the main branches
thereof. whose principal trade is in deal-boards, cut by those saw-mills, since
their rift timber is near all consumed. On each side of that fine navigable
river of Piscataqua, down toward the mouth of it, are seated on the north
side, the town of Kittery, (a long seattering plantation made up of several
hamlets) on the south side the town of Portsmouth, to which belongs the great
island lying in the mouth of the said river, a place of considerable trade of
late years, which, together with Strawberry Bank, the upper part of the said
town of Portsmouth, are the magazine, and chief or only place of trade and
commerce for all the plantations betwixt it and Casco-Bay. All the said
plantations have in these two last years, 1675 and 1676, felt more or less of
the rage and cruelty of the barbarous and perfidious Indians belonging to that
side of the country, as shall more particularly be declared in what follows,
after a short discourse of the first planting of that side of the country,
which may serve as a kind of prologue to the the following tragedy.

THIS part of New England began first to be planted about the same time with
Virginia, viz. in the year 1606. There the first letters patent granted by the
King, for the limitation of Virginia, did extend from (...) and was divided
into (...) and the second colony; the (...) appropriated to the city of London,
the other to the cities of Bristol, Exeter, and town of Plymouth, each of which
had laws, privileges, and authority for the government, and advancing their
several plantations alike, as faith Capt. Smith in his history of Virginia and
New England. This second colony of New England, promising but little advantage
to the undertakers, by reason of its mountainous and rocky situation, found but
few adventurers forward to promote the planting thereof, after the death of Sir
John Popham, who was the first that ever procured men or means to possess it;
for when the main pillars are removed, what can be expected but that the whole
building should fall to the ground. Yet notwithstanding the discouragements the
first planters met with in their first winter seasoning, in that cold and rocky
desert (which made them all return home in the year 1608) Sir Francis Popham,
his son, having the ships and provision which remained of the company, and
supplying what was necessary for his purpose, sent diverse times to the coast
for trade and fishing, of whose loss or gain, as faith my author, himself was
best able to give an account: And some of the ships sent by him, and the Earl
of Southhampton, with other noble adventurers, did bring home some of the
natives of the place in one of the following years, by whose informations some
of the first undertakers were encouraged once more to try the verity of their
hopes, and see if possibly they might find something that could induce a fresh
resolution to prosecute so pious and honorable a work.

BUT in the mean time before there was yet any sp^ech or endeavor to settle
any other plantation in those parts, that about Sagadahock being thus abandoned
for the present, by the first undertakers, the Frenchmen immediately took the
opportunity to settle themselves within our limits, which being understood by
those of Virginia, they discreetly taking into their consideration the
inconveniences that might arise by suffering them to harbor there, Sir Samuel
Argal was sent with a commission to displace them, which he with great
discretion, dexterity, and judgment, performed about the year 1613, which made
way for the plantation at Nova Scotia, granted afterward by King James to Sir
William Alexander, one of his Majesty's most honorable council of Scotland. The
said Argal seized the forts which the Frenchmen had built at Mount Mansel, St.
Croix and Port Real, and carried away their ordnance and provisions to the
colony of Virginia, to their great benefit. The said places were held by the
English many years after, till about the year 1635, by commission from the
Scotch Lord aforesaid; but how his right came afterward to be alienated to any
of the French nation, does not concern us with reference to the business in
hand, further to enquire.

THINGS remaining in this posture for the space of near seven years, some of
the first adventurers apprehensive of better hopes of good that might ensue by
a fresh attempt, resolved to set the design a foot a second time, to which end
several ships were sent on that account in the year 1615, but with as bad
success as the former; for in the year before, viz 1614, Capt. Smith, desirous
to promote the colony of New England, as well as that of Virginia, came thither
with two vessels, and returned back to England in the least of them. with
intent to be there again that next year to promote the said plantation; but
after he was gone, one Thomas Hunt, master of the ship he left behind, like a
dishonest man, to prevent the carrying on the plantation, that he and a few
merchants might wholly enjoy the benefit of the trade of the country, after he
had made his voyage, seized upon 24 of the poor innocent natives, that in
confidence of his honesty, had put themselves into his hands, then clapping
them under hatches, carried them away to Malego, whither he was bound with the
fish he had made upon the coast, for that market; but this vile act, although
it kept him for ever after from any more employment in those parts, yet that
was the least part of the mischief that attended his wicked practice; for upon
the arrival of the adventurers ships the next year, two natives of the place
that had been some years in England, and coming back unto the said ships as
soon as they understood the injury so treacherously done to their countrymen,
they contracted such a hatred against our whole nation, that although one of
the said natives died soon after, yet the other called Epenow, studied how to
be revenged, which he so far found means to effect, that he frustrated this
second attempt of settling a plantation in these parts.

YET did not the adventurers cast off all hope of carrying on their design.
wherein Providence within a few years after so favored them, that one or more
of the savages, called Tisquamtum and Samoset, carried away by Hunt, was
brought back to Newfoundland, from whence he was soon after conveyed by the
prudent endeavor of Captain Mason (then Governor of the plantation began upon
Newfoundland) into the hands of some of the adventurers, by whose means they
hoped to work a peace betwixt the said natives on that coast where the fire had
been kindled before; for the adventurers employed Capt. Thomas Darmer, a
prudent and industrious gentleman, to settle the affairs of the plantation, now
a third time revived again about Kennebeck, about the year 1619. By his
prudence and care a lasting peace was made betwixt the natives of the place and
the English, who were but a little before so abhorred by them, for the wrong
formerly received, so as the plantation began at last to prosper, and continue
in good liking, and assurance of the friendship of their neighbors that had
been lately so exasperated against them. This Tisquamtum beforementioned, was
not a little instrumental and helpful to the plantation begun at New Plymouth
about the following year, 1620, in their weak beginnings, there being frequent
mention of his name, as also of one Sameset, a native of the same place, by the
like providence brought back to Kennebeck, and from thence with Tisquamtum came
to the new planters at Patuxet, or Plymouth, and bro't them into acquaintance
with Massasoit, the great Sachem about those parts; without whose friendship
that new plantation would hardly have subsisted long.

THIS story premised, is the more to be observed in this place, because the
friendship upon the means and occasions aforesaid, confirmed between the
Indians in these eastern parts and the English, had continued steadfast and
constant to this year, when it was broken by another treacherous and wicked
practice of a like nature, and parrallel to that of the aforesaid Hunt, as may
more fully be declared afterward.

POSSIBLY the like satisfaction may prove the more probable means to procure a
settled peace. But to return whence this digression has been made. Some years
were spent to bring things to this issue: The adventurers were put to much care
and pains before they could get their patent confirmed and renewed against Many
obstructions they met with from some interlopers that began to look into the
trade of this country, and would irregularly have had a share therein, or made
it common to all traders, to which end they petitioned to a parliament then
called, to bring about their ends, but at the last it was settled firmly in the
hands of sundry noble and worthy patentees, Lords, Knights, gentlemen, and
merchants, commonly known by the name of the council of Plymouth, who had the
absolute power under the King for making all grants, and disposing of all lands
from the 40th to the 48th degrees of north latitude; all which was accomplished
about the year 1621. Some printed relations that speak of these transactions,
write much of the flourishing state, and hopeful prosperity of this plantation,
published about fifty years since, yet did it never appear by what followed,
that any considerable advantage did ever accrue to the first undertakers, from
this their new plantation of the eastern parts, unless by the trade of fish and
furs, which latter continued not long; as for the former, the chief benefit
redounded only to them that managed it by their own particular stocks, and
personal endeavors; and if without offense it may be spoken, the multitude of
patents soon after granted to gentlemen of broken fortunes, have provided but
places of an honorable exile or confinement, whither many deserving persons of
better education than fortune, were sent to shift for themselves in a foreign
land, without being further troublesome to those nearer home, on whom they had
their hopes and dependence; yet it must not be denied but that some of the
undertakers were at vast expense, casting their bread upon these waters, where
none of their friends and relations have as yet had an opportunity to find it:
The reason of which is not hard to give, in reference to all those lands and
territories that lie to the eastward of Piscataqua river. One main cause has
been the multiplicity of grants and patents for the dividing of the said tract
of land, for besides the strife that has been occasioned by the intricacy and
indistinctness of their liberties and bounds, (enough to have maintained a
greater number of lawyers than ever were the inhabitants) if the grantees had
been supplied with moneys proportionable to their suits and controversies about
their bounds and jurisdictions, which sometimes they have been ready to deside
with their swords, witness those fatal names imposed on such accounts upon some
places belonging to those parts, as Bloody-Point, Black-Point, Blue-Point, and
every considerable parcel of land being by patent granted to several particular
persons, hindered the erecting of townships and villages, which if it had been
otherwise disposed of, might have been full of towns, and well peopled, and
thereby the inhabitants had been able to have stood upon their guard, and
defended themselves against the common enemy, whereas now they were but like
scopoe dissolutoe, or like his arrows that being bound up in one bundle could
not be broken by an ordinary force, but being loose, were easily snapped
asunder by any single band. Another reason might be, the employing of such
agents and instruments as either wanted skill or fidelity to manage what they
were in^^^sted with, which made many of the adventurers long ago complain, that
(instead of bills of exchange and other returns which they expected) they
received nothing but large inventories of the wants of their several
plantations, and the servants sent over to impove them, which were all the
returns that many of them ever received for the large sums of money many
disbursed for the carrying on their affairs. A third reason may be the several
changes of government the inhabitants have passed under, which have occasioned
not only much vexation and expense to such as were upon the place, but much
discouragement to several others, who by the commodiousness of the place would
willingly have chosen stations in those parts, had they seen any hope of a
settled government ever like to be obtained; which is not hard to demonstrate,
by giving a little touch as we pass along, on the several changes of government
the places aforementioned have been molded into, and the several proprietors
that of late have claimed interest in the land. In the year 1624, a patent was
granted by the council of Plymouth, the grand proprietors, to Capt. Mason, for
a large tract of land about Piscataqua, but it not being distinctly bounded,
himself with Sir Ferdinando Gorges, obtained a joint patent in the year 1639,
for the land betwixt the east of Sagadahock, and the west of Naumkeag, but that
also interfering with the bounds granted before that time to sundry gentlemen
and merchants that had obtained a patent from the south of Charles river, to
the northward of Merrimack, Capt. Mason's bounds were afterward by consent (as
is said) of his agent or agents, reduced to some branches about Piscataqua
river (who yet could not agree with those that acted in the name of Shrewsbury
men) but being wholly neglected by the pretended proprietor or his successors,
(till of late days) was by the desire of the inhabitants yielded up to the
Massachusetts government, near twenty years since.

IN the year 1630, a patent was granted by the said council of Plymouth (signed
by the Earl of Warwick, and Sir Ferdinando Gorges, and sealed with the common
seal of the council aforesaid) to John Die, Thomas Lupe, Grace Harding, and John
Roach, of London, for a large tract of land on the south side of Sagadabock,
forty miles square by the seaside, and so up into the country: John Die
aforesaid, and his partners took in another as partner and associate with them,
Mr. Richard Dummer, of Newbury, in New England, in the year 1638, to whom they
delivered the original patent, with an order from them, and in their name to
take up the land described in the patent, but he being denied opportunity to
effect it, as also a ship formerly sent by the patentees for that end, not
accomplishing their desire, they not long after sold all their interest in the
said patent, to one Mr. Rigby, a Lancashire gentleman, who made Mr. Cleaves his
agent to manage the business of his purchased interest in the said patent; to
whom Mr. Dummer was ordered to deliver the original patent, which accordingly
he did: What trouble was occasioned soon after between the said Mr. Cleaves and
Mr. Umes, agent for Sir Ferdinando Gorges, is well known to the inhabitants of
the place, and need not be here mentioned; nor yet how the said Mr. Rigby came
afterward to lose his interest (at least with the inhabitants) in the patent.

IN the year 1632, Sir Ferdinando Gorges not resting in the joint patent
obtained for himself and Capt. Mason, obtained a distinct patent for himself,
and got it confirmed by King Charles the first, of blessed memory, for all that
large tract of land from Sagadahock to Piscataqua river, and so about an
hundred miles up into the country, by the name of the province of Maine. What
benefit and improvement was ever made thereof by his agents or successors, is
best known to themselves; but for the inhabitants, who upon one account or
another had been induced, either by any precedaneous grant or liberty from
himself, or his agents, to take up any land within the bounds of the said
province; they finding much inconvenience and trouble for want of an orderly
and settled government, did at the last, petition the general court of the
Massachusetts to be taken under their jurisdiction and government (reserving the
liberties and privileges of their former purchases and grants, as to title,
possession, and propriety to themselves) which was granted them, though not
only and altogether upon the grounds on which it was desired by the
petitioners. Yet notwithstanding all this, were not things settled either to
the comfort or content of the inhabitants: For sometimes some demanded right of
jurisdiction over them, by virtue of Sir Ferdinando's patent, sometimes
Commissioners employed by his Highness the Duke of York, attempted to settle a
government amongst the people; sometimes they tried what might be done by
agreement amongst themselves, but after their return for England, by one means
or other, the government relapsed again into the hands of the Massachusetts,
although a supersedeas thereunto seems to have been put by an order from his
Majesty this last year.

BY these several vicissitudes and changes of government, the flourishing of
the said province has been much obstructed, which else might have been much
advanced, and the inhabitants been put into a capacity to have secured
themselves against the late barbarous incursions of the Indians; and possibly
those exorbitancies that many of the present proprietors have run into, to the
just provocation of the Indians, might thereby have been prevented, and so the
mischief also which has ensued, might thereby have been averted: For a well
ordered government would never have suffered those things that now were
connived at, which if they had been timely looked into by such as had absolute
or positive and unquestioned power of rule in their hands, would have been
otherwise ordered, the present mischief that is come upon those places, might
thereby have been, if not prevented, yet more easily re^essed, than now it is
like to be.

AS for the tract of land that lies eastward beyond Kennebeck, betwixt that and
Pemmaquid, it is said to have belonged to one Mr. Aldworth and his successors,
who was Alderman of Bristol, and one that had a patent thereof, and employed
some as his agents, that did sometimes reside upon the place, and was lately
settled in some order of government by his Highness the Duke of York's
Commissioners, by whom also was an agreement made betwixt the Sagamores of the
Indians in those parts, and the English, at a court kept by their appointment
in Kennebeck, which if it had been observed, might in all probability have
prevented in a great measure the quarrel which is now fallen out betwixt the
English and the said Indians: For upon some jealousies of the rising of those
Indians about twelve or thirteen years since, it was agreed that if any
mischief should happen to be done by the English or Indians, one against
another, though it were to the killing any person, neither side should right
themselves, but complaint should be made to the Sagamores if the Indians did
the wrong, and to the court if it was done by the English; both which did
promise satisfaction should be made for the preventing any quarrel: The names
of the Sachems, as likewise of them that were in power at the court, do still
remain upon public record. But matters of government in those parts being since
collapsed, no authority more than what was merely voluntary and persuasive
being owned, things are now brought to that miserable state which follows next
to be declared.

EVER since the first settling of any English plantatation in those parts about
Kennebeck, for the space of above fifty years, the Indians always carried it
fair, and held good correspondence with the English, until the news came of
Philip's rebellion, and rising against the inhabitants of Plymouth colony in
the end of June, 1675; after which time it was apprehended by such as had the
examination of the Indians about Kennebeck, that there was a general surmise
amongst them, that they should be required to assist the said Philip, although
they would not own that they were at all engaged in the quarrel. The like
jealousies did appear in all the Indians that inhabited to the eastward of
Piscataqua, which plainly shows that there was a design of a general rising of
the Indians against the English all over the country (possibly as far as
Virginia, the Indians there making insurrections the same year) and that many
if not most of them were willing it should succeed, although the oldest and
wisest of them did not like it, fearing the issue, as they had cause: But many
of the young men about Casco Bay, and Amoscoggan, were certainly known to flock
thither the last year, and did, sundry of them, come short home: For herein
they acted but like savages, as those in Virginia did fifty years before,
showing themselves friendly and courteous to their new neighbors, till they
had an opportunity to do them mischief. So that notwithstanding many of the
inhabitants in the eastern, as well as in the western parts of the country,
that were wont to trade with the Indians, were not willing to believe any such
purpose among them, but were ready to think some of the ruder sort of the
English, by their imprudent and irregular actions, had driven them into this
rebellion; yet is it too evident that the said Indians (who naturally delight
in bloody and deceitful actions) did lay hold of any opportunity that might
serve as a pretense for their barbarous practices The Indians about Wammeset
and Piscataqua, that had joined with their countrymen in their rising against
the English the last winter, when they were pinched with hunger, in the cold
winter following returned back to the English, and desired to make peace, and
firmly engaged to continue their wonted friendship; yea, some of them, as if
they were really sorry for their murders and cruelties, of their own voluntary
motion came with the prisoners they had taken, and resigned them up to the
English, yet when their own ends were answered, and another opportunity was
offered of doing further mischief of a like nature, they presently returned to
their former practice, as is well known of Simon and Andrew, that had killed
some, and led others captive the last spring from Bradford and Haverhill, who
came in in the end of June to Major Waldern's, bringing home English prisoners
with them, yet did the very same Indians within less than two months after join
with the Amoscoggan and Kennebeck Indians, in committing the sad tragedies that
were last acted in those parts; yet was he and his partner suffered to escape
for want of sufficient guarding the prison where they were put, in order for
further trial. But sero sapiunt phryges; it is hoped that we shall after some
few more experiences of this nature, learn to beware of this subtle brood and
generation of vipers. Ever since enmity was put between the seed of the woman
and the seed of the serpent, it has been the portion of her seed in every
generation, and in every nation to meet with the sad effects of that enmity;
nor can they ever expect to find better dealing from any of the other sort,
further than either fear of their power, or hope of benefit by their favor, may
induce them to another disposition, as we the inhabitants of New England have
found by this late and sad experience in reference to these Pagans in the west,
amongst whom our lot is cast, they proving, as one says of the Mahometans in
the east, like a nest of hornets, that if any one of them chance to be
provoked, they will be all about his ears that comes near them. But it is now
time to begin with the particulars of the tragedy itself, that the reader
account not the prologue too long. It was on the 24th of June, 1675, when the
first mischief was done by the Indians about Mount-Hope, before twenty days
were over, the first fire began to kindle in these more remote and northerly
bounds of the said country, or two hundred and fifty miles distance, and upon
this occasion, the 11th of July, 1675, a letter was brought to Kennebeck from
one Henry Sawyer, an inhabitant of York, signifying the news of the Indians
rising about Plymouth, and that a course was taken to disarm the Indians along
the shore. This ^umour did so far awaken the inhabitants of those parts, that
the very next day, at a general meeting of the English, at one Capt.
Pa^tishal's house, several offered themselves as volunteers to go up the said
river of Kennebeck, to make discovery of the Indians fidelity, or else to fight
them if there was occasion. The third day after, marching up the river to
Quegeseck, they met with the inhabitants of Sheepscut river, which is a river
lying about twelve or fourteen miles to the north east of Kennebeck. Diverse of
the Indians thereabouts, by the persuasion of one Mr. Walker, that used to
trade with them, brought down an inconsiderable part of their ammunition, as a
few guns, a little powder and shot, with a few knives. About 7 of the Kennebeck
Indians, and 5 of those called Amoscoggan Indians, about Pegypscot (a river
more southward toward Casco) made this pretense of bringing in their arms.
Capt. Lake, Capt. Pattishall, with Mr. Wiswall, in whose hands was settled a
kind of military power for those parts, were sent for further to examine the
said Indians, of whom upon examination they saw reason to suspect some, if not
all, whereupon they sent messengers a second time to the Amoscoggan Indians,
and also a letter to Mr. Walker, to send down their arms and ammunition to them
for their greater security. After Mr. Wiswall was returned home, the 5
Amoscoggan Indians aforesaid, brought in their guns, but probably with no good
intent; for an Indian called Sown, having an ax in his hand, struck at one
Hosea Mallet, a Frenchman, but was prevented from doing him mischief; however,
the said Indian was presently bound and put into a cellar. Some of the English
that used to trade with those Indians were ready to excuse the Indian, saying
he was drunk, or that he was a distracted fellow, but Mr. Wiswall, with the
other two examinants, looked upon those as mere excuses, and altogether
groundless, for one of them to this day affirms that he was as rational and
sensible as any of the rest.

THE ancient Indians being asked what they thought was meet to be done in the
said case, said be was worthy to die for such an affront, yet they would be
glad if his life might be spared, offering to be jointly bound in his behalf,
to pay 40 beaver skins at the next fall voyage, giving their hand (...) of
their fidelity, and also leaving their arms in the hands of the English as a
pledge of their faithfully keeping those articles of peace concluded on betwixt
them. If they proved themselves honest men they were to have their arms again,
which was accordingly performed the last June, 1676; they having in the mean
time carried themselves peaceably toward the English. The day after, viz. July
the 19th, 1675, an Indian of great note amongst them, called Robbinhood, with
great applause of the rest, made a dance, and sung a song to declare their
content in what was transacted; and so they parted, setting the Indians at
liberty that had thus engaged for their friend Sown, the Indian; but yet to
this day not one skin of beaver was ever paid to the English, as was promised;
the Indians all this while were well provided for victuals by Capt. Lake, with
other supplies of rum and tobacco, even to the disgusting of some English then
present.

BUT the Indians left as hostages upon Sowen's account, however civilly they
were treated, ran all away at the last, trusting more to the celerity of their
own feet, than to the civility of their English friends, who after they were
escaped, joined with a parcel of their fellows soon after, about twenty in all,
in robbing the house of one Mr. Purchase, an ancient planter (...) Pegypscot
river, and a known trader with the Indians, whatever wrong may be pretended by
the said Indians, as done them in their trading (of which more may be spoken
afterward) that will in no wife excuse their perfidious treachery and
falsehood, in breaking covenant with the English, dissembling and seeking all
advantages of cruelty against their English neighbors, of which in the
following winter and summer, 1676, there will be a more full and undeniable
discovery. This was done in the beginning of September, 1675. Those Indians
that first assaulted Mr. Purchase's house, did no other mischief than pludering
it of strong liquor and ammunition, also killing a calf or two, with a few
sheep, but no more than what they eat, and spoiling a feather bed by ripping it
open to turn out the feathers, contenting themselves with the case, which they
might more easily carry away. They offered no incivility to the mistress of the
house (her husband and sons being at that time from home) yet one of her sons
approaching near the house, and finding it possessed by those new inhabitants,
he rode away with all speed, and yet no faster than there was need, for an
Indian followed him with a gun under his coat, to have shot at him, if he could
by his flattery and dissembling, have got him within the reach of his piece.

IT is said that at the first they used fair words, and spoke of trading, but
as they went away, told those of the house, that there were others coming after
that would deal far worse with them, which within a short time after came to
pass; for these were but the messengers of death, which was soon after
inflicted, and that in a most barbarous manner upon sundry inhabitants of the
neighboring plantations.

THE English in those parts being much incensed hereat, 25 of them soon after
going up Casco-Bay in a sloop and two boats to gather Indian corn, and to look
to what they had upon the said Bay, near Amoscoggan river; when they came near
the houses they heard a knocking, and a noise about the houses, and presently
espied two or three Indians, who as yet did not see them. The English being
come a good way from their vessel, endeavored to get between the Indians and
the woods, which when they perceived, they ran toward the water side, but the
English in pursuit killed one of them and wounded another, who however escaped
away in a canoe across the river, a third running back toward the woods, fled
to the other Indians, and acquainted them with what was done, who presently
came down and lay in wait to intercept the English, that thought of no danger,
but scattered themselves all about the place to gather their corn, and lade the
boats therewith, but before they were ready to go away, the Indians coming
down, fired upon them, and forced them all into the sloop; had not some of them
been better prepared than the rest, they might all have been cut off; for some
little resistance being made by them that were ready with their guns, it gave
the rest an opportunity to get all into the sloop, yet not without many wounds.
So with much ado, they all escaped with their lives, leaving the two boats a
most laden with corn, a prey to the Indians, who presently burnt one, and
plundered the other of all that was therein; some are ready to think that the
English did imprudently begin the quarrel, and not first enquire into what the
Indians were about in the house, and seek redress according to the
aformentioned agreement, made at the court in Kennebeck. But if this happened
after what follows next to be related, viz. that which was done to old Mr.
Wakely and his family, the English can be blamed for nothing but their
negligence and security, in that having alarmed their enemies, they stood not
better upon their guard, which is not very certain; for it is thought that within
a few days after, or the next week, a more horrible outrage was committed upon
the family of an ancient man, whose name was Wakely, an inhabitant of
Casco-Bay, who had some years before removed from Gloucester or Cape-Ann, out
of some discontent, which afterward he often bewailed, resolving either to
have returned back, or else to have removed to some securer place, but he was
arrested by the sons of violence before he could effect his purpose.

THIS old man, together with his wife, his son, and his daughter in law, (then
far advanced in pregnancy) with three grandchildren, were cruelly murdered by
those barbarous savages at one time; another of his grandchildren was taken
alive and led into captivity, a daughter of his was said to be carried to
Narrhaganset, which shows that they joined with the southern Indians in the
rebellion. When once these Indians had embrued their hands in English blood,
they were emholdened to the like bloody attempts in the adjacent places.

THIS Wakely lived so far from his neighbors, or else was encompassed with
creeks or rivers, that no relief could presently be sent to him; however,
Lieut. Ingerson, of Casco, the next day with a file of men, repaired to the
place where his house stood, to see what was the reason of the fire they
discerned the day before, where they found the house burnt to ashes, the bodies
of the old man and his wife half consumed with the fire, the young woman
killed, and three of the grandchildren having their brains beat out, and their
bodies laid under some oaken planks not far from the house; one girl of about
11 years old, was carried captive by them, and having been carried up and down
the country some hundreds of miles, as far as Narrhaganset fort, was this last
June returned back to Major Waldern's, by one Squando, the Sagamore of Saco; a
strange mixture of mercy and cruelty.

SOON after, Capt. Bonithon's and Major Phillips's dwellings were assaulted,
one on the east, the other on the west side of Saco river. It is said they had
seasonable notice of what was intended against them by their barbarous enemies,
those Amoscoggan Indians, by an Indian of Saco, their neighbor, better minded
than the rest of his countrymen, who observing a strange Indian coming to his
wigwam in company with some of his acquaintance, one of whom informed him,
after the rest with the stranger were gone, that the said stranger came from
the westward, and that his business was to persuade the eastern Indians to fall
upon the English in their dwellings here, as the rest had done to the westward.
Capt. Bonithon, either upon this information, or upon the knowledge of what was
done a little before at Casco, had left his house, and was retired over the
river with his family to Major Phillips's garrison. Thus two are better than
one, for otherwise both might have been destroyed; for upon the 18th of
September following, being the seventh day of the week, about 11 o'clock, those
at Major Phillips's garrison saw Capt. Bonithon's house on fire, which by the
good Providence of God was to them as the firing of a beacon, giving them
notice to look to themselves, their enemies being now come; for otherwise they
might, to their great disadvantage, have been too suddenly surprised, for
within half an hour after they were upon them, when a sentinel placed in the
chamber gave notice that he saw an Indian by the fence side near a corn field;
Major Phillips, not willing to believe till he might see with his own eyes, ran
hastily up, another of his men coming after, cried, Major what do you mean? do
you intend to be killed; at which words he turned suddenly back from the window
out of which he was looking, when presently a bullet struck him on the
shoulder, grazing only upon it without breaking the bone. The Indians upon the
shot, thinking he had been slain thereby (as they heard afterward) gave a
great shout, upon which they discerned that they were surrounded by them,
whereupon they instantly fired on the enemy from all quarters, and from the
flankers of the fortification, so as they wounded the Captain of the Indians,
who presently leaving the assault, retired three or four miles from the place,
where he soon after died, as they were informed: He counseled them to leave
the siege, but they were resolved not so to quit the place; nor were those
within less resolute to defend it: One of the best men was soon after disabled
from any further service, by a wound he received in one of the vollies made
upon them by the assailants; but that did not in the least daunt the rest of
the defendants, who continued still to fire upon the enemy: This dispute lasted
about an hour, after which the enemy despairing to take the house by assault,
though it upon a device how to burn it.

FIRST, firing the house of one of his tenants, then his saw-mill, after that
his corn-mill, hoping by that means to draw them out of the garrison to put out
the fire, but missing of their purpose in that, they called out, you English
cowardly dogs, come out and quench the fire. They continued this sport all the
afternoon, continually almost without any intermission firing upon them. The
besieged hoped for relief from the town, but none came, the Major still
encouraging his men to hold it out, which they manfully did all that night,
when they were alarmed almost every half hour; and between whiles they could
hear their axes and other instruments, knocking about the mills till the next
day. Those within the house conceived they were preparing some engine wherewith
to burn the house, which really was the case, for about four or five o'clock in
the morning, at the sitting of the moon, the Major was called by his men to
look out, when he saw a cart with four wheels, having a barricado built in the
fore part to keep off shot, and filled with combustible matter, birch rinds,
straw, powder, andpoles 20 foot long, ready to fire the house; he bid them let
them drive it within pistol shot, before they made any shot against them; his
men were a little discouraged at the fight of this engine; but he bid them be
of good courage, and use means putting their trust in God, who, he was
confident would relieve them. The cart when brought a little nearer, became
unweildy by reason of the barricado planted in it, and being to pass through a
small gutter, one wheel stuck fast in the slough, which bro't the cart suddenly
to the left, whereby the drivers lay all open to their right flanker, when they
fired upon them out of the said flanker, and having so fair a shot upon them,
and not being above pistol shot from the place, they killed 6 of the enemy, and
wounded 15, as they found afterward, which no doubt made them too late to
repent of their resolution, not to follow their Captains counsel and example in
leaving the siege; for now they presently departed; so as at sunrise, those
within the house espied 40 of them marching away, but how many more were in the
company they could not tell.

THE Indians it seems went toward Blue Point, where it is said they killed
several persons; but these in the house feared they went for more help, and
expected their return; but it seems their courage failed them as to another
attempt upon an house so well garrisoned and manfully defended. Major Phillips
sent to the town for help, acquainting them with what had passed, but none was
sent them either that day or the next, so having spent almost all their
ammunition, the people that were with him would not be persuaded to tarry
longer than tuesday morning, which constrained him and his family to remove to
the town. About a fortnight after, the Indians hearing thereof, came and burnt
down the empty house. There were 50 persons in the said house during the time
of the siege, and but 10 able hands; they had 5 more that could do something,
but through age or minority, not able to make any great resistance; yet it
pleased God, in whose hands are all men's lives and limbs, who is never wont to
fail them, who in time of danger are ready to confide in his power and
goodness, as not to neglect the use of due means for their own preservation, so
to order things, that not one person of all those 50 was either killed or
mortally wounded. Major Phillips himself was wounded, but not dangerously, at
the beginning of the assault, his mills with other edifices were the first day
burnt by the enemy, and so were all the houses at Saco, or most of them soon
after, that were above the fishermens stages. One Mrs. Hitcock being carried
captive by the enemy from the same place, died in the winter following, by
eating some poisonous root instead of ground nuts, as was reported by the
Indians afterward.

MUCH about the same time, five persons going up the river of Saco, were all
killed by the same Indians.

THESE tragedies being thus acted at Casco-Bay and Saco, those barbarous
enemies dispersed themselves in parties, intending to do all the mischief they
could to the English inhabiting about that side of the country. In the same
month of September they came down toward Piscataqua, doing the like spoil upon
the inhabitants of the several branches of that river, which they had been
doing elsewhere. In the first place they burnt the two Cheflyes houses about
oyster river, and killed two men that were passing along the river in a canoe,
and carried away an old Irishman, with a young man taken from about Exeter, who
both of them soon after made an escape to a garrison at salmon falls in
Kittery, by the help of an Indian better disposed than the rest, the first
after seven weeks, the other after a month's captivity.

ABOUT the same time one Goodman Robinson, of Exeter, with his son, were
traveling toward Hampton, where, as they passed along, they were way laid by
three Indians, viz. John Sampson, Cromwell, and John Linde, who shot the old
man, and left him dead upon the place; his son, hearing the guns, escaped their
hands by running into a swamp, whither the Indians pursued him, but could not
overtake him, so he got safe into Hampton about midnight, where he related what
had besel him by the way, and how narrowly he avoided the danger, intimating
likewise, that he feared his father was killed, which was found too true, by
Lieut. Saver, who the next day with 12 soldiers of ^^e town went to search
those woods, where they found ^^e poor old man shot through his back, the
bullet having passed through his body, and was stopped by the skin on the other
side. Another person of Exeter, whose name was Foulsam, was at the same time
driving a pair of oxen in the same road, where, soon after he heard the report
of the guns when Robinson was killed, he espied the three Indians creeping upon
their bellies toward him, to do as much for him as they had done for Robinson,
but leaving his oxen, he put on his house with all speed, and so was delivered
from the danger that the other fell into; it is reported that one of the
Indians made a shot at him; but he was either got out of their reach, or else
they missed their aim at that time. The same Indians had a little before mer
with another Englishman in those woods, one Charles Randlet, whom they carried
captive, although he soon after escaped out of their hands, by the help of
another Indian called James. It is said there were four Indians of that
company, and that the fourth was sent away with Randlet, so that there were but
three seen together at the killing and pursu^ (...) the other aforementioned.
One of the said Indi^ (...) viz. John Samson, was killed by some of Capt.
Hathorn's soldiers at Casco Bay, in September following, 1676, when the scou^s
of our forces came upon the Indians on a sudden, and had a small brush with
them, but all the rest made a shift to get away: As for the other two, viz.
Cromwell and John Linde, one of them, it is said, is since killed, or taken and
sold away, the other is at Kennebeck, whom vengeance may also in due time
overtake, as it has done the other.

WITHIN a few days after that barbarous fact at Oyster river, two Indians, viz.
one named Andrew, and the other Hopehood, the son of him called Robinhood,
assaulted the house of one Tozer at Newechewannick, wherein were fifteen
persons, yet all women and children, who without all doubt had all of them
fallen into the merciless hands of the too cruel and barbarous caitiffs, had
not a young maid of about 18 years of age, first espied them, who being endued
with more courage than ordinarilly the rest of the sex use to be (the blessing
of Jael light upon her) first shut too the door, whereby they were denied
entrance till the rest within escaped to the next house, that was better
fortified; that young heroess kept the door fast against them so long, till the
Indians had chopped it in pieces with their hatchets, when entering the house,
they knocked the poor maid down with their hatchets, and gave her many other
wounds, leaving her for dead upon the place; after which they passed on toward
the next dwelling, in their way meeting with two children that had escaped the
house first broken open by them, they killed one of them, of three years old,
which could not follow fast enough, or else they that carried it could not
convey it over a fence soon enough to save themselves and it; and carried away
the other of seven years old, which however was returned safe within half a
year after. The poor maid that had ventured her use so far to save many others,
was by a strange Providence enabled to recover so much strengh after they were
gone, as to repair to the next garrison, where she was soon after healed of her
wounds, and restored to perfect health again.

THE next day toward night more of the barbarous enemies being gathered
together, they made an assault upon the neighboring dwellings. The English as
many as could be spared out of the garrison (not above 8 in number) pursued
after them about half a mile, but night coming on, it was judged best to
retreat, lest otherwise they might have been intercepted in their return home,
by any of them lying in ambush, which is their usual way of doing mischief.
After diverse shot made on both sides, but 5 of the enemy appeared; who yet took
the advantage of Capt. Wincol's absence, (whose dwelling was not far off) to
burn his house and barn, with another house and two barns more, wherein was
much English ^orn, supposed to be above an hundred bushels in one of them.
After they had done this mischief they fled away. The next day after, the same
Indians, or others of their fellows, came upon the other side of the river,
from whence they shot over several times, to some that were grinding in the
mill, but after the exchanging of many shot on both sides the river betwixt
them, 6 of the enemy showed themselves in the twilight, uttering several
insolent and barbarous speeches, calling our men English dogs, etc. yet all
this while out of reach of their shot, and then they ran all away like dogs
after they had done barking.

AFTER this those very Indians, as was supposed, burned 5 or 6 houses about
Oyster river, and killed two men, viz one William Roberts, and his son in law.
The inhabitants of Dover, with some other resolute young men, being much
provoked by these many insolences and injuries done by the enemy, obtained
liberty from the Major of the regiment, to try whether they could not meet with
some of the Indians, by secret amputhes, and skulking amongst the bushes and
trees, as the Indians used to do with them; to which end about twenty divided
themselves into several small parties: Soon after as they were looking for the
enemy, a party of ours espied 5 of the Indians, some gathering corn in the
field, while the rest of them were busied in heating of an oven to bake some of
the fruit which they also gathered in the same field. The English were at such
a distance that they could not make any sign to their comrades, without being
discovered by the Indians in the field; wherefore two of them crept as near as
they could to the house, at one end of the field, where they suddenly rushed
upon two of the wretches, and knocked them down with the butt end of their
muskets, which was not done so silently, but the other three in the field took
the alarm and fled away, who might else as easily as the other two have been
surprised.

THESE outrages thus daily committed, filled all the plantations about
Piscataqua with fear and confusion; scarce any place where there was not reason
for some to complain either of the loss of their friends, or burning of their
houses; which caused most of them that lived scatteringly, at any distance from
neighbors, either to garrison their houses, or else to desert their own
dwellings, and to repair to their next neighbors that were better fortified
than themselves; but all the inhabitants in those parts in general were alarmed
to stand upon their guard.

ON the 7th of October following, being a day of public humiliation, a man was
shot down as he was riding between two garrison houses about Newechewannick,
and died of his wounds two months after; about the same instant of time two
young men were shot dead about a mile from that place; these two had their arms
or guns with them, which were carried away by those who killed them, together
with their upper garments: It it not said that these three last (though killed
upon a day of humifiation) were surprised in their repairing to, or returning
from the place of public worship, which would in a great measure have abated
the sorrow of their sad funerals, if when they were suddenly arrested by the
harbingers of death, they had been found so doing. Soon after this they
assaulted another house at Oyster river, notwithstanding it was garrisoned, and
meeting with a good old man, whose name was Beard, without the garrison, they
killed him upon the place, and in a barbarous manner cut off his head, and set
it upon a pole in derision. Not far off about the same time they burnt another
house and barn.

UPON the 16th of October, being Sat^^^ay, about an 100 of the Indians were
gathered together to assault Newechewannick; they began with one named Tozer,
half a mile from the upper garrison, at Salmon Falls: The said Tizer was
presently killed, his son taken captive (but returned after some months
restraint) several guns being shot at this assault, alarmed Lieut. Plaisted, at
the next garrison, who like a man of a public spirit, immediately sent out 7
men from the garrison under his command, to see what the matter was, but being
met by an ambush laid in the way as they went, lost 2 or 3 of their company,
the rest hardly escaping back to the place from whence they came; whereupon the
said Lieut. Plaisted immediately dispatched away a messenger to Major Waldern,
at Quechecho, which because it seems to be the last time that ever that good
and useful man set pen to paper, the letter shall be here inserted.

Salmon Falls, October 16th, 1675.
Mr. Richard Waldern and Lieut. Coffin, these are to inform you, that just now
the Indians are engaging us with at least 100 men, and have slain four of our
men already, Richard Tozer, James Barny, Isaac Bottes, and Tozer's son, and
burnt Benoni Hodsdan's house: Sirs, if ever you have any love for us and the
country, now show youselves with men to help us, or else we are all in great
danger to be slain, unless our God wonderfully appear for our deliverance. They
that cannot fight let them pray; nothing else, but I rest,

Yours to serve you, ROGER PLAISTED, GEORGE BROUGHTON.


WHAT answer was returned to this importunate and pathetical letter is not
fully known at present; most probably he that was most concerned in the
contents of it was either absent from home, or in no capacity to send the
relief desired, which if it could have been had, might have prevented the sad
mischief that fell out the next day ^ when Lieut. Plaisted being more earnestly
bent to perform that last office of love to his deceased friends, whom he could
not by all his endcavours save from the danger of death, while they were in the
land of the living, would needs venture himself with 20 soldiers out of his
garrison, to fetch off the dead bodies.

TO that end he ordered a pair of oxen to be yoked to bring them to his
garrison, in order to their christian burial, not considering that the Indians
lay skulking thereabouts, waiting for such opportunities. They went first to
the furthest place, where they found R. Tozer's body, and put it in the cart,
but coming back to take up the other two bodies which were fallen in a little
swamp nearer to the garrison, they were set upon by 150 of the enemy, who had
hid themselves in the bushes, and under a stone wall, and logs in the way as
they were to pass; by the sudden noise of the guns the cattle being frighted,
ran away to the garrison with such of the dead as were first laid thereon (and
possibly with one of them wounded at that instant) leaving their owners to
fight it out with the enemy. Lieut. Plaisted being thus desperately assaulted,
he with his 20 men was forced to retreat to a place of better advantage; but
being there so warmly pursued, they were not able to abide it long, although
they killed and mortally wounded several of the Indians, as themselves have
since confessed; but they most of them being so much over-matched, took the
opportunity of a fair retreat, and so got safe to their garrison, while Lieut.
Plaisted out of the height of his courage, disdaining either to fly from, or
yield himself (for it is said the Indians were loath to kill him, but desirous
rather to take him prisoner) into the hands of such cursed caitiffs, did fight
it out desperately, till he was slain upon the place; his eldest son and
another man were slain in their too late retreat, and his other son was sorely
wounded, so that he died within a few weeks after.

THE Indians were contented with this mischief for the present, and slunk away
into the woods before the next day, when Captain Frost came up from Sturgeon
Creek, a few miles below the river, with a party of his friends, and buried the
dead. During these onsets the enemy also took the advantage to burn three
houses and two barns before they left the place.

THE latter end of the same month they burnt a mill near the same place
belonging to Mr. Hutchinson, a merchant of Boston; from whence they came down
toward Sturgeon Creek, where they burnt one house and killed two men not far
from Captain Frost's dwelling, he escaping himself very narrowly, being shot at
by the enemy, about ten in number, who might easily have burnt his house and
taken all that was in it, being but three boys besides himself, had he not used
this policy, to call out to some to march this, and the other way, to look
after the Indians, as if he had had many at hand to command, which under God
was the means of his escape; for his house was neither fortified, nor well
manned, although far from neighbors.

THE next day the said Indians passed down the river on Kittery side, killed
one man, whose house they first plundered, and then set it on fire; all this
was done just over against Portsmouth, from whence out of a small battery was
discharged a piece of ordnance, which by a good Providence was directed so to
fling its shot, as it fell very near a party of the Indians, for they were so
affrighted therewith (if none of them were killed) that they left a good part
of their plunder near the place. They were pursued by some of the English
before they could recover their home, and by the help of the snow that fell
about that time, were traced till they were overtaken, but being near a swamp
escaped, through haste leaving two of their packs behind.

SOON after, they went up the river again to Quechecho, where they burnt a
house and two or three barns. -- Another party of them got over or beyond the
other branches of Piscataqua river, toward Exeter, and Lampney Eele river,
where they killed one man. Many of them were seen in the woods about Exeter,
and between Hampton and Exeter, where they killed one or two men in the woods
as they were traveling homewards, occasioning the people of those towns to
stand continually upon their guard, which proved a great annoyance to the
inhabitants.

BUT let us look a little back to the plantations more eastward from Piscataqua
river, where these outrages of the Indians first began.

AT Casco-Bay, Lieut. Ingerson's son with another man, going out a fowling
about this time, were both killed before they returned home, his father's
houses being burnt, with many others also thereabouts.

AT Black Point, Lieut. Augur with two more were assaulted by the Indians,
where after many shot exchanged betwixt them, himself was so wounded, that he
died soon after, and his brother also was killed within a few days after, not
far from the same place.

WHEN the rising of the Indians first began in those eastern parts (with us
called the county of Yorkshire) Capt. Wincol of Newechewannick, with some
others, having a sympathy for the sufferings of his neighbors, marched up that
way with a small party of men. In his first skirmish with the enemy he chanced
to lose two or three of his company; the rest, not being above 11 in all, as
they were marching along by the sea side were assaulted by a great number of
the Indians, judged to be 150; being hard beset with so great a number, they
retreated to an heap of bolts that lay near the water side, by the shelter of
which they lay safe from the enemy's guns, and so well played their few guns,
that they slew many of the Indians, and put them all to a kind of rout at last;
after which, by the help of an old canoe, they recovered safe to the other side
of the bank. But nine Saco men had worse success, who came with a good
intention to help their friends, upon the hearing of their guns; but as they
came to rescue Capt Wincol with his small party, they themselves fell into an
ambush of the enemy, and so were all cut off, with two other men also, near the
place where the first skirmish was, for the Indians from the shore side could
discern any that were coming toward them when they were at a great distance,
and so might easily way-lay them before they could come up to them. Near upon
seven houses were burnt about this time, and some persons killed at Black Point.

TWO persons were killed at Wells in the beginning of winter, one of them was a
servant to Mr. William Symonds (one of the principal men in the town aforesaid)
the gentleman himself with his family were removed to a garrison house in the
middle of the town. His servant going early in the morning to look after some
business there, tarried longer than was needful, to provide something for
himself, the Indians invited themselves to breakfast with him, making the poor
fellow pay the shot, when they had done, with the loss of his life.

A WEEK after one Cross was slain at Wells likewise, who was a kind of a
distracted fellow. Also one Isaac Cousins was there killed in the beginning of
winter, after there had been some overtures of peace between Major Waldern and
the Indians.

WITH such kind of mutual encounters was the latter part of the year spent
betwixt the Indians and the English from Piscataqua river to Kennebeck, from
the beginning of August to the end of November, wherein many were slain on both
sides; of the English in those parts were slain upwards of fifty; the enemy
lost, as appeared afterward by their own confession, above 90, partly in the
aforesaid skirmishes, and partly in their joining with the Indians to the
westward, whither it is said, many of them were invited to repair, to help
destroy the English, in hopes to enjoy their possessions afterward; but God
had otherwise determined, who did arise at last to save the meek ones of the
earth, and plead the cause of his people.

THE Governor and Council of Massachusetts had at this time their hands full
with the like attempts of Philip and his accomplices to the westward, yet were
not unmindful of the deplorable condition of these eastern plantations; having
committed the care thereof to the Majors of the respective regiments of the
several counties on that side of the country, but more especially to the care
and prudence of the Honorable Major D. Denison, Major General of the colony, a
getleman who by his great insight in, and long experience of all martial
affairs, was every way accomplished for the managing that whole affair; he had,
to ease the other side of the country, drawn out a sufficient number of
soldiers from the next counties, to have reduced all the Indians eastward to
their obedience; but just as they were intended to march up to the headquarters
of the Indians, to fall upon them there, viz. to Ossapy and Pigwauchet, about
an hundred miles up into the country northward, the winter setting in so sharp
and severe in the beginning of December, and latter end of November, it was not
possible to have marched a day's journey into the woods without hazarding all
their lives that should venture up, the snow being found generally in those
woods four foot thick on the 10th of December, so as it was not possible for
any to have traveled that way unless they carried rackets under their feet,
wherewith to walk upon the top of the snow: This only consideration forced them
to lay aside their design for the present, but soon after it was done to their
hands; for the depth of the snow, and sharpness of the cold, were so extreme,
that the Indians in those parts were so pinched therewith, that being starved
they began to sue for peace, making their address first to Major Waldern on
that account, by whose mediations that whole body of Indians eastward were
brought to an hopeful conclusion of peace, which was mutually agreed upon, and
possibly might have remained firm enough to this day, had there not been too
just an occasion given for the breaking of the same, by the wicked practice of
some lewd persons which opened the door, and made way for the bringing in all
those sad calamities and mischiess that have since fallen upon those parts of
the country, as shall hereafter be declared.

IN the latter end of June, 1676, the Indians that had made a general
conspiracy against the English. were strangely dispersed and dispirited, so
that they from that time began to separate one from another, and every nation
of them to shift for themselves, as has already been mentioned in the former
part of this narrative. Canonicus, the great Sachem of the Narrhagansets,
distrusting the proffers of the English, was slain in the woods by the Mobawks,
his Squaw surrendering herself, by this means her life was spared.

MANY of those about Lancaster, and the places adjoining thereto, did cunningly
endeavor to hide themselves amongst those Indians about Piscataqua, that had
newly made their submission to the English, by Major Waldern's means, and
concluded a peace, ye could neither dissemble their nature and disposition
past before from suspicion of mischief, nor yet so artisicially conceal their
persons, but they were easily discerned by such as in former times had any
acquaintance with the eastern Indians by way of trade, or other converse:
Whereupon the forces newly raised in the Massachusetts, under the command of
Capt. William H^thonne, and Capt. Joseph Sill, designed for the subduing of
those Indians about the river of Merrimack and Piscataqua, that still stood out
in hostility against the English, meeting with those under the command of Major
Waldern aforesaid, and Capt. Frost of Kittery; it was mutually agreed betwixt
those several commanders to seize upon all those Indians that at that time were
met together about Major Waldern's dwelling at Quechecho; the design succeeded
according to expectation, and all the Indians were handsomely surprised the 6th
of September, 1676, without the loss of any persons life, either Indian or
English; to the number of near 400; by which device, after our forces had them
all in their hands, they separated the peaceable from the perfidious, that had
been our enemies during the late troubles; finding above 200 involved in the
former rebellion, more or less, they accordingly were sent down to the Governor
and Council at Boston, who adjudged 7 or 8 of them immediately to die; such as
were known to have had their hands in the blood of the English, or that had
been shed by their means; the rest that were found only accessaries to the late
mischiefs, had their lives spared, but were sent into other parts of the world
to try the difference between the friendship of their neighbors here, and
their service with other masters elsewhere.

THOSE who had been always peaceable and true to the English, never
intermeddling in the quarrel, as Wannalancet, the Sagamore of Pennicook, and
some others, were quietly dismissed to their own places. Besides those that
were surprised at the time aforesaid, there were several others who had been
the chief actors, that were taken up and down in those woods beyond Merrimack,
and so were delivered up to justice; as John Manoco, Sagamore Sam, old Jethro,
with some others, as has been already mentioned, yet young Jethro brought in
40 at one time. It was a special ^^vor from God so to order it, that the
Indians aforesaid, were so surprised; for had they continued in their former
rebellion, and had taken the opportunity to have joined with the eastern
Indians, as some of them did a few months before, they would in all likelihood
have utterly destroyed all the plantations of the English beyond Piscataqua
river, as manifestly appears by the mischief which was lately done by means of
a few, that by too much connivance of some in those parts, that entertained a
better opinion of them than it seems they deserved. For whereas mention was
formerly made of a small party of Indians, that on the 3d day of May, in this
present year, had murdered one Thomas Kembel, of Bradford, and carried away his
wife and 5 children captive; yet two or three of the actors did, upon what
consideration is not known, return the woman and children again within six
weeks, and because of their voluntarily returning of them, were dealt more
favorably with; being only put into prison at Dover, for a time; yet possibly
conceiving that a prison was but a preparation for a worse evil, they took an
opportunity (two of the chief actors in the aforesaid mischief, one called
Simon, the other Andrew) to convey themselves out of the place of restraint,
and afterward going amongst the Amoscoggan and Kennebeck Indians, have joined
with them in those bloody and cruel depredations lately made in those parts,
which follow in order next to be related.

SOME little color or pretense of injury was alleged before those eastern
Indians began their outrage, both in the former, as well as in the present
year; the chief actor or rather the beginner of all the aforesaid mischiefs
eastward, is one Squande, the Sagamore of Saco Indians, whose Squaw, as is
said, was abused by a rude and indiscreet act of some English seaman, the last
summer, 1675, who either overset the canoe wherein the said squaw with her
child were sailing in a river thereabouts, or else to try whether the children
of the Indians as they had heard, could swim as naturally as any other
creatures, wittingly cast her child into the water; but the squaw immediately
diving into the water after it, fetched it up from the bottom of the river, yet
it so falling out that within a while after the said child died (which it might
have done if no such affront had been offered) the said Squando, father of the
child, has been so provoked thereat, that he has ever since set himself to do
all the mischief he can to the English in those parts, and was never as yet,
since that time, truly willing to be reconciled, although he is said to have
sent home some that were taken captive the last year. Surely if their hearts
had not been secretly filled with malice and revenge before, they might have
obtained satisfaction for the wrong done at an easier rate; more probable it is
that this was only an occasion to vent the mischief they had formerly conceived
in their hearts.

THERE is an injury of an higher nature, mentioned as the ground of their
quarrel with us who live about Pemmaquid and Kennebeck, which happened the last
spring, viz. one Laughton, with another person or more, who having obtained
under the hand of Major Waldern, a warrant to seize any Indians eastward that
had been guilty of any murder or spoil done to the English in those parts, did
(most perfidiously and wickedly entice some of the Indians about Cape Sables,
who never had been in the least manner guilty of any injury done to the
English) on board their vessel, or else some other way, and then carried them
away to fell them for slaves; which the Indians in those parts look upon as an
injury done to themselves, and have alleged it to the inhabitants of
Pemmaquid, as one of the principal grounds of their present quarrel: The thing
alleged is too true as to matter of fact, and the persons that did it were
lately committed to prison in order to their further trial. Yet all those
Indians do, or may know full well, that they who did them that wrong, were
liable to due punishment (or else their quarrel might be uncounted just, and
they considered as Indians, must have the more allowance) if they could be
found, nor ever were any countenanced amongst us, that had done them any kind
of injury, nor did those that take upon them the revenging of the injury, know
that they were inhabitants of this country that did the wrong; nor was there
ever any orderly complaint made thereof; but this cannot excuse their
perfidiousness and cruelty. Some other pretenses alleged by the said Indians
that yet do bear no proportion to the mention of a wrong or injury, viz.
because our traders were forbidden to fell any ammunition to any Indians
whatsoever; which those Indians say they cannot live without; yet seeing they
themselves, as well as the westward Indians have so ill improved that which
they had before, there was little reason why they should quarrel with us for
felling no more.

FURTHER also, it is affirmed by some persons worthy of credit, that for diverse
years past have lived in those parts, that the Indians thereabouts need not
have wanted powder or shot, only they wanted something wherewith to cloak their
malicious and barbarous practices of late committed against us; but there being
different opinions about this point, we shall leave it for the present. But
this being premised in reference to the pretended ground, or occasion of the
quarrel, it remains that the effects thereof be now related.

BEFORE the war with Philip was well ended to the southward, there was a fresh
alarm founded again to the eastward; for on the 11th of August, 1676, the very
day before Philip's heart, that had harbored so many mischievous and
treacherous devices against the English, was by one of his own company shot
through, a party of Indians began their outrages at Casco in a most perfidious
and treacherous manner, killing and carring away captive, to the number of 30
persons, and burning their houses; amongst whom was the family of one Anthory
Bracket, an inhabitant of Casco, who was thought to have been killed, but he
himself, with his wife, and one of his five children carried away captive, with
a negro, did happily make an escape from their bloody and deceitful hands, in
November next ensuing.

THE manner how Anthony Bracket and his wife made their escape was very
remarkable, and therefore judged worthy to be here inserted, although out of
due place. The Indians that led them captive, having brought them to the north
side of Casco Bay, news was brought to the said Indians of the surprizal of
Arowsick house, in Kennebeck, with all the stores therein, which did so rejoice
them, that they made all haste to share in the good things there to be had:
Thus eager to be gone, they promised Bracket and his wife that they also should
have a share therein if they would make haste after them, bringing along a
burden alloted to each of them: The woman having a little before observed an
old birch canoe lying by the water side, hoped it was an opportunity Providence
offered for their escape; whereupon she first prudently asked the Indians to
let the negro, their own servant (at the same time carried captive by them)
help them to carry their burdens, which was granted; then she begged of them a
piece or two of meat, which was not denied them. Thus being furnished with help
and provision, the Indians leaving them behind to come after with their several
burdens, and a young child, they could not but look upon it as a nutrus
Divinus, to bid them shift for themselves: The woman also found a needle and
thread in the house, with which she mended the canoe, while they tarried on
that side of the bay, in which they soon ventured to get away, which
prosperously succeeded; for in that old canoe they crossed a water eight or
nine miles broad, and when they came on the south side of the bay, they might
have been in as much danger of other Indians, that had lately been about
Black-Point, and had taken it; but they were newly gone: So things on all sides
thus concurring to help forward their deliverance, they came safely to the fat
at Black-Point, where also by special Providence they met with a vessel bound
for Piscataqua. that came into that harbor but a few hours before they came
thither, by which means they attived safe in Piscataqua river soon after; all
which circumstances are very worthy to be noted.

AMONGST those Indians that seized this Bracket's family, the Chief was one
Simon, who had but a little before escaped out of Dover prison, where he was
not carefully overlooked; he had had his hand in the murder of sundry English,
as he had confessed; not missing any, save one, on whom he had discharged his
gun; but because he came in voluntarily, bringing in a woman and 5 children of
the English, who had been carried captive a little before, it was questioned
whether his last act of submission might not balance his former transgression,
and therefore he was committed to that, not so secure a prison, till his case
might be further considered of. It is said that coming to that Bracket's house
over night, he pulled forth a counterfeited pass, under the hands of some
public officers, or men entrusted with that service, making show of all
friendship; but in the morning, or soon after, he pulled off the vizor of a
friend, and discovered what he was; yet granting life to this person and his
family, that did not, or could not resist, which he denied to someof the
neighbors not far off, who were many of them killed by this bloody villian and
his partners.

THERE are some circumstances in the assault of Anthony Bracket's house very
considerable, which, because it was the first outrage committed by the Indians
in this their second insurrection, 1676, are worthy of a more particular
remembering.

THIS Indian beforementioned, called Simon, after he had escaped out of the
prison at Dover, came to Casco, and either in the end of July or beginning of
August, acquainted himself with this Anthony Bracket, and often frequented his
house. Upon the 9th of August some of the Indians having killed a cow of his,
the Indian Simon coming to his house promised to bring the Indians to him that
had killed his cow. In the mean time they of the place sent two men to Major
Waldern's at Dover, to complain of this injury done by the Indians, but before
their return, very early in the morning on the 11th of August, Simon with a
party of Indians came to Anthony Bracket's house, and told him there were the
Indians that had killed his cow; but as soon as they had said that, the Indians
went further into his house and took hold of all the guns they could see;
Bracket asked what was the meaning of that, Simon replied, that so it must be,
asking him withal, whether he had rather serve the Indians, or be slain by
them, to which he answered, that if the case were so, he would rather choose to
serve them than be killed by them; Simon replied, that then they must be bound,
which was presently done. The said Bracket, his wife, and a negro were all
bound by the Indians; his wife and a brother, who offering to resist was killed
forthwith, the rest, with five children were led away prisoners.

TWO hours after, one Pike, that lived not far off, but knowing nothing of all
this, went up in a canoe toward one Robert Corbin's house, where he found one
Humphry Durham and Benjamin At^^el at work about their hay; after a little
stay, he lost them, intending to go up higher with his canoe. but as soon as he
was a little past, he heard the report of guns, which made him with another man
he had with him presently return back; before he came beyond Corban's house he
saw an English boy running with all haste, which made him fear some mischief
was in hand, and presently a volley of shot came against them, but the bullets
flying over their heads, did them no hurt; presently Simon appeared, and called
them to come on shore; but they liked not his courtesy, and turning their canoe
into the stream, got out of the reach of their guns, hasting down to his own
house with all speed; when he came near to his house, he called to the people
to make haste away toward the garrison-house, and bid the rest look to
themselves, and fire upon the Indians that were coming against them: In the
mean while the Indians passing from Anthony Bracket's to Corban's, killed
Corban himself, together with Humph^y Durham and Benjamin Atwel
beforementioned; then passing on to other houses, killed some, and carried
others away captive. At one of the next houses the women and children got off
into the water by a canoe; but one James Ross, his wife and children were
carried away. Corban's wife, with one of the other men's wives, and the
children of another, they carried away likewise.

IN another side of the town as three persons were going to reap at Anthony
Bracket's, passing from an house where they left their canoe, met with John
Mountjoy and one Wakely, to whom they told what had happened, soon after they
heard two guns fired, whereby it seems two men were killed; wherefore coming
back toward Thomas Bracket's, where they had left their canoe, they saw him
shot down by the Indians; one of the three not so well able to run, hid himself
in the bushes in hope to make his escape more conveniently afterward, which
accordingly he did; but in the mean time he saw the Indians carry away Thomas
Bracket's wife and children. Soon after the three men aforesaid, got safe to
Mr. Mountjoy's garrison, but not trusting to the security of that garrison,
they soon after repaired to an island in the bay, called James Andrew's island.
One George Lewis and his wife tarried all this time in their house till the
next day, when they had opportunity to get safe to the island aforesaid,
together with the two men that were now returned from Major Waldern; whither
they had been sent, but too late, to make complaint of the Indians that had
counterfeited his pass to travel into those parts, and had done this mischief.

THE day after, one George Felt, suspecting the worst by reason of a smoke he
saw on the opposite side of the town, took his wife and children into a canoe
to see what the matter was, but when he came near a point of land not far off,
he found several of his neighbors goods, which made him conclude their owners
were killed, which was a sufficient warning to him likewise to fly for his
life, which he did to the same island. After a number of them had escaped
thither, they recollected that they had left powder behind them in one or two
places; whereupon they determined to venture a party of them in the night, to
prevent the Indians from having any advantage thereby, and for their own
defense if occasion should require; accordingly their attempt succeeded well,
for they brought away a barrel of powder from one Well's house, and likewise a
considerable quantity out of a chest in a store house, where the Indians had
been ransacking, and had taken things out of the other end of the chest, yet
overlooked the powder. In this surprizal of the plantation in Casco-Bay, called
Falmouth, there were 34 persons killed and carried into captivity.

THAT this was not a casual attempt, but a designed plot, will appear, in that
just about the same time, the Indians at Kennebeck made the like insurrection,
whereby it is concluded, either that the Indians which escaped from Dover
stirred them up thereunto, or else that the said Indians finding them in a
disposition tending that way, by reason of some injuries done those that dwell
farther northward, they offered their service to help forward the design.

IT is to be noted here that the Indians about Kennebeck were persuaded to
continue their former amity with the English, notwithstanding the report of
Philip's rising that year before, and the outrages committed the last autumn
and winter following; yet which is more, they had lately renewed their league
with the English in those parts, although they had often complained to those of
Pemmaquid, of the injury they suffered in the withholding from them the trade
of powder and shot, without which they said they could not subsist, and for
want of which, it is alleged by themselves, that some of them perished the
last winter.

BUT the quarrel of late fallen out betwixt the English and the Indians about
Kennebeck and eastward thereof, being a matter of great importance, it shall,
for the satisfaction of the reader, in what follows be more particularly
described, it being the duty of every one that publishes things of this
nature, to do the right of an historian to all who are any ways concerned in
what is made public. The information was received from a prudent person, an eye
and ear witness of all that happened amongst the said Indians both the former
and the present year, and one that was more publicly concerned in those
transactions than some others, therefore the more credit may be given thereto.

MENTION is already made of what happened in September, 1675, to the company
belonging to a sloop and two boats that went up Casco-Bay to gather corn. upon
that accident it is said diverse Indians on the east side of Kennebeck river
repaired to their fort at Totonnock (a place higher up into the country beyond
Kennebeck and Sheepscot river) where was an English trading house: And the
Indians eastward of said river, had as yet done no harm to any of the English,
yet did Capt. Sylvanus Davis, agent for Major Clarke and Capt. Lake of Boston,
upon these overtures think fit to fetch down the powder and shot, with other
goods from the said trading house, telling the Indians, by the messenger sent
up, he would have them come down and live below in that river, to take off
jealousies, and that he would then sopply them with what was needful. -- But
the messenger told them in case they would not come down and deliver up their
arms the English would kill them. He that sends a message by the hand of a
fool, faith Solomon, cutteth off the foet, and drinks damage. This message
was delivered by him as he afterward confessed, but who put it into his mouth,
or whether it was the device of his own heart, does not at present concern us
to enquire, but the damage that side of the country has sustained thereby is
not easy to recount; for upon this threatening message the Indians forsook their
fort and went further eastward, and sent abroad to John's river and to the sea
side, to get all the Indians they could together to come up Penobscot river.

A GENTLEMAN who at that time lived at Pemmaquid, a kind of superintendent over
the affairs of that place, considering the sad state things were running into,
labored to obtain a parley with the said Indians, or with some of them, which
after much trouble and cost he did accomplish. But in the mean time, such was
the violence used by some refractory English in those parts, that they could
scarce be restrained from offering violence to the persons he sent up as
messengers, or others that lived quietly amongst them, and did also as
violently set themselves up to oppose him or any others that acted with more
moderation than the rest; protesting against them as those who for gain
supplied the Indians with powder and shot, and said they would kill any Indian
they met; others at Monhiggon offered five pounds for every Indian that should
be brought, yet would not these persons that were so violent against the
Indians in their discourse, be persuaded then or afterward to go out to fight
the Indians in an orderly way, as appeared both by their security in not acting
better upon their guard, and by their sudden flight afterward, running away
like a flock of sheep, at the barking of any little dog. Things being in this
posture, what could be expected but a present war with the Indians, although as
it seems, there were few or none to be found willing to undertake it, or fit to
manage it in those parts. However, the person aforesaid understanding the
general court at Boston had appointed a council of war at Kennebeck, applied
himself to them, laying before them the desperate state things were falling
into; whereupon they issued out warrants to restrain all manner of persons from
meddling with the Indians without further order, which within a few days should
be had. In the mean time the Sachems of the Indians met at Pemmaquid, where
after many complaints made of the hard dealing of the English in Kennebeck
river, they came to terms of peace, promising to keep true friendship with the
English, and to hinder the Amoscoggan Indians from meddling with the English,
if by any means the could, and also to return peaceably in the spring of the
year. This gentleman aforesaid, having a long time waited to go to Boston, was
willing to take the opportunity of the present winter, hoping things were now
pretty well settled in those parts between the Indians and the English, found
soon after that he was cited thither to answer some complaints, though ill
grounded, for selling powder and shot to the Indians contrary to order. But
those false opinions being easily blown away by his own appearance at Boston,
and having dispatched his business there, he returned before the winter was
over to Pemmaquid, where hearing of a vessel that intended to take Indians in
those parts and carry them away to market, which he had many strong reasons to
believe, (it being no hard matter to surprise many such, that suspecting no
fraud, would easily be enticed aboard a vessel to trade, or may be to drink
liquor) sent to both the master and company, if they had any such intent, to
forbear, seeing those Indians were at peace with us; and likewise to the
Indians, to inform them of such a vessel, and to be aware thereof; but yet it
seems the master and company took several Indians eastward, who were also at
peace with us, and to our great sorrow shipped them on board for a market.

THE winter being now over, the aforementioned agent of Pemmaquid went to a
meeting of the Indians eastward, to persuade them of the country's willingness
to continue a peace with them. They seemed very joyful thereat, and in the
spring brought some presents to confirm the peace, and to that end also
delivered up an English captive boy to those of Kennebeck. But when the summer
came on, the said Indians having liberty to travel up and down the country to
visit their friends as they used to do, they missed many of them, who had in
the winter been perfidiously carried away. and as is related, they fell into a
rage against the English, making complaint thereof to the said agent, Mr.
Earthy, Mr. Richard Oliver, and others. They were told means should be used for
bringing them back again, which had been so transported. Those to whom the
complaint was made, did scarce believe it to be true, not having heard thereof
from any other hand, and probably hoping none, especially after such solemn
warning, would deal so perfidiously with heathens, to lay such a stumbling
block before them.

THE Indians being certain of the thing done, could not be easily pacified,
being likewise incensed against the English for withholding the trade of
powder and shot the last winter, saying they were frighted from their corn the
last year by the people about Kennebeck, insomuch that many of them died in the
following winter for want of powder and shot wherewith to kill venison and
foul; adding withal, that if the English were their friends as they pretended,
they would not suffer them to die for want thereof. However, the said agent
making the best he could of a bad cause, used all means to pacify the
complainants, and to that end promised them that if they would meet with any of
the Amoscoggan Indians (who had all along the bitterest enmity against the
English) he would give them a meeting to treat in order to a peace, Major
Waldern having already concluded a peace with the Piscataqua and Casco Indians,
and by that means, if they could conclude the like peace with the Amoscoggan
men (that could not yet be found) there would be a general peace with all the
Indians eastward of Piscataqua, which the Indians that were present at this
discourse seemed very joyful at. Yet still by one fatal accident or another,
j^alousies still seemed to increase in their minds, or else the former injuries
began to boil a fresh in their spirits, as not being easily diges^ed, whatever
had been said or done to allay the offensiveness thereof. Soon after comes a
post from Tetonnock, to desire him to repair thither according to his promise,
where they told him he should meet Squando, and diverse Amoscoggan Sachems, and
that Mug was sent post to fetch the said Squando. This gentleman, mindful of
his promise, went with the post to Kennebeck, finding Capt. Lake at his house
in Arowsick. It was judged meet that Captain Sylvester Davis should go along
with him, with instructions from the council then sitting in Kennebeck, how to
carry on their treaty. After they had gone part of the way toward Totonnock,
they came to an English house, where they were cold what great jealousies of
deceit in the Indians were upon their spirits, from what they had heard of Mug,
and Tarumkin, an Amoscoggan Sachem. Going further, to a place called
Kedonucook, they met with Indians, who were very shy of telling them any thing;
which, added to their former intimation, greatly increased their fears; but
being resolved on their voyage, they proceeded in their way thither, yet
failing short of the place on purpose, that they might finish their business
with them the next day. When they came to their fort, they were first faluted
with a volley of shot, then brought into a wigwam where their Sachems were:
Madockawando sat as chief, who now styles himself their minister. Being set in
council, they made Assiminalqua their speaker, whose adopted son was the said
Madockawando: He told them it was not their custom, if any came as messengers
to treat with them, to seize upon their persons, as sometimes the Mobawks did
with such as had been sent to them: Capt. Davis, and the other gentleman told
them therein they dealt like men; answer was presently made them, you did
otherwise by our men, when 14 came to treat with you, and set a guard over
them, and took away their guns; and not only so, but a second time you required
our guns, and demanded us to come down unto you, or else you would kill us,
which was the cause of our leaving both our fort and corn, to our great loss.

IT was without doubt no small trouble to their minds, in a treaty with these
Pagans, baec diei potuisse, and non potuisse refelli: Yet to put the best
construction might be, on such irregular actions, which could not well be
justified, they told them the persons who had so done, were not within the
limits of their government, and therefore though they could not call them to an
account for so acting, yet they did utterly disallow thereof; adding further,
as soon as we understood thereof, we sent for you to Pemmaquid, and treated you
kindly, and kept you, as you know, from the violence of the English; the
Indians replied, we do but inform you, and will treat further in the afternoon;
but when the afternoon came, our two messengers told them their business was to
treat with the Amoscoggan Sachems, and that they were sorry Squando was not
there; then having confirmed their peace with those eastward Indians, they
entreated the Amoscoggan men to speak, who likewise urged Tarumkin, the chief
Amoscoggan Sachem to speak, who after some pause, said he had been to the
westward, where he had found many Indians unwilling for peace; but says he, I
found three Sachems (whom he named, though those he spoke to knew them not)
willing to have peace; and for my own part I am willing for peace, and give
them his hand, with protestation of his continuing in friendship; so did 7 or 8
more of the Amoscoggan men; whose names they took, of whom Mug and Robinhood's
son were two. After this Madockawando asked them what they should do for powder
and shot, when they had eat up their Indian corn, what they should do for the
winter, for their hunting voyages; asking withal, whether they would have them
die, or leave their country, and go all over to the French. Our messengers told
him, they would do what they could with the Governor, some might be allowed
them for necessity: He said they had waited long already, and therefore would
have them now, say yea or nay, whether they should have powder as formerly, or
not: Our messengers then replied, you yourselves say many of the weftern
Indians would not have peace, and therefore if we fell you powder, and you give
it to the western men, what do we but cut our own throats? Adding further, it
is not in our power without leave, if you should wait ten years more, to let
you have powder, at which words they seemed much to be offended.

BUT yet the next day they resolved to go down with them, and to speak with the
western men, thereby, if it might be, to stop their further proceeding.

SO going down with them the next day, they met with some Indians who had got
strong liqour, with whom they fell a drinking; our messengers stayed at two
places for them, and finding that still they tarried behind, not knowing what
farther to do, they went home, it being the sixth day of the week; but the next
night save one, news came to Kennebeck, that the Indians had killed diverse
English in Casco, although it was not yet known at Pemmaquid: Upon this news
Capt. Davis set out one sentinel the next night; the rest (such was their
security) went all to bed, and in the morning were all like Laish surprised;
thus might it be said, Invadunt AEdem somno (sinon) vinoque sepultam. The
particulars of the surprising of Kennebeck, and Arowsick house, are thus
related by such as were acquainted therewith.

UPON the 13th of August, 1676, several Indians repaired in the evening to the
house of one Mr. Hammond, an ancient inhabitant, and trader with the Indians up
Kennebeck river; his daughter, or a maid that was servant in the house, either
naturally afraid of the natives, or else from something she observed in their
countenance or carriage, manifested so much sear, as made her run out of the
house to hide herself in some place abroad; the Indians perceiving it, the more
to dissemble their treachery, ran after her, and brought her into the house,
telling her (although they could not persuade her so to believe) that there was
no reason to be afraid of them; presently after more of the barbarous villians
coming into the house, she grew more afraid than before, being now more
strongly persuaded that they came on purpose to kill or surprise those in the
family, whereupon she suddenly made an escape out the house, and presently
passed into a field of Indian corn, whereby she might the better avoid the
danger of any pursuer, and so ran across over the land that night, ten or
twelve miles, to give them notice that lived at Sheepscot river; it is said
that after she got out, she heard a noise in the house, as if they were
fighting or scuffling within doors; but she did not count it wisdom to go back
and see what the matter was, knowing before enough of their villainies, how well
soever her mistress (that was more versed in the trade of the Indians) might
think of them. Those of Sheepscot taking this warning, escaped away as soon as
they could, leaving their cattle and dwellings as a prey to the Indians. What
befell master Hammond and his family, is not yet certainly known: Reports pass
up and down, that some who came down the river afterward, saw some of the dead
stripped upon the banks of the river, which makes us fear the worst concerning
all the rest; for certainly the whole family, 16 in number, were all at that
time either killed or carried away captive, none save the maid aforesaid, being
known to make an escape, to inform their friends, like Job's messengers, what
befell the rest of the family.

THE Indians having in this manner surprised Mr. Hammand's house, they passed
down the river the same night, but going by another house, they meddled not
with the people, only turned their canoes adrift, that they might not find
means afterward to escape themselves, or help others so to do: Possibly their
chief aim being at Arowsick house, they would no^, for fear of being
discovered, make any attempt upon any place near by; wherefore, the 14th of
August, very early in the morning, having in the night, or before break of day,
passed over on to the island called Arowsick; several of them undiscovered lay
hid under the walls of the fort, and behind a great rock near adjoining, till
the sentinel was gone off from his pl^^^ (who went off it seems sooner than he
should, considering the danger) when presently some Indians followed him in at
the fort gate (as some report) while others of them immediately seized the port
holes thereof, and shot down all they saw passing up and down within the walls,
and so in a little time became masters of the fore, and all that was within it:
Capt. Lake (joint owner with Major Clarke, of the whole island) hearing the
bustle that was below, betwixt the Indians and those that belonged to the
place, was strangely surprised, yet himself with Capt. Sylvanus Davis, and two
more, understanding that the Indians had seized the fort, and killed diverse of
the English, apprehending it bootless, or rather heartless to stay, as not
being able to stand upon their guard, or make any refistance, made a shift to
find a passage out at a back door, whereby they escaped to the water side,
where they found a canoe, into which they all entered, and made away toward
another island near by: This was not done so secretly but the Indians discerned
them before they were gone far; four of them therefore hasted after those that
had escaped in another canoe, and coming within shot, discharged their guns
upon them, whereby said Davis was badly wounded; yet making haste, as they
generally used to do that fly for their lives, timor addidit alas, they got a
shore before the Indians overtook them; it is said they were strangely
dispirited, or else they might easily have defended themselves against their
pursuers: But when once men's hearts are sunk with fear and discouragement upon
a sudden surprizal, it is hard to buoy them up, to make any competent
resistance. Capt. Davis being badly wounded, could neither trust to his legs to
fly, nor yet make use of his hands to fight, yet was strangely preserved;
Providence directing him to go into the cleft of a rock, ear by the place where
he first landed; the Indians by the glittering of the fun beams in their eyes
as they came ashore, did not discern him; so that lying hid under the covert of
the hand of Providence for two days, he at last crawled a little above the
water side, till he found a canoe, whereby he escaped with his life. The other
two were better foot men, and parting with Capt. Lake, made their escape ten or
twelve miles, to the farther end of the island, and so escaped from the
Indians, till they found means to get off Poor Capt. Lake, who a few hours
before slept quietly in his mansion house, furrounded with a strong
fortification, defended with many soldiers, is now forced to fly away with none
to attend him; and as the awful hand of Providence ordered things, was as some
say, pursued by such Indians as were mere strangers to the place, that knew not
the master from the man, but by one of whom he was shot down, as is supposed
soon after he came ashore; Lieut. Davis heard two guns, by which it was
thought, and soon after was known to be by an Indian, who has since confessed
to Capt. Davis that he shot him that day Arowsick was taken, which he intended
not to have done, but that he held up his pistol against him; whereas if he had
but asked quarter, he should have had his life. Capt. Lake was slain at that
time, although many hopes were for some time entertained that he was taken
alive, and kept with other captives amongst the Indians; and it is said the
Indians of those parts did not intend to kill him, if they could have helped
it; but it was known his hat was seen upon an Indian's head not long after,
which made his friends conclude what had befallen that good man, who might
emphatically be so termed, in distinction from them that may truly be called
just men, and no more: For it seems according to the just agreement betwixt
himself and his part owner of Arowsick island, it was not his turn this year to
have been upon the place, but such was his goodness, that he yielded to the
desire of his friend and partner, as in his room and stead to take upon himself
that service in this time of danger; it is hoped his goodness in future time
will not be forgotten by such as were any way concerned therein, or had
advantage thereby.

THIS island (called Arowsick, from an Indian so named that formerly possessed
it, and of whom it was purchased by one Mr. Richards, who sold it to Capt. Lake
and Major Clarke) lies up ten miles within the mouth of Kennebeck river; it is
some miles in length, and contains many thousand acres of very good land; where
meadow and arable ground are in a good proportion well suited together. Within
the fort aforesaid, were many convenient buildings for several officers, as
well for wares and trading, as habitation: Six several edifices are said to
have been there erected. The warehouse at that time was well furnished with all
sorts of goods; besides a mill and other accommodations and dwellings, within a
mile of the fort and mansion house; some inhabitants of which hardly made their
escape upon the first surprizal of the fort.

ALL which considered, the loss that befell the proprietors at the surprizal of
this island, seems to be very great, valued at many thousands; but those that
were the owners, with others of late times, have found from their own
experience, what Solomon said of old, there is a time to get, and a time to
lose, a time to keep, and a time to cast away; a time to break down, as well as
a time to build up. The persons killed and taken at Kennebeck, both at Mr.
Hammond's, and at Arowsick, are said to be 53.

UPON the report of this sad disaster, all the plantations of the English in
those parts were soon after left, and forsaken by degrees. All the rest of the
inhabitants of Kennebeck river, Sheepscot river, Sagadahock, and Damanicottee,
fearing to be served in the same kind, fled to the islands of Cape Bonawagan,
and Damaril's Cove.

ON the second day at night a post was sent to Pemmaquid to inform them of what
had happened, who being but eight or ten men, had a mind to go on the island
called Monbiggon, having secured the best of their goods, but the wind taking
them short, they were forced to turn into Damaril's Cove, where they found Mr.
Wiswall, and Mr. Colicot; there they labored two days to settle a garrison;
but through the mutinous disposition of the people, and the want of provision,
nothing could be done to secure the island, so that it was soon deserted. From
thence they went to Monbiggon, resolving there to tarry till they heard from
Boston, from whence Mr. Colicot and Mr. Wiswall promised to do their utmost
endeavor to send help. There they settled three guards, and appointed 25 to
watch every night, not knowing but that the Indians might come every hour. But
continuing there a fortnight, and finding no relief like to come, and seeing
all the country burnt round about, (for after they had got all that could be
saved from Pemmaquid, they saw all the other islands, Windgin's, Corbin's
Sound, New-Harbour, and Pemmaquid, all on fire in two hours time) then
considering what was best to be done, they found no boats could be sent to sea
for fear of weakening the island, and that most of those who were on it were
strangers, coasters, and such as came from the main, and ready to be gone upon
every occasion, they laid an embargo for one week; after which a letter was
received from Major Clarke, desiring their assistance for enquiring after Capt.
Lake, if alive, saying, what could be had at Kennebeck, etc. but intimating
nothing of any help like to come; besides, those that brought the letter told
them it was in vain to expect any help from Boston, it being questioned there
what they had to do with those parts. Upon which the inhabitants considered,
that if they should tarry there and spend all their provision, and neither be
able to go to sea, nor yet to live, or be safe ashore for want of help, it were
better for them to remove while they had something to live upon, and seek
employment elsewhere; so by consent they resolved forthwith to transport
themselves and what they had saved of their goods, to some place of security,
so they sailed the first opportunity, some for Piscataqua, some for Boston, and
some for Salem, at one of which places they all safely arrived.

HAVING thus escaped at first, as Lot out of Sodom, but not counting themselves
safe in that Zoar, where for a little while they made out to hide their heads,
till they might escape to some surer place, there waiting for better times,
when they may with peace and quietness return to their former habitations, or
seek some other elsewhere.

WHEN the aforesaid exploits were done by the Indians about Casco-Bay, several
of the English removed to Jewel's island, where they hoped to be more secure
from the Indians, but the barbarous enemy finding so little resistance made
against them on the main land, a considerable party of them came with their
canoes to destroy that island also, about three weeks after the aforementioned
mischiefs.

THERE was a fortified house upon the said island, where the English that
either kept upon the island, or repaired thither, hoped to secure themselves.
But at the time the Indians assaulted the place, many of the English were
absent, and few left in the garrison but women and children. Some were gone to
other places to fetch Indian corn, others were in a boat employed about fish,
amongst whom was one Richard Pots with two more. The wife of the said Pots was
washing by the water side, where she was surprised with her children, and
carried away in fight of her husband, who was not a little distressed with that
sad spectacle, but was incapable of affording any relief either to his wife or
children. One of these little innocents, espying his father in the boat, ran
into the water, calling out for help; but an Indian was running after him to
catch him up; the poor man in a great agony, being within half a gun shot, was
about to fire upon the Indian, but fearing he might wound or perhaps kill his
child, which the villian had seized and was carrying off, he forbore, choosing
rather to have him carried away alive, than expose him to the loss of his life
or limbs, by shooting at the Indian.

IT is said some of the Indians were killed by those in the garrison; it is
mentioned that a lad at one shot killed two or three of them; some guns were
found afterward under the fort, which were supposed to have belonged to some
of the Indians that were killed. Some that were abroad when the fort was
assaulted, desperately broke in through the Indians, whereby at the last many
people were preserved. Some flying away to Jewel's island in a cance, to ward
Richmond's island, met with a ketch, to which they made known the distress the
people were in, who thereupon went to the place and took in all the people they
found there, and carried them off to a place of more safety. Yet there were
several persons said to be killed and carried away at that time, viz. three
men, who were known to be killed, two women and two children, that are supposed
to be yet alive, though in the enemy's power.

FROM thence they went to Spurwinks, where they assaulted one place, or more,
and killed one man, wounded another, and carried another away captive. Amongst
those that were in danger of surprizal, one that could not run hid himself in a
garden of cabbages, so that he was not found, yet was very near them, for he
overheard several questions they asked him they took; by which means he was the
better enabled afterward to prevent the danger two more were coming into, for
the poor fellow they had taken, told them that one Gendal, and another man were
to come that way by and by; whereupon this man that had hid himself, meeting
Gendal and the other man, gave them notice of the danger, whereby they were
delivered out of the snare for that time. Not long after Mr. Gendal fell into
their hands, as shall hereafter be related. Within a while after, or about the
same time, another fatal accident befell six or seven persons belonging to
Casco: For, upon the 23d of September, some persons that belonged to a sloop
and a shallop, that were pressed into the service (one reason of which was to
prevent their straggling, they being persons that belonged to those parts about
Casco) were over desirous to save some of their provision, to which end they
first made their address to Capt. Hathorne, (under whom they were ordered to
serve) desi^ing they might be released; the Captain told them he could not do
it, but desired them to have patience for a while; they told him they must and
would go, else their families must starve at home; the Captain told them
further of the danger, and bid them not stir at their peril. However go they
would, and soon after went to Mountjoy's island to fetch sheep, where they
landed seven men; but the Indians suddenly fell upon them, when they betook
themselves to the ruins of a stone house, where they defended themselves as
long as they could; but at last they were all destroyed either with stones cast
in upon them, or with the enemies shot, except one, who, though at the first it
was hoped his wounds were not mortal, yet soon after died thereof. Amongst
these was one George Felt, much lamented, who had been more active than any man
in those parts against the Indians, but at last he lost his own life amongst
them, in this too desperate an adventure.

THE Indians growing more bold by these attempts in those remote places, drew
down nearer toward Piscataqua, for not long after a party of them came upon
Cape Nidduck, where they killed and carried away all the inhabitants of a few
scattering houses, to the number of seven in all; and such was their savage
cruelty exercised in this place, as is not usually to be heard of, for having
dashed out the brains of a poor woman that gave suck, they nailed the young
child to the dead body of its mother, which was found sucking in that awful
manner, when the people came to the place. The day before a man and his wife
were killed by them at Wells, and two more soon after. On the 12th of October
following, near an 100 of the Indians made an assault upon Block-Point, all the
inhabitants being gathered into one fortified place upon that point, which a
few hands might have defended against all the Indians on that side of the
country; but as it seems, one called Mugg, was the leader of the Indians, one
that had from a child been well acquainted with the English, and had lived some
years in English families, who though a cunning fellow, and had succeeded much
in his attempts, yet at this time showed more courtesy to the English, than
according to former outrages could be expected from any of those barbarous
miscreants, and was willing to make offer of a treaty to Mr. Josselin, Chief of
the garrison, to whom the said Mugg promised liberty for all that were there,
to depart with their goods upon the surrender of the place: The said Josselin
reports, that when he came back from his treating with Mugg, that all the
people were sled away out of the garrison, having carried away their goods by
water before his return, insomuch that having none but his household servants
to stand by him, he was capable of making no resistance, and so surrendered.

WHEN people have once been frighted with reports and sense of danger, they are
ready to fly away like a heart before the hunter or his hounds; one of the
inhabitants of the place affirmed he saw an 150 Indians, which was more by an
100 than any body else ever saw near the fort. But when a place is consigned to
ruin, every thing they take in hand shall tend that way.

THE loss of Black Point was accompanied with another sad accident that
happened about the same time at Richmond's island: For young Mr. Friar, with
some others at Piscataqua, to whom it seemed grievous that the Indians should
make all that spoil in every place in those farther plantations, ventured upon
the great importunity of Mr. Gendal, with a ketch, to try what they could save
of such things as the Indians had left; but things were so ordered, that before
they had loaded their ketch, coming too near the stage head, they presently
found themselves in danger of a sorprizal; for part of their company being
ashore, were seized by the Indians, or in danger thereof, whom they were not
willing to leave behind; and besides the wind blowing in hard upon them, they
could not get out of the harbor, but were forced to abide the danger of an
assault; the Indians getting many of them into the stage head, annoyed them so
fast with their shot, that not a man of them was able to look above deck, but
he was in danger of being shot down; amongst the rest Mr. James Friar venturing
too much in view of the enemy, received a wound in his knee, which appeared not
dangerous at first, but for want of bover looking to, than could be found
amongst that black regiment, into whose hands he soon after fell, it proved
mortal unto him within a sew days after; he being by a strange accident brought
home to his father's house, at the great island in Piscataqua Mr. Friar being
thus wounded, the rest of the company defended themselves for a while, with
much courage and resolution, till they were brought to the sad choice of
falling into the hands of one of these three bad masters, the fire, the water,
or the barbarous heathen, to whom at last they thought it best to yield, in
hopes of liberty afterward, at least of lengthening out their lives a little
longer, for the Indians had manned out a canoe with several hands to cut their
cable, and others stood ready within the defense of the stage head, to fire
upon any one that stired in the ketch, by which means the vessel after the
cable was cut, soon drove ashore; and then it was threatened to be presently
burnt, if they did not all yield, to which they all at last consented.

THE Indians how barbarous soever in their own nature, yet civilly treated
their prisoners, and upon farther discourse sent one or two of them to
Piscataqua, to give them there an opportunity to ransom their friends. The
persons sent home to procure a ransom, were to return with such a quantity of
goods as the Indians had desired, by such a precise time; but they that brought
the things for their ransom, coming a day or two before the time, when those
that sent them were gone up the river at Black-Point, and not returned: Some
other Indians waiting for such an opportunity, seized the goods, at least that
part which they most desired, and through mistake, killing one of the three men
that brought them, dismissed the other two, without return of the prisoners as
was expected.

AS to what happened afterward, we are yet much in the dark, and for the
present can write but by guess: For within a few days after the return of Mr.
Gendal, and the other man that went to carry the ransom, before the 1st of
November, Mugg himself came to Piscataqua, bringing Mr. James Friar, who soon
after died of his wound; one of the prisoners along with him complaining that
without his knowledge some of the Indians had seized what was sent for the
ransom of the rest, promising upon his faith, that he would make good his word
for the sending home all the prisoners, and offered also in the name of the
other Indians to confirm a new peace with the English for the future. The Major
General of the Massachusetts colony was then at Piscataqua, but not willing to
transact a matter of that nature and moment by his sole authority, ordered the
said Mugg (supposed to be the chief leader of the Indians) to be carried down
to Boston, to the Governor and Council there, to conclude the business, with
whom he soon after agreed upon a firm peace with the English of the
Massachusetts, in the name of Madockawando, the Chief of all the Indians in the
eastern parts about Penobscot, engaging also to remain himself as hostage,
aboard the vessel (in which he was sent home from Boston, the 21st of November
following) until the prisoners (which are said to be 50 or 60, that they have
still in their hands) be sent home, and the rest of the articles performed; the
issue of which we as yet wait to hear in God's good time, this 12th day of
December following, 1676, when they there have made an end of the reckoning, it
is hoped we may have our right again.

THERE are two principal actors amongst the Indians that have all along
promoted these designs amongst them, one named Squando, Sagamore of Saco, and
the aforementioned Madockawando, the chief commander of the Indians eastward
about Penobscot, who are said to be, by them that know them, a strange kind of
moralized savages; grave and serious in their speech and carriage, and not
without some show of a kind of religion, which no doubt but they have learned
from the Prince of Darkness (by the help of some Papist in those parts) that
can transform himself into an Angel of light; under that shape, the better to
carry on the designs of his kingdom. It is said also, they pretend to have
received some visions and revelations, by which they have been commanded to
worship the great God, and not to work on the Lord's day. We know where that
fountain has its rise, that sends forth at the same place sweet and bitter
waters; and from whence their hearts are inspired, that join blessing of God,
with cursing and killing his servants.

IT is reported by some that came lately from those parts, that the Indians
there do as yet refuse to have any peace with the English, and will not as yet
return any of our captive friends, till God speak to the aforesaid enthusiasts,
that are their leaders, that they should no longer make war with us, and the
like.

BUT not to trouble ourselves farther with those ministers of Satan, or those
that are actuated by the Angel of the bottomless pit, who possibly since their
delusions are but two sold more the children of Hell than they were before. We
know better how to understand the mind of the great Lord of Heaven and Earth,
than to depend on such lying oracles.

THAT God who has at present turned their hearts to hate his people, and deal
subtly with his servants, we hope in time, will either turn the stream, and
cause them to deal friendly and sincerely with his people as heretofore, or
give us an opportunity to destroy them.

IN the next place it remains, that some account be given of our forces under
Capt. Hathorne, and of their several expeditions into the eastern parts, since
the middle of September last; first up toward Casco, by the seaside, then
afterward through the woods, directly northward, toward Ossapy and Pigwauchet,
in hopes to have found the enemy there at their headquarters.

UPON the first report of those devastations and spoils that had been made by
fire and sword in those eastern plantations, it was judged necessary to send
some forces that way to put a stop to the current of those outrages, before the
remainder of the southern Indians could have an opportunity to join with them:
To that end about an 130 English, with 40 Indians, were dispatched away into
those parts, under the command of Capt. William Hathorne, Capt. Sill. and Capt.
Hunting, who were to join with such as could be raised in those parts, under
Major Waldern and Capt. Frost. After they had surprised the Indians that
flocked into those parts, (as was related before) which was done upon the 6th
of September, 1676, Capt. Hathborne, who was commander in chief, marched the
forces by the seaside, toward Casco; For at that time they were upon some
demure, whether to march disectly toward Ossapy and Pigwauchet, where the
headquarters of the enemy was supposed to be, or else to march directly toward
Casco Bay, where they heard parties of he enemy were daily spoiling the
plantations of the English; at the last it was judged most expedient to try if
they could not meet with some parties of the enemy amongst those plantations
near the sea side, by that means at least to prevent them from doing more
mischief, if they could not find an opportunity to fall upon some of them and
destroy them; but their time was not yet come, nor were all the desolations as
yet accomplished, which God had a purpose to bring about by their means: For
notwithstanding there was a sufficient force to have suppressed all the numbers
of the enemy, if they had been many more than they were, yet being emboldened
and grown subtle by their former successes, they had so dispersed themselves
all about the woods in those parts, that when our forces were in one place,
they would be in another, and so did much mischief thereabouts, while our
soldiers were out after them: For after they had by several stops in ten days
time got to Casco from Newechewannick (about the 8th of September) they marched
to Wells, and from Wells to Winter Harbor, and so from whence to Black-Point
they passed by water, and then arrived at Casco Bay, about the 20th of
September; ^et about that very time were several of the English cu^ off at
Mountjoy's island, and that in sight of our forces, when they were not able to
come at them for want of boats, the island lying two leagues off in the bay;
this happened the 23d of the same month, as was said before; and within two
days after, another party of the enemy were doing mischief at Wells and
Cape-Nidduck, and yet escaped away when they had done.

NOR could our forces in all their expedition meet with any of them, but two;
one of which soon after he was taken, was let go by the treachery or
carelessness of them that held him. For when our forces were come within a few
miles of the hither side of Casco Bay, some of our Natick Indian scouts going
in company with the Indians under Blind Will (a Sagamore of Piscataqua, who
went in company with 8 of his men, supposed to be good pilots for the places
more eastward) met with some of the enemy, and laid hold of a couple of them;
justice was done to one of them; the other, although he was led by two of Blind
Will's Indians, they made shift to let go, who escaping, got over a river, and
gave notice to the Indians who were on the other side, and were heard but a
little before threshing in a barn that belonged to one Anthony Bracket, whom
they had lately surprised, Another disappointment our forces met with about the
same time; for when Capt. Hathorne was up at Casco Bay with his soldiers, he
never could come up with the Indians, either through want of skill in them that
were his scouts, or rather want of faithfulness in one that should have been
his guide, who had got his living by trading with the Indians, therefore seemed
unwilling to have the brood of them destroyed, as was known afterward; and by
that means a party of the enemy escaped the hands of our soldiers. Yet it
pleased God at one time to bring the forlorn of our forces upon a party of the
enemy, who espying the English, presently fled away into the woods like so many
wild dee^; yet one of them, viz J. Sanpson, who had been of the company that
killed Robinson the year before, was by the special hand of Divine justice,
suffered to fell by some of our forces; he was a very lusty, stout man, and one
that was armed with several forts of weapons, but there is no weapon shall
defend them whom death has a commission to destroy; there is no ransom in that
war. The rest of the Indians that were scattered about Casco Bay, having
discovered our forces, made their escape; but we hope their time is short, and
that God will find some way to cut off the bloody and deceitful enemies of his
people, and not suffer them to live out half their days.

BUT by one such accident or other, our soldiers could not meet with any of
them that had done the mischief about those parts. While our forces lay about
Casco-Bay, a small party of the enemy came down upon the borders of the town of
Wells, where they lay in ambush near a garrison house at one end of the town,
and shot Mr. JamesGouge from his horse, on Lord's Day, Sept. 24th, as he was
going home from the meeting, and then knocked down his wife, giving her several
wounds with their hatchers about the head, or which she died in three days
after.

THE next day, Sept. 25th, the same party, being not more than seven in number,
went toward York, and surprised Cape-Nidduck in a most barbarous manner,
killing most of the poor people belonging thereunto. Some of their neighbors
hearing the guns, came to their rescue; the Indians being on the further side
of a river, dared them to come over and fight with them man to man, using many
reproachful expressions, and making a shot at them, which some of the company
not being able to bear, did very resolutely adventure through the river after
them; but they were not willing to try the valor of the English, when they
perceived they found a way to pass over the river upon them, but returned back
toward Wells, where they killed one George Farrow, Sept. 27th, as he was too
carelessly venturing to his house without any company. These things happened
while our forces were at Casco, where they tarried seven or eight days; and
bearing of these outrages committed in some of those places which they left
behind them, and not being able to meet with any of them in the place where
they were, they returned back toward Wells and York; but the Indians were
escaped away into the woods after their companions, before they came there. Our
soldiers having thus spent much time and pains in a fruitless expedition
toward Casco, resolved to venture another march after them up toward Ossapy,
supposing they might by that time be drawn homewards toward their winter
quarters; or else that they might destroy what they had left behind them, to
prevent their harboring there for the future: But it seemed good to him, who
by his sovereign power and infinite wisdom orders all events and purposes
(wherein his people or others are concerned) to disappoint all endeavors used
at that time for the suppressing of the enemy, or putting any stop to their
wonted successes; for soon after our forces were returned back from Casco, news
was brought of the surprizal of Black-Point, on the 12th of October, as was
mentioned before; which notwithstanding, it was judged more advisable to
venture and proceed on with the expedition toward Ossapy, (whither it was
supposed by this time the greatest number of them were retired) rather than to
return back again to recover Black-Point, where was nothing to be expected but
an empty fort, and some deserted houses, which it seems the Indians had
forsaken by that time. And besides, that other forces were about the same time
ordered to repair thither, sufficient for the repairing and securing the place
with what else was left remaining from the hands of the enemy: And likewise
several soldiers were ordered to garrison the towns thereabouts, to prevent
them from making any further assault upon them. However, they were so far
emboldened by the taking of Black-Point, and the ketch at Richmond island, that
a party of them came the very next week after, toward Wells, hoping to attain
that, and all the towns and places between Casco-Bay and Piscataqua, as they
had done Black-Point: For a party of them under Mugg their chief leader,
brought Mr. Gendal along with them to Wells, where they summoned the first
garrison at the town's end. To facilitate the business, they sent the said
Gendal as their agent or messenger to move them' so surrender without hazarding
an onset; but the people were not so despondent as to yield up the place upon
so slight an occasion; which when the enemy discerned, they soon drew off,
after they had done some little mischief to the inhabitants; for first they
killed Isaac Littlefield, not far from the garrison; it is said they would
willingly have had him yield himself prisoner, but he refusing, they shot him
down, yet they were so civil as to suffer his friends to fetch away his body,
without offering any further act of inhumanity to it, or hostility toward
those that carried it off.

AN old man called Cross, was likewise killed by them about the same time; and
another whose name was Joseph Bigford, belonging to the garrison, was so badly
wounded that he died very soon after. Thirteen head of next cattle were also
killed by them, out of which (through haste) they only took the tongues,
leaving the bodies whole to the owners, unless it was the leg of one of them,
which was also taken away.

THIS was all the mischief done by them after the taking of Black-Point. The
inhabitants of Winter-Harbour, near adjoining thereto, being alarmed with the
surprizal of the other place, fled away with their goods for a time, until they
heard the enemy were moved farther eastward, and then it is said they returned
to their place again. In this posture have things remained ever since in those
eastera plantations between Piscataqua and Casco-Bay.

BUT our forces under the command of Captain Hathorne and Capt. Sill, having at
last obtained all things necessary for a winter march into the woods, did upon
the first of November following, set out toward Ossapy, where, after four days
march of a very difficult way, over many rivers, not easy to pass at that time
of the year, they arrived; but found not an Indian either there, or in the way
as they marched along. The Indians belonging to those parts had not many years
before, hired some English traders to build them a fort for their security
against the Mohawks, which was built very strong for that purpose, fourteen
foot high, with flankers at each corner; but at this time the soldiers
intending to disappoint them of their refuge, made fuel thereof, which at that
time was very needful for our people, who had marched many miles through deep
snow in a very cold season, when they could hardly keep themselves from
freezing as they passed along, so early in the winter. None of the enemy being
to be found there in their strongest fort, it was not counted worth while for
all the company to march any further; wherefore a small party being sent up
eighteen or twenty miles farther northward amongst the woods, where as they
passed along they met with many vast lakes, (supposed to be the cause of the
sharpness of the cold in that side of the country) making the place scarce
habitable for any besides those savages that used to hunt thereabouts for moose
in the winter, and beaver in the summer. But at this time it is supposed they
were all gone lower toward the sea side, to share the spoils of the English
plantations lately surprised by them, which is all the reward they have met
with, who in former years for the sake of a little lucre by traffic with them,
have run themselves there into the very jaws of destruction, either by
irregular dealing with them, or by their too much confidence in their deceitful
friendship.

THE 9th of November, our forces having spent nine days in this service,
returned safe to Newechewannick, from whence they set forth at the first,
having run more hazard of their limbs by the sharpness of the frost, than of
their lives by any assault from their enemies.

THERE was great probability that the design might have had some good effect if
Mugg did not much abuse those he fled unto, with a proffer of peace; for he
told them that there were about an hundred of them about Ossapy not many days
before. But it becomes us to look beyond second causes in events of this
nature, and conclude that God had raised up these barbarous enemies to bring a
like chastisement upon the English in this side of the country, with that which
others had endured elsewhere in the end of the former and beginning of the
present year.

WHEREAS mention was formerly made of a peace concluded at Boston, between the
Governor and Council of the Massachusetts, and Mugg an eastward Indian, in the
name of Madockawando, chief Sagamore of all the Indians about Pemmaquid and
Penobscot; which said Mugg was sent from Boston, Nov. 21st, with two vessels to
receive the prisoners were detained by the Indians, and also to see the
ratification of the several articles of the said peace concluded upon; which
articles for the better satisfaction of those that have not been acquainted
with them, are thought fit to be here inserted, and are as follow, viz.

BOSTON, Nov. 6, 1676.
Covenants and agreements made and concluded by and between the Governor and
Council of the Massachusetts colony, in New England, of the one part; and Mugg,
Indian, in the name and behalf of Madockawando and Cheberrina, Sachems of
Penobscot, on the other part.
1. WHEREAS the said Mugg has been sent and employed by the said Sachems upon
a treaty with the said Governor and Council relating to a conclusion of peace,
does hereby covenant and engage for himself and in behalf of the said Sachems,
that from henceforth they will cease all acts of hostility, and hold an entire
and firm union and peace with all the English of the colonies in New England.

2. THAT immediately upon the said Mugg's return, the said Sachems shall
deliver up unto such Englishman, or men, as shall by order of the said Governor
and Council be sent with him, all such English captives, vessels and goods
whatsoever, arms and great artillery belonging to the English, as are in their
custody, or under their power, as have been taken from them during the time of
the late hostility.

3. THAT they will use their utmost endeavor with all possible speed to
procure pay, wherewith to make full satisfaction unto the English for all such
injuries, losses and damages, as they have sustained by them in their housing,
cattle, or other estate, during the time of the late hostility; or else to pay
such a number of beaver skins yearly, in order thereunto, as shall be agreed on
between the said Sachems; and such person or persons as shall be sent unto them
from the said Governor and Council for the ^a^isication hereof, to be paid at
such time and place as shall be then agreed upon.

4. THAT upon condition of the English furnishing of them with powder and
ammunition for their necessary supplies and maintenance, they do covenant and
promise not to trade for, or buy any powder or ammunition, but of such persons
as shall from time to time be deputed by the Governor for that end.

5. THAT if it does appear that Walter Gendal, and the men sent with him in the
vessel from Piscataqua (with goods from Mr. Friar for the redemption of the
captives according to agreement) or any of them are surprised and slain by any
of their Indians, or any others whom they can bring under their power, that
they shall forthwith execute such murderer or murderers, or otherwise deliver
them up into the hands of the English.

6. THAT if the Amoscoggan or any other Indians in the eastern parts, that are
in hostility with the English, shall not fully consent unto these covenants and
agreements, but shall persist in acts of hostility against the English, that
then the said Sachems shall, and will hold all such Indians to be their
enemies, and to take up arms against them, and engage them as such.

Lastly, THE said Mugg, as a pledge and assurance of his own fidelity, and that
he is empowered by the said Sachems for the end aforesaid, and for the
performance of the aforementioned agreements, does freely and willingly deposit
himself, and his life in the hands of the English, to remain with them as a
hostage until the said captives, goods and vessels shall be delivered up.

Signed in presence of JOHN EARTHY, RICHARD OLIVER, ISAAC ADDINGTON.
The X mark of Mugg, Indian.

The said Mugg lifted up his hand to heaven for the true performance thereof,
esteemed amongst them a strong obligation to perform what they promise.

THINGS were so ordered by the good Providence of God, that the said vessels
arrived safely at Penobscot in the beginning of the next month, where they
sound the said Madockawando, who was ready to confirm and make good the
articles of the peace concluded at Boston by his agent in his name; and was
willing also to deliver all the prisoners that were then in his power, or under
his command, which were but eleven, who were taken in the vessel at Richmond's
island, the 12th of October last. The said Mugg likewise being sensible of the
obligation he lay under to make his word good, did venture to go up himself to
another plantation of the Indians, where was supposed some more of the English
prisoners were, to see whether he could obtain their release, as also to
persuade the rest of the Indians thereabouts to join in the confirmation of the
peace: It appeared to the persons belonging to the vessels, that the said Mugg
went with some reluctance, as feating the Indians he was going amongst, would
either kill him, or keep him prisoner; to which end, he ordered the commanders
belonging to the vessels, to tarry for him about three days, or four at the
most, assuring them, that if he did not return by that time, they might
certainly conclude that either his life or liberty was taken from him; however,
the vessels tarried about or near a week beyond the time limited, in
expectation of his coming; but after so long stay, they neither seeing nor
hearing from him, were ready to fear the worst, viz. that his countrymen had
made him sure, from having more to do with the English; whereupon for fear of
being shut up by the sharpness of the winter from returning themselves, they
rook the opportunity of the next fair wind, of setting sail for Boston (only
turning into Pemmaquid, to see if they could hear any farther news there) where
they arrived with such prisoners as were freely delivered by Madockawando, the
25th of December following, anne 1676; amongst which prisoners, besides the two
aforementioned, who were found at Penobscot, there was a third, by a more
remarkable Providence than ordinary, added unto them, Mr. Thomas Cobbet, son of
that reverend and worthy minister of the gospel, Mr. Thomas Cobbet, pastor of
the church at Ipswich, a town within the Massachusetts jurisdiction, who had all
the time of his son's captivity, together with his friends, wrestled with God
in their daily prayers for his release, and accordingly he was with the more
joy received by his friends, as an answer and return of their prayers. The said
young man had lived with Mr. Friar, merchant, of Portsmouth, for some years
before, and had been often at sea with Mr. James Friar, the eldest son of the
said merchant, and who had after much experience of his faithfulness,
dexterity, and courage on all such accounts, borne him so much respect, that
when he was urged by his father to go along with Mr. Gendal, as was said
before, he would not venture unless his friend Thomas Cobbet, would go along
with him; which service he only for his friends sake accepted, which proved a
fatal adventure to Mr. James Friar, and might have been to the other also, had
not God otherwise disposed of him, having, as is hoped, more service for him in
the land of the living. Amongst all the prisoners at that time taken, the said
Thomas Cobbet seemed to have had the hardest portion; for beside; the desperate
dangers that he escaped, before he was taken, first by a bullet shot through
his waistcoat, secondly by a drunken Indian, who had a knife at his throat to
cut it, when his hands were bound, when the Indians came to share the prisoners
amongst them, he fell into the hands of one of the ruggedest fellow, by whom
within a sew days after his surprizal, he was carried first from Black-Point to
Sheepscot river, in the ketch, which the Indians made to fail in, in the said
river, from whence he was forced to travel with his Pateroon, four or five
miles over land, to Damariscottee, where he was compelled to row or paddle in a
canoe, about fifty miles farther to Penobscot, and there taking leave of all
his English friends and acquaintance, at least for the winter, he was put to
paddle a canoe up fifty or sixty miles farther eastward, to an island called
Mount-Desert, where his Pateroon used to keep his winter ^^^ion, and to appoint
his hunting vovages; and in that desert-like condition was the poor young man
forced to continue nine weeks in the service of a savage miscreant, who
sometimes would tyrannize over him, because he could not understand his
language, and for want thereof, might occasion him to miss of his game, or the
like. Whatever sickness he was subject to, by chance of diet, or on any other
account, he could expect no other allowance than the wigwam will afford: If
Joseph be in the prison, so long as God is with him there, he shall be
preserved, and in due time remembered.

AFTER the end of the nine weeks, the Indian whom he was to serve, had spent
all his powder, whereupon on a sudden he took up a resolution to send this
young man down to Penobscot to Mr. Casteen, to procure more powder to kill
moose and deer, which it seems is all their way of living at Mount-Desert; the
Indian was certainly overruled by Divine Providence, in sending his captive
down thither, for a few days before, as it seems, after the Indians in that
place had been powawing together. he told him, that there were two English
vessels then come into Pemmaquid, or Penobscot, which indeed proved so; yet was
it not minded by him surely when he sent his captive thither for powder, for it
proved the means of his escape, which his Pateroon might easily have
conjectured, if it had not been hid from him. As soon as he arrived at
Penobscot, he met with Mugg, who presently saluted him by the name of Mr.
Cobbet, and taking him by the hand, told him he had been at his father's house
(which was the 1st or 2d of November before, as he passed through Ipswich to
Boston) and had promised to send him home, as soon as he returned. Madockawando
taking notice of what Mugg was speaking that way, although he was willing that
he should be released according to agreement (his Pateroon being one of this
Sagamore's subjects, though during the hunting voyage of the winter, he lived
at such a distance from him) began to demand something for satisfaction, in a
way of ransom, not understanding before that his father was a great preachman,
as they use to call it: Reply was made him, that he should have something in
lieu of a ransom, viz. a fine coat, which they had for him on board the vessel;
which the Sagamore desired to see, before he would absolutely grant a release;
but upon sight of the said coat he seemed very well satisfied, and gave him
free liberty to return home. Whilst this Mr. Thomas Cobbet was a prisoner at
Mount-Desert, going along with the Indians to hunt on an extreme cold day, he
was so overcome with the sharpness thereof, that all his senses whore suddenly
benumbed, so that he fell down upon the snow, not being able to stir hand or
foot, and had without doubt there perished in a little time, but the Indians he
was going along with, missing him, presently ran about the woods to seck him,
and when they sound him, they were either so pitiful to him, or so careful of
their own good, as not to cast away a likely young man, from whom they expected
either much service, or a good ransom, for want of a little care and pains to
preserve his life; wherefore taking him upon their shoulders, they carried him
into the next wigwam, so that he soon after revived, and came to himself again,
without any farther mischief.

AT another time, the savage villian, whose prisoner he was, so long as he had
strong liquor, for five days together was so drunk the he was like a furious
mad beast, so that none durst come near him, his squaws he almost killed in one
of those drunken fits.

THE said Thomas was forced to get out of his fight into the woods all that
night, for fear of being injured by him; where making a fire, he kept himself
alive; the squaws being by God's special Providence so inclined to pity, that
they came to him daily with victuals, by which means he was at that time also
preserved; all which put together, makes his deliverance the more remarkable,
as an answer of prayer.

AS for the rest of the prisoners (which are said to be 50 or 60) they were
left with those who first surprised them at Kennebeck, and Seepscot river: The
women are employed it seems to sew, and make garments for them; they having
plundered many English goods at Arowsick. They are so much elated with their
late successes, in spoiling so many English habitations, that they seem not
very ready to hearken to terms of peace, as their Sagamore Madockawando does
desire: Nor are the English able to come near them with any of their forces
this winter season, in regard both of the remoteness of the place, and
sharpness of the cold, which used to be extreme in those parts. How their
hearts may be inclined in the following year, or what the English may be
enabled to do against them, is known unto God only, on whom we desire to wait
for a comfortable issue of these our troubles. But until they have spent all
the plunder that is taken, it is no doubt, but they will seem averse from
having peace; 20 ^^^ers to the westward did, whose hearts were hardened against
all proffers of that uature, till they were destroyed; possibly some remnants
of them that escaped in those other parts, are got hither amongst these, and do
animate them all they can to hostility against us, till they make these as
miserable as themselves, and so forced at the last to fly their country. Many
have been the troubles we have met with from these our barbarous neighbors
round about us, but God we trust will deliver us out of them all, as he has
promised to do for the righteous, who may in the darkest night of affliction
say, light is sown for them, which shall spring up in the appointed time
thereof.

NO farther news came to hand concerning the English prisoners at Kennebeck,
after the return of Capt. Moor from Penobscot, till the 5th of January; when
one Francis Card with another young man, formerly an inhabitant of some place
about Kennebeck, or of Arowsick (but then a prisoner with the Indians) made an
escape from them, and got over to Casco-Bay, and then to Black-Point, from
thence he was conveyed to Piscataqua soon after, and then to Boston.

THE manner of his escape, as he reports was this: He was employed by the
Indians to thresh corn at a barn a little lower in the river, than the place
where the Indians commonly kept; being trusted alone, to go and come of
himself, because there was no suspicion of any coming to carry him away, or
seeming possibility to get away without being discovered, he found means to
plot with another young man, who was sent to look horses; whose flesh it seems
is by those wild savages, preferred before the best beef, so that having their
choice of both, they took what they liked best. This being the employment of
the young man, he had the better opportunity when he was in the woods to make a
contrivance to get away. Thus being resolved upon their design, they provided
necessaries accordingly, and sent such a message home to their masters, as
might occasion them not to expect them very soon that night. Thus resolved,
they marched away as soon as they perceived the coast was clear; and having
provided a canoe accordingly fit for the design, by the help of which they got
over the water, by which they were to pass, which was not frozen; and in the
night time turned into a swamp, where they might make a fire to keep them from
suffering with the cold, without being discerned; so that within two or three
days they recovered the fort and garrison at Black-Point, from whence they were
soon conveyed to Boston.

THIS Francis Card made this relation of matters when he came to Boston, viz.
that the prisoners which he left behind were well, and not much ill used, only
put to do the servile work about the Indians. Woe must it needs be with
christians, when put not only to sojourn, but to serve in those tents of Kedar.
Such of the women as were skilled in knitting and sewing, were improved to make
stockings and garments for their Pateroons: So it seems the warehouse at
Arowsick furnished them with cloth, stuff, and linen, and the inhabitants
served for artificers to cut it out, and make it up.

HE reported also that the Indians spoke nothing of any peace; but rather being
heightened with their late and great successes, were contriving how to get
possession of the other places in the hands of the English on that side of the
country, which God forbid should ever come to pass; but finding so easy work of
their former exploits, they hope to accomplish their purposes with the like
facility in all other places where they come.

IT seems Squando is their chief leader, that enthusiastical, or rather
diabolical miscreant; who has put on a garb of religion, and orders his people
to do the like; performing religious worship amongst the Indians in his way,
yet is supposed to have very familiar converse with the devil, that appears to
him as an Angel of light in some shape or other very frequently. This Francis
Card also affirms, that there is not so great a number of the Indians as is
here reported; for he faith, when they were going out upon some design, while
he was in their hands, he had an opportunity to count them all, and could find
but 98 of them that were men; neither could he discern that there were any of
the western Indians, unless Simon and Andrew, that formerly escaped out of
Dover prison; although it was before apprehended there were multitudes of them
stocked thither.

Francis Card's declaration of their beginning, August 14th.

THE Indians came to Richard Hammond's, and there killed Richard Hammond,
Samuel Smith, Joshua Grant, there parting their company, eleven men came up
Kennebeck river to my house, and there took me, and my family. Therefore the
rest of their company went to Arowsick, and there took the garrison: About a
fortnight after they came down Kennebeck river, and so went down to Damaril's
Cove, and there burnt houses, and killed cattle; then coming back parted their
company; one party went to Jewel's island, and the other party went to
Sagadahock, being in number 81. Those that went to Sagadahock took a shallop;
from thence came to Kennebeck river, and then went to killing and destroying of
cattle and houses; for they had intelligence of a ketch and a shallop at
Damaril's Cove, and going there they took the shallop, and killed two men,
being in number about 80. The next day made up their forces, went out to
Black-Point, being about an 100 fighting men, and are now in two forts about 60
at a place, with six or eight wigwams between the two forts.

NOW the best place to land men is in Casco-Bay, and in Kennebeck river; the
one place being eight, the other about fourteen miles from the fort where I was
kept; and if the army do not go now with speed, they will be gone forty miles
farther up in the country. At the first taking of me they carried me up to
Taconet, and the men coming down, they brought me and two more men down for
fear of our killing their women and children; for they kept their women and
children at Taconet all the summer. As soon as the warm weather does set in,
they do intend to go away to Taconet, and there to build two forts, for there
is their fishing places, and planting ground. Squando does inform them that God
does speak to him, and does tell him that God has left our nation to them to
destroy, and the Indians take for truth all that he tells them; because they
have met with no affront. Now Mugg the rogue, being come again to the fort,
does make his brags and laughs at the English, and faith, that he has found
the way to burn Boston, and does make laughter at your kind entertainment; they
make their brags how they do intend to take vessels, and to go to all the
fishing islands, and so to drive all the country before them; reckoning to be a
great number in the spring. There is a great many Indians at Canada that have
not been out this summer, both of Kennebeck and Damarascoggin, therefore a
great many of these Indians at Kennebeck do intend to go to Canada in the
spring to them. And they do give gifts both of captives, and of goods to the
eastern Indians, to have them to go out with them; but as yet I do not know
what they will do, for Madockawando and Squando are of several judgments, and
so have parted, and Madockawando does pretend love to the English; they do use
our English captives as civilly as we can expect by such a people. That this is
truth, is declared by me, Francis Card, the 22d of January, 1676.

BY the report which he brings it does not appear so difficult a matter to make
an attempt to recover the place, and destroy them that hold it, as was before
apprehended: Insomuch as that design, that was under debate before the Governor
and Council a little before, and was let fall for the present, as a matter not
feasible, has since been set a foot with a fresh resolution: And another thing
also occurred about the same time, which put new life into the said design,
viz. an apprehension that there were several of the Narrhagansets scattered
about in these woods near Piscataqua, who it was feared might join with those
of Kennebeck in the spring, and so come down upon the English plantations, and
spoil them all that are thereabouts. For soon after Francis Card came to
Boston, some of Major Waldern's Indians at Quechecho, as they were hunting in
the woods chanced to meet with three strange Indians, two of which had guns;
but those of Quechecho were without. The other Indians began to insinuate into
them, to see if they could make way for their acceptance with the English:
Those Indians that this motion was made unto, in a most perfidious manner gave
them encouragement in the business, and appointed a place where to meet them
the next day, saying they would not have them now go home with them to their
wigwams, lest their women and children should be frighted with the sight of
their guns; all which was spoken upon a treacherous account, by that means to
betray them, for they had neither women nor children at their wigwams; but not
having guns themselves, as the others had, they durst not then seize upon them.
The next day therefore, according to appointment, their guests expecting a
treaty, and a friendly compliance (yet coming apart, as was ordered the day
before to be the more easily surprised) arrived at the place appointed; and
there presently the first, being thus treacherously brought into the snare, was
dispatched out of hand. The like was also done to the second. The third was not
at such a distance, but he either discerned or suspected what became of his
fellows, and therefore made the more haste to escape; but his deceitful friends
were two quick for him, who shot him down before he could get out of their
reach; so that they took him alive, as is said; but he could not live much
longer by reason of his wounds. These Quechecho Indians cut off the scalps of
their poor countrymen (which is their usual manner, when it is too far to carry
their heads) which being brought to Major Waldern's Indians, they were
presently discerned to be Narrhagansets by the cut of their hair. This instance
is a sufficient evidence of the subtility, guile, and falsehood, natural to all
these Indians, and may satisfy any rational person, what little trust there is
to be put in their words, promises, or engagements, though never so solemnly
made, farther than they that make them, see advantage in the keeping and
performing, Subtility, malice, and revenge, seems to be as inseparable from
them, as if it were a part of their essence.

WHATEVER hopes may be of their conversion to christianity in after time, there
is but little appearance of any truth in their hearts at present, where so much
of the contrary is so ordinarily breathed out of their mouths.

THESE were the manners of the Gentiles in former times, while they remained
children of disobedience, until they were renewed after another image: Nor are
these incapable subjects for divine grace to work upon; yet are there some
natural vices proper to every nation in the world, as Paul speaks of the
Grecians, from the testimony of one of their own poets.

BUT to return. These things so concurring, and several gentlemen from about
Piscataqua repairing to Boston, so represented the state of things eastward
before the Governor and Council, that it was apprehended not only necessary,
but feasible also to suppress the aforesaid Indians in those parts: Whereupon
it was forthwith concluded that an expedition should be made against them; to
which end 200 soldiers, whereof about 60 were of the Natick Indians, who had
given good proof of their valor and faithfulness to the English; all which
were immediately dispatched away the first week in February, by water, under
the conduct of Major Waldern, as commander in chief; a person well approved for
his activity, as well as fidelity and courage in matters of this nature. They
had to encounter with rough and contrary winds, and much cold weather the first
week after their setting out; but having so much experience of the favor and
goodness of Almighty GOD, who is always wont to be present with his servants in
like cases, though he has often for a time deferred, for the trial of their
faith and exercise of their patience, yet uses not to fail his people, that
put their trust in him, and diligently seek his face; a solemn time being
appointed for that end, to which we expect a comfortable answer. We that have
sent forth our friends on the public service, being thus engaged to follow them
with our prayers, at present in silence wait upon the Lord of Hosts to give a
blessing to the design; hoping our friends in this necessary, though difficult
service, thus called forth, have gone out with the like encouragement and
resolution that sometimes Joab did. Let us be of good courage, and play the men
for our people, and for the cause of our God. And let the Lord do that which
seems him good.

UPON the 11th of February, two Indian squaws that had run away from Major
Waldern's in the beginning of winter, out of discontent, because the husband of
one of them, and some of the relations of the other were sent away, came back
with more wit than they carried away with them, though with less flesh upon
their backs; having wandered up toward Pigwauchet, till they were almost
starved there. they say some Indians were soon by them, pretending they were
going to the head of Connecticut river, with hostile intents against the
English; but they going away in the manner before described, little heed is to
be given so the stories they tell upon their return.

THE 19th of February following, John Abbot, the master of Mr. Fryer's ketch,
taken October 12th, at Black-Point, came in to the Isle of Shoales, having made
a desperate adventure to escape. He gave a more probable account of things in
those parts.

HE faith they were first carried to Sheepsect river, where the vessel in which
they were taken was moored all the winter; in which time the Indians having
spent all their ammunition and most of their provision, though it it high time to
be looking out for more; to which end they caused the said Abbot to fit up the
vessel (being a pinnance of about 30 tons) as well as he could, with such
assistance as they could afford him; and ten of them shipped themselves in the
same, intending for Penobscot; from thence to sail up that river as far as they
could; and then leaving their vessel to proceed on with their canoes as high up
the river as the stream would permit, and so to pass on to Canada, to buy
powder of the French there; it being at this time thirty-two shillings a pound
amongst the Indians at Kennebeck. But as Providence ordered it, after these
mariners launched into the deep, a small storm with a contrary wind began to
rise; of which the English skipper found ways in his steering to make the
danger seem more than really it was, insomuch that they resolved to put in at
Capebonawaggon, three leagues to the eastward of Seepscot, where eight of them
went ashore, leaving two Indians on board with the English skipper. After he
had got so well rid of them, he contrived how to get clear of the other also;
therefore he persuaded them that the vessel would not ride safely in that
place, so that he prevailed with them to let him go to another harbor, called
Damaril's Cove, two or three leagues more eastward. In the way as he sailed, he
so ordered his steering, that sometimes the waves were ready to overtake the
vessel, which put his two Indians into a fright, so as they made all the haste
they could to get ashore, as soon as they came within the harbor, urging him
to go along with them; but he pretended a necessary excuse to stay behind to
look after the vessel, but with intent, as soon as he should see them ashore,
to hoist sail for some English harbor, having no body on board with him, but a
small English child about three years old: It seems the Indians had a child or
two of their own dead in the vessel, who dying after they began their voyage,
they were the forwarder to go ashore with them, for burial: The said Abbot now
perceiving he had obtained his purpose (for he ost resolved on this project
before) first greasing the mast with a piece of fat pork left by the Indians,
as high as he could reach, that he with his own hands might the more easily
hoist the sail, so choosing rather to cast himself upon the Providence of God
in the waters, than to trust himself any longer with perfidious savages on the
dry land, he came safe to the Isle of Shoales before the evening of the next
day, the 19th of February.

WITHIN a few days after John Abbot aforesaid made his escape in the vessel,
there came an express from Maj. Waldern (the commander in chief over our for^^s
sent to Kennebeck to subdue the Indians in those parts, and deliver the English
captives that have been detained in their hands since August last) which gives
this account of their proceeding.

February 17th. This morning the wind north-east, soon after south and
south-west, we set fail with our vessels from Black-Point, for Portland, but on
the east side of Cape Elizabeth, we espied John Pain (who was sent out a scout)
who brought word the way was clear of ice and Indians; whereupon we steered for
Mary-Point, at the head of Casco-Bay, and got there this night, but too late to
get to the fort before morning.

Feb. 18th. We sent this morning our scouts out by land, who returning about 8
o'clock, brought word they espied the tracks of three Indians, and found a
birch canoe at Muckquit, about four miles off, by which we feared we were
discovered; the companies about four o'clock were drawn forth, and just
beginning their march, when we espied five canoes of the enemy about half a
mile off; they landed over against us on an island, and hallowed to us, whereby
we perceived they desired a treaty; hoping to gain the captives, we sent John
Pain to them, they promised him to bring the captives by morning, and desired
peace. After this John Pain was sent again, and stayed among the Indians in the
room of Simon, who came to the Major. He was questioned, and answered as
follows.

Quest. How came you to know we were here?

Answ. We continually kept out our scouts, and yesterday our Indians left a
canoe at Muckquit, which this day we missed, and perceived the English had
taken it, and our men that left the canoe espied you a great way off at
Portland.

Quest. Why did you break your covenant with me?

Answ. Blind Will stirred us up to the war here, and said he would kill you at
Quechecho. Simon having said this, asked the Major what his business was here,
to whom it was answered, we came to fetch off the captives and make war as we
see good. Simon also told us that the captives were all well, that we should
have them by morning, that Squando was there, and would give the captives to
Major Waldern, that they intended peace, and had sent to Boston before slow,
but that Mugg told them the English would be here s^^ortly.

THE Major upon this dismissed Simon, and sent for Squando, to which Squando
answered, he would meet him half way if he would come alone in a birch canoe.
To this the Major answered, he would not venture himself in one of their leaky
canoes, and that if he had no more to say, the treaty was ended: To this
Squando answered, he would be with us again at ten o'clock, and bring the
captives.

Feb. 19th. Wind north-east, the weather thick: About noon we discovered a
party of Indians in fourteen canoes about three miles above us in the bay; they
landed on a point of land, and burnt one English house, and shouted to some of
our men that were scouts, challenging them to fight: Immediately on the return
of our scouts we marched against them as secretly as we could; upon sight of us
they fled; but Capt. Frost came upon them with his whole body before they were
half out of gun shot: In this skirmish we judged we killed and wounded several
of them without any damage, yet some of their bullets hit some of our men. For
the Captain's sake immediately after this we hung out a flag of truce, and the
enemy did the like. John Pain was sent to them to demand the reason why they
fired the house, and broke their promise.

Simon met him half way, and answered, the house was fired accidentally without
order from Squando; that they had sent for the captives who were a great way
off, and the foul weather hindered their coming: He questioned John Pain also
why we fought them while we were in treaty.

Pain answered, they broke it themselves in not performing their promise,
challenging our soldiers to sight; the latter Simon denied, and answered the
other as before: Simon told him they had two men wounded, and expected
satisfaction, but also promised the captives the next day, and so lest us.

Feb. 20th. The wind north-east, and snow, it was resolved to fail for
Kennebeck the first fair wind, whither we had immediately gone upon our
knowledge that we were discovered by the enemy, but that the wind and weather
hindered us hitherto.

Feb. 21st. This morning the wind north-west, we set sail for Kennebeck, and
arrived at the harbour's mouth at four o'clock. About sun set we set sail up
the river, and got to the lower end of Arowsick.

Feb. 22d. We set sail this morning, but could not get to the head of the river
for ice, whereupon we landed our soldiers at two o'clock, about twelve miles
off Abound^ssit fort, and immediately began our march; at 8 o'clock at night,
came to the fort; we found no Indians, there we took up our quarters this night.

Feb. 23d. We sent out scouts to discover the march of the enemy, but found so
many tracks every way, that we knew not what way to follow them. At a council
of war it was resolved that Major Waldern should sail for Penobscot, with two
of the ketches, and part of the soldiers to seek after the captives, and fight
the enemy if he had opportunity; the rest to build a garrison. In the absence
of our forces, the vessels espied several fires below the river, and one
English house was burnt; about sunset the soldiers returned to the vessels.

Feb. 24th. This morning the Major with two boats and a shallop went to spy out
a place to settle a garrison, and found one against the lower end of Arowsick
island, and the vessels are brought to it.

Feb. 25th. We rested here this sabbath.

John Baker's house opposite the lower end of Arowsick, being judged the most
convenient place for their purpose, as well for the convenience of water for
the soldiers, as for a cove wherein ships might ride, within command thereof,
their vessels therefore were immediately anchored there, where they rested on
the Lord's day, February 25th.

NEXT day, according to the advice of the commanders, Major Waldern embarked 60
men in two vessels, with which he set sail immediately for Penobscot, leaving
the rest to be employed in making preparation for settling a garrison in the
said place.

IN their way off from Gyobscut-Point, they espied two Indians in a canoe, that
waved their caps, as if they desired to speak with them. John Pain and Walter
Gendal were presently sent; they gave them intelligence that many Indians were
at Pemmaquid with English captives, upon which they bent their course thither;
where arriving, they anchored at four o'clock the same day; soon after two
Indians hollow to them from Mr. Gardner's fort. John Pain was sent ashore to
enquire who they were, and what was become of the captives. Sundry sorts of
Indians were found upon the place, with several Sagamores, the chief of whom,
was Mattahando, who told them he was glad to see English men there, and that he
desired peace, and promised to deliver such captives as were at Penobscot, the
next morning; adding also, that he desired to speak with Capt. Davis. After
John Pain returned to the Major, he was sent back with the said Davis, and
stayed ashore till three Sagamores went on board, and signified as much to
Major Waldern, as they had said before to John Pain. While they were in
discourse, an English captive was espied in a canoe with his Pateroon, with
whom they desired to speak, but it was not granted at that time, he being
carried farther up the river out of sight.

SOON after the Major went on shore with six men, yet carrying no arms with
them. He found their words smoother than oil, yet were there drawn swords in
their hearts, of which some of their actions gave no small ground of suspicion;
for they deferred all till the next morning; nor were they willing to let the
man that was espied before in the canoe come on board to see his friends
without leaving an hostage in his room, of which the Major was very glad, that
he might have an opportunity of a little discourse with one whom they might
trust. When they returned from the shore, a sign was promised to be given for
the appearance of the Indians by the firing of three guns.

THE next morning, February 27th, the Major with the same number as before,
went to treat with them, they, with John Pain, first hallowing to them: Upon
their coming on shore their persons were searched on both sides, and all arms
laid aside. The whole forenoon was spent in a treaty, whereat they seemed much
to rejoice in expectation of a peace with the English; yet when Major Waldern
desired a present delivery of captives, with assistance of men and canoes to
fight the Monoscoggin Indians, enemies to them both, it was denied, though they
could not have had a better testimony of their fidelity.

THEY alleged that the captives were given them by the Kennebeck Indians, and
they must have something for keeping them all winter, and therefore were not
willing to let them go without a ransom; and as for their canoes, they said
they had them in present service, being then bound for Penobscot. The price
demanded, twelve skins a person, was yielded to; upon which they delivered
William Chadburn, John Winnick, and John Worwood, which were all that they
would own, or could be proved they had.

THAT part of the pay which was to be in liquor, was presently laid down, the
rest was promised to be fent in the afternoon. The commanders debated what was
farther to be done; one or two of the old Sagamores (who were believed) seemed
sincere about the peace, professed that none of them had any hand in the war,
but only some of their young men, whom they could not rule; but several of the
company affirming they saw some of the said Indians at Casco engaged in
hostility against the English, it was resolved not to enter into any league of
peace with them, but rather to fight them, or surprise them after they had
dispatched the business about the captives.

THIS being determined, the Major with five of his men went on shore, with part
of the ransom, the better to beget a confidence in them, and then to return on
board again, and fit his men for further service; but if he had not wisely
provided against all exigencies beforehand, he might have been prevented from
ever going on board any more, for stepping aside a rod or two from the place
for better circumspection, he espied the point of a lance from under a board,
hid there, as were other arms near by, for a treacherous design that was in
their minds, soon after, upon the receiving the rest of the pay, to have been
put into execution. Whereupon Major Waldern took up the lance and came toward
them, charging them with falsehood and treachery, for hiding weapons just by,
wherewith to destroy them as soon as they had delivered the goods. The Indians
discovered their guilt by their countenances, some of them making toward him,
thinking to get the weapon out of his hands; but he bid them stand off,
threatening to kill every one that offered to touch him; and immediately waved
his cap over his head (which was the sign agreed upon for all the soldiers to
come on shore in case of need) upon which token the soldiers all hasted away.
In the mean time the English that went on shore to wait upon the Major, were
forced to bestir themselves, both to secure the goods from being carried away,
and to defend Major Waldern. Some of the squaws, with others of the enemy ran
away; one of them catched up a bundle of guns that were hid near by, and ran
off with them. Captain Frost seized an Indian called Megunnaway, a notorious
rogue, (that had been in arms at Connecticut last June, at the Falls, and saw
the brave and resolute Captain Turner, when he was slain about Green-River; and
helped to kill Thomas Bracket at Casco in August last) and with the help of
Lieut. Nutter, according to the Major's order, carried him on board, while
himself searching about farther, found three guns hid in a cow-house just at
hand, wherewith he armed the other three men that were with him. By this time
some of the soldiers were got ashore, and instantly, according to their Major's
command, pursued the enemy toward their canoes; in the chase several of the
enemy were slain, whose bodies were found at their return to the number of
seven, amongst whom was Mattabando the Sagamore, with an old Powaw, to whom the
Devil had revealed, as sometimes he did to Saul, that on the same day he should
be with him; for he had a little before told the Indians, that within two days
the English would come and kill them all, which was at the very same time
verified upon himself. The body of our men overtook them before they all
recovered their canoes, so that without doubt, diverse others of them were slain
likewise, for they sunk a canoe, wherein were five drowned before their eyes,
and many others were not able to paddle; four they took prisoners, whom they
brought away with them. There was about 25 Indians present at this encounter.

MUCH more damage might have been done by our men upon the enemy, if they had
known the most direct way to their canoes; but the Indians having prepared all
things ready for flight, as well as for fight, the more easily made their
escape. One of the captives was sister to Madockawando, who was entertained
very courteously by the Commander in Chief, and would have been carried
forthwith to her brother, in hopes by her means to have gained the better terms
for our remaining English captives, had it not been certainly known that he was
gone from home upon a hunting design, and not to return in two months.

THE English took much plunder from the Indians, about a thousand weight of
dried beef, with other things. Megunnaway was shot to death the same day or the
next; so that justice is by degrees pursuing those perfidious villains, and one
after another they are brought under the wheel of destruction. Simon, that arch
traitor, seems as is said, by his consumptive looks, to have received the
sentence of death, which may bring him into the same place or state with the
rest.

Feb. 28th, they set sail for Sheepscot, but the wind failing, they put in at
Kennebeck, from whence Capt. Fisk with 40 men, were sent to the said place to
seek after plunder, where they found between 30 and 40 bushels of good wheat,
which they brought away with them; several other things they lighted upon here
and there, some of which were brought away, such as, one or two great guns,
some anchors from Sagadahock, and boards from Arowsick, where they found an
hundred thousand foot, of which they brought home enough for the lading of
their vessels, leaving the rest to be transported in a more convenient season.

WHILE our soldiers were upon Arowsick, two of the enemy chanced to come upon
the place, one of them instantly received his reward, the other received his
payment in part, which however is supposed to amount to the whole, the canoe
wherein he was escapeing, being found the next day all bloody, and split
asunder.

March 1st, one of the Indian squaws, a captive, was sent to Taconet fort, with
a message to the Sagamores to treat for the rest of the captives. Five days
were given her to return, which were not expired, when Major Waldern, with most
of the soldiers were called to return home toward Boston, where they arrived
on the 11th of March, 1676 -- 7, having first put in at Portsmouth; bringing
along with them the bones, or rather the body of Capt. Lake, preserved entire
and whole, and free from putrefaction by the coldness of the long winter, so as
it was when found, by the discretion of one that was near him when he was
slain, easily discerned to be his, by such as had known him before.

IT is supposed by those that returned, that the enemy are by this encounter of
the English so scattered and broken, that they will not be able to rally again
suddenly, or make any attempt hereafter, if the present advantage be seriously
pursued. Thus have out enemies, many of them, fallen into the pit themselves,
which they have been digging for others.

THIS day also letters were received from Major Pynchon, of Springfield, but
without mention of any appearance of the enemy in that quarter; whereby we are
encouraged to believe, that they have stumbled and fallen down backward, so
that they shall never rise any more to make farther disturbance. That which
crowned the present service was the performing it without loss of blood; all
safely returning. Let them accordingly remember to pay a suitable tributs of
thankfulness to him, under whose banner they went forth and returned in safety.

THE END.
BOOKS SOLD BY J. BOIL.
JOSEPHUS'S HISTORY OF THE JEWS, 4 Vol.

WHITEFIELD'S WHOLE WORKS, 7 vols.

A very neat Edition of the HISTORY of the MARTYRS, containing their Swanlike
Songs, Treatises, Speeches, Letters, Prayers, etc. in their Prisons or Exiles;
at the Bar or Stake, etc. collected out of the Ecclesiastical Histories of
Eusebius, Fox, Fuller, Clark, Petrie, and Scotland, by THOMAS MALL, A. M.
neatly bound and lettered in One and Two Volumns.

DODDRIDGE'S RISE AND PROGRESS.

COLEMAN'S PARABLE TEN VIRGINS.

And many other Books in Divinity -- A few in History. School Books,
Stationary, etc.

BIBLES, Testaments, Dilworth's Spelling-Books, Psalters, Primers, etc, by
Wholesale.


