AMERICA'S APPEAL TO The Impartial WORLD.

Wherein the RIGHTS of the AMERICANS, as MEN, BRITISH SUBJECTS, and as
COLONISTS; the Equity of the Demand, and of the Manner in which it is made upon
them by Great Britain, are stated and considered. And,

The Opposition made by the Colonies to Acts of Parliament, their resorting to
ARMS in their necessary DEFENSE, against the Military Armaments, employed to
enforce them, VINDICATED.

Woe! to thee that spoilest when thou wast not spoiled; and dealest
treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee, etc. Isaiah xxxiii.
My bowels, my bowels! I am pained at my heart, my heart makes a noise in me; I
cannot hold my peace because thou have heard, Oh my soul! the sound of the
trumpet and the alarm of war. Jer. iv. And they answered the King, the man that
consumed us and devised against us, that we should be destroyed from remaining
in any of the coasts of Israel, let, etc. 2 Samuel xxi. HARTFORD: Printed by
EBENEZER WATSON, 1775

AMERICA'S APPEAL TO THE IMPARTIAL WORLD.
AT a time when we are called upon to surrender our liberties, our religion,
and country; or defend them at the point of the sword, against those, that were
our friends, our brethren, and allies, (whose swords, and ours, till lately
were never drawn but for mutual defense; and in joint battalions, cemented in
love, affinity, and valor, have wrought wonders, vanquished armies, and
triumphed over the power of mighty potentates) nothing will inspire our
councils with unanimity, our resolves with firmness, and render the exertions,
the noble struggles of a brave, free and injured people, bold, rapid and
irresistible, like a right understanding of the necessity and rectitude of the
defense, we are compelled to make, in this unnatural contention.

TO WRITE upon a subject, that has been so often and ably handled -- a subject
so important in its nature, so extensive in its consequences, in which the fate
of America, the rights and liberties of millions, nay more, of mankind, are
involved; and to trace those rights to their native original source, develope
the fountain from whence derived; define their nature and immutability, and
show wherefore the arbitrary institutions of civil government (originally
ordained to connect the strength of each, for the security of all) cannot
destroy or alter them, requires a fund of abilities far beyond mine; yet, to
attempt it, may serve to awaken and stimulate some masterly pen, to execute a
task so arduous, and beneficial to the world. And should these imperfect
considerations, on a subject so important, call forth the prolific fire of some
great intuitive genius, to lighten upon the subject, on which I have only
glimmered, and like a skilful physician, comprehending the disease and the
remedy, point out the one, and prescribe the other, or some mighty deliverer,
while others lop here and there a scattered branch, with unerring aim, to give
a blow at the root, my end would be answered, my pains compensated, and my
country rescued from the darkness that invelops, and from the misery and
slavery that impend it. With these views, the following pages are humbly
dedicated to the candor and patronage, of the impartial world; to whom, (under
God) we make our appeal, with fervent desires, that He, who has the hearts of
King's in his hands suspends the fate of empires on his nod, and whom, even
angry, conflicting elements instantly obey, would hush the civil tumults, still
and dispel the thundering tempest, that darkens and disquiets our hemisphere.

I SHALL consider the subject under the following divisions.

I. THE natural rights of the Americans, considered as men. II. THE rights of
Americans antecedent to any charters, or colony constitutions under the crown.
III. THEIR rights subsequent to such charters, or colony constitutions. IV. THE
equity of the demand made on the colonies, and of the manner in which it is
made.
FREE agency, or a rational existence, with its powers and faculties, and
freedom of enjoying and exercising them, is the gift of God to man. The right
of the donor, and the authenticity of the donation, are both incontestable;
hence man has an absolute property in, and right of dominion over himself, his
powers and faculties; with self-love to stimulate, and reason to guide him, in
the free use and exercise of them, independent of, and uncontrolable by any but
him, who created and gave them. And whatever is acquired by the use, and
application of a man's faculties, is equally the property of that man, as the
faculties by which the acquisitions are made; and that which is absolutely the
property of a man, he cannot be divested of, but by his own voluntary act, or
consent, either expressed, or implied. Expressed, by actual gift, sale, or
exchange, by himself, or his lawful substitute: -- implied, as where a man
enters into, and takes the benefits of a government, he implicitly consents to
be subject to it is laws; so, when he transgresses the laws, there is an implied
consent to submit to it is penalties. -- And from this principle, all the civil
Ex^usia, in the (...), which is translated power, signifies a rightful
authority o^ (...) power, and stands opposed to dunamis, a natural power or
might.
exousiai, or rightful authorities, that are ordained of God, and exist in the
world, are derived as from their native source. From whence are authorities,
dominions and powers? from God, the sovereign ruler, as the fountain, through
the voice and consent of the people. For what purpose are they erected? for the
good of the people. Wherefore the sovereign ruler, condescends to cloth, with
authority, the man who by the general voice, is exalted, from among the people,
to bear rule; and to pronounce him his minister for their good. Hence, it is
evident, that man has the clearest right, by the most indefeasible title, to
personal security, liberty, and private property. And whatever is a man's own,
he has, most clearly, a right to enjoy and defend; to repel force by force; to
recover what is injuriously pillaged or plundered from him, and to make
reasonable reprisals for the unjust vexation. I have not noticed the authority
of parents over children, it not being to the argument, but remark, that the
Creator, fore^^^ing the necessity of civil government, arising from the
depravity of human nature, has wisely formed our infancy, and childhood,
feeble and dependent on the protection, and government of parents, thereby
preparing us, in childhood, for dependence on, and subjection to civil
government, in manhood.
And, upon this principle, an offensive war may sometimes be justifiable, viz.
when it is necessary for preservation and defense.

II. I am now to consider the rights of the Americans, antecedent to any
charters or colony constitutions under the crown.

WHEN our ancestors left the kingdom of England, they were subjects of that
kingdom, and entitled to equal privileges with the rest of its subjects; when
they came into America, where no civil constitutions were existing, they joined
themselves to none: the lands which they entered and possessed, they acquired
by purchase, or by conquest of the natives: they came over of themselves, viz.
were not colonies sent out, to make settlements by government; not to mention
the intolerable oppressions, by which they were driven out, crossed the
Atlantic, and availed themselves of possessions, at their own risque and
expense, and by their own sword and prowess. Now, in America, they were still
subjects of the kingdom of England, or they were not; if the former, then they
were entitled to enjoy, in America, the same or equal privileges, with those
enjoyed by the subjects residing in England -- if the latter, then that kingdom
had no right of jurisdiction over them, and they were in a state of nature, at
liberty to erect such a constitution of civil government as they should choose.
Upon the supposition that they were still subjects of that kingdom, let us
consider what rights and privileges they were entitled to enjoy: 1st. IN regard
to legislation. 2d. TAXATION. And, 3d. THE mode of trial.


BY nature, every man (under God) is his own legislator, judge, and avenger,
and absolute lord of his property. In civil government, rightly constituted,
every one retains a share in the legislative, taxative, judicial, and the
vindictive powers, by having a voice in the supreme legislature, which enacts
the laws, and imposes the taxes, and by having a right, in all cases wherein he
is injured, to resort to, and demand redress, in a course of law, from the
tribunal of the public, and the sword of state. And the English nation, early
impressed, with these first great principles of natures dictates, erected a
system of civil government, correspondent thereto; invested the parliament,
which consisted of all the estates, that composed the nation, in epitome, with
the supreme sovereignty of the kingdom; and in which, each estate made a part,
and had a share, either personally or by actual representation, to advise,
resolve, consent, or dissent, and in which, the concurrence of all three, viz.
the King, Lords and Commons, was necessary, to every act of legislation. Thus
the English government was constituted upon the foundation of reason; and the
natural rights of the subjects, instead of being given up, or impaired, were
confirmed, improved and strengthened, although the mode of exercising them was
altered: Wherefore it is a maxim in the English laws, that to an act of
parliament, every man, in judgment of law is party. The English constitution,
like other imitations of nature, was a system of consummate wisdom, and policy,
the balance of power, being so judiciously placed, as to connect the force, and
to preserve the rights of all; each estate, armed with a power of self defense,
against the encroachments of the other two, by being enabled to put a negative
upon any or all of their resolves, neither the King, Lords or Commons, could be
deprived of their rights or properties but by their own consent in parliament,
and no laws could be made, or taxes imposed, but such as were necessary, and in
the judgment of the three estates in parliament, for the common good, and
interest of the realm. Most justly then did a celebrated French writer,
treating of the English, and the excellence of their constitution, say, that
England could never lose its freedom, until parliament lost its virtue. The
English, animated with the spirit of freedom, to their immortal honor,
anciently claimed these privileges, as their unalienable rights, and anxious to
preserve and transmit them unimpaired to posterity; caused them to be reduced
to writing, and in the most solemn manner to be recognized, ratified and
confirmed, first by King John, then by his son Henry the IIId. in the 3d and
37th years of his reign, at Westminster Hall, where Magna Charta was read in
the presence of the Nobility and Bishops, with lighted candles in their hands;
the King, all the while laying his hand on his breast, at last, solemnly
swearing faithfully and inviolably to observe all things therein contained, as
he was a man, a christian, a soldier and a King; then the Bishops extinguished
the candles and threw them on the ground, and every one said, thus let him be
extinguished and stink in hell, who violates this charter: Upon which there was
universal festivity and joy, ringing of bells, etc. and again by Edward the
1st. in the 25th year of his reign, by the statute called Confirmatio Cartarum.
Afterward by a multitude of corroborating acts, reckoned in all, by Lord Cook,
to be thirty-two, from Edw. 1st. to Hen. 4th. and since, in a great variety of
instances, by the bills of right and acts of settlement; whereby Magna Charta,
that great charter of liberties, has been established as the standard of right
throughout the realm, and all judgments contrary thereto declared void, it was
ordered to be read twice a year in all the cathedral churches, and sentence of
excommunication to be denounced against all, who by word or deed, acted
contrary to, or infringed it.

2d. WITH REGARD TO TAXATION.

As the rights of private property are sacred, and no one can be divested
thereof without his free consent: The English constitution, in this also
religiously follows the dictates of reason: No subject of England can be
constrained to pay any aids or taxes, even for the defense of the realm, or the
support of government, but such as are imposed by his own consent, or that of
his representative in parliament. By the stat. 25 Edw. 1st. c. 5 and 6, it is
provided, that the King shall not take any aids or taxes, but by the common
assent of the realm: And what that common assent is, is more fully explained,
by the 34th of Edw. 1st. stat. 4, c. 1, which enacts, that no talliage or aid
shall be taken, without assent of Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights,
Burgesses, and other freemen of the land; and by the 14th Edw. 3. stat. 2. it
is provided, that the Prelates, Earls, Barons, Commons, and Citizens, Burgesses
and Merchants, shall not be charged to make any aid, if it be not by the common
assent of the great men, and Commons in Parliament: And as this fundamental
principle had been shamefully violated by succeeding Princes, it was made an
article in the petition of right, third of King Cha. I. that no man shall be
compelled to yield any gift, loan, or benevolence, tax, or any such charge,
without common consent, by act of Parliament; and again by the 1st of William
and Mary, stat. 2, it is declared, that levying money for, or to the use of the
crown, by pretense of prerogative, without grant of parliament, or for longer
time, or in other manner, then the same is or shall be granted, is illegal; and
that the subjects do claim, demand, and insist upon all and singular the
premises, as their ancient undoubted rights and liberties. Lastly, these rights
and liberties were asserted and confirmed, in the act of settlement which
limited the crown, to the illustrious house of his present Majesty, in the
beginning of this century. Talliage from the French taille to cut, signifies a
part cut or carved out of the whole estate, and in a law sense includes all
subsidies, taxes, impositions, and duties whatsoever, none of which might be
taken without common consent in parliament. Hence, it is the ancient and
unalienable right of the House of Commons, to originate all money bills, they
being the free donations of the people, and not the exactions of the Prince;
upon the principle that civil government is constituted for the good of the
people, and not the people for government: And there is no difference in the
reason and nature of the thing, between the King's levying money in England
without consent of parliament, and the parliamant's levying money in America
without the consent of the Americans.

3d. IN REGARD TO THE MODE OF TRIAL.

As it is not the laws merely, that are made, considered in themselves, but the
construction and sense put upon them, by the judges and triers, that falls upon
the subject and affects him in his person and property; it was necessary that
the constitution should guard the rights of the subject, in the executive as
well as the legislative part of government: And no mode of trial would so
effectually do this, be so unexceptionable, by reason of their equality, and
the impartial manner in which they are taken and impanelled; so advantageous,
on account of their knowledge of the parties, the credibility of the witnesses,
and what weight ought to be given to their testimony, as that by our peers, a
jury of the vicinity: For very good and wholesome laws may be perniciously
executed. Wherefore it is expressly provided and ordained, in the Great Charter,
chap. 29, That no freeman shall be taken or disseised of his freehold, or
liberties, or free customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or any otherwise
destroyed; and we will not pass sentence upon him, nor condemn him, but by
lawful judgment of his peers; or by the laws of the land. By this no freeman
might be molested in his person, liberty or estate, but according to the laws
of the land, by lawful warrant, granted by lawful authority, expressing the
cause for which, the time when, and place where he is to answer or be
imprisoned, with the terms of his enlargement; nor have sentence passed upon
him in any case, but by lawful judgment of his peers; who, in the instance of
giving their verdict, do unanimously declare and announce the law, with respect
to themselves, in like circumstances. It is, says Dr. Blackstone, the most
transcendant privilege which any subject can enjoy or wish for, that he cannot
be affected in his property, his liberty or person, but by the unanimous
consent of twelve of his neighbors and equals: And when a celebrated French
writer concludes, that because Rome, Sparta, and Carthage, lost their
liberties, therefore England must in time lose theirs, he should have
recollected, that Rome, Sparta, and Carthage were strangers to trial by jury;
and that it is a duty which every man owes to his country, his friends, his
posterity and himself, to maintain, to the utmost of his power, this valuable
constitution in all its parts, to restore it to its ancient dignity, if at all
impaired, or deviated from its first institution, etc. and above all, to guard
with the most jealous circumspection, against the introduction of new and
arbitrary methods of trial, which, under a variety of plausible pretenses, may
in time, imperceptably undermine this best preservative of English liberties.
English subjects, therefore, could be bound by no laws, be liable to no taxes,
but what were made and imposed by their own consent; nor have any sentence
passed upon them but by the judgment of their equals. Glorious constitution!
worthy to be engraved in capitals of gold, on pillars of marble; to be
perpetuated through all time, a barrier, to circumscribe and bound the restless
ambition of aspiring monarchs, and the palladium of civil liberty; especially,
when in addition to these, we consider the Habeas Corpus act, passed in 31 Car.
II. that second Magna Charta and stable bulwark of the subjects liberties,
which provides a remedy for the immediate relief of such as are unjustly
imprisoned, under color of law. And enacts, that no subject of this our realm,
who is an inhabitant of England, Wales, or Berwick, shall be sent a prisoner to
Scotland, Ireland, Jersey, Guernsey, or places beyond the seas, and all such
imprisonments are declared illegal, the party causing them disabled to bear any
office, incurs the penalty of a praemunire, becomes incapable of the King's
pardon, and also is to answer damages to the party aggrieved. Of great
importance, says the above cited author, to the public, is the preservation of
personal liberty, for if once it was left in the power of any, the highest
magistrate, to imprison arbitrarily, whomsoever he or his officers thought
proper (as in France is daily practiced by the crown) there would soon be an
end to all other rights and immunities. How consistent with these principles,
the present mode of administering government is, the impartial world may judge,
by the late revenue and other acts of parliament, relative to America,
directing its inhabitants to be imprisoned, and transported beyond sea for
trial; erecting courts of admiralty, and other arbitrary tribunals, to decide
in matters most interesting, without the intervention of a jury.

These privileges, important and inestimable as they are, every subject of the
realm of England has right to possess and enjoy. And the Americans, antecedent
to their charters, etc. if they were still subjects of that realm, had right to
have and enjoy in America. Now, if it was impossible for the Americans, in
their situation, to enjoy the rights and privileges of the English government,
it follows, that they were not amenable to its power, nor taxable for its
support; nam qui sentit onus, sentire debet commodum, he that bears the burden
ought to enjoy the blessing, and vice versa. Can any thing be more absurd, than
that a man should be tied to a government, bound to yield subjection, and
contribute support, wherever he is, on the face of the earth, without having
any part or voice in its administration, or power to enjoy its immunities. And
that it was impossible for the Americans to enjoy the privileges of the English
government, is evident, there being no provision in the constitution for
summoning members to parliament from the American world; and if there was, the
local distance, the risk and uncertainty of crossing the atlantic, the
disparity between the two countries, in respect of situation, numbers, age,
abilities and other circumstances, would render any representation of America
in the parliament of England, utterly impracticable and vain. So that our
ancestors, in America, were unable to exercise and enjoy that capital right of
all English subjects, viz. the having a voice in the supreme legislature,
without which, as the causa sine qua non, the parliament of England could not
bind them in any respect. Hence the right of subjectship, on the part of the
Americans, and of jurisdiction over them by parliament, became dormant,
ineffectual rights, incapable of being exercised; for the whole ground of the
parliament's right to bind the Americans, consisted in their being subjects;
and for that very reason, if they were subjects, the parliament could have no
right to bind them, or exercise jurisdiction over them, without their consent.

I will now enquire, whether the Americans, antecedent to their charters, etc.
are to he considered as being subjects of the kingdom of England, or not.

From what has been already said, it is evident, that they either were not
subjects of that kingdom, or as though they they were not: But this will be
further illustrated, by considering, in what subjectship consists: Complete
subjectship By this is meant one that is a subject of the kingdom as well as of
the King.
consists in being under allegiance to the King, inhabiting territories within
the kingdom, in having, or at least in being capable of having a voice in the
supreme legislature, and enjoying, or in being able to enjoy the benefits and
immunities of the government.

Allegiance, from ligo, to bind, is the bond that connects the subjects with
their sovereign, and their sovereign with them: Hence the King is called their
liege Lord, and they his liege subjects; because he is bound to protect and
they to obey. And there are three kinds of allegiance, natural, acquired, and
local, every one born within the realm, is by birth, inheritable to the laws,
entitled to the immunities of the government, and to the protection of the
King; wherefore his allegiance, like St. Paul's, is natural: Every alien friend
that comes into the realm, who by the King's letters patent is made a denizen,
or by act of parliament is naturalized, has an acquired allegiance; every
alien friend that comes into the realm to reside for a time, owes a local
temporary allegiance, during his residence there. And the obligation to
obedience in all these cases, arises from the reason and fitness of things, and
is comprehensively expressed in this short law maxim, protectio trabit
subjectionem, and subjectio protectionem, protection mutually entitles to
subjection, and subjection to protection. Hence it follows (as mankind by
joining to society do not mean, nor does allegiance intend to confine them
perpetually to dwell in one country) that when a person, under a natural,
acquired, or local allegiance removes out of the realm to some distant climate,
goes out of the protection of the King, and loses all benefit of the laws and
government of the kingdom; his allegiance, which is mutual or not at all,
cease, for cessante causa cesset effectus, the cause or reason ceasing, which
in this case is protection and the benefits of government, the effect, viz. the
obligation of obedience also cease. There is also what is called a legal
allegiance, ex provisione legis, that is by positive institution, as the oath
of allegiance taken by the subjects, wherein they swear to bear all true and
faithful allegiance to the King; which is a counter part to the King's
coronation oath, whereby he swears to protect his subjects in all their just
rights, to abjure popery, and maintain the protestant religion, to govern the
kingdom and administer justice according to the laws of the realm. Both which
are only confirmations of the mutual obligations resulting from the relation,
that subsists between them as King and subjects, and do attend upon and follow
it, in its extent and duration. I am not insensible that it is a doctrine of
antiquity, patronized by many, that natural allegiance is universal and
perpetual; cannot be lost or forfeited, but by the commission of crimes, etc.
but notwithstanding, I beg leave to suggest a few considerations on this point.
The place of a man's birth, in respect to himself, is a matter of accident and
necessity, and not of choice; and is a man so bound by accident and necessity,
as to the place of his birth, that when he arrives to the age of discretion, he
cannot remove into another kingdom and country, and become the subject of
another prince? Does not the obligation of subjection and obedience to parents,
cease with our childhood and state of dependence, although that of respect and
reverence ever remains? Should the King of Great Britain voluntarily resign his
crown, or abdicate the government, remove and reside in Italy, or enter into
religion, whereby he would be civilly dead, would he, notwithstanding, be King,
de jure and de facto, and would the subjects be under obligation of allegiance
to him, as their liege Lord? incapable of placing another on the throne,
without incurring the crime of treason, or being involved in the dilemma of
owing subjection to two rightful sovereigns, at one time? If so, then he that
is once King, can never be divested of royal authority, the principles of the
revolution are false; and no new subjects can ever be acquired, for all are
born under allegiance to some prince or state; where, upon these principles,
they must ever remain, fixed as fate; and acquired allegiance, by act of
parliament in England, is all a farce.

BUT be this as it may, yet should a number of the subjects of Great Britain,
under a natural allegiance to the King, by his license remove voluntarily, or
by accident be carried to some distant, uncivilized, or uninhabited country,
where they should find it convenient and beneficial to settle; would they be
incapable of erecting civil government, and making laws, for the well ordering
of their affairs, independent of the King and kingdom? If so, they would be of
all men most miserable, and their boasted subjectship would be their greatest
calamity, because they have the rights of British subjects, they are rendered
incapable of enjoying the rights of men. Upon this contracted principle, no new
countries could be peopled, or new empires founded; but all things must remain
as they were. And is the world and its empires so fixed and concluded by an
unalterable fate? Are men, who were created in the image of their maker, to
contemplate the heavens and soar above the stars, whose first great law was to
increase, multiply and replenish the earth, and by experiencing the boundless
profusion of divine goodness, learn to be profusely bounteous and good, to be
so restrained? Is this becoming the dignity of their rational nature, and
suited to the selfish By selfish here is meant virtuous passions that prompt us
to seek our own preservation etc. as self-love, etc.


social passions, implanted in the human soul? Whose motives are our own good
and the good of mankind: To attempt to eradicate or alter these, by the
arbitrary restraints of civil government, is to impeach the wisdom of the
Creator, for not suiting man's passions and faculties, to his station here, and
offering violence to human nature. Let civil government then be suited to man's
nature and passions, (I mean not the depraved, ungodly desires and cravings of
tyranny, which grasps for universal despotic sway; or of licentiousness, that
is ever impatient of all legal restraints, how ever reasonable and righteous)
for if it is not, there will be a perpetual conflict between the regulations
and restraints of government, and the reasonable desires and passions of the
subjects.

It may be said, that the reason why natural allegiance is perpetual, is not
merely on account of our being born, etc. but the protection and support of the
government, afforded us where born; this is an obligation of debt. Much, most
undoubtedly, we owe to our parents and to the government that supported and
protected our infa^^ile state: But is it true, that because we were once
dependant, we must ever be so? Because we were once obliged, we can never be
disengaged from the obligation? If it is, then all mankind are insolvents,
servants of servants, the curse of Canaan is the portion of all: And every
alien born is utterly incapable of ever becoming a subject of the kingdom of
Great Britain.

But to return, allegiance is due to the King in his natural and political
capacity; and does not necessarily superinduce an obligation of obedience to
the power of parliament; for a person may be a subject of the King of England
and not of the realm; be under allegiance to the King, yet owe no obedience to
parliament; as was the case of Scotland, upon the accession of King James the
1st. to the throne of England, before the act of union; and as the case is at
present with Hanover; and as was the case of Normandy, when William the
Conqueror wore the crown of England.

THE rights of a subject may be suspended for a time, with respect to the
enjoyment and exercise of them, by some temporary impediment, which when
removed they revive: But when the obstacle that suspends and impedes the
exercise and enjoyment of them, is universal, permanent and perpetual, it is an
extinguishment of those rights. Thus much I thought necessary to observe,
before I gave a relation of the cause and manner of our ancestors first coming
and settling in America.

NORTH AMERICA was first discovered by Sebastian Cabot, in the reign of Henry
the 7th, A. D. 1498, and was at that time inhabited by the Indian natives, who
lived principally by hunting: In A. D. 1606 King James, by letters patent,
erected two companies called the Virginia Companies, with power to make
settlements in America. Though none were made in New England by virtue of that
authority. About the close of the sixteenth century, several attempts were made
for settling Virginia, before any proved successful: The three first companies
that came all perished, by hunger, diseases or Indian cruelty: The fourth was
reduced to almost the same situation, when Lord Delaware came to their relief.
Thus Virginia, being the first province that was settled in America, to her
honor be it remembered, has likewise been foremost in maintaining and
vindicating the rights of the Americans.

IN A. D. 1620, England, torn with religious dissentions, the friends of the
reformation, persecuted with unrelenting cruelty, by the intolerant spirit that
influenced government, were forced to renounce their religion and liberties, or
assert them with their lives. The protestants, to the number of one hundred and
fifty, who before had fled to Holland for safety, having made a purchase under
the Plymouth Company, and obtained the royal license, quitted their native
country, preferring the enjoyment of their religion and liberty, in a howling
desert, to the pomp and pleasures of luxury and sin in England; crossed the
Atlantic and arrived at Plymouth in America in A. D. 1620, and by their own
valor, industry, risk and expense (under the smiles of Heaven) acquired
plantations, subdued savage enemies, built cities, turned the wilderness into
fruitful fields, and rendered it vocal with the praises of their Savior, and
from small beginnings, in process of time, became great in number, and in
extent of territory; Great numbers, not long after, from religious
considerations, emigrating from. England, came and settled the other colonies
in America; for, says an English historian, it seems that all the provinces of
North America were planted from motives of religion. Thus was gradually
unfolded the rudiments of a future empire, before in embryo.

UPON what principles then, could England have jurisdiction over the persons
and properties of those brave and free adventurers who settled the colonies?
Because England was most powerful? This would be founding right in might, an
argument too absurd to need refutation, applied to any but the supreme Being;
who, though almighty, yet can do no wrong. Or because they were once subjects
of that kingdom? This, if it proves any thing, proves too much, as has been
shown. Or was it because the country was discovered by the King of England?
Whatever rights accrue by first discovering a vacant country, accrue to the
Prince, under whom it is made; and they are jura coronoe, rights of the crown,
belonging to the King and not to the kingdom. But America, had long before been
discovered and inhabited by numerous tribes of Indians, the original
proprietors of the country; subjects capable of property, and who made a part
of the human species, when the Almighty gave the earth to the children of men;
and why black squalid hair, a tawny complexion, a particular manner of living,
and ignorance of divine revelation, should be absolute disqualifications, to
have and hold property, any more than a black skin, curled head, flat nose and
bandy legs, should be the infallible criterion of slavery, I cant devise.

III. Let us consider the Rights of the AMERICANS subsequent to their Charters
and Colony Constitutions.

As there are certain rights of men, which are unalienable even by themselves;
and others which they do not mean to alienate, when they enter into civil
society. And as power is naturally restless, aspiring and insatiable; it
therefore becomes necessary in all civil communities (either at their first
formation or by degrees) that certain great first principles be settled and
established, determining and bounding the power and prerogative of the ruler,
ascertaining and securing the rights and liberties of the subjects, as the
foundation stamina of the government; which in all civil states is called the
constitution, on the certainty and permanency of which, the rights of both the
ruler and the subjects depend; nor may they be altered or changed by ruler or
people, but by the whole collective body, or a major part at least, nor may
they be touched by the legislator; for the moment that alters essentially the
constitution, it annihilates its own existence, its constitutional authority.
Not only so, but on supposition the legislator might alter it; such a stretch
of power would be dangerous beyond conception; for could the British parliament
alter the original principles of the constitution, the people might be deprived
of their liberties and properties, and the parliament become absolute and
perpetual; and for redress in such case, should it ever happen, they must
resort to their native rights, and be justified in making insurrection. For
when the constitution is violated, they have no other remedy; but for all other
wrongs and abuses that may possibly happen, the constitution remaining
inviolate, the people have a remedy thereby.

THE Americans antecedent to their colony constitutions, must be considered
either as the subjects of the kingdom of England, or as subjects of the King
and not of the kingdom, or as subjects of neither; and their territory as
belonging either to that kingdom, the King, or to neither. In which of these
lights they should be considered, I leave the impartial world to judge. If the
first, then the grants and patents from the crown conveyed nothing, nam ex
nihilo nihil gignitur, for what the King had not he could not grant, and the
colonies, besides their rights as English subjects, have acquired an
indefeasable title, by prescription, to the lands they have possessed, to the
privileges, immunities and exemptions they have enjoyed, and to all the powers
of government, rights of jurisdiction, regalities, etc. which they have had and
exercised, beyond which, the memory of man runs not to the contrary. If the
second, then by the royal grants, patents, etc. all the powers of government,
rights of jurisdiction, liberties and privileges, with the property of the
lands in fee, are passed from the crown, and vested in the colonies, absolutely
and indefeasably, according to the tenor of their several grants and
constitutions. If the last, then all these rights of jurisdiction, of property
and liberty, were underived and self-originated. If, therefore, they were to be
considered as English subjects, by the constitution of that kingdom, they had
right to enjoy all these privileges; if not as English subjects, then they were
theirs without being beholden therefore. In either view, therefore, they were
entitled to have and enjoy all the rights, liberties and privileges, which, by
their several constitutions, were granted and confirmed to them, antecedent
thereto. And their constitutions are the original compacts, containing the
first great principles, or stamina of their governments; combining the members,
connecting and subordinating them to the King as their supreme head and liege
Lord; also prescribing the forms of their several governments, determining and
bounding the power of the crown over them, within proper limits, and
ascertaining and securing their rights, jurisdictions and liberties; and are
not to be compared to the charters of corporations in England (although they
are to be deemed sacred) which are royal favors granted to particular
corporations, beyond what are enjoyed by the subjects in common; if they should
be forfeited and taken away the membes will still retain the great essential
rights of British subjects, and these original compacts were made and entered
into by the King, not only for himself, but expressly for his heirs and
successors on the one part, and the colonies, their successors and assigns on
the other; whereby the connection was formed, not only between the parties then
in being, but between the crown and the colonies, through all successions of
each; and those compacts are permanent and perpetual, as unalterable as Magna
Charta, or the primary principles of the English constitution: nor can they be
vacated or changed by the king, any more than by the colonies, nor be forfeited
by one more than the other; for they are mutually obligatory on both, and are
the ligaments and bonds that connect the colonies with the king of
Great Britain, and the king with them: cut, therefore, and dissolve them, and
the colonies will become immediately disunited from the crown, and the crown
from them. Should the original parties to these constitutions awake in their
tombs, and come forth (on a controversy that would awake the dead, could the
dead be waked) and with united voice testify, that this was their original,
true intent and meaning, would it not be awfully striking and convincing? But
we have greater evidence; we have their original declaration, made in that day,
deliberately reduced to writing, and solemnly ratified and confirmed, which is
as follows: We do, for us, our heirs and successors, grant to, etc. and their
successors, by these presents, that these our letters patent, shall be firm,
good, and effectual in the law, to all intents, constructions and purposes
whatever, according to our true intent and meaning herein before declared, as
shall be construed, reputed and adjudged most favorable on the behalf, and for
the best benefit and behoof of the grantees, etc. notwithstanding any omissions
therein, or any statute, act, ordinance, provision, proclamation or restriction
heretofore made, had, enacted, ordained or provided, or any other matter, cause
or thing whatsoever, to the contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding.

And the reasons for erecting these constitutions, are recited in the preamble
of some of them, as follows, viz. Whereas by the several navigations,
discoveries, and successful plantations of diverse of our loving subjects of
this our realm of England, several lands, islands, places, colonies and
plantations have been obtained and settled, etc. and thereby the trade and
commerce there, greatly increased, etc. and that the same, or the greatest part
thereof, was purchased and obtained, for great and valuable considerations, and
some other parts thereof gained by conquest, with much difficulty, and at the
only endeavors, expense and charge of them and their associates, and those
under whom they claim, subdued and improved, and thereby become a considerable
addition of our dominions and interest there. Now, KNOW YE, That in
consideration thereof, and in regard the said colony is remote from other the
English plantations in the place aforesaid, and to the end the affairs and
business which shall from time to time happen, or arise concerning the same,
may be duly ordered and managed, we have therefore thought fit, etc.

Through this portal, majesty itself, like the meridian sun, lightens upon the
subject, and makes plain (...), which the wits and disputers of a venal age,
would envelope in midnight obscurity. In consideration that these discoveries,
settlements, etc. were obtained for great and valuable considerations, etc. and
at their, viz. the colonist's only endeavors and expense of blood and
treasure, and in regard that they are remote, so that they cannot otherwise
enjoy the benefits of civil government, etc. therefore, it is most reasonable
and necessary, that they should have a government of their own. These
constitutions are in some respects various in different colonies; all have
their assemblies, or parliaments, consisting of the governor, council, and the
representatives of the people; invested with the supreme power of legislation
and taxation; though in some, their laws are subject to be negativ'd by the
royal dissent, within a limited time: in some, the governor and council are
chosen by the people, in others, the council; and in some, both governor and
council are appointed by the crown. All have their courts of judicature, to
take cognizance of all causes, arising within their territorial limits, and the
power of judging in the last resort, though this right has been infringed in
sundry instances, by appeals to the king and council. But how a judgment in
England can be executed in America, according to the course of law, is to me a
paradox.

Further, it is ordained and declared, That all and every of the subjects of
us, our heirs, etc. which shall go to inhabit in said colony, and every of
their children that shall happen to be born there, or on the sea in going to or
returning from thence, shall have and enjoy all liberties and immunities of
free and natural subjects, within any the dominions of us, our heirs or
successors, to all intents, constructions and purposes whatever, as if they and
every of them were born within the realm of England, This does not bring the
Americans within the realm of England; but it proves them to be out of it: For
were it not so, the granting to them and to their children privileges equal to
natural subjects, born within the realm, would have been idle and unnecessary,
being no more than they would have been entitled to without it, after settling
the foundation principles, and enumerating a variety of capital articles in the
constitution of their governments; to avoid prolixity and all mistake and
omissions in a recital of their rights and privileges; they are in short,
summed up and declared to be similar and as ample in every respect, as those of
the natural born subjects of the realm, to which the colonists are referred, to
learn the full extent of their own; which demonstrates the similarity and
likeness that subsists between the civil constitutions of the two countries;
although several and distinct; and the lands are granted to be holden, not in
capite, or by knight service, but in free and common soccage as of the manor of
East-Greenwich; paying there for a certain proportion of the gold and silver
ore, that should from time to time be found, etc. in lieu of all services,
duties and demands whatsoever. Thus, whether the Americans, antecedent to their
constitutions, were subjects of the kingdom of England or not, they have now
the clearest right to enjoy the liberties and privileges of English subjects:
and to hold their lands discharged of all duties and demands of every kind,
except as above. And nothing is plainer, than that the colonists cannot enjoy
such privileges, unless they have parliaments and assemblies of their own;
invested with the supreme power of legislation and taxation, in which they may
be represented, and for this I have a very great and ancient authority, viz.
the case of the Virginians, determined by one of the Kings of England, (...) a
century and a half ago, which, to use the words of the English historian, is as
follows: The government of this province was not at first adapted to the
principles of the English constitution, and to the enjoyment of that liberty,
to which a subject of Great Britain thinks himself entitled, in every part of
the globe. It was governed by a Governor and Council appointed by the King of
Great Britain. As the inhabitants increased, the inconveniency of this form
became more grievous; and a new branch was added to their constitution, by
which the people, who had formerly no consideration, were allowed to elect
their representatives from each county, with privileges resembling those of the
representatives of the Commons of England; thus two houses, the upper and lower
house of assembly were formed; the upper house appointed by the crown are
styled honorable, and answer in some measure to the house of p^^rs in the
British constitution. The lower house (...) the guardian of the people's
liberties. And thus, with a Governor representing the King, and an upper and
lower house of assembly, this government bears a striking resemblance to our
own. Now, if the parliament has right to bind the colonists in any instance of
legislation and taxation, it has in all: Wherein, then, will consist the
similarity of the colony constitutions to that of Great Britain? Wherein the
power of their assemblies to guard the rights of the people? In fine, where is
the boasted English liberties of the subjects? All laid in the dust, and the
colonies subjected to be governed and taxed by the parliament, who are, and
their constituents both, interested in augmenting their taxes and burdens.

REALM signifies kingdom; and kingdom signifies the country or countries, that
are subject to one sovereign prince. And should a school boy be asked, whether
America, which is three thousand miles distant, was within the kingdom of
Great Britain, both being subject to one prince, he must answer that it was
not; but that it was within the kingdom of the King of Great Britain and
America. Nor are the following questions more difficult, viz. whether the House
of Commons, who have only a representative authority, have right to bind those
whom they do not represent? Or whether, in virtue of their being the
representatives of the people in Great Britain, they are the representatives of
the people in America? viz. whether the Britons and the Americans are
identically the same persons, or whether the Britons are, have, or ought to
have, every thing, and the Americans nothing? If the colonies, when they were
first constituted, were not subject to the jurisdiction of parliament, they are
not become so, by any thing since: and that they were not is evident, not only
from the declaration of the King in the constitutions, but by the royal conduct
toward them from time to time, treating them as though they were not.

UPON the remonstrance of the Virginians against the imposition of duties on
their trade, King Charles the second issued a declaration under his privy seal,
dated 19th of April, A. D. 1676, affirming, that taxes ought not to be laid
upon the proprietors and inhabitants of the colony, but by the common consent
of the General Assembly. And when a revenue was wanted for the support of civil
government in Virginia, in A. D. 1679, an act was framed and sent over to be
passed by their Assembly, in these words, Enacted by the King's most excellent
Majesty, by and with the consent of the General Assembly of the colony of
Virginia, that a duty of, etc. which was accordingly passed into a law.

AND it was declared by James the first and Charles first, when a bill was
proposed in the House of Commons, and repeatedly and strenuously urged, to give
liberty to the subjects of England to fish on the coast of America; that it was
unnecessary, that the colonies were without the realm and jurisdiction of
parliament, and that the Privy Council would take orders in matters relating to
them. And liberty of fishing in America, is reserved in some of the charters
that were afterward made; which shows that without such reservation, they
would not have had right to fish-on the coast of the colonies. And upon
complaint of piracies, etc. committed off the coast of Connecticut, King
Charles the second, in A. D. 1683-4, instead of causing an act of Parliament to
be made to restrain and punish them, writes this letter to the General Assembly
in Connecticut, which letter, is now extant in the hands of the Secretary.
Charles Rex, trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well: Whereas we are
informed of great disorders and depredations daily committed, to the prejudice
of our allies; contrary to treaties between us and a good correspondence that
ought to be maintained between christian princes and states; and we having
already given strict order in our Island of Jamaica, against such illegal
proceedings, by passing a law for restraining and punishing privateers and
pirates, etc. our will and pleasure is, that you take care that such a law (a
copy whereof is herewith sent you) be passed within our colony, under your
government, which you are to certify unto us by the first opportunity, so we
bid you heartily farewell. Given at our Court at New Market, the 8th day of
March, A. D. 1683-4, in the 36th year of our reign. By his Majesty's command.
L. Jenkins. And accordingly the bill was passed into a law by the General
Assembly of Connecticut. Can it be supposed, that this bill would have been
sent to Connecticut to be passed into a law, if the Parliament had had
jurisdiction thereof? Further, Great Britain sending their culprits into
banishment in America, demonstrates, that America is out of the jurisdiction of
that kingdom, for banishment consists in putting a subject out of the limits
and jurisdiction of the government. It is in the memory of every one, that the
King sent his requisitions to the colonies to raise men and money in the last
war, which were readily complied with, by his most dutiful and loyal subjects,
in the provinces: Whefore was this, if the Parliament has supreme legislative
and taxative jurisdiction over them? And to put this matter beyond all doubt,
and to show that the colonies have right, not only to enjoy, but to defend
themselves, and their liberties, against any and all (the parliament not
excepted) that should be so stupid, or vile, as to invade them; hear the solemn
declaration and warrant of their King, in their original constitutions: And we
do for us, our heirs and successors, give and grant unto, etc. and their
successors, by these presents, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the
chief commanders, governors and officers of the said company for the time
being, who shall be resident in the parts, etc. hereafter mentioned, and others
inhabiting there, by their leave, admittance, etc. from time to time, and at
all times hereafter, for their special defense and safety, to assemble, martial
array, and put in warlike posture, the inhabitants of the said colony, and
commissionate, empower and authorize such person or persons as they shall think
fit to lead and conduct the said inhabitants; and to encounter, expulse, repel
and resist, by force of arms, as well by sea as by land; and also to kill, slay
and destroy, by all fitting ways, enterprises and means whatsoever, all and
every such person or persons, as shall at any time hereafter, attempt or
enterprise the destruction, invasion, detriment or annoyance of the said
inhabitants or plantation; and to use and exercise the law martial, etc. and to
take or surprise, by all ways and means whatsoever, all and every such person
or persons, with their ships, armor, ammunition, and other goods of such as
shall in such hostile manner, invade, or attempt the defeating of the said
plantation; (...) the hurt of the said company and inhabitants. Thus, (...)
liberties and privileges are not only granted and confirmed, but a power is
expressly given (...) the (...) to defend them to the utmost, against those who
should invade or attempt to destroy them. And are the Americans chargeable with
treason and rebellion, for yielding to the irresistible impulses of
self-preservation, and acting under and in pursuance of the royal license and
authority of their king? It is certain that the colonies, in all their
constitutions, were considered as being out of the jurisdiction of parliament,
from the provisions made in every one, to supply the want of such jurisdiction,
by investing their several assemblies with supreme power of legislation; and
that their kings ever considered and treated them as being so, until that fatal
period when George Grenville, that monster of ministers, came into
administration; and that the colonies so understood themselves to be.

From all which I think we may infer, with great clearness and certainty, that
he that is king of Great Britain, is, by the constitutions of the colonies,
also king of the American colonies, bound to protect and govern them according
to their several constitutions, and not to destroy them: and that the
parliament has no jurisdiction or power with respect to them; for the
parliament consists of the three estates, the king, lords and commons, and was
constituted for the government of that realm; and the king sustains a
threefold capacity, as king of Great Britain, the first of the three estates
in parliament, and as king of the American colonies, and according to the maxim
of the English laws, Quando duo jura concurrent in una and eadem persona, idem
est, ac si essent in diversis; when several rights or capacities meet and are
vested in one and the same person, they remain entire, and as distinct as
though they were vested in different persons. This right of sovereignty over
the Americans, is derived from a different source from that of Great Britain,
viz. the constitutions of the colonies, extends to different objects, viz. the
colonies, and is exercisable in a different manner, viz. according to their
several constitutions. And what the king does as king of Great Britain, or as
one of the estates in parliament, he does not as king of the colonies; for if
so, then all the judges and officers appointed in the realm of England, would
be judges and officers in America; all the laws and taxes that receive the
royal assent in parliament, would immediately be binding upon the Americans,
unless expressly excepted; contrary to the united voice of all their princes,
politicians and lawyers, which is, that even Ireland, which they hold as a
conquered country, is not bound by acts of parliament, unless specially named.
The Lords being the noble peers of that realm, set in parliament in right of
their estates and dignity, their authority cannot extend beyond the limits of
the kingdom of which they are peers. The House of Commons, act by a delegated
authority, and can have no greater power than their constituents can give, and
their constituents can give no greater than they have; and from whence, in the
name of common sense, have the people of Great Britain right of dominion over
the persons, properties and liberties of the good people in America?

BUT some may object, that upon these principles, the colonies have an
unlimited power of legislation, etc. within themselves, contrary to an express
clause in their constitutions, which restrains them from making laws, etc.
contrary to the laws of the realm of England.

THESE constitutions are to be considered, not only as the stipulations of the
sovereign and the particular colonies with whom they are made, but also of the
colonists among themselves; although they are conceived wholly in the style and
language of grants from the crown. And the language of the clause referred to
in the objection, is after this manner, and we do further of, etc. give and
grant unto the said Governor and Company, etc. that it shall and may be lawful
for them, etc. to erect and make all necessary and proper judicatories; to hear
and decide all matters and causes, etc. and to make, ordain and establish all
manner of wholesome and reasonable laws, statutes, ordinances, directions and
instructions, not contrary to the laws of this our realm of England.

THIS restraint to colony legislation, cannot be construed to extend the
jurisdiction of parliament; for if it could, it would be repugnant to the
grant, and void; for parliament might make laws contrary to all the laws the
colonies have or could make; in this sense, it would be reserving a power that
would devour and destroy all the powers constituted and granted in the patents,
etc.

NOR is it to be understood, that the colonies may not make laws respecting
their own people, which are contrary to laws in England, concerning a similar
matter; for instance, in England the laws permit persons of certain rank and
estate to play at games; in the colonies all persons without distinction are
prohibited playing at games. By the laws of this our realm, then is not meant,
any particular rules and regulations of law; but the grounds, principles and
spirit of the laws and constitution, then existing in the realm of England, on
which the whole system of their laws were founded, by which dictated, and to
which they were conformed. As the constitutions of the colonies were founded on
the same principles with that of England, and the colonists entitled to like
privileges with the natural subjects of that realm, and referred to the great
charter of English liberties, to learn the full extent and nature of their own:
Therefore it is stipulated and granted, that they may make all reasonable laws,
etc. not contrary, to what? To the genius of the laws and civil constitution of
this our realm of England; for such would likewise be contrary to the genius of
their own governments. Between which and the English constitution there is such
a similarity, that you cannot thwart the principles of one, without
contradicting the spirit of the other; and the sword that pierces the sides of
one, penetrates the bowels of the other. This restriction is limited to the
laws or system of government then in being in and over that realm: and does not
extend to any civil constitutions that might afterward be made; nor to any
laws made, or that should be made there, to extend to the colonies, out of that
realm; for this would, as has been shown, be repugnant to the grant; and
further, such would not be the laws of that realm, but of the colonies. This
clause therefore, instead of restraining the colonies under the power of
parliament, does demonstrate them to be distinct states, without and
independent of the jurisdiction of parliament.

I AM not insensible, that by act of parliament 7 and 8 Will. III. cap. 22. it
is declared, that all laws, by laws, usuages and customs which shall be in
practice in any of the plantations, repugnant to any law made, or to be made in
England relative to the said plantations, shall be utterly void and of none
effect. And by stat. 6 of Geo. III. cap. 12. It is further declared, that all
his Majesty's colonies and plantations in America, have been, are, and of right
ought to be, subordinate to and dependant on the imperial crown and parliament
of Great Britain, who have full power and authority to make laws and statutes
of sufficient validity, to bind the colonies and people of America, subjects of
the crown of Great Britain, in all cases whatsoever, with a number of other
statutes of the present reign, sounded on the same principles and of the same
fatal tendency. By these statutes, the Americans are deprived of all authority,
even to make a by-law; and of all their liberties and properties; by subjecting
both to the arbitrary power and disposal of parliament, in all cases
whatsoever. Let these statutes be executed upon the Americans; and what, in the
name of wonder, I ask, what will they have left, that has even the shadow of
power or privilege, natural, civil, or religious; that they will be able to
exercise and enjoy? But let us examine the ground and authority of these acts
that sound such a peal, the knell of American freedom.

IT is not the parliament's declaring a thing to be so, that makes it so, nor
their enjoining a thing to be done, that makes it a duty to do it. Should the
parliament, in the plenitude of their power, pass an act, that the four
elements have been, are, and ought to be subordinate to, and dependant on the
jurisdiction of parliament; and that they have full power, etc. to make laws of
sufficient validity to bind them, in all cases whatsoever. And that there
should be neither rain nor sunshine, seed time nor harvest, in all the
continent of America, for three years and seven months; would the elements and
the heavens be guilty of treason and rebellion, if they pursued their ancient
course: And are not the liberties of men, who are appointed lords of this lower
creation, of more importance than those of the elements, and are they not
equally sacred and inviolable?

THE obligation of obedience to a law, arises wholly from the authority of the
makers, over those on whom it is enjoined; so that if the Americans are
naturally independent of the power of parliament, and by no concessions and
civil constitutions of their own have submitted thereto, and put themselves
under it; no acts of parliament can make them dependant. And if the parliament
has no right of dominion over the Americans; it follows that the Americans are
under no obligation of obedience to its laws.

I CANNOT but remark upon the singular phraseology of this declaratory act of
parliament, viz. that all his Majesty's colonies (not our colonies) have been,
are, and of right ought to be subordinate to, and dependant on the imperial
crown and parliament of Great Britain, who have full power and authority to
make laws and statutes of sufficient validity to bind the colonies and people
in America, subjects of the crown of Great Britain, in all cases whatsoever.
What strange circumlocution of law language is used to express what they meant
to conceal! What is the amount of this declaratory act? That the parliament has
full power and authority to make laws, etc. to bind the colonies and people of
America in all cases whatsoever? no, but to bind the colonies and people of
America subjects of the crown of Great Britain, viz. They have power to bind
the subjects of the crown of Great Britain in America. Now if the colonies are
not subjects of the crown of Great Britain, viz. are not subjects of the King
in virtue of his crown of that kingdom, then by their own declaration the
parliament has no right to bind them. And it is very evident from what has
been said, that the King's right of sovereignty over the colonies is not
derived from, or holden in virtue of his crown, as King of Great Britain; but
from the particular stipulations entered into with the colonies by their
several constitutions; otherwise their constitutions would have been idle and
unnecessary. Nor will it help the matter, should we for argument's sake, yield
to them that the colonies were subjects of the crown of Great Britain; then
they would be entitled to the privileges of subjects, which is an exemption
from legislation or taxation without their voice or consent. So that whether
the colonies are or are not subjects of the crown of Great Britain, the act is
altogether unfounded.

BUT it may be objected to the colonies claim of exemption from the
jurisdiction of parliament on account of their not being represented; that
there are many persons of property, and large towns in England who do not vote
in the election of representatives to parliament, yet are bound by its laws,
etc. There is no borough, city, town, or shire in England, nor any man of
competent estate and a subject of the kingdom, but what may have a voice in the
election of representatives to parliament; if, therefore, some do wave a
privilege which they might enjoy, their stupidity ought to be a warning, and
not an example for the Americans to imitate: Nor does it by any means follow,
that because some are bound, who might and will not send representatives; that
therefore, the parliament has right to bind all, even those who cannot, if
they would, be represented. Besides, every member of parliament, though c^^sen
by one particular district, when elected and returned, serves for the whole
realm; and no laws or taxes are made and imposed on such, but what equally
affect those that make them, and their constituents. The case of the
unrepresented Americans is directly the reverse; they cannot be represented,
and the burdens laid on them proportionably alleviate the burdens of those
that impose them, and their constituents.

AGAIN, it may be objected, that several acts of parliament respecting America,
have been acquiesced in, etc. Neither the parliament's making laws, nor the
American's acquiescing therein, can create an authority to make them on one
hand, nor an obligation to obey them on the other, though they may be
considered as some evidence thereof. From the first settlement of the colonies,
to the conclusion of the last war, no taxes, or duties have been claimed, or
imposed by act of parliament in America, for the purpose of raising a revenue,
unless the act respecting the post office is considered as such. The first act
that was made to extend to America, equally extended to Asia and Africa; and
was made in the 12th of Charles II. merely for the regulation of trade;
requiring all English goods to be shipped in English vessels, and navigated by
English mariners. The 25th of the same reign produced the first act that
imposed duties for any purpose in America, and the preamble declares it to be
for the regulation of trade only; nor are the avails appropriated to any part
of the revenue: Yet this produced an insurrection in Virginia, agents were sent
to England on the account; and a declaration obtained from the King under his
privy seal, dated April 19th, A. D. 1676 That taxes ought not to be laid upon
the proprietors and inhabitants of the colony, but by the common consent of the
General Assembly. The other acts that ^^spected the colonies, except the 7 and
8 of Will. III. antea, were for the regulation of trade only, until of late;
the duties were never acquiesced in, were always murmered at, protested
against, as being oppressive and unjust, and eluded as far as possible. And as
the trade of the colonies was, of choice, principally with Great Britain and
the British Islands, many of those acts did not much affect them in their
interest or inclination. If such an acquiescence may be construed a submission
to acts of parliament; the nonuser of such power by parliament, for so long a
time, may, with greater reason, be construed a relinquishment thereof. For the
non user of a power, by those that are able to exercise such power, is greater
evidence against the existence of it, than the non-resistence of thousands is
for it, who are incapable of making resistance.

BUT it will be said that the post office in America was by act of parliament
and is for the express purpose of raising a revenue.

THE post office is a convenient and useful institution, and on that account,
it has been received and used in America, and not on account of the act of
parliament; and derives all its authority, in America, from its being received
and adopted there: As many of the rules of the Roman civil law, are received
and adopted by universal consent in England, and are obligatory upon the
people; not from the authority of the Roman Emperors that ordained them, but
from their own act in receiving and adopting them. Further, the act of
parliament forbids all persons to carry or transport any letters, etc. by land
or water, on pain of severe penalties, except the postmaster or his deputies:
And it is well known, that this part of the act was daily violated; yet no
person was ever prosecuted: Which shows that the post office in America was not
such, as the parliament had enacted; but such as the universal consent and
practice of the people there had made it; and also, how little deference is
paid to acts of parliament in America.

From all the cases of pretended acquiescence to acts of parliament, nothing
can be inferred favorable to the jurisdiction of parliament, for either it was
for the interest of the Americans to comply with them, or it was not; if the
former, then they complied, not from a principle of obedience to them; but from
motives of interest and inclination; if the latter, then they demonstrate the
incompetency of parliament to make laws for the Americans; who through ignorance,
or some other principle, has enjoined what is prejudicial. And no wise
constitution would vest a power in any body of men, who, from their situation
and circumstances, are and must be, necessarily incompetent for the proper
exercise of it.

IT may be objected, that all these charters and colony constitutions were made
by and with the King, in his political capacity, as the supreme head of the
kingdom; and that whatever he does as such, is in virtue of authority derived
from the kingdom; and for the use and benefit thereof, and not with and for the
King only.

THESE constitutions, are either the compacts of both the king and kingdom of
Great Britain with the colonies; entered into by the King for himself, and in
behalf of his kingdom, or they are the compacts of the King only.

IF the former, then the kingdom of Great Britain, as well as the King, is a
party to them, bound and concluded by them; and can have no greater authority
over the colonies, than is therein expressly stipulated, and in no other manner
than is therein provided. For if the kingdom will take the benefit of the
King's acts, it must in those respects, be likewise bound by them. And there is
not the least color of legislative authority in the colony constitutions,
stipulated or reserved to the parliament, over the persons or properties of the
Americans, except in one or two instances, which are altogether singular, and
as absurd as singular, but full and complete power of legislation is vested in
the General Assemblies of the several colonies -- subject only in some, to the
royal dissent within a limited time; and to have the colony Assemblies, subject
at the same time to the legislative power of Parliament, would be constituting
an imperium in imperio, one supreme power within another, the height of
political absurdity.

BUT if these constitutions, are the compacts of the King, only with the
colonies, then the kingdom and parliament of Great Britain have no power over
them, more than they and their Assemblies have over the kingdom and parliament,
for they are distinct sister states, neither having any power or authority over
the other. And that these constitutions, were entered into and granted by the
King for himself only, is evident, in that, no mention is made in them of the
parliament, except as above, and in them the reservation is void, being against
Magna Charta: Or of their being made by the King, in behalf of himself and
kingdom; and this most certainly the King is capable of doing; for the King
considered in his natural capacity as a man, is subject to all the frailties of
human nature, has sensations of pleasure and pain, which are his own, and may
make contracts and be bound by them, although in his political capacity he is
by way of eminence styled perfect, etc.

IN his political capacity he also has certain prerogatives, royal rights and
interests, which are his own, and not the kingdom's; and these he may alienate
by gift or sale, etc.

SHOULD France offer the King of Great Britain the crown of that kingdom, and
he accept it; could not France be subject to the King, without being subject to
the kingdom of Great Britain, and subordinate to the power of parliament? Upon
these principles, should the King of England be elected Emperor of Germany, the
British parliament, would legislate for the whole Germanic body. And the case
would not be otherwise, with a people in a state of nature, that should make
choice of the King of Great Britain for their King, and he accept thereof, they
would not thereby, elect the kingdom for their masters nor be subjected to its
parliament. Thus, whether these constitutions are considered as the compacts of
the King and kingdom of Great Britain, or only of the King, the colonies are
clearly out of the reach of the jurisdiction of parliament, -- and it is
evident that they were originally intended so to be, and all the advantages
expected from them by Great Britain, were their trade, which has far exceeded
their most sanguine expectations. For these constitutions were not entered into
and granted by the King in virtue of his being the King of Great Britain; the
King of France or Prussia might have done the same; or any individual, the
Americans should have elected for their King. The force and authority of these
constitutions, is not derived from any antecedent right in the crown of
Great Britain to grant them; but from the mutual agreements and stipulations
contained in them, between the crown of Great Britain and the colonies.

FURTHER, it is objected, that the settlement of the crown is by act of
parliament; and the colonies do acknowledge him to be their King, on whom the
crown is thus settled, consequently in this they do recognize the power of
parliament.

THE colonies do and ever did acknowledge the power of parliament to settle and
determine who has right, and who shall wear the crown of Great Britain; but it
is by force of the constitutions of the colonies only, that he, who is thus
crowned King of Great Britain, becomes King of the colonies. One designates the
King of the colonies, and the other makes him so.

LASTLY it is objected, that in all civil states it is necessary, there should
some where be lodged a supreme power over the whole.

THE truth of this objection will not be contested; but its application in the
present argument is to be considered. If Great Britain and America both
constitute but one civil state, then it is necessary that there should be one
supreme power, lodged either in Great Britain or America, in such manner as is
consistent with the liberties of the subjects. But if they are distinct states,
then it is necessary, that there should be a supreme power lodged in each. The
only thing then to be done is to prove, that Great Britain and America are
distinct states. And this point has been already considered; so that little
new can be said upon it. However it may be observed, that a civil state, is a
country or body of people that are connected and united under one and the same
constitution of civil government; by this the kingdoms and states in Germany
and other parts of Europe are distinguished and known. Now there is no such
civil constitution existing, as that of Great Britain and America.

GREAT BRITAIN has its civil constitution; the colonies have their's; and
though, the spirit and principles of them are similar, yet the constitutions of
the two countries are entirely distinct and several: The constitution of
Great Britain is not the constitution of the colonies, nor vice versa. They are
two countries, three thousand miles distant from each other, inhabited by
different people, under distinct constitutions of government, with different
customs, laws and interests, both having one King. Now, if any can believe that
Great Britain and America are but one civil state, they must overthrow the
doctrine of identity and diversity, confound all distin^^^^^ (...) nature, and
believe that two is one and one is two. Further, they are and must be distinct
states from the nature of their situation, and in order to their ^^joying the
privileges of their respective governments. And the constitutions of civil
government ought to be erected on the foundation of reason and ^^conformable to
the nature of things; nor is it difficult to conceive of two distinct
countries, independent of each other, each having its own civil constitutions,
laws, parliaments, courts, commerce and interest, united under one sovereign
Prince. And would it be necessary that there should be in one of these states,
a supreme power over the persons and properties of the other? If it would, then
it follows, that it would be necessary in such case that the subjects of one
should be slaves to the other, incapable of liberty or property. Are not
Hanover and Saxony distinct states, both within the empire, and subordinate to
the imperial crown of Germany? They are. And is not this the case of
Great Britain and America? Two distinct states, or countries under one
sovereign Prince, both equally his subjects and incapable or being slaves? Each
invested with plenary powers of government, in their several countries? This is
really the situation of the colonies; and not to admit of a system of civil
government, adapted to their situation, or to insist on the exercise of such
powers over them, as are inconsistent with, and subversive of their natural and
constitutional rights and liberties, is really pointing the controversy, not
merely at the Americans, but at the great former and ruler of the universe, for
making and situating them as they are. From all which it follows (...) colonies
are distinct states from that of Great Britain; have and ought to have a
supreme power of government lodged in them.

THUS, the question is reduced to a single point, either the parliament has no
such power over the persons and properties, of the Americans as is claimed, or
the Americans (...) slaves Slavery consists in being wholly under the power and
control of another, as to our actions and properties: And he that has
authority to restrain and control my conduct in any instance, without my
consent, has in all. And he that has right to take one penny of my property,
without my consent, has right to take all. For, deprive us of this barrier of
our liberties and properties, our own consent; and there remains no security
against tyranny and absolute despotism on one hand, and total abject miserable
slavery on the other. For power is entire and indivisible; and property is
single and pointed as an atom. All is our's, and nothing can be taken from us,
but by our consent; or nothing is our's, and all may be taken, without our
consent. The right of dominion over the persons and properties of others, is
not natural, but derived; and there are but two sources from whence it can be
derived; from the almighty, who is the absolute proprietor of all, and from our
own free consent. Why then wrangle we so long about a question so short and
easy of decision,? Why this mighty din of war, and garments rolled in blood;
the seas covered with fleets, the land with armies, and the nation rushing on
swift destruction? Let the parliament show their warrant, the diploma and
patent of their power to rule over America, derived from either of the above
fountains, and we will not contend; but if they cannot, wherefore do they
contend with us? For even a culprit has right to challenge of the executioner,
the warrant of his power, or refuse submission.

THE question is not whether the king is to be obeyed or not, for the
Americans, have ever recognized his authority as their rightful sovereign, and
liege lord; have ever been ready, with their lives and fortunes, to support his
crown and government, according to the constitutions of the nation; and now
call upon him as their liege lord (whom he is bound to protect) for protection,
on pain of their allegiance, against the army, levied by the British
parliament, against his loyal and dutiful subjects in America.

NOR is the question Whether the Americans would be independent or not, unless
the state they have ever enjoyed has been such; for they ever have
acknowledged themselves to be subjects of the king, subordinate to, and
dependent on the crown, but not on the parliament of Great Britain, unless any
should think there is no medium between submission to parliament, and perfect
independance. -- But the question is, Whether the parliament of Great Britain
has power over the persons and properties of the Americans, to bind the one,
and dispose of the other at their pleasure? Hear the language of parliament in
their acts disposing of the property of the Americans: We, your Majesty's
dutiful subjects, the Commons of Great Britain, in parliament assembled, have
therefore resolved to give and grant unto your Majesty, the several rates and
duties hereinafter mentioned, etc. in America. -- Here the Commons in England
are pluming themselves on their great liberality to their sovereign, with the
property of the Americans, as though it was all their own. If the parliament
have no such power as is claimed, their invading our rights, and in them the
rights of the constitution, under pretense of authority; besieging and
desolating our sea ports, employing dirty tools, whose sordid souls, like
vermin, delight to riot on filth; to practice every artifice to seduce, that
they may the easier destroy; with money tempting, with arms terrifying the
inhabitants, to induce and compel a servile submission; is treason against the
kingdom, of the deepest die, and blackest complexion: whereby the constitution,
that firm foundation of the nation's peace, and pillar of government that
supports the throne, is shaken to its very basis; the kingdom rent, and divided
against itself; and those sons of thunder that should be the protectors of its
rights, are become its destroyers. Nor will American freedom fall alone;
Great-Britain's shakes, totters, and must tumble likewise, nor long survive the
catastrophe: And the Americans resisting the measures, and defending against
the force used to accomplish these dreadful events, and precipitate the nation
into total, irreparable ruin and destruction, are deeds of the greatest loyalty
to their king, and the constitution that supports him on the throne, and of
fidelity to his government. For subjects to levy war against their king, is
treason, but the king's levying war against his subjects, is a crime of royal
magnitude, and wants a name. Should the king of France join with the enemies of
his kingdom, and levy war against his subjects, would he notwithstanding,
retain his royal authority over them, and they be incapable of defense against
such an unnatural attack, without incurring the crime of treason and rebellion?
If so, woe! to the inhabitants of kingdoms, for, by reason of their kings, the
earth would be made desolate.

LET none be dismayed at the strength and power of our oppressors; nor at the
horrors of war into which we are compelled, for the necessary defense of our
rights. Can we expect the laurels, without entering the list? To be crowned
without being tried? The fairest fruits are always most obnoxious to the birds
of prey: English liberties, the boast and glory of the nation, the admiration
of its friends, and envy of its foes; were obtained, sword in hand, from king
John, by his free and spirited barons; and what rivers of blood have been shed,
to maintain and defend them, against the encroachments of succeeding kings, to
the time of the glorious revolution, is well known to all, acquainted with the
English history. Such is the state of the world, that the way to freedom and
glory, is a way of danger and conflict. The road to Canaan was through the
desert and the deep; and the grave is the subterranean path to celestial bliss.
And let it not be forgotten that those of Israel whose hearts failed them
through fear of being destroyed by their enemies, and discouraged their
brethren, were destroyed of their maker. Nor ought any to think, by joining
themselves to the enemies of their country, they shall escape, however fair the
promises, or great the reward; and though they should not meet with their
deserts, from the hands of their injured countrymen: for the minister, wants
your assistance to destroy your fellows, only, that yourselves may be the
easier destroyed; and when you have done his drudgery, you will become his
prey. Divide and impera, divide and distrue, divide and command, divide and
destroy, are maxims of deep policy, fabricated in a very old cabinet.

IV. I shall now proceed in the last place to consider this question in another
light, viz. the equity of the demand made upon the colonies, and of the manner
in which it is made. The ill policy of such measures, having in a most
inimitable manner, been considered and exposed by those illustrious patriots,
the Earl of Chatham, Burke, Bar, the Bishop of Asaph, etc. (whose names and
memories no distance of place or time, will be able to obliterate from the
grateful minds of the Americans) with such dignity of sentiment, energy and
perspecuity of reason, such rectitude of intention, uncorruptness and candor of
disposition, and with such force of elocution, as must have rendered them
irresistible, only by the omnipotence of parliament.

GREAT BRITAIN can have no demands upon the old colonies, except for assistance
afforded them against their enemies in war, and protection to their trade at
sea; for the lands were neither acquired or settled at the expense of the
crown. New York, indeed, was obtained by conquest from the Dutch, without much
risk or loss; and was afterward in the treaty at Breda, A. D. 1667, confirmed
to the English in exchange for Surinam. Nor have those colonies since, been any
expense to the crown, either for support of their governments, or inhabitants:
And the Americans have had no enemies but what were equally the enemies of
Great Britain; nor been engaged in any wars, but what the nation was equally
engaged in, except the wars with the Indians; which they carried on and
maintained themselves. It will be necessary to state the advantages the
Americans have been to Great Britain, as well as those they have derived from
thence, by assistance afforded in the wars, and by comparing, strike the
balance.

FROM the first settlement of the colonies, they have been almost continually
engaged in a bloody and expensive, though successful war with the French and
Indians, on their frontiers, until the reduction of Canada; whereby their
settlements were extended; and by a rapid population, the number of inhabitants
have been greatly increased; and the trade to England proportionably augmented.
In A. D. 1690, Sir William Phips raised an army in New England, took Port
Royal, or Annapolis, in Nova Scotia, from the French; and reduced another
settlement of considerable consequence, at the mouth of the river St. John's,
on the Bay of Fundy, both which, king William ceded to the French at the peace
of Riswick, A. D. 1697; and received an equivalent for them. In A. D. 1703, the
beginning of Queen Ann's war, Annapolis was retaken, by the New England people.
Afterward Sir William Phips, with the New England People, attempted the
reduction of Canada, and was obliged to return, not by the arms of the enemy,
but by the severity of the season coming on earlier than usual: However, he
built a fort on the mouth of Pemaquid on the frontiers of the country, which
reduced all the Indians, North West of Merimac river, under the crown of
England. By these successes, Great Britain was induced to engage in an
expedition against Quebec. In A. D. 1711, Admiral Walker was sent to Boston,
with a fleet, and some land forces; New England furnished their quota of troops
for the expedition; but by reason of the great fogs, and some mistake of the
pilot's, part of the fleet was stove upon the rocks; eight hundred of the men
lost, and the expedition rendered abortive. Annapolis, and all Nova Scotia was
confirmed to Great Britain, at the peace of Utrecht, A. D. 1713; whereby all
that country, its valuable fisheries, and trade, were added to the crown of
Great Britain. Not to mention the ineffectual, but costly expedition, formed by
the New England people against Canada, in A. D. 1740; and that against the
Island of Cuba, at another time. On the 16th of June, A. D. 1745, the important
fortress of Louisbourgh surrendered to Commodore Warren, and Mr. Pepperel;
reduced by a long and perilous siege of forty-nine days (through the smiles of
heaven) by the valor and intrepidity of American troops, assisted by Commodore
Warren, with a small squadron in the harbor; by which, the command of the
Newfoundland fishery, the gulf of St. Lawrence, the only pass by sea to
Quebec, the capital of the capital of the French settlements in America, fell
into the hands of the English, and which afterward purchased the peace of
Europe, and procured to the crown of England, in the peace of Aix Chappelle,
sundry important places that had been taken. Thus, the Americans labored,
fought and toiled; and the Britons reaped the advantage. The noble exertions of
the Americans, and the part they took in the last war; their laudable emulation
to be foremost, in complying with the requisitions of their sovereign; their
troops contending for stations of danger, as posts of distinction; esteeming
their lives and their properties, an inconsiderable sacrifice, for the glory of
their king, and the renown of his arms; and the large levies of men and money
made by them, are fresh in every one's memory. The amazing advantages derived
from the war in America, to the crown and kingdom of Great Britain, is also
well known. The whole eastern and northern country, the New-foundland fishery,
trade, and navigation, a source of boundless wealth; the island of Cape-Breton,
the extensive country of Canada and Louisiana, from the arctic pole, to the
tropic of Cancer, with their train of fortresses, lakes, etc. the peltry and
furr trade of that whole country, with the almost inexhaustable treasures of
the Havanna; a harvest in which the Americans, with the Britons, bore the heat
and burden of the day; yet the Americans shared little or none of the fruit,
except being delivered from troublesome neighbors, on their frontiers, and
some individuals drawing a share in the plunder, at the Havanna. And what a
mighty accession of weight and importance was this, to the crown of
Great Britain, in the scale of power, among the European states and princes!
But why need I dwell upon these? At the conclusion of the last war, justice
swayed the scepter; and a a righteous minister had the royal ear; the Americans
were considered as creditors to the nation; and thousands of pounds were sent
over to reimburse them. But Oh! the sad reverse of times, ministers and of
measures!

IN the next place, let me enquire, in respect to the protection afforded our
trade at sea. Our trade, from inclination and choice, has been principally
with Great Britain and the British isles, and like the trade in all cases,
carried on between an infant country, in want of all kinds of manufactures, and
an old, wealthy, manufacturing kingdom. Our's was of necessity and for
consumption; their's for profit and advantage. They purchased of us our raw
materials, and sold to us their wrought manufactures; both at their own price,
and at their own ports. In this view of the matter, must it not be supposed,
that the advantages of this trade to that kingdom, amply paid for its
protection; and their motives to protect it were their own emolument and
profit? But this will be more fully illustrated, when we consider, that the
amount of the trade between Great Britain, and the colonies, at a medium for
three years, before it was interrupted by these unhappy disputes, is computed
at about three millions, three hundred and eighty-five thousand pounds per
annum: From which deduct a certain proportion, for raw materials, that are
imported into England, which is comparatively inconsiderable; the remainder is
a clear profit and gain to Great Britain; and is divided between the public
exchequer, and private coffers -- for the whole cost of the raw materials, the
duties on the importation of them, the manufacturer's labor, his living and
his family's, his taxes upon his house, windows, salt, soap, candles, coal,
etc. etc. etc. upon his eatables, his drinkables, and clothing; those of his
family, his apprentices and journeymen; and not only so, but also the taxes his
shoemaker, weaver, and tailor paid, when working for him; the merchants
profits, the charges of bailage, truckage, freight, insurance; and the duties
upon the articles themselves, all go in to make up the price, and are paid by
the American consumer. In this view of the matter, I believe I am within bounds
to suppose, that the direct trade, (leaving out of the question the cercuitous
trade by way of the West Indies and other parts) neats a profit of three
millions to Great Britain: And near one halt of that sum, is made up of taxes
and duties, which are paid in England; whereby the public revenue is so much
increased and eventually is actually paid by the Americans.

CAN any suppose, that this is not an ample compensation, for all the
protection afforded our trade at sea? What nation in Europe would not rejoice
to receive our trade on these terms, and give us thousands for its purchase?
But, upon supposition it is not sufficient, and that the colonies are indebted
to them; ought they not to state the account, that the balance might be seen;
and to make a demand of payment? And not without doing either, thrust their
hands into our pockets; and rend from thence, not only what we owe them, but
what they please: Not only what we ought to pay, but our whole property; nor
that only, but our liberties too. And if asked wherefore this? the answer is,
that the nation is indebt, and that we owe them. If we owe them, let them make
it appear, and the colonies will pay them; that the nation is in debt, needs no
proof; but for what? For expense in war, and for charges of government in time
of peace? Could these have accumulated -- the enormous sum of 145,000000, the
national debt in A. D. 1766? Bribery and corruption, luxury and exorbitant
pensions multiplied, might.

BUT it is time to close these enquiries; and what may we not expect, from what
is threatened and already done, that is in the power of parliament to do?

IS not the King of Great Britain, the visible head of the christian church in
England? and by the Quebec bill, is he not, as amply constituted the head of
the romish church in Canada? Have not the Americans, by the constitution of
nature, as men, by the constitution of England, as Englishmen, and by the
constitutions in America, as colonists; a right of exemption from all laws,
that are made, and taxes that are imposed, without their voice and consent? And
from other mode of trial, than by their peers of the vicinity?

AND by the late acts of parliament, are not taxes and duties imposed, and laws
enacted to bind them, not only without, but in which, they neither had nor
could have any voice? And is not the whole government, of that ancient province
of the Massachusetts, demolished at a blow, by an engine of tyranny, without
being summoned, heard or tried? Are not strange and unusual methods for
imprisonment, transportation and trial, introduced? Arbitrary tribunals
erected, to decide in matters most interesting, without the intervention of a
jury? In a word, are not all our rights and liberties, natural, religious and
civil, made a mark for their arrows, and threatened to be laid in the dust? And
to complete our ruin, are not our harbors blocked up? our coasts lined with
fleets? our country filled with armed troops? our towns sacked? inhabitants
plundered? friends slaughtered? our pleasant places desolated with fire and
sword? all announced rebels? our estates declared forfeit; and our blood
eagerly panted for? When I think of Boston, that unhappy capital; what she once
was, and the miserable captive state, to which she is now reduced, I am almost
ready to adopt the plaintive strains of captive Israel concerning her: By the
rivers of Babylon there we set down, yea, we wept when we remembered Zion; we
hanged our harps upon the willows, in the midst thereof, for there they that
carried us captive and wasted us, required of us a song and mirth, saying, sing
us one of the songs of Zion. How shall we sing the Lord's song in a strange
land? if I forget thee Oh Jerusalem! let my right hand forget her cunning, if I
do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer
not Jerusalem, above my chief joy. Remember O Lord! the children of Edom, in
the day of Jerusalem, who said raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof.

WHAT shall we say, is there any force in sacred compacts and national
constitutions? any honor in crowned heads? any faith to be put in ministers,
the nobles and great men of the nation? In a word, is there any such thing as
truth and justice? Is there not a power above us? and that there is all nature
declares; the vindicator of right and avenger of wrong. To him therefore we
make our last appeal; and to the impartial world, to judge between
Great Britain and America.

THESE unheard of intolerable calamities, spring not of the dust, come not
causeless, nor will they end fruitless. THEY call on the Americans for
repentance toward their maker, and vengeance on their adversaries. And can it
be a crime to resist? Is it not a duty we owe to our maker, to our country, to
ourselves and to posterity? Does not the principle of self-preservation, which
is implanted by the author of nature in the human breast, (to operate
instantaneous as the lightning, resistless as the shafts of war, to ward of
impending danger) urge us to the conflict; add wings to our feet, firmness and
unanimity to our hearts, impenatrability to our battalions, and under the
influence of its mighty author, will it not render successful and glorious
American arms? But it may be said that the Americans have destroyed the tea of
the East India company, at Boston, which was a violation of private property,
and ought to be paid for. That tea was sent on the same errand that Gageand his
troops are; to effect by artifice what they are now attempting by force. I
mention not Thomas Hutchinson, for his crimes here, and condign punishment
hereafter, without repentance, must exceed all conception or description.
Should the British parliament cause cargoes of wine, impregnated with poison,
to be sent to America, with orders to have them dispersed amongst the
inhabitants: and their servants, the miscreants of their power, should
obstinately insist on doing it, the Americans must destroy the wines, which, by
their baneful mixture would be justly obnoxious to destruction, or be destroyed
by their poison.

MY countrymen, we have every thing to fear, from the malignity, power and
cunning of our adversaries. Yet, from the justness of our cause, the greatness
of our numbers and resources, the unanimity of our hearts, cemented by interest
and by perils; the bravery, and what is more, the desperateness of our spirits;
who think not life worth saving, when all that is dear in life is gone, we have
reason to be afraid of nothing. For your animation, hear the advice and
lamentation of a French gentleman, Monsieur Mezeray, over the lost liberties of
his country, to an English subject: We had once in France, the same happiness
and the same privileges, which you now have. Our laws were made by
representatives of our own choosing; therefore our money was not taken from us,
but granted by us. Our Kings, were then subject to the rules of law and reason.
Now alas! we are miserable and all is lost Think nothing Sir, too dear to
maintain these precicious advantages, if ever there should be occasion; venture
your life and estate, rather than basely submit to that abject condition to
which you see us reduced.

AND for your encouragement, turn your eyes to the free states of Holland and
Switzerland; and in them, as in a glass, see America strugglig under
intolerable oppressions; and with an intrepid, unconquerable spirit,
overlooking all danger, bursting the bonds, and demolishing the engines of
tyranny, emerging from a sea of calamities, rising superior to every obstacle;
and overlooking in time the power and towering heights of their haughty
oppressors.

SINCE then we are compelled to take up the sword, in the necessary defense or
our country, our liberties and properties, ourselves and posterity: Let us gird
on the harness, having our bosoms mailed, with firm defiance of every danger;
and with fixed determined purpose, to part with our liberty only with our
lives, engage in the conflict; and nobly play the man for our country, the
cities and churches of him that transplanted and hitherto sustained them;
thereby prove the truth of our descent, and demonstrate to the world, that the
free irrepressable spirit, that inspired the breasts and animated the conduct
of our brave forefathers; is not degenerated in us, their offspring. With fair
pretenses, they invite us to submit our necks to their yoke; but with unheard
of cruelties and oppressions, they determine us, to prefer death to submission.
Let none be disheartened from a prospect of the expense; though it should be to
the half, or even the whole of our estates. Compared with the prize at stake,
our liberty, the liberty of our country, of mankind, and of millions yet
unborn, it would be lighter than the dust on the balance: For if we submit,
adieu for ever; adieu to property, for liberty will be lost, our only capacity
of acquiring and holding property.

AND what shall I say, of the officers and soldiers of the British army, who
are the appointed ministers of this vengeance on the Americans? against whom
are they come forth, in hostile army? Strangers and foes to them and their
nation? No, it is against their brethren, their fellows and companions, of
their flesh and of their bone; members of the same nation; subjects of the same
King; and entitled to the same or equal privileges; with kindred blood in their
veins, and a pulse beating high for English liberties. And can their hearts be
courageous, and their hands strong, when they level the shaft, or lift up the
spear against those, with whom of late, side by side and shoulder to shoulder,
in compacted battalions, they fought, bled, and conquered, in defense of the
country, and the liberries, they are now sent to lay waste and destroy. I
appeal to their sense of honor, their sentiments of justice, to their bowels
of humanity, those tender feelings of sympathy, these social passions, that
possess and warm the human heart, and are the spring of all social and public
virtues, and let their tongues utter the sentiments of their souls, and America
will be justified, they being the judges.

METHINKS I hear the King, retired with his hand upon his breast, in pensive
solliloquy, saying to himself, who, and what am I? A King, that wears the
crown, and sways the scepter of Great Britain and America; and though a King,
robed in royalty, yet I am a man, my power finite, my body mortal, and myself
accountable to him, who raised me to this dignity, that I might be his minister
for the people's good. But Oh! what tragic scenes do I behold? One part of my
dominions aiming destruction against the other, plunging their swords in the
bosoms, and imbruing their hands in the blood of their fellows and brethren. Is
it possible, that Britons should become the foes and assassins of Britons, or
their descendants? My throne totters, my loins tremble, my kingdom is divided
and torn, my heart ready to fail, for the glory of my reign is departing. What
can be the cause of these tremenduous (...) threaten the dissolution of my
kingdom (...) in America, refuse to resign their liberties and properties, to
the disposal of my subjects in Great Britain? And insist on holding and
enjoying them as their unalienable rights? Well, what will be the mighty injury
to my crown, or to the nation, in its wealth, strength, or honor, if America
should enjoy, its former freedom? What will be gained by reducing them to
submission and slavery? lifeless carcases, a desolated country, millions in
wealth, and millions in strength dashed at a blow. Mighty acquisition of loss.
Should the attempt be pursued and fail, America will be lost, nay more, she
will become Great-Britain's determined enemy. Have not my subjects in
Great Britain rights that are sacred and inviolable, and which they would not
resign but with their lives? They have. Have not my subjects in America rights
equally sacred, and of which they are and ought to be equally tenacious? They
have. And are not those rights, for which they now so earnestly contend, of
that kind? Certainly there is much in favor of their claim. What if they are
mistaken? Ought they to atone for their mistake by rivers of blood, and the
sacrifice of themselves, their country and their posterity? but what, my mind
shudders and recoils at the thought, what, if the Americans are right? Oh
heaven forgive! And all this ghastly ruin, is owing to the blunder of a
minister, and the fatal errors adopted by parliament. Of whom will these rivers
of blood be required? What can expiate such accumulated wrongs? and atone for
such amazing devastations? I am sorely distressed, civil war rages within,
foreign enemies threaten without, the commerce of my kingdom languisheth,
manufacturers famish and fail, and coffeehouse is almost universal. What
shall I do for the dignity of my crown, the peace of my dominions, and the
safety of the nation? All is at risk. I have been deceived by my informers,
misguided by my ministers, and by my own inattention to the sufferings, and
dutiful petitions of my subjects, reduced all to the most dreadful hazard. For
British troops cease to be glorious, in so inglorious a cause. Should their
seaports, from Georgia to Nova Scotia, be desolated with fire and sword, it
would only consolidate their union, and render more impregnable their
resistance in the interior country. Could we dry up their harbors, and bar
every outlet to the sea, unless we had power to restrain the showers and the
shines of heaven; and the fertility of the earth, they will possess
inexhaustable resources. America must and will be free, their ancestors
acquired it for them, my royal predecessors guaranteed it to them; it is theirs
by purchase, it is theirs by the plighted faith of Kings; they are deserving of
it; and with them it flourishes, like a plant of generous kind, in its native
soil, and the heavens are propitious to liberty. My legions must be recalled,
the sword must be sheathed, the olive branch, the symbol of peace be held out;
for it was never designed that Britons, invinsible by others, should contend
with Britons or their descendants, in battle; and royal munificence be exerted,
to alleviate the distresses, console the miseries, and repair the injuries,
caused by the unhappy error, which let eternal darkness veil. Oh! may the
future make reparation for the past, my crown flourish in the prosperity,
liberty, and the happiness of all my dominions. Thus will my reign become
glorious, my demise tranquil. But alas! where am I transported on the wings of
groundless fancy? Repentance I fear is too late, for crimes so enormous; the
injuries are irreparable, and America is irretrievably lost: the thunders I
prepared, to lay her breathless at my feet, have discharged her of her
allegiance, and driven her forever from my power.

APPENDIX.
THE preceding pamphlet was wrote some time past, and not published sooner for
want of paper: The author has subjoined an appendix, containing some thoughts
on government, and American independance.

To consider things rightly, is to consider them truly as they are, with all
their relations and attending circumstances, to investigate truth, is the
highest achievement of reason; and to follow nature, the perfection of art.
That which is conformable to axioms of immutable truth, founded in reason, and
productive of general security and happiness to mankind, must in every sense,
be denominated good.

CIVIL society, is allowed by all to be the greatest temperal blessing; and
civil government is absolutely necessary to its subsistence; it is a temporary
remedy, against the ill effects of general depravity; and because the
introduction of moral evil has made it necessary; it is not therefore a
necessary evil.

LIBERTY consists in a power of acting under the guidance and control of
reason: Licentiousness in acting under the influence of sensual passions,
contrary to the dictates of reason; whilst we contend for the former, we ought
to bear testimony against the latter: And whilst we point out arguments against
the errors and abuses of government, we ought cautiously to distinguish between
government and its abuses; to amputate the latter, without injuring the former,
and not indifferently charge both; lest we raise an army of rebel spirits more
dangerous and difficult to reduce, than all the legions of Britain.

GOVERNMENT originates (under God) from the people, as from its native source;
centers in them, their good is its ultimate object; and operates by securing to
them, the enjoyment of their natural rights and civil privileges; and as the
mode of doing this, has no prescribed form in nature, or revelation; mankind,
at their option, have endeavored it variously; and thereby given rise to the
various forms of government subsisting in the world, as monarchy, aristocracy,
democracy, etc. each of these have failed in their turns, through want of
integrity, or discernment, or both in the administration; and have been
alternately preferred or discarded by writers, not so much on account of their
own excellence or defects, as of those who administered them. That form of
government that is adapted to the genius and circumstances of the governed,
affords them the greatest security, and places the authority of the governing
most out of the reach of the former, to violate and contemn, their corruptions
and abuses most within, to prevent and redress, is the best. A perfect model of
civil government perfectly administered and obeyed, cannot be expected, but in
a state of perfection, where it would be perfectly unnecessary. That government
in ordinary is the best that is best administered.

SOME begin their government with their political existence; it grows up with
them; the great first principles thereof, are never altered while they continue
a people, and become so incorporated with their being, that they have the force
of natural, rather than political institutions. Others, after a century or two
have occasion to alter and new model their old governments, or frame new ones:
This is usually attended with much difficulty and great danger, requires an
extensive knowledge of the genius, tempers, circumstances, situation, ancient
customs, habits, laws and manners of the people; and great judgment and skill,
to adapt new regulations to old usuages, so as to form a happy coalition. The
British nation, at the time of forming their great charter (no matter how they
became so) consisted of a King, nobility and commons: To connect the strength
and wisdom of these, for the public weal, without infringing or endangering the
rights of either, was their great object: And this was done in the constitution
of parliament, so far as it concerned legislation and taxation. Its object
therefore, was directly, political and civil liberty. All offices were in the
gift of the crown; and the payment of them in the option of the people; The
powers of government were so balanced, as to render all mutual restraints upon,
and mutually restrained by each other. If the people have lost their liberties,
suffered themselves to be bought and sold, like beasts of burden, the fault is
theirs and their corrupters, and not the constitution's, which put in their
power to have preserved them.

THUS, the principles were excellent, although the practice has been most
perverse. Amongst all the forms of civil government, none can be pronounced
absolutely best, and only relatively so: For that which best suits one people
would badly suit another, or the same, at a different period.

THE strength and spring of every free government, is the virtue of the people;
virtue grows on knowledge, and knowledge on education. Most nations have
established a falsehood for their first principle, viz. that their Kings are
perfect; and the consequence of this, is a second, that gives them a license to
serve the devil with impunity, viz. that they can do no wrong: Then follows the
most impious ascriptions of divine qualities and titles to him; and to complete
the image, the riches of the nation are lavished in the magnificence, costly
equipage and dazzling splendors of their prince; thereby to build power on
show; and like the formido avium, or scare crow, derive respect and obedience
only from the passion of fear: A multitude of criminal laws, with severe
penalties are necessary to support the authority of the rulers, and secure the
obedience of the subjects; whilst the sovereign himself, is wholly insecure in
the midst of his subjects, without a life guard. This is inverting the order of
nature and of civil government; and leaving the necessary means of rendering
mankind wise, virtuous and good. Rulers ought to know, and be known to their
subjects, to be but men; and the punishment of their crimes, to be in
proportion to their elevation in power. Half the sum, employed to diffuse
general knowledge; by erecting public seminaries, with masters well furnished
to teach children, not only common learning, but to instruct and impress on
their young and tender minds, the principles of virtue and the rudiments of
government, which would grow up with their growth, and derive strength from
age; would be more effectual than all the brilliancy of a crown, or tortures of
a rack; this is the only permanent foundation of a free government; this is
laying the foundation in a constitution, not without or over, but within the
subjects; love and not fear will become the spring of their obedience: the
ruler be distinguished, only by his distinguished virtues, and know no good,
separate from that of his subjects; and his authority be supported, more by the
virtue of the people, than by the terror of his power. The only way to make men
good subjects of a rational and free government, is to make them wise and
virtuous; but such a government as this is utterly incompatible with the idea
of slavery, because incompatible with a state of ignorance.

OF INDEPENDANCE.
IT is with states as it is with men, they have their infancy, their manhood
and their decline: Nature has its course in all, and never works in vain; when
a people are ripe for any mighty change, means wont be wanting to effect it.
From what providence has done and is doing for us, we must learn, what is our
duty to do; for we may only follow, where nature leads, and in this is infinite
safety; from small, we are become great, from a few, many, from feeble,
powerful, from poor, rich; nature has stored our country with all necessaries
for subsistence in peace, and for defense in war; it has united our hearts, our
interests and our councils, in the common cause.

INDEPENDANCE consists in being under obligation to acknowledge no superior
power on earth. The King by withdrawing his protection and levying war upon us,
has discharged us of our allegiance, and of all obligations to obedience: For
protection and subjection are mutual, and cannot subsist a part: He having
violated the compact on his part, we of course are released from ours; and on
the same principles, if we owed any obedience to parliament (which we did not)
we are wholly discharged of it. We are compelled to provide, not only for our
own subsistence, but for defense against a powerful enemy: Our affections are
weaned from Great Britain, by similar means and almost as miraculously as the
Israelites were from Egypt: These are facts, a surprising concurrence of
incidents, equally out of our knowledge to have foreseen, or our power to have
prevented, point us to some great event. Providence has furnished us with the
means; the King, contrary to his design, has discharged us of our allegiance
and forced us from our dependence, and we are become necessarily independent,
in order to preservation and subsistence, and this without our act or choice.
And is it a crime to be, what we cant help but be? It is not from a rebellious
spirit in the Americans, but unavoidable necessity, that we are become so: Like
a timorous child that is able to walk but disinclined to attempt it, placed in
the middle of a floor, must use his legs or fall; while the tender parent that
placed him there, stands ready to save him, if likely to fall, nam qui
transtulit sustinet, He that transplanted, upholds and sustains. All Europe,
must gaze with wonder, approbation and applause; Great Britain join in
acquitting us; while the tyrant minister (Lord North) in his own bosom reads
the sentence of his condemnation, for condemning us: to be where nature and
providence has placed us, is to be right, and to do what such a state points
out and requires to be done, is duty. In this situation two objects of the
greatest importance demand our attention, viz. defense and government; these we
ought diligently to attend to and leave the event; and let those who begun the
war, be first in the proposals of pea^^; those who have refused to hear others,
when they prayed, pray without being heard. And since parliament will have our
trade, only on terms incompatible with our liberty, permit them to have
neither; welcome all nations to our ports and to a participation of our trade,
and enter into alliance with none; thus, we may enjoy the commerce of all,
without being concerned in the quarrels of any. Providence has furnished us
with resources for defense; numbers to constitute armies, materials for
constructing a navy, for making of powder, ball, cannon, mortars, arms, etc.
and all kinds of ordnance and military stores. Our threatened situation
demands, that we immediately take every precaution, and use all the means in
our power for our preservation and defense, and with noble and valiant
exertions, withstand and repel the attacks of tyranny. Nature has placed the
island of Great Britain, and the continent of America so distant from each
other, that it is impossible for them to be represented in one legislative
body: The consequence is, that their distant situations are incompatible with
their being subjects to one supreme legislature. Representation is the feet on
which a free government stands, it ought therefore to be equal and full; maim
and render partial the former, and it will infallibly mutilate the latter. The
measures of government necessary to be adopted, at present, are the same,
either for a temporary or a perpetual expedient.

THE colonies have so long subsisted separate and independent of each other,
enjoyed their particular forms of government, laws, customs and manners and
particular rules for the regulation and distribution of property; that it will,
doubtless, be thought expedient for each to retain its ancient form of
government, laws, etc. as far as possible; to have supreme legislative and
executive powers of government over all causes, matters and things within its
territorial limits, and to regulate its own internal police. Those whose
Governors, or other officers, are taken off by the crown, to have them elected
by the freemen, or appointed by their several assemblies; for which purpose
particular constitutions to be framed, as they shall elect. That a certain
number of delegates be annually elected by the freemen in each colony, to form
a general council or congress, whose power to extend over all matters of common
and general concernment: Such as making war and peace, sending and receiving
ambassadors, general regulations respecting trade and maritime affairs; to
decide all matters of controversy between colony and colony, relative to bounds
and limits, etc. etc. of whom one to be chosen president, and to continue in
office until another be chosen and sworn. And in matters so interesting, as
that of making war and peace, to be a majority of at least two thirds, computed
by colonies; and for carrying on a war to have power to levy troops and provide
for their subsistence, etc. to have an explicit constitution, ascertaining the
number of members the congress shall consist of, and that each colony shall
send; containing regulations for convening, proroguing and adjourning; also
granting, defining, and limiting the powers they are to have, exercise, etc.
which constitution to be laid before the several assemblies; and by them
acceded to and confirmed. By some such method the colonies may retain their
independance of each other; and all their former usuages, laws, etc. and the
wisdom and strength of each, be connected in general congress, for the security
and defense of the whole.

TO be reconciled to Great Britain upon unjust terms, is to be reconciled to
injustice, ruin and slavery; until they shall have condemned the measures that
have been pursued against America, recalled their fleets and armies, exposed to
the public eye, and condign punishment, the authors and advisers of the present
unjust and cruel war; and have repaired the damage and expense caused thereby
in America, and given up the cannot expect that we will treat with them, about
future connections. They have endeavored, by all the arts of seduction, and of
power, to destroy and enslave us; and now they have sent commissioners, under
pretense of treating with the Americans. Accommodation is their oftensible, but
we have reason to fear that to divide; corrupt and destroy is their real
object: For with whom are they to treat? With the general Congress? No; it is
said, with the several governors; all of whom, except one or two, live, and
breath, and have their being, in the minister, and are moved by him like the
puppets in the show, by the hand that pulls the wire, to which they are hung.
They might as well have stayed at home, and treated with the minister. But it
is said they are to treat with the several colonies. But how is this? unless
they acknowledge their independence of parliament? The supreme legislature of a
country only, has power to treat and be treated with respecting war and peace.
The act, 6th Geo. III. declares that the parliament of Great Britain has
supreme power of legislatition over the colonies; and to establish such power,
the parliament is in war with America: The Commissiners therefore, cannot,
consistent with their ideas of power, treat with any but the British
parliament. By sending Commissioners to treat with us, they would acknowledge
our power to make a treaty; which is predicable only of independence. Query
then, whether those Commissioners are coming to treat for peace, with a mighty
armament for war? In fine, that government, in which the people are subject to
no laws, or taxes, but by their voice or consent; condemned by no sentence but
by the verdict of their equals; where property is near equally distributed;
crimes clearly defined and distinguished, and punishments duly proportioned to
their nature and magnitude; and where the rising generation are universally
instructed in the principles of virtue, and the rudiments of government; there
civil liberty and (...)


