SAGITTARIUS's LETTERS AND POLITICAL SPECULATIONS. EXTRACTED From the PUBLIC
LEDGER.

HUMBLY INSCRIBED To the VERY LOYAL and TRULY PIOUS Doctor SAMUEL COOPER,
Pastor of the Congregational Church in Brattle Street.

Ye HYPOCRITES, well did Esaias prophecy of you, saying. THIS PEOPLE draws
nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips, but their
heart is far from me. Matthew. xv. 7, 8. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall
eat the good of the Land. -- But if ye Refuse and REBEL, ye shall be devoured
with the SWORD: For the MOUTH of the LORD has spoken it. Isaiah i. 19, 20.
BOSTON. Printed By Order of the SELECT MEN and sold at (...) Hall, for the
Benefit of the distressed Patriots. MDCCLXXV

LETTERS, etc.
LETTER I.
IF we were to credit the complaints of the faction at Boston, we must think
them the most oppressed people in the world; if we were to judge of them from
their own behavior, we must believe them the most factious and seditious
subjects in the universe. They and their Agents loudly declare, that they are a
PACEABLE PIOUS and LOYAL people: but their transactions impress upon us no
other idea than that of a people in an open state of rebellion. The praise with
which they bedaub themselves is, undoubtedly, a strong proof of their modesty;
and the outrageous abuse they throw out against Government, is a stricking
instance of their good temper, good sense, and moderation. It surely cannot be
deemed unfair or unjust to compare their professions and their actions
together: By their PROFESSIONS we shall be able to determine what sort of folks
they would wish us to believe them to be; by their ACTIONS we shall be
convinced what kind of people they really are.

The Boston Faction, or more properly Doctor Franklin's Faction at Boston, have
professed themselves to be of a PACEABLE and QUIET SPIRIT, and to act always
according to Law. As a proof of this declaration, they pulled down and
plundered the Lieutenant Governor's house, broke open the Secretary's house,
and demolished the Stamp and Admiralty Offices. Notwithstanding this evidence
against them, they still averred that they were influenced solely by the spirit
of Law, and the spirit of Meekness, and that all the mischief committed amongst
them was done by Boys and Negroes. A COURTIER is proverbial with us for
promising to do a favor, and not performing it* but a BOSTONIAN quite eclipses
him, he will do you a capital injury, before your face, and ^hen grave^y deny
it.

We shall now give an example of Bostonian PIETY. Boston Smugglers are far
above lurking on the coast, and running their goods clandestinely. Under the
cherishing wings of the Faction, they boldly push along-side the wharfs, walk
deliberately to the Custom house. TAKE THE NECESSARY OATHS with the utmost
composure and unlade their cargoes: If any Officers of the Revenue attempt to
interfere, the whole Board of Commissioners, Collectors* Comptrollers, and
Inspectors, all are knocked down, or driven put of town. Upon this they affirm,
that as these Officers have abdicated, as they call i^, they have no right to
return; and that all their business seemed to be to disturb the peace and quiet
of the town. The pious Bostonian derives ^is right of cheating the Revenue, and
of perjuring himself, from the example of his fathers and the rights of nature.

As to their loyalty their continued opposition to acts of Parliament afford
full conviction of it. Besides, when troops were sent to protect the King's
Officers in the execution of the Laws, they published and dispersed over a^l
America such blustering resolves, that people, WHO DID NOT KNOW THEM, believed
when the troops arrived a dreadful carnage would ensue; but these people soon
found they had form^d a very erroneous opinion; the tro^ps landed Anne, 1768.
without the least obstruction, to the amazement of the Southern Colonies, who
said, that as BOSTON WAS TAKEN without any resistance, they had best be quiet
too.

Instead of the desperate opposition they had so often threatened, they had
recourse to the WAR OF WORDS; in Newspapers, under the direction of the
Faction, the Officers and Soldiers were reviled in the most oppr^brious
language; it was said they were only sent to vex and harrass them, and to
contaminate their morals. The Officers laughed at all the abuse thrown out
against them, and kept the troops quiet. This good order disappointed the
Faction; they wanted to excite the Soldiers to some outrage, in order to around
a pretense for their removal. Finding railing ineffectual, they proceeded to
personal insults and personal attack; when an Officer or Soldier was met with
at night, he seldom escaped without very barbarous treatment. (...) difficult
to discover the offenders, and if discovered, the influence of the Faction
preserved them from punishment. Several instances of this occurred; when some
of these Boston Rioters were apprehended, numbers of volunteer witnesses
offered themselves, and always swore that the Soldiers were the aggressors From
trials of this kind in which they always met with impunity, they advanced to
insults and assults in open day, urged on by a notion that the ^roops would not
fire upon them without the orders of a Magistrate; and they all knew, that, let
them act ever so outrageously no Magistrate would proceed to such extremity,
many of them being of the Faction, and the rest intimidated by the weakness of
Government. Urged on by this notion, they thought it would be an easy matter to
disarm the Soldiers, and turn them out of town. They began their operations by
a concerted attack on the Sentinel at the Custom*House; the Soldier, when
almost overpowered, made a signal to the main guard; the Captain of the guard
marched with a few men to his rescue; but the Faction continuing the assault
with redoubled violence, and some of the Soldiers being knocked down, and their
muskets nearly wrested from them, fired, and killed and wounded some of the
Rioters.

The consequence of this insurrection was, that the troops were, by some very
deep scheme of politics, ordered down to Castle Island, and the Laws and
Officers of the Revenue left to shift for themselves.

Since the above period, the Faction have kept the town in a continued state of
disorder, confusion, and riot. By a variety of artifices, they have gained the
House of Representatives. The Council, being chosen by the House of
Representatives, naturally inc^ine to the party which gives them existence:
Besi^des some of the Leaders of the Faction, have a strong motive for joining
in oppsition to the Laws of trade, they have acquired very large fortunes by
ILLEGAL TRAFFIC, and they continue to increase them by the same means: Thus the
substance of all the writings in their behalf is Take away the troops, the
ships of war, and the Commissioners, and put us in our former situation of
SMUGGLING without risk and without penalties, otherwise we will continue
mutinous and rebellious.

Can it be supposed, that these people would wish to see laws in vigor, and
reverenced, which would, at once, cut off their immense gains? The exemption
against taxation, claimed by this There are others of the faction pupils of the
learned Dr Franklin, who are really mad enough to think of an (...) and total
independence on the mother country. The great Dr. is the father of this
extrava^ant idea, he feasts his fancy on it, and already conceits himself in
imagination at the head of his meek Senate.
part of the faction, is only a mask to cover their interested designs. The act
lowering the duty on the tea from England, contained in itself a powerful
reason for their opposing it. The bringing tea cheap from England, would have
at once annihilated their exorbitant profits While importation of tea from
England was interdicted by the Almighty Boston Committee, that very
conscientious Committee sold their own smuggled stuff at the very moderate
profit of cent per cent. From this true state of the case, the destruction of
the East India Company's tea is not surprising. It arrived in a town where the
laws had no force, where they were even condemn^d; where the faction had
repeatedly declared to all the world that they had despised England and her
Acts of Parliament; in a town from whence they had banished his Majesty's Civil
Officers with every mark of contumely; from whence even his Majesty's troops
had been dismissed with disgrace; where no Magistrate durst appear but on the
side of faction; where those who did appear were themselves the faction,
abetted by the Representatives and the Council. In such a situation, it is not
to be wondered at, that the faction finding themselves omnipotent at Boston,
committed that daring act of insolence and rebellion.

A^l the above enumerated outrages and rebellions, are, what the Faction at
Boston call ENGLISH LIBERTIES* and which they have often as foolishly as
impudently declared, they would die in defending. But they may easily and
effectually be restrained and regulated; when they see and feel, that this
country has taken a fixed determination, they will shrink from all but
word-of-mouth opposition; and that, like all other unfounded clamor, will soon
expire of itself.

But this good and much wished for end will not be obtained, till the laws and
acts of trade, which have been so often violated and trampled upon, are
supported with vigor ^are rendered respectable, and have a real operation.

Thi^ same ministry which faction has been so long telling us, are destroying
our Liberties, seem for some time past to have indulged the Bostonians with too
many; yet their moderation is commendable, and suitable to the spirit of our
laws and of our costitution, which do not admit of those immediate, however
efficacious, remedies, that are administered in unlimited monarchies and
despotic states.

It might too probably be thought, that the evils which reigned in Boston,
would work their own cure, and heal of themselves; or that the laws would
recover of their relaxed state But the experiment has been made, and
Government, in that province, has been found totally debilitated, and the laws
without energy There appears now no other remedy adequate to the disease, but
the correcting hand of the supreme Legislature.

LETTER II.
FROM the conduct and claims of the NEW ENGLANDERS, they appear the most
reasonable, moderate, and modest of subjects. They have no^ displayed the least
irregularity in their behavior, nor the least arrogance in their claims; their
actions are all forcibly marked with gratitude, affection, and loyalty. Their
Agents and Writers also support their interest here, with the most engaging
candor and politeness, with the strictest truth and justice No person that has
eyes to see, ears to hear, or has learned to read, can doubt this, for they
have ass^red us of it themselves

Can there be a greater proof of their openness and candor than their telling
us so often, that they owe us FIVE MILLIONS and that they will not pay us till
we have humbly submitted to all their demands? Can there be a stronger example
of their modesty, than their saying, that we have always been obliged to them,
but they never were so to us?

I think at the conclusion of the last peace, we found ourselves loaded with an
enormous debt of One Hundred and Forty Millions; one half of which we
contracted in protecting and defending America* and now to pay the interest of
it, we all are, from Beggars to Peers annually taxed Yet they positively
assert, that they have always been at the charge of their own establishments,
and that they have always protected and defended themselves and that we never
were at any expense on their account And all this we must swallow without a wry
face, upon their single ipse dixit, otherwise their GREAT MEN, and their GREAT
WRITERS, will abuse us in all the News Paper.

Their fathers went to America, which they say, is out of the jurisdiction of
England, therefore they are a free and a separate state, and not under the
contron^ of our legislature. And we must not deny this, else they will call in
the aid of some fereign State to reduce us to reason. If any person had said so
much of them, he would have gained no credit with the world: but it is one of
their own PUBLIC RESOLVES which they printed and published themselves, and
which they have puffed off and circulated over all America.

Their doctrine is both ingenious and convincing. We have their leave to expend
our blood and treasure, to tax, and to ruin ourselves for their protection and
defense; but they are neither bound in gratitude to thank us, nor in honor or
honesty to contribute a single sh^^ing to relieve our necessities or to pay for
their own government.

They too have found out a NEW WAY TO PAY OLD DEBTS. A Mr. Rome goes over to
America to collect L50 000 owing his House in London. The Judges there, in
league with the debtors, render his errand abortive. He complains of this in a
letter to a friend. This letter is stolon by SOMEBODY and transmitted to
America. A printed copy of it is produced in Court against him, and the debtors
imprison their CREDITOR for daring to complain of their collusive de^i^quenc^.

Another House in London sent him powers to demand L.26 000 of debts long due
to them; but when he consulted his lawyer, he received the following short
advice, Not to put himself to any expense, until Parliament had made a proper
alteration in their government. Will not this convince the English merchant,
that the American Judges should be rendered independent of the people? and the
merchants of London would have done a much wiser act four years ago* if instead
of petitioning parliament to take off American Taxes, they had implored
Parliament to REFORM AMERICAN CHARTERS.

The late bankruptcy of the oldest and most considerable American Houses in
Bristol, and perhaps in England, is the melancholy effects of American
outstanding debts.

The British merchants have but dreary prespects from the other side of the
Atlantic; they know that every vessel from that quarter brings a renewal of
disappointments, and a renewal of promises, which latter never will be
fulfilled Their case is affecting but it was not unforeseen nor unforetold;
several years ago they were warned publicly and repeatedly of the ruinous state
of American credit. They were told; that the MILLIONS which this generous
kingdom lavished last war on the wilds of America, had raised pedlars and
ploughmen to the rank of merchants; that this sudden influx of wealth had
turned the heads of these dunghill traders; that a few years of peace had
reduced these mushroom merchants to their primitive insignificancy; that the
Americans were over stocked with English goods; that the English merchants
might be convinced of it from looking into their public prints, from the daily
auctions advertised in every quarter of every great town on that continent;
that most of those who now traded on credit were either fast declining, or raw
striplings just out of their apprenticeship; that American commerce, which had
overflowed so extensively, was now reverting fast back to the more contracted
channel in which it had glided before the war; therefore that the English
merchants should be cautious who they credited. But experience is the best
teacher. And sorry I am to say it, that the banks of the Ohio and Missisippi
will be cultivated at the expense of the English merchants, and with the
produce of unpaid English goods.

What an unhappy delusion have we labored under for near two centuries! How
many millions have we spent in the cause of an ungrateful people! And has not
the blood of our bravest men streamed through all their continent, from the icy
(...) of Canada, to the burning sands of Florida? Can an Englishman forget the
carnage of his brave countrymen on the banks of the Mononghahela, before the
intrenchments of Ticonderoga, or the loss of the gallant Wolf on the plains of
Abraham, that day of triumph and mourning, when the rugged soldier wept amidst
his conquests? No, he will never forget them; neither, while memory lasts, will
he forget American gratitude!

Thus the Pelican tears her breast for the support of her young; they grow
vigorous, and fatten on her blood: when she is exhausted, away they fly; and
she is left to expire.

LETTER III.
THE following is an account of the late and present state of the Town of
Boston, I beg that you will give it a place in your paper on Monday. (7 th
March 1774) It will appear on that day with peculiar propriety, the American
papers being then to be laid before the House of Commons.

IF it is true, that people are never in a more desperate state than when they
are left to their own devices, we are gone past recovery. The situation we have
been in for these nine years past has been truly deplorable; the lovers of
peace and good order have been for years groaning ^^der a worse than Egyptian
bondage; it is even unsafe to be neutral. One must either take an active part
in all the rebellious meetings and actions of the faction, or at least seem to
countenance them, otherwise he is branded as an enemy to the country, and his
effects, person, and family, in danger of being sacrificed. Indeed the most
loyal of us are convinced, by what we have already seen, and by the risk, we
have already run, that it is better for us seemingly to coincide with the
faction, than to be tarred and feathered, to have our houses pulled down, our
goods plundered, and ourselves and our families totally ruined. This terrifying
situation has arisen from parliament taking up our (...) seriously, and then
dropping them after a few ineffectual resolves.

It is to be sure time for us to be quiet; for after seeing the factious
smugglers surprise and burn his Majesty's ships, destroy the East India Tea,
and not only deny, but oppose the authority of parliament with impunity, we
have no choice left.

I am lost in amazement, and can hardly form a rational conjecture, why
parliament should overlook so many flagrant insurrections. Here it has had a
very unhappy effect: we are presumptuous, because we think we are safe. The
inattention of parliament has made the faction arrogant and insolent beyond all
bounds. The recent destruction of the tea may convince all the world of it; and
yet according to custom, after the commission of any mischief, they are now
dreadfully frightened. But I make no doubt they will receive the usual
comforting letters from their agents in London, that their friends are
increasing, and that they have nothing to fear from the ministry or the
parliament. Indeed if parliament allows us to go on as we have done for some
years past, his Majesty will not have one real subject in these colonies, for
the faction will force every person to join and act with them, and what is
strange, I have seen some of these pressed men become more violent and
turbulent than the veterans of the faction.

The Moderator of one of the Town meetings about the time the tea was
destroyed, was called a Tory some years ago, and in such disrepute with the
faction, that when his house was on fire, the Liberty Boys swore that he and it
might burn together, if it was not for the danger the rest of the town would be
in. Now is he set at (...) head in the most momentuous times, by the
recommendation no doubt of his kinsman Dr. Franklin. At present the
licentiousness of the lower people is almost insufferable: If you employ a
tradesman he will at least charge you double, and you dare not complain for
fear of having your windows broke, and yourself insulted and pelted in the
streets as an enemy to the country. In short, a person who inlists with the
faction, though formerly a Tory, a knave, or an Atheist, instantly becomes a
Whig, an Honest Man, and a Saint. Faction here, as well as with you in London,
covers all sins. One of our most bawling demagogues and voluminus writers is a
crazy Doctor, whom some years ago they were going to banish out of Town for
professing himself an Athiest.

But the principle man amongst them was once our Tax Gatherer, and spent about
two thousand pounds lawful money belonging to the Town; but he was forgiven
this and made representative, and clerk to the House of Representatives, on
account of his seditious writings. Another great patriot not long ago brought
milk into Town to sell. From these specimens you may judge what unprincipled
fellows and ^mighty men our patriots are. It is true the smugglers are the main
body, but they generally keep out of sight, and present such men as the above
to execute their resolves.

I am not surprised that their Agents should write such accounts from London as
they know will be agreeable, without regarding the conformity of them to truth,
because they are paid for it. But that such a man as Pownall, one who was so
universally despised and ridiculed while our Governor, should contribute his
mite to keep up the fire of rebellion, is to me incomprehensible. It is
conjectured here that he wants to come out again Governor, but if they were
weak enough to appoint him at home, he would find little comfort or case here,
whatever his vanity may induce him to think. Our Faction only makes a tool of
him, and whatever encouragement their letters may give him he would be
thoroughly mortified to hear the foolish dirty anecdotes that are given of him
here. In the pamphlet enclosed, entitled The History of Sir Thomas Brazen, you
will find some account of him. When he was ordered home he prevailed upon the
House of Representatives (who then were ready enough to vote what did not
belong to them) to compliment him with the Province ship of war to carry him to
England, but the body of Merchants to whom the vessel belonged. and who had a
hearty contempt for him, absolutely refused to concur, and so he did not
receive this much coveted honor. -- I had a most forgot to tell you, that he
prints his own speeches and sends them out to us, to show us how much he is our
friend, but some of us much question whether ever they were spoke.

I shall be much obliged to you, if you will let me know by the first
opportunity, if Parliament are likely to do any thing for us. If the many
insurrections and rebellions amongst us, for these last nine years, do not work
a regulation and amendment in our Charter this winter, those who have hitherto
respected the mother country will be forced, for their own safety, to join the
faction, or to fly the province.

LETTER IV.
THE Americans and their advocates would wish to persuade the people of England
that they are not under the control of Parliament, nor bound in duty to obey
its Acts. Under the specious pretext of combating against slavery, a pretext
which has a singular effect on Englishmen, they imagine we will always continue
blind to our own interest and to their insidious designs.

The reasons they give to prove themselves an independent people, are founded
on the most extravagant and impudent absurdities. According to them, the Laws
of England do not reach America. This extraordinary doctrine scarcely needs a
refutation; its weakness and want of solidity is evident without investigation.
An Englishman leaves England and settles in North America, a country discovered
by an Englishman, and appertaining to the crown of England, and therefore
American logic places him out of the line of our legislature. To ^ver this
seriously, is either folly, impudence, or madness. An inhabitant of Middlesex
by moving to the Isle of Man or the islands of Scilly might, with as good
authority, declare himself out of the dominions of England.

But let us grant them their assertion: If Americans are not of this kingdom,
why do they claim the privileges of Englishmen? why do they claim the
protection of England? Why have they put this kingdom to the expense of so many
MILLIONS to defend them? But I suppose, when they resorted to this defense
against taxation it was the first that occurred to them, and they did not
reflect on the objections that might be raised against it; and they also surely
forgot that old maxim of Law, Reason, and Justice, quoted by their own dearly
beloved Farmer, the celebrated Mr Dickinson, one of their greatest Champions,
Qui sentit commodum, sentire debet et onus.
They who feel the benefit, ought to feel the burden.


Driven from one idle appeal, they are accustomed to set up another; they say
they cannot be legally taxed by the British Legislature, because they are not
represented in the British Parliament; for that taxation and representation
cannot be separated This has been often refuted The large manufacturing towns
of Manchester, Brimigham, Sheffield, and the millions of people in the kingdom
who have no votes in the election of members, are unanswerable arguments
against this assertion.

Their next silly defense is, that Government ought to make a requisition of a
stipulated sum, and their Assemblies would grant it if they were able and
thought it expedient.

As to their ability, we know and have seen the common porters in that country,
living, as to all kinds of provisions, much more luxuriously than the first
merchants here; and as to the higher orders among them, they enjoy the present
moment, leaving futurity to care for itself. Their having large families does
not furnish them with reflection; they swim along thoughtless, with the tide of
fashion, in profusion and gaiety, abandoning their offspring to providence and
the fertility of the soil. This is the reason that so many of them die
insolvent, and that so many heavy debts remain unpaid to the English merchants.
Now if taxes were raised among them equivalent to their incomes in trade, it
would have the happy effect of rendering them more punctual, attentive, and
industrious.

As to expediency, it has been tried, and they did not think it even expedient
to send us an answer. Though the circumstance of the Mother Country applying to
all her different petty colonies is rather humiliating and disgraceful, yet
even this has been done. The result is too well known to be denied. The Colony
Agents were acquainted by Mr. Greenville, that a revenue would be required from
them to defray the expenses of their protection The House of Commons to forward
this just and reasonable measure, resolved, "That a stamp duty might be
necessary." Mr. Greenville earnestly recommended to the Colonies the making
grants by their own assemblies; or if they disliked stamp duties, to propose
any other effectual made of raising money, and carry it into execution
themselves; but all in vain. The Colonies raised no fund among themselves, they
made no offer, no grant, nor laid any tax. Parliament therefore passed the
stamp act next year.

In the course of the altercations and complaints concerning this act, the
Americans held forth upon every occasion, the doctrine, that representation and
taxation should accompany each other: Upon this several hints were given, that
even on that ground any proposals would be seriously and heartily attended to.
Then they flew from their own clamourous exception, and shamefully declared,
that their local situation effectually debarred them from a representation in
the British Parliament; and their factious adherents, both at home and abroad,
most vociferously and violently declaimed against the absurdity of the idea,
though they themselves were the very first people that suggested and enforced
that idea.

To pursue them through all their incoherences, contradictions,
tergiversations, and complaints, is mere children's play. Their first
declaration is, that they are not English subjects; when this is disproved,
then they agree that they are English subjects but that they ought not to be
taxed. When it is urged, why do they claim the benefit and reject the burden?
Because, they say, they are not represented. When representation is held forth
to them. -- Oh, then their locality is an insuperable hindrance; but when
England wants money from them, a requisition should be made to their
Assemblies. A requisition was made by Mr. Greenville and they did not grant a
shilling; and the whole empire was disturbed and disgusted with their
scurrilous complaints, their vainglorious threatenings, and their mean
ostentatious (...)-applause Like a termagant woman they thought to gain their
point, from their incessant clamor and raving. Indeed so ridiculous are their
assertions and their claims, that a refutation would not be necessary, but for
the credulity of some good people, who think that they must be aggrieved
because they complain.

The truth is, the Americans do not doubt either the right or power or justice
of England in taxing them; they are fully conscious of all these things in
their own minds, and will often confess them in private, though they deny them
in public. Their aim is, to keep their money and their f^^e trade, or rather
their illicit trade, as long as they can, as was heartily consest by one of the
greatest merchants in New England. In reply to this confession, their duty and
gratitude to the Mother Country, and a regard to their own peace, were urged;
but our merchant said laughingly, they were all very well agreed to keep their
money, and to make the most of their present advantages in trade, as long as
they possibly could and that they would not submit till they were forced; in
the mean time some commotions might arise in Europe, or some disturbances in
England, or their friends might come into the ministry, either of which would
ocasion the discountenance of the taxation scheme; that there were many chances
in their favor, if they strenuously persisted in opposition; but if they once
acquiesced, they could never renew the struggle with any prospect of success.

From this state of facts, but more from their own conduct. England may now,
after a trial of ten years, be fully convinced of the intentions and
dispositions of the Americans. They will acknowledge no dependence; they will
not admit even the right of taxation; they say acts of trade hurt their
commerce; in short, they disclaim any connection with us. What the final
determination of all these rebellious declarations will be, any man of common
penetration may foresee. There ought to be in every government, a subordination
in the subject, and a reverence for the laws; there ought, in every government,
to exist somewhere a regulating and contro^ling power, to be employed on all
occasions for the good of the whose empire; one part of the kingdom ought not
to be permitted to act independent of, or in direct opposition to the laws,
while the other part is forced to act in strict conformity to them: The
refractory Colonists must therefore be brought back by FORCE within the line of
the laws; lenient measures have been long ineffectually tried, they have only
given encouragement to further arrogance and encroachment: The Empire, to be
sure, will resound with their pretended grievances, their heavy oppressions,
their gross reproaches, and their noisy complaints; but as now we all are
thoroughly convinced of their hypocrisy and turbulence, their seditious
outcries will have no avail.

Like an unbroken colt when first bound in the traces, they will doubtless be
very unruly, and will make many efforts to disengage themselves from their
enforced subserviency to the laws; but as long custom is very powerful, and
often reconciles us to great hardships, it is to be hoped that, in time, duty
to their Sovereign, respect for the Laws, and affection to the Mother Country,
will universally prevail amongst them.

IT is thought that Dr. Franklin's new Colony Grant has not yet gone through
all the necessary forms of office, and if that is the ease, and it should stick
in the passage, so much the better for Britain; we have already more Colonies
than we can manage; should the Grant be cancelled, this artful scheme of the
Doctor's to accelerate the independency of his beloved country, we hope will
never be brought forward again. As to this Colony in idea, it is so happily
situated as to be totally out of the reach of Britain, and if we should be so
very good natured as to credit our Manufactures to people settled there, it
would be hardly possible to send them to this American Paradise, but at an
expense ten times exceeding the original value. Their abstracted situation in
this new world, would necessarily impel them to manufacture for themselves, and
they would afford an asylum for every vagrant and runaway from the other
Colonies. Was a man in debt, he might sell off his stock and clamber over the
American Alps with the money in his pocket, and there he would be nearly as
safe from his creditors in England a^ if he was beyond the verge of nature.
Great consolation it would be to England to hear by every vessel from America,
of the rapid increase of VANDALIA, from the retreat of your debtors bag and
baggage over the almost inaccessible Allegany Mountains. Was another man
inclined, by one capital stroke, to make his fortune, all he had to do was to
order 10 000 l. or 20 000 l worth of goods, and when they arrived from London,
sell them off by auction, or any other speedy method, and then troop off to the
fertile (...) of the Ohio.

It was lately asserted in a morning paper, that his Majesty was now fully
convinced of Dr. Franklin's innocence. This is only an impudent puff of the
Doctor's own composing, his Majesty has been for years past well informed, and
fully convinced of the Doctor's seditious and traitorous designs, and the
Doctor himself knows in his own conscience, (if he is not too much of a
philosopher to have one) that his dismission and disgrace are justly merited.

All that has been said here in vindication of the Bostonians militates against
them, for every vessel from thence brings an account of some confounded riot,
which flatly contradicts the praises which their Agents in England are always
unluckily bestowing on them. Thus the anonymous Writers who figure away in the
front of the Newspapers, and sometimes in the rear of them, are fairly overset
by a plain matter of fact, simply narrated in the middle. That same Mr Ma^colm,
whom the Bostonians employed a boy to run his fl^d against, in order to make a
quarrel with him, happens only to be a Custom House Officer and as the valiant
Bostonians had already driven off the Commissioners, they thought it best to
send the inferior Officers after them. Now let any man sitting by his own
fireside, surounded by his family, read the treatment this unfortunate man met
with, and let him conceive himself in his situation, and then let him judge
what punishment is due to the miscreants at Boston, who used him so
barbarously; and what credit should be given to their Writers and Agents here,
when they tell us "they are an orderly and regular people".

This poor man having retreated to the upper floor of the house he had taken
shelter in, was followed by the mob and seized; a rope was fixed round him, and
he was lowered out of the garret window to the riotous multitude below, then
stripped naked, anointed with tar, covered over with feathers, and placed in a
cart, in which he was driven through the principal streets of the town, and
after that a mile out of town to the gallows, to which he was tied, cruelly
beat and whipped. When the man was almost expiring, it being the middle of the
Winter, they carted him back again, and left him in the street to the mercy of
whoever chused to take care of him.

This attrocious deed, barbarous as it is, is far from being uncommon at
Boston. That seditious town has been in the very same disorder for these last
ten years. And after a thousand instances of riot, sedition, and rebellion,
their writers here have the effrontery to tell us, "they are a humane,
peaceable, and loyal people."

LETTER V. Substance of the American Papers read before the House of Commons on
Saturday, and which are to be debated upon this day, 14th March, 1774, (WITH
REMARKS)
THESE papers consist of copies, and extracts of letters from the Commander of
the Forces, and from the several Governors in America; of threats and prophetic
warnings to the gentlemen to whom the tea was consigned; narratives of
transactions; of copies of letters from the several consignees at Boston to a
ringleader of the faction in that town; of votes of the town of Boston,
previous to the arrival of the tea: of a petition of the consignees to the
council of the Massachusett's, praying that they and their property might be
taken under their protection, with the absolute denial of the council (observe,
of his Majesty's Council) to afford the least support or assistance, or even a
promise of it; of notes from the India House; of letters from the Admiral
commanding in Boston harbor, and from Lieutenant Colonel Leslie, of the 64th
regiment, in barracks at Castle William; of a proclamation of the Governor's
against the factious meetings of the inhabitants, which they treated with
ineffable contempt; of copies of treasonable papers printed in America; of a
copy of the transactions of the Massachusett's council, condemning the
destruction of the tea, and advising legal prosecutions against the
perpetrators, which they well knew no person would dare to carry on, and
expressing their own abhorrence of the unjustifiable dead, although they would
not take any previous step to prevent it, even when petitioned for that very
purpose.

So far relative to the MASSACHUSETT's.

The papers written and printed from the other Colonies are exactly of the same
nature. They are the regular official informations of the different Governors
transmitted to the American Secretary of State, with copies of all the
inflammatory fugitive Papers, Hand Bills, Alarms, Resolves of Town Meetings,
and Minutes of Council. In short, the whole budget of abuse that has been
vented against Parliament and the ministry from New England to the Carolinas,
was read to themselves on Saturday last.

As there was no outrage committed but at Boston, it would be superfluous to
narrate all the incendiary scribbling and printing in the different Colonies;
it may suffice just to observe, that all the printed bills read were fully
larded with the phrases of "desperate plans of despotism," "ministerial designs
to ruin their Liberties," "Slavery," "galling fetters," "forging infernal
chains," "Popery," "despotic rule," etc.

The Massachusett's council appeared in a very Jesuitical point of view: They
would not give the least assistance or protection to the Consignees, or to the
East India Company's property: They would not even take into consideration the
landing and scuring the teas. By their replies it would seem, that they rather
rejoiced in the opposition formed by the faction; and if they did not openly
range themselves on its side, at least by their neutrality, and the purport of
their answer, it was sufficiently evident, that they did not even wish to
interpose as mediators. The Consignees prayed to resign themselves and the
property entrusted to their care, to the council, not only as their guardians
and protectors, but also those of the people at large. But these worthy
gentlemen thought proper to have nothing to do with them; and rather hinted
that the tea scheme was calculated to disturb the peace of the town and
province.

The letters from the different Governors contain a minute and regular detail
of the state of their different provinces, but particularly of the Capitals of
each, from the first intelligence of teas being shipped at home, to its arrival
in America and return back or destruction.

Above all the rest of the advices, Governor Hutchinson's letters are the most
precise, exact, and circumstantial. He endeavored both to soothe and
intimidate the faction. It was he himself who advised the Consignees to apply
to the council for their personal safety, and security of their property; for
his two eldest sons were two of the Consignees. He also, during the height of
their turbulent, unlawful and seditious assemblings, before the destruction of
the tea, sent the sheriff to the town meeting at Boston, commanding them to
break up and depart. When the sheriff Mr. Greenleafe arrived in the Hall, and
intimated that he had a paper to read from the Governor, the faction put it to
vote "whether he should be permitted to read it or not?" After some debate;
permission was granted, and the sheriff accordingly pronounced the Governor's
orders for them to disperse. The instant he had finished, the faction saluted
him with an universal hiss, which continued, and accompanied him out of doors.
The proclamation was afterward published in the Gazette from whence it was
copied into the other papers, and criticized and commented upon with every mark
of contempt and indignity. Before the arrival of the tea, the Governor, who is
very insinuating, appeared to have taken every measure that prudence could
suggest both for the safety of the India property and the safety of the
Consignees. The principal leader of the faction was applied to; he commanded
the Governor's Company of Cadets, but it was not to be expected that the leader
of the faction would muster the Cadets to oppose his own party and his own
plots The applications, of course, had no effect. Perhaps acquiescence was not
expected, though it might be deemed proper, in point of duty, to make the
request, o^ rather to issue the order.

By Governor Hutchinson's letters, the people of the town, or the faction,
obliged Mr. Rotch, the owner of Captain Hall's vessel, to demand a clearance
outward from the Custom-House, in order that the tea might be carried back.
Mr. Rotch resisted a long time, but his person being threatened, nay his life,
at last made him comply. The Custom House refused to grant him an illegal
clearance, the Governor was then applied to for a pass, without which the
vessel would have been stopped at Castle William; but this was also refused to
Mr. Rotch, because it was totally inconsistent with the duty of a Governor to
grant a pass to a vessel that had not been regularly cleared at the
Custom-House. This ^negociation, or insurrection, or rebellion, came to a
crisis about the middle of December. The faction, sitting in town-meeting*
heard the account of the refusals above mentioned, from Mr. Rotch. It appears
they expected such answers, and were prepared for the event; for immediately
after Mr. Rotch's account, signals were given both from within and without the
meeting. A number of men, disguised, boarded the vessels containing the tea,
and, as it is said, threw the whole into the sea, though some unbelievers may
think that not a little of it might be purloined, and that MADAM THETIS had not
so strong a dish of tea that evening as some people may imagine.

This is a recollected Summary of what was heard with regard to to the facts,
as they happened in regular progression. The opinions of the Writers, as far as
may be judged from what is expressed in their letters, now come to be mentioned.

Upon the face of the whole transaction, in every colony where the tea arrived,
it is evident that the Governors acted with the utmost prudence and
circumspection. It happened the ship bound for Boston was the first that
reached her destined port: Every civil precaution seems to have been tried to
preserve the peace of the town; his Majesty's Council, the Cadets, and the
Militia, were all applied to without effect; the sheriff read a proclamation to
the factious, commanding them to dissolve their assembly, and this proclamation
was immediately afterward inserted in the Gazette: Both the sheriff and the
proclamation were treated with insult. The people of Boston seem, on this
occasion, to have been fairly tried; the Governor seems to have taken, from the
beginning, a determination not to call either on the Naval or Military Force,
then in the Bay and at Castle Island. The loyal and peaceable people of that
town were altogether left to the exercise of their own judgment, and they have
given all the world a notable proof of it, by wantonly destroying a valuable
property, when all they had to do was to keep firm in their resolution, not to
buy or drink any of it; they will, however, pay for their outrageous pastime;
they must make good the loss; and they will feel the indemnification the more
bitter, as they must pay for a commodity which they declare they did not taste,
and which they pretend to abhor.

The other Governors, after the accomplishment of the Boston exploit, wisely
agreed to let the tea be carried back, as what had already happened was
sufficient to rouse the English nation and parliament; and by this prudent
conduct they put it out of the power of the people under their Government to
act in the same foolish and frantic manner as the people of Boston.

As to Governor Hutchinson, if it had not been for his resolution not to
irritate the people, by calling in the assistance of the Navy, the tea would
have been saved; but, as the Bostonians always made great complaints of the
interposition of the Navy and Army, and not only declared, but SWORE, they had
always begun every disturbance, every rational man will be glad to find that
their Governor gave them no such plea on this occasion: They were left to their
own will and pleasure, and behaved ten times worse than ever.

It appears, by all the letters from America, that nothing can be done there by
Officers, Civil Military, or Naval, to effectuate the re-establishment of peace
in that country; they can make no movement, even the most trifling, but what is
exclaimed against by the licentious Bostonians, as an infringment of their
Liberties. They have therefore remained, for these last three years, in total
inactivity, submitting to the insults of faction with the most patient
endurance, in hopes that Parliament, by an alteration and regulation of their
absurd Charters, will at least relieve them, and all the rest of his Majesty's
good subjects in the Colonies.

Governor Hutchinson's settled opinion is, that no effort in the Colonies by
any body of men civil or military, can remove the evils that now reign amongst
them. It is Parliament, and Parliament only, which can restore that turbulent
country to peace, and bring order out of confusion. And it is said, that his
letters for these six years past have uniformly inculcated and held forth the
same doctrine.

POLICY OF GREAT BRITAIN WITH REGARD TO AMERICA.
All forcible, as well as pacific measures, will be nugatory and ineffectual
with the Boston rebels unless their CHARTER is VACATED. It is the spring and
source of all their insolent and unjustifiable acts. The council being chosen
by the people yearly, must vote according to their pleasure, so that, in fact
they are not the Counselors of the King, but Tools of the faction. The people
of Massachusett's Province are also over represented; the number ought to be
reduced to a fourth part of the present. Boston, instead of sending four
members should send but two at most, though one would be better. Without this
previous necessary step, every other attempt to bring them to reason will be
fruitless, nay, will be inflammatory, whether the method be gentle or vigorous;
it will only be pruning and watering the tree of Sedition, instead of striking
at its root.

The Charters of Connecticut and Rhode Island should also be vacated. The
people in those Colonies choose their Governors, Judges, Assemblymen,
Counselors, and all the rest of their Officers; and the King and Parliament
have as much influence there as in the wilds of Tartary.

IT is a certain fact that all the old American merchants are of late become
very cautious whom they credit in America Their losses have taught them wisdom.
They have left off that general and indiscriminate credit, which they had some
years ago so injudiciously plunged into; now they trust only their old tried
customers; and they will not accept of recommendations, even from them, of any
new beginners, unless these recommendations are accompanied with securities to
the full extent of the credit required. The decrease of our exports to America
has not arisen from their boastful resolves not to import our goods, but from
their disinclination to pay for what we have already sent them; for the
greatest patriots are those very merchants who are most backward in their
payments. It is a very disagreeable circumstance for a capital house here to
fail for want of remittances from Boston, that very patriotic and honest town;
but it is not surprising that patiots do not pay their debts. Men who dedicate
their whole time to the interest of the community, are far above attending to
their own private interest, or to the interest of their creditors; and an
American resolution not to import our goods, always implies a resolution not to
pay for those they have already imported. That a merchant of this city, a man
of spirit, knowledge, acuteness, and industry, should be obliged to undertake a
voyage to the land of Patriotism, civilly to ask a great Patriot to pay nine or
ten thousand pounds long due to him, is probable enough, and it is also very
probable, that after the utmost exertion of his ingenuity, and residing in the
town of Boston for some months, that at last he should find himself obliged to
return without bringing a single farthing of the debt along with him. The
debtor at the same time reputed the richest man in Boston, and also positively
known to be one of the principal leaders of the faction, and a notorious
detected smuggler.

The merchants of England, when they hear of a New England insurrection, listen
to it as they would to any other article of news, never reflecting what a fatal
effect American uproars and rebellions may have on their trade. For till that
country is brought into subjection to the laws, their Charters taken away and
new modelled, and their Judges, Counselors, and Governors appointed by the
King neither peace nor loyalty will inhabit Rhode Island, Connecticut, nor
Massachusett's, nor will the merchants residing there pay their debts due here.
This is fully exemplified in Rhode Island, where 76, 000 l. pounds is due only
to two houses in London, and in the three Provinces, at least a million more
may be added on a moderate computation. The reason why the debts cannot be
recovered, is paticularly stated in the printed letters from America. The
Judges are chosen annually by the people; they must therefore act in such a
manner as to preserve the good will of the people, otherwise at the next
election they are turned adrift. Is it to be expected that such Judges will
give judgment in their Courts in favor of an Englishman, against their own
^electors? If the merchants of England wish to have a chance for recovering
their American debts, let them petition Government for an amendment of American
Charters.

As smuggling is one of the many causes of American rebellion, it would be
advisable in Government to station a number of small vessels of little draught
of water along the coast of America, on purpose to make captures of all (...)
traders. This would undoubtedly occasion heavy complaints from that quarter of
the interruption and embarrassment of trade, but our very good friends ought to
remember, that when they over leap the bounds prescribed to subjects, that they
must expect to suffer the penalties awarded by the laws.

LETTER VI.
IN the days of George the third the Puritans of New England are exactly the
same people as their forefathers were in the days of Charles the first. They
are factious and turbulent, and ever in opposition to legal government.

When their licentious conduct requires reprehension or punishment, then they
are the most misrepresented people under heaven; and they obtest the whole
world to be witnesses of their orderly and holy deportment, and of the grievous
^vactions and oppressions of their enemies. This is always the whining cant of
hypocrisy. They do not expect that people, who are really well acquainted with
their mutinous actions and treasonable plots, should give credit to their own
account of themselves, but by their piteous complainings, they think to impose
on the compassionate, and on that part of the public who are uninformed of
their real character.

Uneasy and arrogant, they left their native country, under the pretense of
enjoying civil and religious liberty. Established in America, they persecuted,
banished, or hanged all that differed from them in opinion: That liberty which
they claimed in England, they denied to others in America; and after having
fled from persecution, they themselves became Persecutors. In the very first
year of their settlement they manifested their hatred to the religion of their
Mother Country; and forcibly banished some of their companions who wished to
follow and practice the rites of the Church of England. Imprisonment,
banishment, and death, soon rid them of all disturbers and opponents; and the
commotions that soon after followed in England, gave them leisure to model
their government on the fullest principles of INDEPENDENCY.

After the restoration, this generous country afforded them every assistance;
we were proud and pleased with our growing children; we admired even their
independent notions, their turbulent petulance, and their declared opposition
to our laws. In fact, like over-fond parents we spoilt our children, we
ourselves encouraged them to rebel against us, and now we are reaping the
fruits of our foolish indulgence.

The New Englanders plead an exemption from taxation, as if they were not
subjects; and they bring forward their CHARTER granted by our Kings, as a proof
of their independence. The most contemptible argument often repeated, makes an
impression on some people. The claims of America at one time gained ground in
this kingdom, not from their validity, but from the impudence with which they
were urged. The generality of people did not know that at first the Colony of
New England was governed by a Council established at Plymouth; and that the
Hudson's B^y Company, the East India Company, or any other chartered Company,
might as well arrogate to themselves an independency on this kingdom, as the
vain and blustering Bostonians. Their first Charter only freed them from Taxes,
Subsidies, and Customs, in New England, for SEVEN years; and from Taxes and
Impositions on goods imported or exported for twenty one years; and this they
and their wise and modest partisans here construe into a complete INDEPENDENCY.

This requires only to be mentioned; the appeal is made to their Charter; let
it be consulted; conviction must follow of course.

LETTER VII.
IT has already been proved from the first Charter of the Massachusetts, itself,
that the Colony of New England was to be governed by a Company established at
Plymouth, in the County of Devon, and that the New Englanders were' to be freed
from Taxes for the first Seven years only: -- This to be sure is a solid
foundation on which to build their independency.

From the first moment of their settlement they displayed their fractious and
refractory spirit, as appears by an order of the Lords of Council in 1632.
Whereas his Majesty has lately been informed of great distraction and much
disorder in the Plantations in the parts of America called NEW ENGLAND. It also
appears, that in their early days they were accustomed to contradict the
charges brought against them, just as they do at present, for the order says
that "most of the things informed were denied:" yet they were allowed to
escape, least the settlement should be discouraged; their Lordships not laying
the faults or fancies of some particular men on the general government. The
next year, 1633, we find them in the same disorderly state, from another order
of the King in Council, which mentions, that such confusion and distraction is
already grown there, as besides the ruin of the Plantation, cannot but highly
tend to the ruin both of the Church and the State here.

When they were at peace with the Indians, and were not occupied in railing at
the Mother Country, their restless inflammable disposition showed itself in
internal commotions. In 1634 they quarrelled with Mr. Winthrop their Governor
and their God almighty, concerning his receipts and disbursements for the
public; but he vindicated himself with great honor, and concluded his defense
with heartily blessing the Lord our God for his gracious acceptance of his
services for his Church and people, which he esteemed an abundant recompense.
They have since often shown the same ingratitude to many of their best friends.

Searching their history about this period, we find their notions of
independency openly professed. They imagined they had a right to plant
Colonies, to establish what order of government they thought proper, and to
form a new State as fully to all intents and purposes as if they had been in a
state of nature: and on that account they styled themselves a COMMONWEALTH.
They denied the jurisdiction of England over them, because, as they said they
were out of the realm, yet they very consistently claimed an authority over the
Colony of Connecticut, because the fettlers there had formerly resided some
time among them, though they were then evidently without the juridiction of
Massachussets.

The Bostonians have incessantly pestered us with their great merit in
cultivating the barren wilderness; but we all know, that we do not owe this to
their good will, but to their fears: They would not stay, and face danger along
with the men of spirit of their own party at home, but made off to hide
themselves in the woods of America. Mr. Cotton their Prophet, immediately after
the emigration, when highly blamed by his friends in England for deserting them
replied, that it was the duty of the young and able bodied to run away, if they
had opportunity, for that God called only the old and infirm to witness to the
truth unto death.

In 1635 his Majesty, on account of the factious state of the Massachusetts,
thought proper to grant a Commission for regulating the Plantations to several
of the principle Officers of State. These Commissioners were empowered to
inflict punishment on all offenders, ecclesiastical or civil. either by
imprisonments or other restraints, or by loss of life or members, the Royal
Assent being first had and obtained; they were, to new and growing evils and
perils to apply remedies, so often as they should appear to them necessary and
expedient: they were to remand all Officers or Governors to England who did not
suppress ALL REBELS; they were to examine the Letters, Patents, or other
writings, granted by the King or his predecessors, and if, upon view thereof,
it appeared they had been surreptitiously or unduly obtained, or that any of
the privileges or liberties therein granted were hurtful to the Kingdom, the
Crown, or Prerogative, they were to cause the same, according to the laws and
customs of our realm of England, to be revoked, him to do all other things
which should be necessary for the wholesome government and protection of the
Colonies, and our people therein biding.

It is evident from this Commission, that in the most early days of our
Colonies there were offenders and growing evils, and that the Letters Patent or
Charters granted them were even then suspected to be contrary to the Laws and
Customs of England: After one hundred and fifty years conviction, it is now
surely time to apply the proper remedies; forbearance and affection on our
part, have hitherto only roused, in Massachusetts, presumption and defiance; and
though our Army and Navy may bring the rebellious Bostonians to submission,
yet, till their Charter is vacated, and another given them, more suitable to
our Constitution, every other expedient will only be temporary.

THE instigators and promoters of the rebellious Bostonians, after having led
them to commit the most outrageous excesses, think now by blustering to ward
off merited vengeance. The Charter of Massachusetts with them, is too sacred to
be touched by our legislature. Before they promulgated this impudent doctrine,
they should have reflected that subjects, when they have acted in defiance of
all law, justly forfeit every privilege granted them; for certainly persons
who infringe the rights of the community, and by their outrages endanger its
welfare, instead of favor and protection have nothing to look for but disgrace
and punishment. If their Charter as they say, authorizes them to oppose the
power of Parliament, and places them above its jurisdiction, it must
immediately occur to every rational man to enquire from whom they received this
extraordinary Charter? Why then they tell us they had it from the King. But
they should consider that the King is only a third part of our legislature, and
that he cannot alienate any part of his dominions without the consent of the
whole. If therefore the King has granted a Charter which militates against the
good of the state, it is both just and necessary that he should recall it, and
that another should be given them more conformable to the constitution of his
kingdom. That Parliament may address his Majesty on this important occasion,
and that the Attorney General may be directed to bring a Quo Warranto against
this very surprising Boston Charter is greatly to be wished. The threats of an
old factious Agent, who vomits out his venom in the news papers are utterly
contemptible; he owes his safety not to his innocence, but to the lenity of our
laws. In a neighboring kingdom (...) seditions and his life would have ended
together at the Place de Greve. In England, however, we act with greater
moderation; instead of taking the worthless life of a traitor, we give him our
contempt.

It is an old custom for the most depraved characters to take merit to
themselves by addressing the truly respectable, as if they were the supporters
of their opinions. Rationalis therefore, or, in other words, the Bostonian
traitor, appea^s to Sir George Saville in a late paper. No two characters ever
before exhibited such a contrast; the one the most virtuous citizen of England,
and the other the most worthless of America. The noble Yorkshire Baronet, it is
known, is not an admirer of Colonies; history and experience have convinced him
that they are rather detrimental than serviceable to the parent state: Hence
his refusal to sit a member of the East India committee in the House of Commons
-- But, to return to the modest Bostonian: He says, it is scurrility to assert
the supremacy of Parliament over America, and that, if his Majesty was to make
a trip to Boston, those loyal peaceable subjects, if his Majesty would make
known his wants, would give and grant supplies, as well as the Parliament of
Ireland. Can any man, who reads this, believe that Rationalis is any other
person than that worthy Bostonian who insists that England must soon become a
province tributary to America; who urges the exemption of Boston and the
Colonies from taxes, though we are now Seventy Millions in debt on their
account; and who now tells us, that Boston wont pay a shilling toward their
own defense and protection, unless his Majesty takes a short trip (as he calls
it) to that Town, and makes known his wants. The Doctor, in his comparison
between Boston and Ireland, seems to have forgot that Ireland, though
conquered, is still a kingdom of itself, and that his rebellious Townsmen have
not yet arrived at the dignity of a separate state; they are English subjects,
and under the control of Parliament as much as the unrepresented six millions
of people dwelling in this Island; and his Majesty might as well be sent to
every petty corporation in England to ask their consent to supplies, distinct
from Parliament, as to the pitiful ostentatious Bostonians.

WE must give up the evidence of our own senses whenever a Bostonian pleases to
insist upon it. When he is detected in smuggling, we must believe him to be a
fair trader; when he perjures himself at the Custom House, we must entertain no
doubts of his piety; when he knocks down the King's Officers, and tars and
feathers them, he is the most peaceable subject in all his Majesty's dominions;
and he is then most faithful and loyal when he acts in direct opposition to the
laws of his country. Let him pull down a house, and carry off the furniture,
and the very next moment he will assure you, he is the most honest man in the
world; let him, along with the rest of his townsmen, assemble expressly for the
purpose of destroying the East India Company's Tea, and let him do it before
your face, and then he will gravely tell you it was destroyed by a parcel of
Mohawks. But if you are resolved to credit the conviction of your own senses,
and will not implicitly believe all that he tells you, why then you are a
friend to tyranny and oppression, he instantly votes you an enemy to the rights
and liberties of the great town of Boston, and if you are not very alert,
hoists you into his cart of tar and feathers, and drives you to the gallows, at
the same time most hypocritically baw^ing out, that he is the most ill used and
distressed poor creative in the universe, though the most dutiful and
affectionate (...) subjects

No minister ever had before, to the most popular measure, so unanimously and
heartily the concurrence of all ranks of people, as Lord North has to the Bill
for punishing the Boston incendiaries. In the House, opposition itself has
given up the cause of the rebels. They are conscious, that if they were in
power they would support government and the supreme right of Parliament;
without doors the people at large are very sensible that the minister is
supporting their own cause. They feel the heavy load of debt under which we are
all laboring, and at the same time reflect that it was contracted in the
defense of America. In short, on one side there are only two or three hired
Agents of the Bostonian rioters, and on the other, Kings, Lords, and Commons,
and all the people of England.

A late writer very justly observes that the Colonists ought to bear a
proportionable share of all national burdens imposed by the supreme
legislature The taxation of the Colonies, therefore, may be reduced to the four
following Articles:

1. That the exports and imports in the Colonies should be brought as near as
circumstances will admit to the same rates as those in Great Britain.

2. That no tax should ever be imposed on the American Colonies by Parliament,
without one of the same kind being imposed on Great Britain in a proportionable
degree.

3. That the Land Tax should be ever at the same rate both in the Mother
Country and in America.

4 That taxes of luxury, or sumptuary taxes, ought ever to be the same in both
countries, under which class stamp duties may very properly be ranged,
independent of their great utility in regulating many domestic concerns.

Certainly the Colonists, as they enjoy the privileges and protection of this
country, ought in reason to bear a part of our national Taxes.

Every real well-wisher of England hopes, that the privileges of the Town of
Boston will not be restored, till these foolish vapouring subjects have, in
their General Court not only passed an act to make good the damage done the
East India Company, but also another, expressly acknowledging the full power
and authority of this kingdom to make laws and statutes of sufficient force and
validity to bind the people of America, subjects to the crown of Great Britain,
in all cases whatsoever.

LETTER VIII.
EVERY page of the history of Massachusetts exhibits convincing testimony of the
violent commotions and lawless conduct of that turbulent Colony; what opinion
then must we form of a Petition lately presented to his Majesty in Council, in
which it is boldly ass^rted, that perfect harmony subsisted between Great
Britain and the Colonies until it was disturbed by the errors and innovations
of his Majesty's Ministers! Surely if this Petitioner has read the history of
that Colony, the orders of Council, and the Acts of Parliament made and issued
solely for the purpose of remedying the disorders and distractions among them,
and to restrain them within the bounds of law and good government, he must be
possessed with the most astonishing confidence to (...) to utter before his
Prince, an assertion so opposite to truth. Yet we must either give him credit
for his astonishing confidence or believe him altogether ignorant of the
history and state of that people for whom he is Agent; he himself has (...) us
no other alternative

To recapitulate the orders of the King in Council, and the Commission granted
to certain Lords for the better regulation of New England, would be
superfluous, as they may be seen in my former letter. These orders, which fully
prove, that disorders and confusions existed there previous even to the very
birth of his Majesty's Ministers, clearly overthrow the confident declaration
(not to give it the harsh term of falsehood) of the Agent of his Majesty's
Council in the Massachusetts Bay: The intelligent reader will no doubt observe
here the decency, propriety, and loyalty of his Majesty's Council in America
employing their Agent to petition his Majesty's Council in England against acts
of Parliament, against the authority of the supreme legislature, and against
the undoubted righ^t^ and welfare of this nation.

But to proceed with the cursory account of the Massachusetts:

In 1636. Mr Vane afterward the famous Sir Henry Vane, was chosen their
Governor; for at that time they had the privilege of electing their own
Governors. These dissatisfied people were greatly pleased with him at first,
but they soon manifested their restless disposition, his Government was only to
last one year; he was a man of their own choice, and yet they were weary of him
in six months. He offered to resign; the Boston Church made objections to his
resignation, and signified them to the Court then sitting. Cautious of
occasioning an internal rupture in the Colony, he agreed to preside there for
the short remaining time; but sailed for England two months after the
expiration of his government.

The jealousy of Mr. Winthrop, their former Governor, and then Deputy Governor,
contributed to hasten his departure. The religious as well as the political
doctrines of these two men very widely differed. Mr. Winthrop was strenuous for
denying admittance to all English subjects, who were suspected to differ from
them in opinion, and encouraged the most factious in their ideas of forming an
independent state. Mr. Vane, on the contrary, very justly asserted the right
that every English subject possessed, of residing in any part of his Majesty's
dominions, and of moving from any one part of these dominions to another, as
best suited him, whilst he continued in subjection to the laws; for that, by
pursuing Mr. Winthrop's plan, the Colony would exceed the limits of his
Majesty's grant, and forfeit the privileges, government, and lands, which they
challenged to be their own.

These substantial reasons had no effect on those stubborn independents; and
immediately after his departure for England, every person, man or woman, who
were supposed to be of his opinion, were disfranchised, imprisoned, and
banished.

Finding themselves possessed of power, they were above giving any reasons for
their despotic exercise of it; and they even considered the questioning their
authority as an insufferable insult. This was strongly examplified in the trial
of Mrs. Hutchinson, who held both the religious and political opinions of Mr.
Vane: She was examined before the Governor, Assistants and Clergy, and
sentenced to be banished, and imprisoned till she could be sent away.

During her trial she urged, that, as the clergy were her principal accusers,
they ought to give their evidence on oath. One of the Judges, in reply to her
demand, said, admit they should mistake you in your speeches (for she was tried
only for her opinions, amongst which toleration in religion was her capital
offense) you would make them to sin, if you urge them to swear. Another of her
Judges was very angry with her, for not believing all the Godly Ministers
without an oath. The Deputy Governor said, he was sure she was deluded by the
devil, and that they should be all sick with fasting. And when the Governor
pronounced, The sentence of the Court is, that you are banished out of our
jurisdiction, as being a woman not fit for our society, and are to be
imprisoned till the Court shall send you away, she very naturally asked, I
desire to know wherefore I am banished? to which the mild sagacious Governor
replied, Say no more! the Court knows wherefore, and is satisfied.

She was accordingly banished, and retired to the woods out of the jurisdiction
of these persecutors, where she and her family, to the amount of sixteen
persons, were murdered by the Indians, except one daughter.

At present, however, the rebellious Bostonians proceed in a more summary way;
those who deny their independency, and who believe in the supremacy of the
British legislature, are driven out of their holy and peaceable town, without
being called even to town meeting; and if, unfortunately, they should be slow
in their retreat, they are seized, stripped naked, besmeared with tar, stuck all
over with feathers, then carted to liberty tree, or to the gallows, and after
having undergone the ceremony of whipping, according to the Levitic^^ law, they
have the oath of banishment administered to them.

Thus we see the Bostonians have proceeded from bad to worse; instead of
reforming they have degenerated; the sons far outdo their forefathers in
rioting and rebellion; and instead of a public mock trial, they give a public
Mob Punishment.

But to return again to their ancestors.

In the year 1637, after the expiration of Mr. Vane's Government, as many
people of his way of thinking were expected from England, the general court of
Massachusett's assembled at Boston, and passed a very extraordinary act. A
penalty was laid on all persons who should entertain in their houses, any
stranger who came with an intent to reside, or should allow the use of any lot
or habitation above three weeks, without liberty from one of the standing
council or two other assistants. The penalty on private persons was forty
pounds, and twenty pounds besides for every month they continued in the
offense; and any town which gave or sold a lot to such stranger, was subject to
a penalty of one hundred pounds.

Of old the Bostonian Puritans by this law denied their fellow subjects
admittance to their sanctified districts; and in our days, their sons refuse
access to our goods, and submission to our laws. Yet, in the face of this
conviction, their advocates have the modesty to affirm, that a perfect harmony
always reigned between them and Great Britain, till the errors and innovations
of his present Majesty's ministers. Can folly or impudence go farther?

That the above recited law might be all powerful, they immediately passed
another to punish any person by fine, imprisonment, or banishment, who should
defame any court, or any of their sentences. By this act, even freedom of
speech was adjudged criminal by the Government of Massachusett's. This new law
drove numbers into voluntary banishment; others were formally disfranchised,
and banished by the court. The ruling party, prayed and thanked GOD for having
rid them of their enemies, and they assured HI^, that they inflicted punishment
solely for his honor and glory, and for the firm establishment of his Kingdom.
And to complete their great work, toleration was every where preached against,
as a damnable sin in rulers, which, if permitted, would bring down the
vengeance of heaven upon the holy land.

Previous to the above laws the New Englanders earnestly entreated strangers to
come amongst them, that is to say^ such as had money, and of them they made
great advantage. To these new comers a milk*cow was sold at 25% or 30% which
enriched the first planters; but when the strangers effects were nearly
exhausted, or when any of their leading men grew jealous of their abilities,
they were tried for broaching tenets contrary to the Kingdom of GOD in New
England, sentenced to be banished, and their goods were confiscated for the
expenses of their condemnation, and to keep them alive in prison till they
should be sent away.

Notwithstanding a very great opposition, the new laws, as already mentioned,
were passed, and violently carried into execution; for the complete
establishment of their independent commonwealth weighed more with the majority,
than the advantage of the strangers money.

Such laws and practices would be deemed by men of candid, upright minds, never
to have had a being, if they were not upon record. Mr. Vane, in his answer to
Mr. Winthrop, discloses their iniquitous proceedings; they were not for
banishing any person (...) they had made the most of his effects: "Why," says
he, should any in higher place speak in open court? Let us have their money
first.

Yet if we choose to listen to the clamours of hypocrisy and deceit, and to
believe them too, there are people who will publicly assure us, that the
Bostonians always were, and at this time are, a mild, equitable, Godly, loyal,
and humane people; that they never committed any illegal acts, any
unjustifiable outrages, any wanton cruelties, any deliberate barbarities; and
that all the flagrant and attrocious insurrections and enormities with which
they are charged, are merely the vile suggestions of Satan, and their enemies,
who envy and persecute the poor people of GOD, even in the howling wilderness.

LETTER IX.
FROM the first establishment of the Massachusett's colony to the present
times, every information concerning the settlers there, as well as their own
public acts, evince their intention of forming an independent state, and of
throwing off their allegiance to this kingdom. In a letter from America,
written in the last century, we are told, that it was not new discipline which
they aimed at, but Sovereignty; and that it was accounted perjury and treason
in their general court, to speak of appeals to the King.

It was also an avowed doctrine of theirs one hundred and forty years ago, that
as their common wealth was founded by free consent, every member thereof was
tied to seek out and entertain all means that might conduce to the welfare of
the incorporation. To this it was rationally and judiciously replied, that they
ought not to seek out all means that might conduce to the welfare of the
incorporation, but all lawful and due means, according to the Charter they hold
from the King. Such replies as this mightily offended them, and all who owned
allegiance to England were fined and banished their dominions. In our days we
find their offspring holding the same principles, for every loyal subject is
driven out of their territories.

About the year 1646, a Que Warranto was brought against their Charter, in
which all their different illegal and oppressive acts are enumerated; amongst
the rest, that of their taking sums of money for admission into their company,
and disfranchising whom they pleased and turning them out of the company. This
alluded to the members of the church of England, and to those who allowed their
dependence on the Crown and state of England. How then can the Bostonian agents
aver that perfect harmony always subsisted between the Massachusett's and this
country till within these last ten years? Is their banishing the members of the
church of England, and those who owned allegiance to England, after stripping
them of their effects, a proof of this perfect harmony? Surely the worthy
Boston Agents must have lost all memory and recollection when they advanced
such a known public untruth.

They were required to send home their patent soon after the Quo Warranto was
brought against it. Then they displayed the same hypocritical submission and
the same rebellious disposition that they do at this present time. In one part
of their answer, they said, they humbly prostrated themselves at the footstool
of supreme authority; in another part they declared, that if their patent
should be taken from them, the common people would conceive themselves freed
from their allegiance and subjection, and thereupon would be ready to
confederate themselves under a new Government; and which would be a dangerous
example to other plantations. The troubles which arose in England immediately
after prevented the necessary regulations then intended. Indeed by our
divisions and quarrels at home, Government has always been prevented from
paying due attention to the proper regulations of the colonies.

There never was any thing more evident than that the people of Massachusett's
intended to establish a separate state, and to exercise a despotic power over
the neighboring colonies. All means that tended to forward this plan were
greedily taken hold of.

In 1641, they gave some of their people who were removing out of their colony,
a very surprising commission. They confessed in the preamble to this
commission, that the lands designed to be taken possession of, were without the
commonwealth of the Massachusett's, and that certain noble personages in
England challenged jurisdiction there by virtue of a patent from the King; yet
as they thought it was necessary to take possession of that country, they
granted authority to their people to settle upon those lands, which they
acknowledged did not belong to them, to form a Government, and to make war with
every other power, civil and military.

To elucidate this extraordinary conduct (though no appology can be made for
their seizing and occupying lands which they agreed belonged to others of his
Majesty's subjects) it is necessary to observe, that they obliged every
inhabitant of their colony to take an OATH of FIDELITY to THEIR COMMONWEALTH;
and it was gravely determined in their general court, that this Oath of
Fidelity should be binding; even though the persons should no longer reside
within their limits. It was upon this principle that they granted the
abovementioned strange commission to the Connecticut settlers, though at the
very same time they declared, as they themselves were out of the realm of
England, it could claim no jurisdiction over them. From this, their
encroaching, rapacious, and rebellious disposition is undeniable. They denied
allegiance to the mother country, where it was due, and voted themselves, and
usurped an authority over a neighboring colony, where they themseves, in their
own commission, confess they had no right, though afterward, in defiance to
their own commission, they voted in their own general court, they had a right.
Inconsistency, self-contradiction, and robbery, they never minded, provided it
answered their purposes of self-interest. Many instances of the same spirit
occur in their history.

Every person who refused to coincide with their opinions, either religious or
political, was treated in a most savage and inhuman manner. A Citizen of London
happening to come to Boston, and differing in some trivial points of religion
from the professing godly there, was summoned before their court of
inquisition, and so terrified, that he thought it most prudent to remove to
Plymouth, a town about forty miles distant; there however Bostonian
recommendations followed him, and he was publicly whipped and driven to Rhode
Island. His persecutors still following him with their kind christian
recommendations, at Rhode Island he was first imprisoned, then whipped, and
afterward banished; from thence he fled to the town of Providence; but his
persecutions were not at an end, the Bostonians sent what they called a warrant
or notification to all the people of Providence, requiring them to submit to
the jurisdiction of the Massachusetts. To this it was replied, that they had no
authority over Providence. But the poor distressed man, with some others, to be
out of the reach of Bostonian cruelty, and to avoid further ill-treatment, went
into the country, and purchased some lands of an Indian Chief, for which he
paid forty pounds. Even to this retreat did the malice of his enemies pursue
him. The Bostonians set up a claim to the lands purchased, and ordered him and
his company to appear at the court of Boston. After the barbarous usage they
had received, it is not to be supposed that they would willingly comply with
this order. They sent back therefore a message, that they were out of the
Massachusetts jurisdiction, and would acknowledge subjection to none but the
state and government of Old England. This declaration exasperased the
Bostonians; they sent an armed force, which after resistance carried them
captive to Boston, where a charge was exhibited against them in these words.

Upon much examinantion and serious consideration of your writings, with your
answers about them, we do charge you to be blasphemous enemies of the true
religion of our Lord Jesus Christ and his holy Ordinances, and also of civil
authority among the people of God, and particularly in this jurisdiction.

This charge brings to our memory a transaction that happened several years ago
in the island of Jamaica. A Scotch Officer, with several others of his corpse,
engaged in a billiard match with some Jews. The children of Israel, it seems,
were much too expert at that game for the Caledonian and his companions. The
latter; after having lost some money, mustered their whole joint stock, and
staked it against the Sons of Circumcision: The game was played; the Scot lost;
but he swept the stakes into his hat, drew his sword, and protected by his
friends, retired, calling out, Damn year saul's, ye scoundrels, year a' enemies
to the Lord Jesus Christ.

But to return to the people of God in New England.

The persecuted Londoner and his companions were brought before the merciful
Bostonian Court; their writings were produced against them; the Governor agreed
with them in their explanation of their writings, and seemed inclinable to
acquit them, but was opposed by the rest of the court. Their sentences will
ever remain a record of infamy against the town of Boston

They were condemned to work in jail, to wear such bolts and irons as might
hinder their escape, and i^ they broke confinement, or maintained any of the
blasphemous abominable heresies with which they had been charged by the general
court, or should reprove the Churches of our LORD JESUS CHRIST in these united
colonies, or the civil Government, upon conviction thereof, and trial by jury,
they should suffer death.

The Boston hypocrites, even in their own sentence, say that their general
court charged them with blasphemy, but they do not say that they proved it.

They were confined one winter, then banished the jurisdiction of the
Massachusetts, and the lands they had purchased of the Indians, their goods when
they were taken prisoners, were seized, sold, and disposed of as follows: To
the people who took them captive, and destroyed their settlement; to pay the
expenses of their trial, and to support them in prison.

In 1665 they preferred a petition to the commissioner sent by the King to
regulate the plentations, for redress of their wrongs, alleging that, besides
all the cruelties they had suffered, eighty head of cattle had been taken from
them. The Bostonians, in their answer, charged them with heretical tenets, and
said that the goods seized did not pay for their prosecution; yet they could
not vindicate themselves for seizing persons and goods without the limits of
their jurisdiction. The poor sufferers, however, never obtained any redress.

It is observable, that the manners of large bodies of people and nations
change greatly in a century or two: But this cannot be said of the Bostonians;
they still are cruel oppressors and persecutors of all who deny their Sovereign
Authority, or who acknowledge any dependence on England: Besides the
unjustifiable injuries committed on the property and persons of individuals,
they have treated with the most daring insults both the Officers of Government
and the acts of the State. Can the security of property, or personal safty, be
expected in a colony where the laws of the parent state have no vigor nay,
even where they are spurned at? Can redress be looked for by injured
individuals, when the supremacy of the Legislature itself is not only disputed,
but denied and opposed? -- In short, a thorough reformation must be made in the
constitution of the Massachusetts, or the authority of this kingdom will be
covered with contempt.

The dreadful bravadoes and threats of the Bostonians, when vigorous measures
are taken with them, will all evaporate in smoke; instead of boldly and
rebelliously manning their batteries, they will skulk to their town meeting,
and there with religious grimace and holy phrase, they will vote us all,
Enemies of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and of the great town of Boston.

THROUGHOUT all nature it is observable, that animals of cruel and deceitful
dispositions are the least susceptible of gratitude. This observation may with
justice be carried into human life. It has been exemplified in the Bostonians.
The merchants, not only of London, but over all the British Dominions, in the
year 1766, strenuously exerted all their interest to obtain the repeal of the
Stamp Act. To this struggle they were principally excited by the piteous
complaints of the Bostonians, who held forth to them fallacious views of
emolument. Unhappily their exertions were successful; they, and their country,
have since felt it; and now are convinced of it. The mistaken merchants,
administration, and the whole kingdom, expected gratitude would be deeply
rooted in the breasts of the Bostonians for the signal successful effort they
had made in their favor. But the obligation was too great for their narrow
souls to comprehend in its full extend; administeration wished the Bostonians
to receive the repeal, granted at the earnest request of the whole mercantile
body of Great Britain, with moderation and thankfulness. The merchants of
London, impressed with the same ideas, wrote cautionary letters to their
principal correspondents, not to show any undue signs of exultation. But the
repeal had been granted, and their monitions were treated with contempt. Their
(...) quest over the parent state, instead of being received (...) modest
affection, was celebrated (...) the most illiberal (...) their General Indecent
triumph; bells rung, bonfires blazed, taverns were opened, and houses
illuminated. The rejoicings on the conquest of Canada, comparatively speaking,
were no more to these than the feeble glimmering of a rush^ight to the broad
(...) of the sun at noonday. Every dirty fellow, just risen from his kennel,
congratulated his neighbor on their glorious victory over England; and they
were so intoxicated with their own vast importance, that the lowest wretch
amongst them conceived himself superior to the first English merchant. Aye,
said they, we have shown our spirit, we have convinced them of our consequence;
they feared (...); they repealed their foolish act; they durst not do
otherways, if they had we should have ruined them These were the literal
expressions of the grateful, dutiful, and loyal people of Boston. These were
the answers they returned to the sensible men amongst them, who (...) decency,
decorum, and gratitude. They could hardly prevail upon themselves to write a
few cold complimentary letters to the English merchants who had acted so
vigorously in their cause. -- An unfortunate vigor indeed for Britain! -- They
bestowed their favors without wisdom; and they have reaped the fruit of
ingratitude. -- The s^ake that they have warmed in their bosoms, has now reared
its ven^mous crest against them. Such are always the effects of ill bestowed,
injudicious, and unnatural obligation.

FROM the tremendous News-paper threats of the pitiful Bostonians, people, who
did not know them, would be apt to believe them a very powerful city. Mighty
they are, indeed, if all they have told us is true: to them ancient Nineveh and
Babylon would seem but villages. The truth is, that this very great town of
Boston contains of men, women, children, and negroe slaves, about fifteen
thousand souls. What, cries our good people here, negroe slaves in Boston! It
cannot be! It is nevertheless very true. For though the Bostonians have
grounded their rebellions on the "immutable laws of nature," and have resolved
in their Town Meetings, that It is the first principle in civil society,
founded in nature and reason, that no law of society can be binding on any
individual, without his consent given by himself in person, or by his
representative of his own free election. Yet notwithstanding the immutable
(...) of nature, and this public resolution of their own in ^own Meeting, they
actually have in town two thousand (...). Negroe slaves, who neither by
themselves in person, nor by representatives of their own free election ever
gave consent to their present state of bondage. That this great Town of Boston,
which contains about 3000 able, but not willing men to fight has disturbed the
whole British empire for these last ten years with their seditious clamours is
certainly fact. This however is not asserted in praise of our vigor, but in
praise of our moderation. Like cowards unopposed they have pushed their
insurrections and treasons to the last extremity, and are now awaiting their
punishment. Notwithstanding all their bravadoes, the faction there does not
amount to a fourth part of the inhabitants. If there had been any vigor in the
magistracy many of their outrages might have been prevented; but there
unhappily prevails among the most loyal subjects of that town, an opinion that
they can do nothing of themselves, without the intervention of the supreme
legislature here. So that the faction, though small when compared to the rest of
the inhabitants, have hitherto carried every thing before them. Their late mad
action has brought their affairs to a crisis; and no man can be a friend to his
country who opposes their punishment. Indeed punishment it cannot be called,
they are only at present to pay for the tea they have wantonly destroyed. But
it is ardently wished by every lover of peace and good order, that some
salutary regulations may take place in the Massachusetts.

LETTER X.
ALTHOUGH the original pretenses which the Bostonians held forth for their
emigration from this country, were the enjoyment of civil and religious
liberty, yet we have shown that they not only denied the enjoyment of these
liberties to many of their fellow subjects, but that they persecuted them in
the most illegal, oppressive, and unrelenting manner. Indeed hypocrites are the
most cruel of all persecutors.

But the exercise of their oppressions and cruelties were not confined to
individuals. Whose Colonies felt the unjust exactions of the haughty and
tyrannical Bostonians. In 1649 a dispute arose between Massachusetts and
Connecticut about supporting a fort erected by the latter. The neighboring
Colonies of Plymouth and Newhaven were appe^^ed to as Umpires to decide the
cause. The Bostonians suspecting judgment would be given against them, passed
a ^aw in their General Court, imposing a duty upon the other Colonies, of which
the following is an extract.

It is therefore ordered by this Court, and the authority thereof, that all
goods belonging or any way appertaining to any inhabitants of the jurisdiction
of Plymouth, Connecticut or Newhaven, that shall be imported within the Castle,
or exported from any part of the Bay, shall pay such custom as is hereafter
expressed, viz. all skins of beaver, otter, mouse, mouse deer, etc. two pence
per skin; and all goods packed in hogsheads or otherwise, ten shillings a ton;
corn and meal two pence a bushel; biscuit six pence per hundred, on pain of
forfeiture.

We shall now give a comentary on this extraordinary usurpation of supreme
power over the adjoining Colonies, written by one of their own historians. Had,
says he, the Massachusetts laid a duty on goods from Connecticut only, as they
had the dispute with them, they might have had at least a color to justify
them; but to extend their resentment against the other two colonies, no excuse
can be framed for it. It was a mere exertion of power, and a proof of their
great superiority, which enabled them in effect to depart from the union or
combination of the Colonies for their mutual defense, whenever they found it
for their interest; and if done by a single magistrate would have been
pronounced tyrannical and oppressive.

Upon the passing this law, the two Colonies of Plymouth and Newhaven, being
too weak to contend with the power of the Massachusetts, observed in reply,
that a burdensome custom had been imposed on them, though they were not
interested in the dispute, but had interfered at the request of the
Massachusetts, and had impartially considered the matter and given their
opinion; therefore they recommended it to the General Court of the
Massachusetts, seriously to consider whether such proceedings agreed with the
law of love, and the tenor and import of the articles of their confederation.

This is strong evidence of their grasping, encroaching, and despotic
principles. The troubles then in England left them at full liberty to act as
they pleased, and to exercise their sovereign authority over their neighbors,
as best suited their will and pleasure. In our days, we find them still
deceitful and oppressive. Four years ago they stopped all intercourse with New
Hampshire and Rhode Island, because these provinces imported goods from England
publicly, whilst they themselves, the professing Bostonians, imported a
thousand times the quantity privately, and were anathematizing and driving out
of their hypocritical town every person who refused to join in their
unwarrantable measures.

Another "principal end of their plantation" according to their own
professions, was the glorious propagation of the Gospel among the poor Heathen
Their methods of conversion were truly Spanish; they propagated the Gospel by
the sword; they seized the Indian lands, that these poor Heathen might have
nothing to care for but their salvation, and then cut their throats for the
good of their souls: Even the tenderness of females was no protection, no
safeguard, against the rapacious inhuman cruelty of those holy hypocrites; men
and women, without discrimination, and without pity, fell sacrifices to their
lust of acquisition. Soon after their first intrusion they took several
captives; the men were put to the sword upon the spot, and the Indians in
alliance with them claiming the women, they murdered them also to end the
dispute.

The treatment of Miantonimo, a famous Indian Sachem, will sufficiently display
New England treachery and barbarity. Under the pretense that he was their
enemy, and was plotting their ruin, they exhibited articles of complaint
against him, and required him to come to Boston to give satisfaction.
Miantonimo possessed a noble and manly spirit; he came in person to the Court,
and demanded, that his accusers should be brought face to face, and that, if
they failed in their proof, they should suffer death as he himself would have
deserved that punishment, if he had been guilty His composed, ingenuous and
spirited (...) our confounded his accusers; the Connecticut people, to finish
the trial, were going to fall upon him and destroy him, but were prevented by
the Massachusetts. Thus he was saved at this time, but marked out for future
murder.

About three years after, he was unfortunately taken prisoner by the Indians,
and carried alive as an acceptable sacrifice to the New Englanders. The
Commissioners of the united Colonies were then assembled. After keeping him a
considerable time in prison, they ordered the Indians to carry him out of their
jurisdiction, and slay him. This sentence was immediately executed, several of
the New Englanders accompanying the Indians to see the murder duly performed.

Whilst he remained in prison he was fed with the hopes of life, provided his
subjects would contribute a sufficient ransom. The poor Indians had nothing but
their wampum and their furs; of these they raised to the value of forty pounds:
the whole was brought to Miantonimo, and by him given to the deceitful New
Englandmen; who after having cheated and stripped the subjects of their property,
infamously murdered their Prince.

Such deceitful barbarity roused the resentment of the Indians. The
Commissioners of the Colonies to prevent a war, entered into what they called
an examination of the allegations against themselves; and the following is what
they thought proper to publish in defense of themselves and their countrymen.

Some loose discourse had passed, that for such quantities of wampum, and such
parcels of other goods, to a great value, there might have been some
probability of sparing his life; yet no such parcels were brought, not any
ransom agreed, nor so much as any serious treaty begun, to redeem their
imprisoned Sachem: and as to the wampum and goods, they were but small parcels,
and scarce considerable for such a purpose, so they were disposed of by
Miantonimo himself, to sundry persons, for courtesies received during his
imprisonment, and upon hope of future favor.

Every person of common sense and common humanity will shu^der, his b^ood wild
run (...), when he reads this detestable defense; indeed, defense it is not; it
is a complete confession of their treacherous, murderous guilt.

The present faction at Boston seem to be possessed with the infernal spirit of
their forefathers: they carry their cruelties as far as their dread of
retribution will allow them. It is not their humanity that prompts them to save
the lives of the Custom House Officers, whom they strip naked, cover with tar
and feathers, and whip at the gallows, but their fear of punishment.

THERE is such a superlative degree of effrontery in the faction of Boston, and
in their defenders here, that if we had not the fullest proofs of their
outrageous treasons, we very probably might be led to conceive that all the
truths told us of (...) were only, as they call them, the misrepresentations of
their enemies. It is an old stale trick of the Bostonians, in their public
votes, to stigmatize with the name of enemies all who speak of them in their
real character. Impudence and falsehood never before were carried to such a
height as by them and their confederates Governor Pow^all rises in the House of
Commons and assures the members that the Bostonians are a loyal and peaceful
people, even in spite of the conviction which they themselves have forced upon
us by their opposing acts of Parliament^ and destroying the India Company's
Tea. This worthy gentleman does not expect to be believed because he knows that
his assertions are absolute untruths; but he is enraged at administration
because he is out of place. A bad advocate and a bad cause afford no prospect
of success. The writers without doors are equally unfortunate with the speakers
within. They retail to the public the vile suggestions, braggadocios, and
(...), transmitted them from Boston, intermingled with their own flummery,
absurdities, and threats. They declare, that the measures of Parliament to
bring back the Boston rebels to their duty are worse than Star Chamber
proceedings, adopted without accusation, or even shadow of evidence. Surely the
flowery agent who hazarded these assertions, imagined that his single anonymous
affirmation would outweigh truth itself. Has not the town of Boston been the
seat of sedition, riot, and robbery, for these ten years? Have not the rebels
there pulled down and plundered houses, expelled the King's Officers, destroyed
a valuable property, and denied the authority of the laws? Yet after all those
villainies and treasons we are told, there is no evidence against them. There is
one thing, however, in which every rational man will agree with Mr. Agent* that
is, that the tea was destroyed by the avowed enemies of the town of Boston; for
no set of men but the faction at Boston, who have always been the avowed
enemies both of their town and country, would have, for these many years back
committed so many cowardly and infamous acts of abuse and oppression. Knaves
and traitors are always enemies to the community in which they reside. It would
have been extremely injudicious in the Governor to have called in either
Military or Naval assistance. If he had been so unwise, the Bostonians would
have had their old excuse, that the behavior of the soldiers and seamen
irritated the inhabitants and brought on the destruction of the Tea, and the
stripping, tarring, feathering, and whipping of the Custom House Officers; for
that till they were called upon by the Governor, the town had been in perfect
peace Formerly they complained that their orderly behavior was disturbed by
the troops, and now they complain that their disorderly conduct was not
prevented by the troops. Faction will always be clamorous, and will utter the
grossest absurdities and contradictions, rather than be silent. The governor
would have been unpardonable, had he required the assistance of the Admiral The
Bostonians in their Town Meeting, in their House of Representatives, and even
in his Majesty's Council, have always publicly declared that the Posse
Comitatus was sufficient to preserve good order and to enforce the laws; the
Governor therefore wisely left the regulation and protection of the Town to the
Posse Comitatus assembled at (...) Hall. There after annulling the Act of
Parliament relative to the Tea, by a vote of their own, in a most unanimous and
respectable manner, they proceeded to destroy the Tea; and then, by way of
celebrating their victory over the Mother Country, they indulged themselves in
the old recreation of tarring, feathering, and whipping the Revenue Officers.
After having committed any mischief, the Bostonians always result to the
miserable subterfuge of protesting their innocence and their peaceable
behavior, and throwing the blame of their own villainy on strangers, Boys,
Negroes, and Mowhawks. Thus after a daring insurrection in the last century,
Darforth, one of the Council, wrote to their Prophet, Dr. Mather, (...) that
the business was acted by soldiers that came armed into Boston from all parts,
to the great astonishment of all beholders Some years ago, when the faction
pulled down and robbed several houses, they published, that the townsmen had
been in perfect, quiet, and that the outrages and robberies had been committed
by strangers, boys, and negroes, to the great amazement of all beholders; and
recently, after having determined the destruction of the Tea in their Town
Meeting, and immediately afterward destroying it, they assured us of their
innocence, and in^i^^ed that the deed was perpetrated by Mohawks, no doubt to
the great amazement of all beholders. Now, notwithstanding all their
hypocritical and lying pretenses, they are, to the joy of every good subject
under the correcting hand of Parliament; and the minister, if he carries into
effectual execution the laws for their present punishment and future restraint,
will be revered as long as England exists.

LETTER XI.
MANY instances have already been given of the oppressive and tyrannical
disposition and actions of the people of Boston and the province of
Massachusetts. Though they fled to America under the pretext of enjoying ^ivil
and religious freedom, yet no sooner were they arrived in that country than we
find them the most intolerant and cruel inquisitors. Antinomians and
A^nabaptists were fined, imprisoned, banished, and their goods confiscated: The
members of the Church of England were treated in the same despotic inhuman
manner. Quakers met with yet more barbarous usage -- they were hanged.

The neighboring Colonies were overawed and taxed by them; and they murdered
the Indians to make way to the possession of their lands Thy denied the
authority of England, because, as they said, they were out of the kingdom; yet
they claimed and exercised sovereign sway over the adjoining Colonies, even
while they confessed these Colonies were out of their jurisdiction. These
multifarious crimes are not the idle suggestions of fancy, but are
authenticated facts, drawn from their own public acts and records.

During the whole course o^ their history i^ is evident that instead of being
governed by the Crown of England, and acting dutifully as subjects, they have
been always governed by a faction among themselves; and that they have
uniformly refused subjection to the supreme legislature of this kingdom. Being
ignorant perhaps, or rather not willing to own, that an Englishman wherever he
goes, always carries his alleigance along with him.

When they discovered a fertile country they immediately took possession of it
without either have or purchase from the Indians; pretending that the Dutch
Counselor Stought^n's letter to the Governor.
would probably seize it i^ the English did not; and that it was too good for
any but friends; intimating by this, that the lands were too good for the Dutch
or Indians, though they were the absolute property of the latter Upon a
discovery of this fort they wrote to Boston that the Providence of God had
guided them to an excellent country. And when they had seized it by force, they
hypocritically declared that it has pleased God further gracioussly to crown
their poor endeavors with success.

Their sentiments with regard to the Indians may be fully comprehended by
reading the following extracts from the opinions of Governor Winthrop, relative
to, and in vindication of some of their wars.

For clearing of this point I desire you seriously to consider an argument or
two. First, He is either a neighbor or no neighbor If he be not a neighbor,
then he is no relation to us by the second Table, and then we may rob, beat, or
kill him, without the breach of any commandment. Nor are we, in this case, to
stand upon the justice of the quarrel. -- Human nature shrinks back with
horror, on the perusal of such diabolical doctrines. Here is the holy Governor,
the Guide, and Shepherd of the Lord's people, logically proving, from the
Decalogue itself, that (...) flock may innocently, and without sin, commit all
forts of Injuries. Villainies, Robberies, and Murders!

Now (says he) for the point of danger. There is no course or voyage undertaken
by us, but may expose the undertakers to peril, and may occasion displeasure
and danger to us from abroad; but such dangers have not hitherto deterred us
from any probable way of our safety or advantage, nor have we sustained any
harm, hitherto, by easting ourselves upon the LORD and his good providence in
such cases. I will remember you of some: When we first set up reformation in
our church way, did not this expose us to as great an hazard as we could run,
both from abroad and at home? Did not our friends in England forewarn us of it,
ere we came away? Did not some amongst ourselves, and those no mean ones,
inculcate our inevitable dangers at home; from no small company left out of
Church Fellowship, and Civil Offices, and Freedom, hitherto? Yet we trusted in
GOD, though there appeared no means of safety, and went on our way, and the
Lord has preserved us, and frustrated all counsels and attempts against us.

Again, when, upon grievous complaints against us to the Lords of the Privy
Council, of such civil innovations amongst us as we could not justify by the
laws of that state, a strict order and command was sent on us to deliver up our
Patent, or else to expect to have it fetched by force. What greater danger
could there be toward us, than appeared in not obeying this command? Yet we
had then courage enough to return an answer, without our patent.

When we undertook a war against the Piquots, which no necessity put us upon,
but only in point of conscience, for they had done us no injury, our friends of
Plymouth complained of it; so did our friends of Connecticut, laying forth the
dangers we had exposed them unto by it, wishing we had forborne to a fitter
season: Yet in due time the Lord's hand appeared in it, to the good of the
whole country, and we felt but little of those great dangers which were justly
to be feared.

Admit we should have stepped aside out of our way, does the favor and
protection of our GOD wholly depend upon our perfect walking?

The above extracts contain a full view of their encroachments, their
knaveries, their hypocrisies, their persecutions, their independent notions,
their detestable injustice to the Indians, and their horrid blasphemies; for
the Supreme Being was always brought in by them as their director and
conductor, even to their most dreadful crimes.

From these confessions of their Governor, under his own hand, we perceive that
they never omitted any probable means of advantage, whether good or bad; that
they called their persecutions of the members of the church of England
reformation; that as early as their first settlement they denied the authority
of the English Legislature; that they acted in opposition to its laws; that
they gloried in their disobedience; that they made such innovations as they
could not justify by the laws of England; that they made wa^ on the peaceable
Indians who had done them no injury, well knowing the superiority of their fire
arms over bows and arrows; and that they crowned all their infamous
transactions, with hypocritically and blasphemously pretending, that
Declaration of the Confederate Colonies of New England, published at Boston,
after the Murder of Miantonimo.
they had an aweful respect to divine rules, endeavoring to walk uprightly and
inoffensively; that they came into these parts of the world with desire to
advance the KINGDOM OF THE LORD JESUS CHRIST; to enjoy his ordinances in peace;
that their Redeemer was the Lord of Hosts, the mighty one in battle; that all
the shields of the earth were in his hands, and that in him they put their
trust.

The rebellious sons are now playing the same game against England, which their
rebellious forefathers did in the last century; but happily at present we have
leisure and vigor enough to correct them. We advance nothing but on the very
best foundation; and to convince the public shall give some extract; from the
instructions of the town of Boston to their representatives, dated May 17, 1770.

No period since the perilous times of our venerable forefathers, has worn a
more gloomy and alarming aspect

The dreadful catastrophe threatens universal havoc, and presents an awful
warning to hazard all.

For many years past we have with sorrow beheld the Approaching Conflict;
various have been the causes that have pressed on this decisive period; and
every thing now conspires to prompt full exertion of our utmost vigilance,
wisdom, and firmness; and as the exigencies of the times require not only the
(...) abilities of true policy, but the more martial virtues conduct, valor
and intrepidity; so Gentlemen, in giving you our suffrages at this election, we
have devolved upon you a most important trust.

We have for a long time beheld with grief and astonishment the unwarrantable
practice of ministerial instructions to the commanders in chief of this
province. It is high time, Gentlemen, for this matter to be searched into and
remedied

It is repugnant to the very first principle of true Government, th^^ a remote
power not only much disconnected, but often different in interest, should
undertake at pleasure to control, nay command, in affairs of the last moment
for the benefit and relief of the people A power three thou and transmarine
miles distant, not only ignorant of our true welfare, but if perchance
discovered, interested to oppose it; not only attempting to oppress but
actually oppressing; -- at will to fix the residence of our Parliament, and
order that Parliament when and how to proceed; again, as it were, sword in hand
to demand our property. These are doctrines and political solecisms which may
take root and spring up under the meridian of modern Rome, but we trust in God
will not flourish in the soil and climate of British America. We therefore
charge you not to grant any supplies to the instruments of Government.

It is now no time to halt between two opinions -- the demands of fraud,
violence, and usurpation are insatiable.

If the Bostonians had not published this bombast treasonable stuff themselves,
and transmitted it to us, we should have been inclined to believe it had been
issued from St. Luke's.

Notwithstanding the frantic publications of the faction, there are many worthy
and loyal subjects in Boston, but the dread of the discipline of tarring and
feathering, and the copious administrations of the treasures of Cloacina upon
their houses, even so as to form a complete blockade, have for some years past
terrified them into a seeming acquiescence with the rebels.

We are; it seems, a "remote power," not only much disconnected but of
different interest, and have neither a right to control nor command them -- no
-- not for their own benefit and relief. His Majesty's instructions to his
Governor are unwarrantable acts. The laws passed by our three estates are the
demands of "fraud, violence and usurpation." And they are determined to hazard
all in the approaching conflict and decisive period. Their ravings and threats
are only the vapourings of arrant cowardice. We know them too well to believe a
syllable of their bravadoes, or of their wisdom, martial virtues, conduct,
valor, or interpidity. In the days of their just chastisment, instead of
putting themselves in battle array, these blustering rebellious knaves will
crowd to Fane^il Hall, and to their Meeting Houses, there, after expressing
their wonder and mortification, that the King and Parliament should treat such
dutiful subjects with such unexampled rigor, they will modestly vote
themselves innocent of the charges brought against them; they will remit their
cause to the Lord, to preserve themselves from danger, and will lovingly
consign over the whole island of Great Britain to the Devil and (...) Angels.

LETTER XII.
THERE is a good sense and candor inherent in human nature when not b^assed by
prejudices. Superior to all other nations these endowments prevail in the minds
of Englishmen. In a question debated before the tribunal of the public, it is
only necessary to ground it on the principles of common sense and of law, and
they immediately are masters of it; for common sense and the law of the kingdom
are nearly allied. It must however be allowed that the fully arguments of
vanity and self-interest very often betray us into a temporary opposition to
our own welfare. Insidious deceivers hang out to us false notions of our
rights, at the very time they are robbing us of our long-boasted privileges.
The hireling, of faction thunder out against us delusive threats, that they may
more readily lead us into measures destructive to our real interest. The good
of the state is their bane: they can only live in troubled waters; and
therefore when hunger presses, they endeavor to instill into us fears formed in
their Garret Manufactory. We are; it seems, to be ruined if we punish the
outrageous Bostonians for (...) repeated rebellions. England is to be undone if
she presumes to introduce order and government into the Province of
Massachusetts: Surely no Englishman in his senses can be swayed with such empty
menaces. The housebreaker and the murderer, when punishment is awarded, might
as well threaten us with the downfall of our constitution, and upon as good
grounds, as the traitorous Bostonians and their agents. Individuals
corporations, and Colonies, are all equally amenable to the laws; and when any
of them endanger the welfare of the state, they are not only liable to, but
deserving of, punishment. It would be considered as a very extrardinary defense
at the Old Bailey, if a culprit on trial there, for breaking open Mr. Sheriff's
house on Tower Hill, should declare that as he had never given his consent to
the laws against Burglary, either by himself in person, or by a representative
of his own choice, that therefore he could not be legally condemned.
Notwithstanding this Bostonian defense, he would certainly he brought in
guilty; and in spite of all his clamours for a vote in the choice of
representatives for the City of London, I fancy that the most patriotic
gentlemen of the London Tavern would not endeavor to rescue him from
undergoing the punishment of his crimes (...) Tyburn.

This is only designed as a preparatory hint to those gentlemen who are such
warm advocates in defense of the rebellion at Boston. Their future fate depends
on their future good behavior. For no reasonable man surely would wish to
animadvertion, or to expose, these persons, who are sensible of the delinquency
of their Constituents: (...) if certain persons are in a proper state of mind,
it would be best proved by their silence.

And now for the venerable forefathers of the loyal Saints of Boston.

The tyranny, iniquities, and rebellious conduct of the venerable patriarchs of
New England, as well as of their hopeful progeny, the present Bostonians, have
already been strongly elucidated. From their own public declarations we have
seen, that to serve their own plundering inhuman purposes they brought the
sacred Commandments of the Almighty to authorize their depradations and
cruelties toward the poor Indians. They first proved, to their own
satisfaction, that the Indians were not their neighbors; and then they
proceeded to "rob and kill them," as opportunity offered.

When the minds of these venerable miscreants were loaded with such a weight of
oppressive guilt, it is not to be supposed they would boggle at trivial crimes.
Their continued tyrannic exertions, exercised in an inferior degree, served to
alleviate and deaden the recollection of their more dreadful barbarities.
Constant action was absolutely necessary in order to stem the incessant tide of
heartrending reflection. Their unjustifiable oppressions of those who followed
the rites of the English Church were therefore to them a relief from care, and
served as a mere pastime.

In 1646, several persons of note, members of the Church of England, presented
a petition to the General Court at Boston, complaining That the fundamental
laws of England were not owned by the Colony as the basis of the Government;
that they were denied the enjoyment of their religious privileges; that they
were debarred from all civil employments, without any just cause, not being
permitted to hear the least office, though it could not be denied they were
well qualified; that they had not even a vote in choosing magistrates, o^ other
civil or military Officers, notwithstanding they had expended their youth,
borne the burden of the day, wasted much of their estates for the subsistence
of these poor plantations, paid all assessments, rates, taxes, at least equal,
if not exceeding others; yea, when the war was denounced against the
Narrowgan^et Indians, without their consent, their goods were seized on far the
service, themselves and servants, especially, forced and impressed to serve in
the war, to the hazarding of all things most dear and near unto them: That
therefore they desire that civil liberty and freedom be forthwith granted to
all Englishmen, without imposing any oaths or covenants on them, which could
not be warranted by the Letters Patent, and which seemed not to concur with the
Oath of Allegiance imposed by Parliament, or, at least, detracted from their
native country and laws, which were styled foreign, and this place termed
rather a free state, than a Colony or corporation of England. We at least
entreat, that the bodies of us and ours may not be impressed, nor our goods
forcibly taken away. Further, that none of the English nation be banished,
unless they break the laws of England.

Under such circumstances of oppression as the petitioners labored, surely
their grievances could not be more mildly expressed, or more rationally
enforced: They claimed only the legal privileges which all good subjects ought
to enjoy, whilst they act in obedience to the laws -- personal safety, security
of property, and liberty of conscience. All these are undoubted privileges of
every Englishman residing in any part of his Majesty's dominions. The
persecuting independents of Massachusetts, however, entertained far different
opinions But it is candid to allow them a fair hearing, and they shall speak
for themselves.

The General Court of the Massachusetts, sitting at Boston, issued the following
declaration, in answer to the above receited petition.

In this petition, which is the first of the sort that we have received, and,
as we conceive, without precedent in this COMMONWEALTH we first observed, It
were a dreadful, daring presumption, if the blessed name of the Most High God
(whose honor is so often avouched to be their alm in this design) should be
made to serve so corrupt a project; and we put them in mind, how dangerous it
is to engage the great name of the Almighty to advance their corrupt and
uncharitable designs, It is not safe to dally with things sacred. Our polity
and fundamentals are framed according to the laws of England, and according to
the Charter; so that the petitioners, if they have not cast off all modesty,
must needs be ashamed of their complaint: If they cannot charge us with any
thing morally evil, they are impudent slanderers. But let us pull off their
mask: -- Some have lived in Virginia, and other plantations, where the
Government has not been so easy to them as here; others have lived in KENT,
under the laws of Gavelkind, more repugnant to the common laws of England than
any of ours; others have had to do in Maritime affairs; others in causes of
Testamentry, and Matrimonial; others in chancery, and others in London and
other corporations: One is a Doctor, a Batchalor, and ^only a Sojourner; a
second, a Church Member, but no Freeman; a third, a Freeman, but no Church
Member; a fourth, a Clerk in the Prothonotaries Office; a fifth, a young
merchant little acquainted with Commonwealth affairs; a sixth was taken up by
accident; a seventh is an old London Grocer. If this be their head, sure they
have an unsavory head, not seasoned with much salt. -- Another matter which
troubles them is, that they are compelled, under a severe fine, every Lord's
day to appear at the Congregation. The law which they account severe is this:
Any two assistants may fine or imprison such persons, inhabiting here, as shall
usually absent themselves from church meetings upon the Lord's day, so as the
fine exceed not five shillings for one offense. In their conclusion, these
remonstrants prognosticate what peace and fel^city we may certainly expect,
both in church and commonwealth, if their petitions be granted, viz. That every
man be left to his own liberty. From such peace, unity, and prosperity, the
Lord deliver us and all the seed of Israel, to the coming of Christ Jesus! Amen.

Signed, by Order of the General Court, ISAAC NOWELL.

The above declarations of the Great and General Court of the Massachusetts
conveened at Boston is, at once, ridiculous, laughable, and detestible. The
Petition, they say, was the first of the sort, and of consequence without
precedent. It was also a daring presumption in those who believed and practiced
the mode of worship according to the English Churches, to beg leave to praise
God according to their own consciences! -- Nay, it was an uncharitable,
corrupt, and dangerous project That it was dangerous, indeed, the poor Church
of Englandmen soon severely felt. The Rebels of Massachusetts impudently
declared, that their constitution was framed according to the laws of England,
at the very moment they refused the Petitioners leave to worship God after the
manner of the Church of England. And what was still more arbitrary, the
Episcopalians were fined every Sunday five shillings if they did not attend the
Bostonian independent meeting houses, to hear their own church government and
religious principles reviled in the grossest terms of abuse. The Petitioners in
the General Court declaration are called impudent slanderers, because they
could not charge the professing Saints with any thing morally evil: Yet it is
plain the Petitioners had charged them with vile imoralities, for one part if
the reply of the Godly Bostonians is as follows:

And for that shameful disease they mention, we may see how ready they are to
publish any thing to our disgrace. They might have covered this blemish, being
the first of this kind we have known in this country, and no guilt thereof
lying upon the government, or upon the country that we can find. There came,
indeed, the last year out of England a lewd person infected with this disease,
who stayed not long with us, but since his departure some others have been
infected, but by what means we cannot find. -- But this was more observeable
wherein the Remonstrants might have seen the good hand of the Lord toward us,
that a stranger coming into the country at that time, who had a special skill
in that malady, through the blessing of God soon cured them.

Signed, by Order of the General Court, ISAAC NOWELL.


Here we find the General Court vindicating the Government (which indeed was
not charged) from any suspicion of its being affected with the foul disease
alluded to. They confess, however, that a lewd person from England had been
admitted amongst them; and that even after he had departed, several of them had
been infected, they could not tell how. But still keeping up their blasphemous
hypocrisy, they bless the Lord for sending into their unpolluted land, a
skilful stranger who speedily cured all the seed of Israel.

But it is time to animadvert upon the other parts of the General Court
declaration.

It seems that some of the Petitioners having resided formerly in Virginia, in
Kent, and in London; their being concerned in maritime affairs, in
testamentary, matremonial and Chancery cases, were sufficient reasons for the
Pharisaical Bostonians refusing them civil and religious liberty. Any tittle,
circumstance, or situation in life appears to have been urged at a solid reason
against the Petitioners. Protection, safety, and tolera^ion, were denied them,
because they were Doctors, Batchelors, Sojourners. One was rejected because he
was one of their own Church Members, another because he was a Freeman, others
as they were Clerks, or Merchants; and amidst the multitude of their wi^e valid
reasonings, innocent old age was to be persecuted only because the Petitioner
was an old London Grocer.

After the Great and General Court had sent abroad the above learned Manifesto,
they summoned the Petitioners before them. The charge against them was
contemptuous and seditious expressions. In vain they urged their right to
Petition; in vain they claimed an appeal to the Courts in England: they were
all severely fined. And besides this punishment, the Reverend New England
Saints, headed by Prophet Cotton, thundered out damnation against them from all
the pulpits throughout the Holy Land.

Many of the Petitioners resenting the severity of their persecution and
punishment, resolved to go home and complain of the Lord's people. But these
Pharasees entreated the Lord to confound them, and he heard their prayers; for
their persons were apprehended, their houses plundered, and their papers
seized: So that through the Lord's gracious assistance, the evil designs of
Satan and his emissaries were disappointed, and the dear Saints of God
triumphed.

HINTS TO A YOUNG POLITICIAN.
THE political scriblers who range themselves on the side of England in
opposition to the loyal town of Boston, are the dullest wretches nature ever
produced; they are such fools as to believe positive facts, in contradiction to
the positive falsehoods daily retailed by the Bostonian Agents; they are so weak
as to think that the Boston people have actually destroyed Tea to the value of
15,000 l. merely because the Governor of the Massachusetts, and the Admiral
commanding there, have affirmed it in their letters to the Secretary of State,
Now these fellows must be altogether devoid of true genuine patriotism, who
give credit to any thing advanced by the servants of Government. Your only men
to (...) trusted are those honest men who beseech you not to be led ^astray by
the evidence of your own senses, but to be led by the (...) by themselves, just
wherever they please. Infinite advantages will acrue to you, if you are once
possessed of this sort of political faith; you have no occasion either to think
or to reason; the Boston Agents will save you that trouble; they will give you
a Creed; they will furnish you with their arguments: When the New-Englanders
burn his Majestys ships, refuse to pay their debts, imprison their creditors,
pull down the houses of the King's Officers, and commit acts of piracy, they
will teach you to refute them all at once, by a simple negative; or, if you
choose to be eloquent, you must declare that all the truths brought against the
Boston Saints are misrepresentations, lies, and illiberal abuse. Let ever so
many cogent proofs be brought against you, never keep silence, never forget
those few magical words, for they will have a wonderful effect on every person
that is as ignorant as yourself. The more ignorant you are, you will of course
be the more obstinate; for ignorance is the mother of obstinacy. If you choose
to be industrious, and to make converts, you must never strive to elucidate
your cause, but to puzzle your antagonist: For example; if the province of
Massachusetts are rebellious, you must declare they have a right to be so,
because they are oppressed with taxes, and because the King has granted them a
Charter. Should it be replied, that there is no exemption from taxation in
their Charter, you must then say their Charter implies it; although it should
be an untruth; for perhaps your opponent has never seen the Charter, and then
he cannot contradict you. But i^ he should be too knowing even in this, you may
assert any other absurdity. Absurdities are innumerable. -- The King has given
a Charter, and he cannot take it away. Nay, he is only one of the three
Estates, and yet not all three can abrogate a Charter granted by one of them.
The Charter is an excuse for rebellion, it is a shield, against punishment.
Though it is true, that it is given the subject to limit him to do nothing
repugnant to the laws of England, yet you are to insist that it absolutely
gives him a power to throw off his allegiance to England. In short you can
never want something to say as long as you can speak; and there is another
happiness in this world, that every where there are fools, some of whom will
believe what you say merely because they do not understand you. To be
incessantly loquacious is therefore a great chance in your favor. If you
cannot reason, at least you can bawl: thunder out the captivating words,
"Oppression," "Slavery," "Liberty," and "Polital Constitution." If you should
be asked what constitutes the political constitution of the Massachusetts?
answer; their Charter, which authorizes the Bostonians to be guilty of all
sorts of injuries, perjuries, and treasons. Let them tell you that no Charter
or political constitution can vindicate crimes -- never mind that -- ^oar out
that the loyal Bostonians are oppressed. If it is proved, that they are not the
oppressed, but the oppressors, deny it; and alternately ring the changes on the
words "loyal Subjects," "Godly Subjects," "intolerable grievances," "illegal
impositions," and "tyrannic Government," and many fools, and many knaves will
join in the cry; as opportunity offers you may confederate with the latter to
cheat the former, but be sure all the while yon are pillaging and betraying
them, hypocritically to cry out; like a true Bostonian -- The Lord rebuke Satan.

LETTER XIII.
PEOPLE possessed of generosity and candor, though the most easily misled,
though (...) often sacrifice their own internal feelings to the artful
insinuations of bad men, yet they are not to be deceived for a length of time.
The rectitude of their hearts soon revolts at the u^due measures of their
seducers; and after many uneasy doubts and struggles, and many close
examinations and scrut^^ies into the pretended virtue and patriotism of their
false bosom friends, they vigorously assert their own right of judgment, and
most asiduously oppose those very men, whom, at first, they so warmly
supported, This is the real private and public character Englishmen.

The unanimity, therefore of the public, relative to the measures pursued by
Parliament, for the indemnification of the India Company, and for the
regulation and preservation of the province of Massachuse^s, is far from
surprising; it is natural, and from the beginning of the business, was
reasonably to be expected. The people of Boston themselves have pressed upon us
full and repeated proofs of their dangerous commotions, insurrections, and
unjustifiable acts. They have even forced conviction upon those, who were most
unwilling to believe any thing to their prejudice -- their best friends.

Granting compensation for the tea destroyed is but a matter of justice to the
India Company; blocking up the port of Boston till the inhabitants say they are
peaceable and return to their duty, is a just, but a temporary expedient. The
constitution of their internal government must be altered, that the people
hereafter may be restrained within the due bounds of law; for all liberty
without the circle of the law, is licentiousness.

To accomplish the great purpose of restoring the laws to their primitive
vigor and operation, the Charter of the Massachusetts must be annihilated. It
is constructed on principles much too democratic, and subversive of all peace,
good order, and government; it is held forth to us by the Bostonian rioters not
only as their warrant for the commission of all sorts of criminal violence, but
also as their shelter and defense against just chastisement.

This Charter, upon which so many flagrant riots and insurrections have been
grounded and vindicated, should surely undergo proper revision and alteration.
The Governor by this Charter, considered as distinct from the Council, has ^o
power. The Council consists of twenty eight members, annually chosen by the
House of Representatives; without the advice and consent of seven Counselors
the Governor cannot act. To the appointment of Judges, Commissioners of Oyer
and Terminer, Sheriffs, Provost Marshlls, Justices of the Peace, and other
Officers belonging to the Council and Courts of Justice, the Governor must have
the voice of seven Counselors: now, though these Counselors to his Majesty's
Governor are sworn to the due and faithful performance of the duties of their
office, yet as they are annually chosen by the people, on every emergency they
act rather as Counselors of the mob, than as supporters of law and government.
The choice of the Council ought therefore most certainly to be solely vested in
the crown, as it is in most of the other provinces

Another necessary regulation is the abolishing of Town Meetings: the herd of
Fools and Knaves collected together in Faneuil Hall, we have been convinced are
capable of the most rebellious resolutions; they have shown the will, but
happily they wanted the power actually to revolt. They should only be
authorized once a year to meet to choose their Town Officers; this is sufficient
employment for the rabble that muster in the Town Hall at Boston, and is in
fact their only proper business when assembled there; but the smugglers among
themselves, and the desperadoes of faction here, have taught them to repeal
acts of our supreme legislature. Indeed the Boston Town Meeting has only been
the tool of the learned Agent, who is himself the tool of the infatuated
repealers of the Stamp Act.

The Town Meeting at Boston is the (...) of sedition. It is there that all
their dangerous insurrections are engendered; it is there that the flame of
discord and rebellion was first lighted up and disseminated over all the
provinces; it is therefore greatly to be wished that Parliament may rescue the
loyal inhabitants of that town and Province from the merciless hand of an
ignorant mob, led on and inflamed by self-interested and profligate men.

As the Town Meetings are only frequented by the smugglers and the seditious,
it may easily be conjectured what sort of men are chosen to serve on juries.
The Town Meeting at present possesses the power of electing Jurors. The most
factious, abandoned, and shameless are therefore always presented to this
Office, so that they often fit on the grand Jury, to examine evidences against
themselves, and on the petit Jury, to try their own misdemeanors and crimes.
The issue of the trial cannot be doubted. There is no such thing as publishing
an adherent of the faction. It would be wonderful indeed if a knave and
plunderer was to give a verdict against himself.

About seven years ago, one of the present representatives of the Town of
Boston, and also one of their select men, and the idol of the faction, thought
proper to exercise the Bostoman liberty of running a cargo of Madeira wine.
This breach of the laws was carried on in the most open audacious manner. Two
Custom House Officers on board the vessel were put (...) confinement. The
Representative and Magistrate himself was present, and caroused with his party
till this exertion of general freedom was accomplished; next day the vessel was
seized; but the faction mustered their raggamuffins, attacked the Custom House
Officers, knocked down with brickbats and bludgeons the Collector and his Son,
the Comptroller and Inspector. The first, an elderly, venerable gentleman, has
not to this day recovered their barbarons treatment.

As this assault and riot was committed in open day, the persons concerned were
well known; it was resolved to prosecute them in law: but the faction
effectually put a stop to this intention; at Town Meeting they chose the
Rioters themselves Grand Jurymen: the prosecutions were withdrawn of course,
for it would have been ridiculous to have expended time and money in a cause
where the delinquents were to be their own Judges.

The Jurors ought to be appointed by the Sheriff.

Can peace, obedience to the laws, and loyalty be expected amongst people under
such an absurd injudicious constitution of government? where criminals are
placed by their guilty companions on the seat of judgment in order to acquit
themselves; where his Majesty's Counselors are chosen by the people, and
unrestrained even by the solemnity of their oaths, always vote in direct
opposition to his authority and to the authority of the laws Similar would be
the absurdity if our House of Commons were annually to elect our House of
Peers. The Upper House depending on the Lower House for its political
existence, would instantly lose all its dignity, weight, impartiality and
independence. Thus his Majesty's Counselors in the Province of Massachusetts,
are only the despicable and willing tools of the factious independents and
smugglers.

For all these reasons, and that good order and government may be established
in that long distracted Provinces, their Town Meetings should be abolished,
their Juries should be chosen by the Sheriffs, his Majesty's Counselors by
himself, and their present foolish inconsistent Charter, which will reflect
indelible disgrace on them who penned and passed it, should be cancelled,
vacated, and anihilated, and another granted them more conformable to the
constitution of England.

LETTER XIV.
FACTIOUS men engaged in a political contest, when the weakness and absurdity
of their claims and arguments are refuted and exposed, generally resort to
clamor and falsehood to support and prop their dying cause. Never was a truth
of this kind so strongly examplified as in the present dispute betwixt the
English nation and the dirty Mechanics and Smugglers of Boston. The adherents
of the Boston rabble, with the most intrepid effrontery declare that perfect
harmony between Great Britain and the Colonies continued until it wad
disturbed by the errors and innovations of his present Majesty's Ministers. If
to deny the authority of the King and Parliament of this kingdom, and to
banish, plunder, and murder English subjects, merely because they were old
London Grocers and citizens of London, and because they acknowledged alleigance
to the Mother Country, is a proof of perfect harmony, these modest consistent
hirelings are in the right. That such were the atrocious practices of the
venerable forefathers of the present Bostonians have been proved from the
public acts of their Great and General Court. What idea then must we form of
that man who within these few weeks asserted, in the face of Majesty, that
perfect harmony always subsisted between Britain and her Colonies, until the
innovations of his present Majesty's Ministers. Some people gradually fink to a
degree of depravity, which on serious reflection must even strike themselves
with abhorrence. What sort of harmony subsisted between the Province of
Massachusetts and England in the year 1722, may be seen from the following
letter written by Mr. Dummer their Agent, containing the sentiments of Lord
Carteret respecting the conduct of the General Court assembled at Boston.

STATE PAPER.
March 10, 1722. Sir,
I have something to communicate from my Lord Carteret, who is one of his
Majesty's principal Secretaries of State, and (...) the care of the Plantations
within his Province; I beg ^eave therefore to acquaint the General Court by
you, that I waited on the Minister to engage his good offices in behalf of our
Charter, against which I had sufficient reasons to believe some designs were
forming, and that his Lordship having first assured me, that there would be no
proceedings against us for the present, and that in general neither the King
nor any of his Ministers had any inclination to violate our privileges; I say,
having given me these assurances, he the^^ desired me to write to the Assembly,
that they would so behave themselves for the future, as not to provoke the
Government to bring the matter of their Charter before the Parliament; for if
they did, he said, that it was his opinion it would be dissolved without
opposition.

His Lordship was pleased to give me for an example a^ instance of what had
lately happened in relation to the right of judicature claimed by the House of
Lords in Ireland, which they had long been possessed of, without admitting any
appeal from their decrees to the House of Lords here; but upon some offense,
which they had lately given, a Bill was brought into the House to annul that
right. It was entitled, A Bill for the better securing the dependence of
Ireland on the Crown of Great Britain, and it passed without a division: This
his Lordship said would be our fate on a like occasion.

I told his Lordship that his Majesty's subjects in New England were a virtuous
industrious people, and universally loyal. His Lordship answered in a very
obliging manner. That he really believed we were in the main that good people I
had represented, but then made this advantage of it, that it was the more
grievous to the government here to receive ill treatment from those who were in
other respect so dutiful and loyal to his Majesty.

I prayed his Lordship to instance in what we had offended, and was answered,

That we denied the right of the Crown to the woods.

That we invaded the prerogative in refusing the Governor's negative power,
though settled and vested in him by Charter.

That by several votes and resolutions of the Lower House, printed in their
Journals, we showed an inclination to be independent of administration here.

That we treated the King's commands as waste paper, particularly in not
settling a proper salary on our Governors, which the rest of the King's
Provinces had done, and which had been often and earnestly recommended to us by
the Crown.

And to these things his Lordship added, that we treated Colonel Shute the
King's Representative, with great contempt, notwithstanding we could not
reasonably expect a better Governor, unless we intended to nominate one
ourselves.

These were the matters which his Lordship chiefly insisted upon:

To all which I made the best answers I am able; especially as to the two
articles of the right of the woods and the negative power; in both which I
always thought, and do still think, that the Assembly may be justified. Yet I
hope I shall be pardoned, if I say, from the long experience I have had in your
affairs, that when we are never so much in the right, it is our true interest
to defend that right with modesty, and conduct it with prudence.

For a conclusion, his Lordship was pleased to say, if I was able to acquit the
Assembly of any evil intentions and wilful faults, yet they were at least
chargeable with great imprudences.

And he then desired me again to recommend to them, for their own sakes, a more
discreet conduct.

(Signed) DUMMER, A^^^T.
(AUTHENTIC EXTRACT)

After the perusal of the many flagrant enormities and crimes committed by the
provincial assembly of the Massachusetts, and of the above authentic extract,
will any candid and honest man say, that these people have always been dutiful
and loyal? If the question was put to the father of the lies himself, he would
hesitate and blush amidst his infernal horrors, before he answered it in the
affirmative.

Their Agent, thought it was evidently his interest to excuse his constituents,
in every point, of their bad conduct, totally gives them up with regard to
their bad usage of their Governor, their not appointing him an adequate salary,
their treating his Majesty's commands as waste paper, and their votes and
resolutions of Independency.

Concerning the Negative power, and the right of the King to the woods, which
Mr. Agent declared the assembly might be justified in denying, no doubt, in
order to preserve their favor, the best answer that can be given will be to
quote the Charter itself.

And we do, by these presents, for us, our heirs and successors, establish and
ordain, That in the framing and passing all such Orders, Laws, Statutes and
Ordinances, and Elections and Acts of Government whatsoever, to be passed, made
or done by the said General Court, or assembly, or council, the Governor of our
said province or territory of the Massachusets-Bay, in New England, for, the
time being, shall have the negative voice; and that without his consent or
approbation, signified or declared in Writing, no such Orders, Laws, Statutes,
or Ordinances, or Elections, or other Acts of Government whatsoever, so to be
made, passed or done by the said General Assembly, or in Council, shall be of
any force, effect, or validity.

The clause relative to the woods shall now be given.

And lastly, for the better providing and furnishing of Masts for our Royal
Navy, we do hereby reserve to Us, our Heirs, and Successors, all Trees of the
diameter of twenty-four inches, and upwards of twelve inches from the ground,
growing upon any soil or tract of land within our said province or territory.

After reading these two extracts from the Charter, the most artful son of
Loyola would find it an insuperable (...), to convince us that the Governor had
no right to the Negative Power, and the King no right to the woods.

The above letter, and some other wholesome advice sent the Great and General
Court, so exceedingly displeased them, that the House of Assembly dismissed Mr.
Dummer, without paying several years salary which they owed him; and,
notwithstanding he published a pamphlet in defense of their Charter, on purpose
to ingratiate himself into their good graces, all the compensation he had was a
vote of their House, declaring that it was not for the interest of the province
to continue him their Agent.

Whenever the Agents of the Bostonians fail in procuring the submission of
England to their mad seditious claims, they are all discarded as unskilful, and
unfaithful negotiators. The dear Saints of God, along with their virtue,
loyalty and righteousness, possess an infinite share of low cunning: They are
for the most part in arrears to their Agents, and, therefore, the charges they
bring against them of inability and per^idy, serve as a sufficient reason for
withholding their salaries. It is, however, shrewdly suspected, that some of
their Agents now thoroughly understand their deceitful characters; and
endeavor by weighty packets of flattery, misrepresentation and falsehood, to
open the hearts and purses of the Lord's people. What their success will be,
time only can determine; but from the hungry growlings and grumblings in the
Newspapers, one would be apt to imagine, that the holy men of Boston had
forgot to make remittances. However, the worthy Agents may be assured, that if
the virtuous and godly Bostonians should after all their labor* neglect their
temporal welfare, that they will be more ardent with regard to their spiritual,
for they will certainly at least nobly pay them, as they have done many of
their former Agents, by fervently praying that they may be gloriously rewarded
by the God of New England.

LETTER XV.
TO be reduced to the miserable necessity of combating known and established
facts, is of all situations the most distressing; yet such is the voluntary
unhappy condition of the defenders and agents of the rebellious Bostonians. The
promised and expected pay of their traitorous employers wholly depends upon
their vigorous efforts here; and what case can be more humiliating and
deplorable than that of these men whose interest and party engage them to
support a cause in direct contradiction to their own reason and feeling! not
possessed of honesty and spirit sufficient to decline the infamous task, they
continue to labor and to drudge in the fruitless and shameful defense of their
treacherous and perfidious associates and constituents. Virtuous humanity must
pity, and rigid honor spurn at such deep depravity. The Bostonian writers in
the Newspapers, and the Bostonian Speechifiers in Parliament may be both
justly included in the above description.

Leaving then the public to the recollection of the enormities and barbarities
already laid before them, committed by the holy men of the Province of
Massachusetts, it shall be the present business to examine the conduct of these
pretended loyal subjects, respecting their allegiance to the Crown of England.

During the administration of that enlightened statesman, Lord Carteret, we
find that his Majesty's subjects in New England were as virtuous and
universally loyal as they are at present.

They denied the right of the Crown to the woods, though that right was
expressly reserved to the Crown by the Charter.

They invaded the prerogative of the King in refusing the Governors negative
power to Laws, Statutes, and Acts of Government, made or done by the Council or
Assembly, though settled and vested in him by the Charter.

They voted and resolved themselves to be a people Independent on England,
though they were English subjects, settled in a country discovered by an
Englishman, and appertaining to the Crown of England.

They treated the King's commands as West Paper.

They would not settle a proper salary on their Governors, though it had been
often and earnestly recommended to them by the Crown.

They at that time treated Colonel Shute, the King's representative, with great
contempt, as they have ever since done all their Governors, because they were
not nominated by themselves.

And when their Agent was called upon and examined relative to their
treasonable intentions, votes, and actions, without entering into a particular
vindication of their crimes, he, like their present Agents, made, to use his
own words, "the best excuse he was able," by confidently asserting that they
were a virtuous people, and universally loyal. And this vague, general, false
assertion, was by them always deemed a sufficient apology for all their
rebellious acts.

When the virtuous and universally loyal Saints of Massachusetts made the above
daring encroachments on the prerogative of the Crown, and manifested their
designs to throw off their allegiance, Colonel Shute was their Governor; and if
any Governor sent from this country could have pleased them; he certainly would
have been the man. He and his family were dissenters; he had served under King
William and the Duke of Malborough, and had been wounded in one of the
principal battles in Flanders; he was universally esteemed amongst his
acquaintance, and at Court, and like a true English soldier, was open, and
generous, humane; and a friend to liberty. But all his good qualities had no
effect on the hypocritical traitors of Boston.

At this time these loyal subjects made another flagrant attack on the rights
of the Crown. The House of Representatives directed the Governor to give orders
to all the During this time they were at war with the Indians.
officers in command to pay proper deference and obedience to the votes and
orders of the House concerning the regulation and management of the forces.
This authoritative usurpation the Governor justly excepted against, and made it
a charge against the House to the King.

The malignity and villainy of the professing Saints will be clearly discovered
by the following fact. As they could not bend the Governor to their purposes
they were determined to murder him. As he sat in one of the chambers of his
house, the window and door of a closet being open, a bullet entered through the
window and door passages, and passed very near him. This was called by the
righteous an accident. But the truth is, that it was a designed villainy to
prevent him from going home to represent their usurpations and treasons.
Immediately after this horrid attempt he embarked secretly, and, on his arrival
in England exhibited the following articles of complaint against the House of
Representatives for encroaching on his Majesty's prerogative.

Their denying the right of the Crown to the trees reserved for masts for the
Royal Navy though expressly mentioned in their Charter.

Refusing to admit the Governor's negative upon their choice of a speaker.

Assuming power to appoint days of fasting and thanksgiving.

Adjourning themselves to a distant day by their own act.

Dismantling forts, and directing artillery and warlike stores to other than
the custody of the Captain General, or his order, and usurping the command of
the forces, the sole right of the Governor as representative of the King.

Suspending military Officers, and refusing their pay.

Appointing Committes of their own to direct and muster his Majesty's forces.

Their then house (like many of their late houses of representatives, who have
assumed the liberty of repealing acts of Parliament) voted the above complaint
groundless, though substantially proved from their own public votes (...)
resolutions; and ordered the amazing sum of one hundred pounds sterling to be
remitted to their Agent, to enable him to varnish over the rebellious
proceedings of the house, and to excuse them as well as he was able.

Mr. Cook, who had been the principal adviser, and at the head of all the
measures complained of in the above memorial, was assigned the very difficult
task of defending his traitorous confederates. His notorious abilities, and the
one hundred pounds, were, by the House of Representatives, supposed fully
adequate to the accomplishment of this grand point.

The light in which his Majesty's Ministers viewed Mr. Cook and the traitors
of Massachusetts, will be evidently seen by the perusal of the following:

AUTHENTIC STATE PAPER. An interesting conference, held between the Lord
President of his Majesty's Council, the Right Hon. Lord Townshend, Secretary of
State, and Elisha Cook, Esquire, Agent for the Province of Massachusetts.
Friday, April 30, 1725.
REPORTS and several papers relating to the Colonies having been read to the
Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council in private, Mr. Cook was sent for in, to
show a reason why a representation might not be made of the whole affair to the
King?

Mr. Cook. The Report of the Attorney and Solicitor General is drawn up by men
of learning; and, as I do not pretend to express myself in a suitable manner
before such great men, I hope your Lorships will allow me to make use of
learned Counsel to defend the Province.

Lord President of the Privy Council. Had you not Counsel allowed you, when
your matters were heard before the Attorney and Solicitor General?

Mr. Cook. Yes, my Lord; but I hope to make it appear that Mr. Attorney and
Solicitor General have made some mistakes in their report, if your Lordship
will allow me to be heard by Counsel.

Lord President of the Privy Council. Have you any thing new to offer, which
has not been offered to the Attorney and Solicitor General?

Mr. Cook. Yes, I have something to say about a certificate from the Secretary
of the Province, sworn to by one Mr. Armstrong, concerning Governor Shute's
ordering the Committee to be paid for mustering the forces.

Lord Townshend, Secretary of State. Hark you, Mr. Cook! I speak to you now as
a friend. If you insist on being heard by Counsel, no doubt the Lords will hear
you; but then I advise you to think well of it before you ask it, for I cannot
answer where it may end. The expense and trouble you will bring on yourself
will not be little, especially if it come into Parliament; and you will play a
very bad game, if, seeking to be Solemnly heard, you have nothing but trifles
to offer in excuse of a Province that has invaded the King's prerogative in
every article of Government, both Civil and Military.

You have taken upon you to demolish forts, to march armies, to muster troops,
and to disband them when you please, without any regard to the King's authority.

Depend upon it you will find yourself mistaken, if you think a certificate
about one single circumstance will excuse all your undutifulness to the Crown.

Mr. Cook I hope, my Lord, it will appear that the people of New England are
as loyal as any of his Majesty's subject,!

Lord Townshend. How does that appear, when you are every day affronting the
King in his governor, and treating the orders of the Government, from hence,
with contempt?

As to Colonel Shute he is out of the case: You have brought things to that
pass that the question now is, who is King of New England? Whether the King, or
your house of representatives?

Mr. Cook. Sir, I hope we have no such inclination as your Lordship supposes.

Lord Townshand. Why all that you have said in your justification, so far as
appears in the papers now read to the Lords, makes against you.

How do you excuse the province as to the things laid to your charge? You bring
Precedents to show that they have done the same things in twenty instances
before, some of which are more criminal than the things complained of. This is
a very odd way of justifying the conduct of your representatives; and depend
upon it the blame will fall very heavy somewhere, if you have nothing to offer
but trifles in your vindication.

As I said before, if you insist on being heard, no doubt the Lords will grant
it; but assure yourself, you will play a very bold game to urge being heard
without something very material to say in the justification of the province.

Mr. Cook. My Lords, if we have made any mistakes, or taken any wrong steps, I
hope it will be imputed to the construction we thought we had reason to put
upon the Charter.

Lord Townshend. As to your Charter you have forfeited every article of it over
and over. There is not one article that you have not broke through, whenever it
stood in the way of carrying on your encroachments on the King's prerogative.

Pray, Mr. Cook, let me ask you, are you that Elisha Cook so often mentioned
in the papers read to the Lords?

Mr. Cook. Yes, my Lord, I am.

Lord Townshend. Why then you have had a notable (...) in what has passed in
New England, and can answer the Lords one question: Pray what is your opinion:
do you think the Governor has a power to negative the Speaker of your House of
Representatives?

Mr. Cook. Yes, my Lord, I believe the Governor has power to negative a
Speaker.

Lord Townshend. Well, and what security or assurances can you give to the
Government, supposing the Lords should be disposed to recommend the people of
New England to the King's favor; what assurances can you give that your House
of Representatives will not dispute the King's authority in this or any other
point?

Mr. Cook My Lord, I have no power to give any assurances of that nature.

Lord Townshend. "Pray what power have you?

Mr. Cook. "My Lord, I am only Agent.

Duke of Newcastle Are you not one of the House of Representatives there?

Mr. Cook. "No, my Lord.

( Upon a signal given by the Lord President.)

Clerk of the Council. "Gentlemen, withdraw"

After a few minutes Mr Cook being sent for again, desired four or five days
to consider of what their Lordships had said to him. Upon which they gave him
till Tuesday next.

Mr Cook afterward on mature consideration, thought proper to withdraw his
Petition.

The encroachments and usurpations upon the King's prerogative are so fully and
explicitly stated in the preceding conference, that to give any observations or
reasoning upon it, would be mere matter of repitition. We still find the people
of Massachusetts amidst all their crimes and disloyalties, boldly ^^claring,
that they were as loyal as any of his Majesty's subjects; which notorious
falsehood appears to be all their learned Agent had to say in their vindication.

Notwithstanding all the strong proofs against this turbulent Province, nothing
more was done by administration than to pass an explanatory Charter, expressly
declaring the Governor's power to negative the Speaker of the House of
Representatives, which was thought not to be sufficiently clear i^ the Charter
itself.

This explanatory Charter the General Court readily accepted and submitted to.
They were afraid that the whole controversy would be carried into Parliament;
they knew they were generally condemned in England, that the Ministry were
highly displeased with them, and they dreaded that the consequence of a
Parliamentary enquiry would be an act to vacate the Charter of the Province.

A BAD cause confounds the best advocates; it cannot then be strange to find
American writers perplexed, and advancing arguments which serve to destroy
their own cause. They tell us that since the American Tea act the Colonists
have turned smugglers, and have furnished themselves with Teas from the French
and Dutch, and not only with Teas, but with Wines, Brandy, Silk, Spices,
Cambricks, and Linen printed and plain. And because their Constituents have
thus acted illegally, and in defiance of the Laws, they wisely advise the
British legislature to ^ow before the Boston smugglers, and to repeal whatever
of its acts the undutiful Bostonians shall direct. For the Supreme Legislature
to surrender all its authority, and humbly to prostrate itself to a parcel of
American smugglers, is to be sure a new way of securing the obedience and
dependence of the Colonies, and effectually proves to us the great m^desty and
the great genius of the Boston writers. Since the people of America, from the
public confession of their own writers, are such universal smugglers, a very
different method of proceeding with them will very naturally suggest itself to
every sensible man, and that is, vigorously to support the revenue Officers in
the strict and vigilant performance of their duty. Their having been hitherto
left without protection to the tender mercies of the riotous Bostonians, has
been the true cause of the great increase of smuggling When part of the Revenue
Officers were driven away, and the rest of them intimidated, smuggling of (...)
became general, and the sweets of it once tasted, it became policy in the
smugglers to keep up the riotous spirit of the people, and to foment commotions
and insurrections, that they might preserve the enjoyment of their clandestine
traffic. It is a well known fact, that besides various sorts of goods run into
the port of Boston from France and Holland, and from many of the French and
Dutch islands, that in the year 1769, no less than Eight Hundred Chests of Tea
were smuggled into that Province from St. Eustatia. The smugglers when
possessed of this Tea, by their ranting speeches about oppression and slavery,
persuaded the ignorant populace to mob all the merchants, except themselves,
who imported from England, and to take the Tea into custody. By this artful
maneuver Tea soon became searce, and as the smugglers only produced theirs in
small quantities at a time, as the remains of what they had imported before the
non-importation agreement, the price of Tea rose in a very short space of time,
from two shillings and three pence, to four shillings and six pence a pound.
This was proved by authentic letters read in the House of Commons, in 1770,
when American affairs were the subject of debate. It was worth the attention of
the smugglers to be at some trouble in raising riots, when the consequence was
to be a continuance of their exorbitant gains. It was curious too that they
made the very people, whom they cheated, the instruments to cheat themselves.

LETTER XVI.
EVER since the first settlement of the Massachusetts, the inhabitants of that
Province have evidently manifested a design to throw off their alleigance to
the Crown of England.

Government here were far from being insensible of their intentions; for the
several administrations of this country, for these hundred and forty years
past, have heartily endeavored to provide and to guard against such a foolish,
inconsiderate, and disloyal attempt. Yet, unhappily for this kingdom, the
provisions of our former ministers were always temporary: Provided they
obtained a momentary quiet they were satisfied, or appeared to be so; they
plumed themselves on the present efficacy of their measures, and they left
future ministers to struggle with the difficulties in which they had involved
the state. Thus the complete regulation of the turbulent and rebellious
New-Englanders was always left as an encumbered legacy to their successors.
They acted like timid men, who just assert their claims that their right may
not expire, but who leave the trouble, the expense, and the danger of the
contest to their heirs. Such has been the weakness, the timidity, and the
pitiful procrastination of all our former Ministers.

As the people of New England found, that amidst all their daring encroachments
and their breaches of alleigance, the good men of England were easy to be
deceived by hypocritical professions of loyalty; they were always provided with
a plentiful stock of verbal obedience, whilst at the very same time they were
assidiously endeavoring to lay the foundation of their independency.

To be overreached by the finesse of our natural enemies as negociators, has
always been the characteristic of the English nation; can it then be wondered
at that we have so long been trepanned by the holy dissimulation of our own
offspring?

The indolence of our Ministers, or rather the dread of giving rise to even
unjust clamours against themselves, has fostered the pride of the Bostonians,
that now they have not only insolently asserted their ideas of their own
independence, but also have proceeded to overt acts of opposition to the
legislature of this kingdom.

That the Bostonians have ever been turbulent and rebellious, appears not only
from the Acts of our King in Council, and from Acts of Parliament, but from
their own Acts.

The Town of Boston was first settled in the year 1630, and two years
afterward (...) were great disturbances and disorders amongst them, though at
that time the Town consisted of but a few houses.

Next year there were both religious and political confusions and distractions
among them, and such as had nearly ruined the plantation.

In 1634 they raised a violent commotion in Boston, and brought their own
Governor, whom they had chosen themselves, to a public trial.

At this period they called themselves a Commonwealth; and threw off their
alleigance, though their Charter, which only exempted them from taxes for seven
years, was but five years old.

It was found necessary in 1635 to appoint some of the principle Officers of
State Commissioners, who were empowered to examine Charters granted by the King
or his precessors, etc.

In pursuance of this Commission, a Quo Warranti was brought against the
Massachusetts Charter, in 1636, for their oppressive, illegal, and rebellious
acts, which are enumerated by Sir John Banks, the then Attorney General. Some
of them are as follows.

Charges exhibited in the Quo Warranto brought against the Charter of the
Massachusetts.
That all the Massachusetts Company named in the Patent, for three years last
past and more, used, in several parts beyond the seas, out of England, without
any Warrant or Royal Grant, the Liberties, Privileges, and Franchises
following:

To make and to swear a Governor and Deputy Governor of themselves, and to name
and swear, out of themselves, so many Officers in England, and abroad in the
Massachusetts Bay, as they please, and, at their wills, to displace and change
any of them.

To admit whom they please into the said company, as well aliens as others, and
to take sums of money for such admissions, and, at their wills, to disfranchise
whom they please, and turn them out of the company.

To hold to themselves all his Majesty's territory of Massachusetts Bay, in New
England, and the same to sell, give, or dispose of, as they please, and have
the sole Government of all that country, and all persons coming or trading
thither.

To hold Courts, and in such Courts to make such laws and statutes against the
laws and customs of England, and all such as are disobedient to the same to
imprison, fine, and amerce, and to levy and convert to their own use.

To transport, against the laws and statutes of England, merchandises and other
things prohibited.

To exact of all persons trading there, his Majesty's subjects, sums of money
at their wills, and imprison such as refuse to pay the same.

To have the sole importation of all merchandises from thence into England,
and, by their own authority, prohibiting any of their Company to export out of
England.

To lay fines and amercements on such persons trading with goods thither, and
to imprison their persons, and lay such mulcts on their merchandise as they
pleased.

To use beyond seas, and on the high seas, at their pleasure, martial law.

To examine on oath any person in any cause touching life and member, and to
proceed to trial, sentence, judgment, and execution, touching life. member,
lands, tenements, goods, and chattles, against the laws and customs of England.

After this the Lords of the Council sent an order requiring them to send home
their patent.

To this letter they made their usual answer, that is, great professions of
loyalty and godliness, which served their purpose at that time, and they were
allowed to retain the Charter.

After this escape the wars in England prevented them being attended to, and
they spent the forty ensuing years in quarrelling amongst themselves, in
robbing and murdering the Indians, in oppressing the neighboring Colonies, and
in establishing their independency.

In 1679 they passed a law declaring the acts of trade an invasion of their
rights, liberties, and properties, they not being represented in Parliament,
For this law they suffered the loss of their Charter, notwithstanding they
repeated all their former hypocritical professions of duty and loyalty, and
appointed many days of fasting and prayer, to obtain the King's favor, and the
smiles of Heaven.

To defend their Charter, they sent home Agents who in their first letter
acquainted them, that his Majesty was greatly provoked, and desired the General
Court to consider whether it was best to hazard all rather than satisfy his
Majesty as to the mode of Submission to the laws for regulating trade.

In 1683, the QUO WARRANTO arrived, accompanied with a declaration from the
King, that if the Colony would make full submission, he would regulate their
Charter for his service and their good, and with no further alterations than
should be necessary for the support of the Government there.

This favorable declaration had no effect; they refused to surrender the
Charter, and therefore, in 1684, judgment was entered up against it.

Even in the height of the disobedience they had the wonderful assurance to ask
favors of the King; but they were told by their correspondents in England,
that it was not probable any thing would be done for them till the regulation
of the Charter, and that the Colony was brought under such an actual dependence
upon the Crown as became his Majesty's subjects

They remained without a Charter till after the revolution, when they sent over
Agents to procure the restitution of their old Charter, but without success.

A draught of a new Charter was made out and shown to the Rev. Mr. Mather,
their Agent, who was so dissatisfied with it, that he declared he would sooner
part with his life than consent to it. Reply was made to him, that the consent
of the Agents was not desired; the Agents of New England were not
plenipotentiaries from a Sovereign state; if they declared they would not
submit to his Majesty's pleasure, the King would settle the country, and they
might take what followed.

When the Charter was granted, Mather accepted it, but Cook, the other Agent,
refused. It was, however, accepted by the Province, and from its inaccuracy,
confusion, and ill construction, has been one of the principal causes of all
the commotions and disturbances in Massachusetts for these last eighty years.

From this period to the year 1722, the Province was a scene of dissension, and
in a continued ferment. The character they then held in England, and with
administraton, may be seen in the opinions of Lord Carteret, and the Lords of
Council, already printed, by which it is fully proved against them, that they
had usurped upon every article of the King's prerogative.

At this time they had great occasion for their old canting professions, and
accordingly made great use of them. Their answer to every charge brought and
established against them was, that they were a virtuous, godly people, and
universally loyal.

Yet this answer, ridiculous, impudent, and false as it was, it seems, had its
effect, though absolutely contradicted by the whole tenor of their conduct,.
for near a century back. For with all this cloud of evidence before them,
nothing more was done by the ministry than to confirm to the Crown the power of
negativing the Speaker of the House of Representatives, which when so much was
necessary to be done, was in a manner doing nothing.

Indeed administration all along seemed to be exceedingly willing to get rid of
them and their affairs, and therefore were content to put up with their
deceitful promises to be quiet and dutiful.

From this time till the administration of Mr. Grenville, many were the
instances they gave of their refractory and seditious spirit. Their criminal
excesses need not at present be recounted. In the midst of their insurrections
Mr. Grenville lost his place, and unhappily for England the men who afterward
were so infatuated as to repeal the Stamp Act, succeeded. To try to obtain a
temporary quiet, they condescended to submit to the mandates of the Boston
rioters, and dastardly gave up their country's best and dearest rights.

The following motion made by Mr. Rigby, together with Mr Charles Townshend's
Speech, will show their opinion of the Bostonians and of American Charters.

June 30. 1766.
A motion was made by Mr. Rigby, and the question being put, that a humble
address be presented to his Majesty to express the earnest wish and desire of
this House.

That his Majesty would be graciously pleased to suspend any prorogation of
this Parliament, until positive assurance shall be received from the several
Governors of the respective Provinces in North America, that the people were
returned to a due sense of their duty and obedience to the laws.

That this House is the more earnest in their pressing sol^icitations to his
Majesty to grant this their humble request, as they apprehend many of the fatal
consequences of the rebellious dispositions of his Majesty's subjects in those
parts might have been prevented, if the Parliament had been called last year as
soon as the accounts of the disorderly and tumultuous conduct of the Americans
came to the knowledge of his Majesty's Ministers.

To assure his Majesty that this House is determined to support the legal
authority of the Crown and the just rights of the British legislature over all
parts of the British dominions, and when permitted to offer their advice, to
guard the honor and dignity of his Crown and Government from all insults
whatsoever.

This motion passed in the negative, after a very long debate, which was closed
by Mr. Charles Townshend as follows:

Summary of Mr. Charles Townshend's Speech on American Charters.
That it had long been his opinion that North America should be regulated and
deprived of their militating contradictory Charters, and that the several
Colonies on that continent should be reduced under one system, governed and
directed by persons of capacity, honor, and virtue.

That now after such a scene of disobedience, tumult and violence, in some of
the American Colonies, which had been followed with the most gracious and
unparalleld instances of grace, lenity and favor, he did expect that the
persons entrusted with the present administration would, be unanimous in
employing the recess of Parliament about the necessary and previous steps to
compass so requisite and so desirable an event.

That the frenzy and madness of the Colonies required the attention of the
supreme and Sovereign authority.

That the Colony Charters had been elsewhere considered, and declared by the
Judges of the Realm as inconsistent and incompatible, ab origin.

That the late and very recent conduct of some Colonies had actually forfeited
the rights and privileges of their Charters, by the most audacious and
unpardonable resolves of several of their subaltern subordinate Assemblies, who
had presumed to encroach and usurp upon the style, dignity and power of a House
of Parliament, by a^ affectation and apery that was rediculous and profligate.

That the regulation of North America was so essential to Great Britain, and to
the Colonies, so equally necessary and beneficial to both, that it should be no
longer delayed, as there now appeared some danger in trusting any longer to the
accidental good behavior of the Coloni^es.

That if, from what he now said, he should be found different in opinion from
the principal persons of the present administration, he must now publicly
declare that he must withdraw, as he could no longer co operate with persons of
such oblique and narrow views of Government; but that he hoped and expected
otherwise, rather believeing that he should be instrumental amongst them to
prepare and bring forward a new system, of police, to be administered upon
principles, with reciprocal advantage to Great Britain and her American
Colonies.

That the Governors, Judges, and Attorney Generals, delegated in America must
be rendered free and independent of the humor and caprices of the people; and
the laws and ordinances of this kingdom must be observed, and dispensed with a
more suitable impartiality, reverence, and solemnity.

Notwithstanding this speech, which neither needs elucidation nor commentary,
nothing was done for the regulation of the Massachusetts Charter or any other
American Charter.

By such weak inconsistent procrastination, former Ministers have transmitted
down to the present minister, "the holy Bostonians," with all their accumulated
falsehoods, hypocrisies, and rebellions about them.

THE great men who support the cause of the righteous at Boston are always
convicting themselves. The more they struggle to veil over their cause, the
more they expose its nakedness to public view. Because the Colonies raised some
thousands of men in the height of their fears to help to defend themselves,
during the last war, it is said that they have borne their full proportion of
expense at all times toward the support of the state. It is impossible for any
assertion to be more unjust and fallacious than this; for the Agents themselves
in their impudent publications confess, that England reimbursed the Americans.
Granting however that they were at some expense to defend themselves last war,
is that to be pleaded and sustained as an exemption from their bearing any part
of the public charge in time of peace? Or is it to weigh with us as an
exculpation of their insurrections, and uniform resistance to the authority of
the King in Parliament. If it was possible to prove, which however it is not,
that they bore their share of expense in the last war, to what would such a
proof amount? Why merely to this, that to preserve themselves, they had acted
in their own defense. Therefore, to produce the foolish story of their having
raised men to assist in protecting themselves, in order to vindicate their
denial of the Supremacy of the Legislature of England, is weak and contemptible
in the highest degree, and a giving up of their cause.

LETTER XVII.
FROM the review of transactions of Massachusetts, from the year 1764 to 1769,
it appears, by the report of the Lords Committees, that the people of that
Colony have, during that period, acted in constant opposition to the
Sovereignty of his Majesty, in his Parliament of Great Britain, over that
Province.

They in defiance of the Laws, publicly carried on illegal traffic; they voted,
in their Assembly, their right to combine against Acts of our Legislature; they
admonished the other Colonies to follow their example; they declared they ought
not to be taxed, because they were not represented; they immediately after
insisted that they could not be represented in Parliament, and therefore that
they ought not to be taxed, they claimed all the immunities and privileges of
British subjects, whilst they denied the authority of Britain over them, and
they voted money to promote a Combination against the Laws of Britain; they, in
their Town Meetings, in their House of Assembly, and in their Council, openly
encouraged and protected those Criminals who had been guilty of the most
unjustifiable enormities, and they as openly proscribed and condemned all the
Crown Officers who had exerted themselves in the execution of the Laws; they,
in their House of Assembly, passed an act of free and general pardon and
indemnity to the Miscreants who had pulled down and robbed houses and public
offices, and burnt the public records; they also voted, in their House of
Assembly, that Acts of Parliament were infringements of their natural rights;
they, in their Council, ever refused assistance and protection to his Majesty's
Revenue Officers; they always gave advice, encouragement, and support, to those
who acted in direct violation of the Laws of Trade; they commanded the Governor
to dismiss the ships of war from the harbor, as these ships interrupted their
clandestine trade; and they passed votes, ordering the inhabitants of the
Province to arm themselves, on purpose to oppose the landing of his Majesty's
troops in the Town of Boston.

All these facts are taken from the report of the Lords Committees, and are
incontrovertible.

In consequence of these many complicated crimes and treasons, his Majesty, in
a speech from the Throne in 1768, desired the concurrence and support of both
Houses of Parliament to defeat the mischievous designs of those turbulent and
seditious persons, who under false pretenses had but too successfully deluded
numbers of his subjects in America; and whose practices, if suffered to
prevail, could not fail to produce the most fatal consequences to his Colonies
immediately, and in the end to all the dominions of his Crown.

The address of the Lords, in reply, mentioned, that they had felt the most
sincere concern tha^ any of their fellow subjects in America had been misled by
factious and designing men into acts of violence and resistance to the
execution of the law, attended with circumstances that manifested a disposition
to throw off their dependence upon Great Britain; that they most ^^^eignedly
gave his Majesty the strongest assurances that they should ever zealously
concur in support of every just and necessary measure to repress that daring
spirit of disobedience, and to enforce a due submission to the laws, and that
they considered it as one of their most essential duties to maintain inviolate
the supreme authority of the legislature of Great Britain over every part of
the dominions of his Majesty's Crown.

A few days after, all the American papers were laid before the House of Peers,
and their Lordships resolved,

That the votes, resolutions, and proceedings of the House of Representatives
of Massachusetts, respecting several late Acts of Parliament were, so far as
they imported, a denial of the power and authority of his Majesty in Parliament
to make laws and statutes of sufficient force and validity to bind the Colonies
and people of America subjects to the Crown of Great Britain, in all cases
whatsoever, illegal, unconstitutional, and derogatory of the rights of the
Crown and Parliament of Great Britain.

That the resolutions of the said House of Representatives of Massachusetts, to
write letters to the several British Colonies on the Continent, desiring them
to join with the said House of Representatives of Massachusetts, to deny the
right of Parliament to impose duties and taxes upon his Majesty's subjects in
America, are proceedings of a most unwarrantable and dangerous nature,
calculated to inflame the minds of his Majesty's subjects in the other
Colonies, tending to create unlawful combinations repugnant to the laws of
Great Britain, and subversive of the constitution.

That the Town of Boston, in the Province of Massachusetts, has been in a state
of Great disorder and confusion, and that the peace of the said Town has been
disturbed by riots and tumults of a dangerous nature, in which the Officers of
his Majesty's Revenue have been obstructed by acts of violence in the execution
of the laws and their lives endangered.

That neither the Council of the said Province, nor the civil Magistrates, did
exert their authority for the suppressing said riots and tumults.

That in these circumstances the preservation of the public peace, and the due
execution of the laws, became impracticable without the aid of a military force
to support and protect the civil Magistrates, and the Officers of his Majesty's
Revenue.

That the declarations, resolutions, and proceedings of the Town Meeting at
Boston. on the In these resolutions they declared that they were governed and
taxed by laws without their consent, and that their trade and navigation were
obstructed by an armed force. This alluded to the seizure of Hancock's vessel
for smuggling four days before, when the Officers of the Customs were assisted
by a (...) from the Romney man of war, on which occasion the professing loyal
Saints of Boston, nearly murdered several of the principal Custom House
Officers.
14th of June, and the In these resolves the dutiful Saints asserted, that
levying money upon them, without the consent of their Parliament was illegal:
They also claimed the privileges of British subjects, but denied their
obligation to pay taxes: They insisted that sending troops amongst them to
enforce Acts of the British Parliament, was an infringement of their natural
constitutional rights, and that the keeping a standing army, in time of peace
was against Law They also issued precepts for the whole Province to take up
Arms, as they expected a war with France, yet voted the expected English
regiments a violation of their rights as it was pro^ound pea^e. The consistency
and good sense of the Boston faction may surely be found out amidst these
shame, (...) contradictions.
12th of September, were illegal and unconstitutional, and calculated to excite
seditions and insurrections in his Majesty's Province of Massachusetts.

That the appointment of a convention to be held at Boston to consist of
Deputies from the several Towns in the Province, and the issuing a Mandate by
the Select men of Boston to each of the said Towns, for the election of such
Deputies, were proceedings subversive of his Majesty's government, and
evidently manifested a design in the inhabitants of Boston, to set up a new and
unconstitutional authority independent of the Crown of Great Britain.

That the elections, by several Towns in the Province of Massachusetts, of
Deputies to sit in the same Convention, and the meeting of such The intention
of the Meeting of this treasonable Convention, which they first styled the
Committee of Safety, was to plan measures to oppose the troops; but the courage
of the righteous only consisted in blustering, for the morning that the troops
landed the^ broke up and ru^hed out of Town like a herd of scalded hogs.
Convention in consequence thereof, were daring insults offered to his
Majesty's authority, and audacious usurpations of the powers of government.

That nothing could be more immediately necessary either for the maintenance of
his Majesty's authority in the said Province, or for guarding his Majesty's
subjects therein, than to proceed in the most speedy and effectual manner for
bringing to condign punishment the chief authors and instigators of the late
disorders, therefore to beseech his Majesty to direct his Governor of
Massachusetts to take the most effectual methods to procure the fullest
informations of all Treasons or misprision of Treason, and to transmit the same
to England, that his Majesty might issue a special Commission for hearing and
determining the said offenses within this realm, pursuant to the provisions of
the Statute 35 Henry VIII.

The Lords Committte report, that the above resolutions, censuring the
proceedings of the Province of Massachusetts, and the conduct of the Council,
and other civil Magistrates, did not produce the The factions at Boston were at
first a little intimidated, but soon finding that no other notice was to be
taken of them, than what was contained in the above resolutions, they grew more
haughty and riotous than ever; they made a jest of the resolves of both Houses,
and annulled them in their own opinion by passing counter resolves in their
Town Meetings and House of Representatives.
good effect that reasonably might have been expected; as a disposition to deny
the authority, and resist the laws of the supreme Legislature continued to
prevail, not only in flagitious publications, but also in a variety of violent
and unwarrantable proceedings of those Merchants and others who had subscribed
to the agreements for non importation of goods from Britain.

These Though the hypocrites at Boston persecuted and banished (...) who
refused to confederate with them against importing, yet the Leaders in this
plot imported an immense quantity of goods in upwards of One Hundred Vessels.
It is true these goods were taken into the possession of the Committee, but
then it ought to be observed, that this Committee always consisted of the
owners of the goods, if these owners were of the Faction, so that they received
their goods into their own Custody, and sold them publicly as goods imported
previous to the agreement against importing.
ass^ciators published the names of all who refused to join with them in their
unlawful combinations in the public news papers, as enemies to their country;
and the mandates and decrees of their committees met with a respect and
obedience denied to the constitutional authority of Government.

After a Review of the transactions, of the Massachusetts, surely no honest man
ought to oppose the regulation of that long distracted and rebellious Province.

LETTER XVIII.
THE Bostonian Agents and Writers are now driven into the regions of absurdity
and contradiction, yet their folly never will be silent. They continue to
assure us, that if England asserts her just authority over the Bostonians, that
they will not pay their debts; that if the Port of Boston is blocked up, all
the West India Planters will be starved; (...) they will throw themselves under
the protection of some other European power; that they will establish an
independent state; that they are now much more numerous and formidable than
either the Swiss or the Dutch when these nations (...) off the Austrian and the
Spanish yoke: that our men of war may take all their vessels for a twelvemonth
to come, but these captures will not pay a third of their debts: that the
second year they will not ship any of their produce, and so we shall all become
bankrupts; yet (...) all this treasonable trash they tell us, that the
Bostonians are distinguished for their duty and loyalty to their Mother Country
and Sovereign. Now when they convince us that loyalty and rebellion are the
same, we shall certainly believe them.

They have given us many specimens of their loyalty in the Appeal to the World,
published by order of the Town of Boston. In this Appeal they set out with
abusing Governor Bernard, General Gage, Commodore Hood the Commissioners of the
American Board of Customs and all others who, from their employments, were
unfortunately obliged to reside amongst them.

A few of their assertions may be entertaining.

Nothing can be more false and malicious than to represent this Town as
disaffected to his Majesty's Government.

That the people should entertain the highest disgust of a Board, instituted to
superintend a revenue to be raised from them without their consent, which was,
and still is, exacted with rigor, is natural.

But it cannot be said, with the least appearance of truth, that they set at
defiance the King's Authority.

Governor Bernard's declarations to his Majesty's Ministers are grounded on
vague, idle reports

The ordering two regiments from Halifax to this Town, for a purpose for which
military power was certainly never designed -- a very dangerous purpose, and
abhorrent to the British constitution, and the spirit of a free Government,
namely, to support the civil authority.

They give the following account of a riot, in which they nearly murdered the
Collector and Comptroller of the Customs.

The Collector and Comptroller indeed represent it as a numerous mob, but they
being particularly interested, their fears might deceive them. It was
occasioned by the unprecedented and unlawful manner of seizing a vessel. --
What they call unlawful manner, was the assistance given by a man of war's
boat. After they had driven the Commissioners out of Town, they called their
enforced absence a "voluntary exile," though the faction had assembled
purposely at Liberty Tree, as their own Notification expressed, to clear the
land of the Vermin which were come to devour them.

In defense of their Town Meetings, they say, Such an Assembly has ever been
the Dread -- often the Scourge of Tyrants.

But the most capital part of this Appeal, not to the King or the Parliament,
but to all the world, is, their declaration against all Acts of the British
Parliament. It shall be given in their own words.

Their rights are invaded by these Acts, therefore until they are all
repealed, the cause of their just complaints cannot be removed. In short, the
grievances which lie heavily upon us, we shall never think redressed, till
every Act passed by the British Parliament is repealed, till the American Board
of Commissioners of the Customs is dissolved, the troops recalled, and things
are restored to the same state they were in before the late extraordinary
measures of administration.

After reading this Manifesto against all Acts of Parliament for raising a
revenue amongst them, no person will wonder at their various commotions and
insurrections, but will be surprised that the regulation of such a rebellious
people wa^ not undertaken long ago, and effectually carried into execution.

LETTER XIX.
A VARIETY of specimens of the literary merit, the virtue and the loyalty of
the Meetings, Assemblies, and Councils, held at Boston, have already been
given. At present the observations of the Merchants of Boston on several Acts
of Parliament shall be taken into consideration. The Merchants of Boston form a
part of those seditious herds of Fools and Knaves which assemble on all
important occasions in Faneuil Hall, in the House of Representatives, or in the
Council Chamber, at Boston; in which places, with the most sanctified
countenances, they preface their wise and learned harangues, and their
treasonable Votes and Resolves, with humbly beseeching the Almighty to stand
forth the champion of rebellion,

This being the case, it is not surprising that the observations of the
merchants should coincide with the seditious determinations of the above
mentioned Assemblies.

The Boston Merchants set out with telling us, that their representative body
have fully and repeatedly remonstrated against several Acts of Parliament
passed in the fourth, sixth, and seventh years of his present Majesty's reign,
as unconstitutional, and as infringing the rights and privileges of the subject.

These Acts are deemed by the Boston Merchants unconstitutional, and an
infringement of their rights, because they are calculated to impede their
clandestine traffic, and because they raise a small revenue on them and the
other Colonies, amounting nearly to fifteen thousand pounds yearly, which is
again spent amongst themselves, whilst England is at more than twenty times
that expense yearly for their protection and defense.

By these Acts certain rates and duties are imposed on Molasses, Sugars, Wines,
Tea. To collect this revenue the Government is at a very great expense, equal
at least, and including the charge of men of war and cutters to guard the
coast, vastly superior to all the revenue that can be collected had our trade
bee^ as extensive as it was before these Acts were made, which is not the case
now, and never will be while they remain in force.

All this is exceeding plain, these Acts of Parliament greatly restrain their
illicit trade; and as Government is at a greater expense in guarding their
coast than the revenue collected by these Acts, they modestly propose that
these Acts shall be repealed that England may bear the whole burden herself.
An Englishman, however, will not think in this manner; he will naturally be of
opinion, that it is but just and reasonable that additional taxes should be
laid upon the Americans, in order that they may pay all the charges of their
own Government.

When the duty on Molasses was six pence sterling a gallon, as there was no
appropriation made of that duty, it was well known in England the Officers of
the Customs connived at the importation; but since the duty on molasses has
been reduced, the whole, though grievous, has been regularly paid.

Granting this insinuation of the dishonesty of the former Custom House
Officers to be true, and that they connived with the Boston smugglers in
running Molasses; the truth of such connivance is surely not a good argument to
obtain a license to continue it. It operates clearly on the opposite fide of
the question, and is a strong reason for more strictly enforcing and executing
the laws of trade. The duty on molasses was at first six pence a gallon; on the
representations and petitions of the people of Boston it was lowered to three
pence; still they were unsatisfied, but said, if the duty was reduced to one
penny a gallon, the smallness of the duty would take away all inclination to
smuggle that commodity, and therefore the revenue would increase. This request
was also granted them, and now they tell Parliament that the molasses Act is
grievous, unconstitutional, and as infringement of their rights.

The duty of the five shillings per hundred on brown, and twenty-two shillings
on white sugars, is a great burden on our trade to the foreign Islands: That,
should we be allowed the free importation of foreign sugars, even for our own
consumption, the trade of Great Britain would not be injured, but greatly
benefitted; for in this case more of the sugars made in the English Islands
might be carried to Great Britain, and what they did not consume would be
exported from thence to foreign markets.

With the Boston Merchants, every regulation, restriction, or tax, is a
grievous unconstitutional burden: one penny, as well as five shillings, is a
great burden. If they were allowed the free importation of foreign sugars, it
might probably be advantageous to them; so might the free importation of tea
and cordage from Holland, and open trade with all the world: But if the English
sugars now consumed in British America were all brought to England, on account
of the Americans supplying themselves from the French, the market would be
glutted, the commodity would become a drug, and our West India Planters would
be ruined.

The Custom-House bonds, certificates, oaths, and fees, are also great
discouragements and embarrassments to the trade of America.

The appointment of an almost incredible number of inferior Officers, as
Tidesmen, Boatmen, Waiters, and others, is another cause of complaint.

The liberty these fellows take, of searching vessels, is not only illegal, but
impudent.

Another intolerable grievance is, the appointment of Officers of the Customs
on board the men of war, cutters, and other armed vessels.

That Smugglers should think bonds, certificates, oaths, and fees, intolerable
grievances, and wish to be relieved from all legal restraints, is natural
enough; but that they should write a pamphlet, on purpose to convince England
that their unlawful goods should be protected from the jaws of these devouring
monsters, Custom-House Officers, certainly manifests a most extraordinary
degree of assurance and folly.

What the Colonists have a right to expect is, a Repeal of all the Acts
imposing duties on any kind of goods imported into the British Colonies, for
the purpose of raising a revenue in America, as being inconsistent with their
rights as free subjects.

If the Boston merchants will be pleased to consider the heavy load of debt
under which England labors, they, instead of a Repeal of all the Acts of Trade
and Revenue, have a right to expect that Parliament will pass a few more, in
order to raise from amongst themselves a sum sufficient to pay for their own
defense.

What follows, is the conclusion of this very curious publication of the Boston
merchants.

The embarrassments, difficulties, and insupportable burdens, under which this
trade, (no doubt meaning their illegal trade) has labored, have already made
us prudent, frugal, and industrious; and such a spirit in the Colonists must
soon, very soon, enable them to subsist without the manufactures of Great
Britain, the Trade of which, as well as its Naval Power, has been greatly
promoted and strengthened by the luxury of the Colonies, consequently any
measures that have a tendency to injure, obstruct and diminish the American
Trade and Navigation, must have the same effect upon that of Great Britain, and
in all probability prove her ruin.

The Boston Merchants display a filial affection toward us, for having luckily
discovered, that if England forces them to contribute ever so small a pittance
to the support of the state and their own protection, that such conduct will in
all probability prove her ruin; they have been at the great trouble and expense
of writing a twelvepenny book on purpose to inform us of our approaching danger.

In some respects, however, the Boston Merchants differ widely in sentiment
from the rest of the Saints. The generality of the people of Massachusetts have
for the best part of two centuries declared, that they were a pious, prudent,
frugal, and industrious people, but the Boston Merchants assert, that till the
fourth year of the present reign they were imprudent, prodigal, idle, and
luxurious. These accounts rather contradict each other, and there appears no
other way of explaining them, than by believing that the Boston Saints and
Boston Merchants will say any thing rather than port with their money and their
clandestine trade.

Respecting their manufactures, Great Britain has nothing to fear from them. It
is not to be supposed that their manufactures will be very formidable, till
unoccupied lands become dear and scarce, of which there is at present but a
very distant prospect. It is true they have a large Manufactory House at
Boston, but the principal Manufacturer ever they had in it was an old Irishman,
a Manufacturer of Twine, which he himself hawked about the streets, and not
being able with all his industry to procure a livelihood, he fitted up part of
this house of labor for the accommodation of a Spouting Club, and this Club
was succeeded by a Dancing Assembly, consisting of the Boston Saints and
Patriots, who, having quarelled with the Commissioners, left them in possession
of Concert Hall, and metamorphosed their Boasted House of Industry into a
temporary residence for dissipation and intrigue.

LETTER XX.
IN the year 1645, a civil dissension disturbed the whole Colony of
Massachusetts, for when they were at peace with their neighbors they always
quarrelled amongst themselves. It was occasioned by a difference in sentiment
concerning the identity of a swine which was claimed by a poor woman as having
strayed from her some years before, and her title being disputed by a person of
more consequence, not the Court only, but the whole country were divided and
inflamed. The identity of the famous Martin Guerre was not more controverted in
France in the preceding century. Pity for the poor woman influenced the common
people against right. At last the Magistrates, who supported the opposite side,
for the Magistrates were divided too, prevailed upon the right owner, who had
recovered judgment, to relinquish the animal that the public tranquillity might
be restored.

This Hog Controversy brought on a political contest between the Assistants or
Council and Deputies or Representatives, but as each House was equally
tenacious of their opinions, they could not come to an agreement: The matter,
in dispute, which respected their manner of voting conjunctly, and the
executive powers exercised by the Assistants or Counselors during the recess
of the General Court, were therefore referred to the serious consideration of
their wise and holy Saints and Prophets the Parsons, whose determination was
acquiesced in by both Houses as they began to be sick of the contention.

This same year they still continued to persecute all those who differed from
them either in religious or political opinion. The celebrated Sir Henry Vane,
afterward beheaded for being one of the Regicides, in a letter to Governor
Winthrop, gently and seasonably reproves them for their oppressions and
persecutions. As this letter is short, and as the opinions of such a great man
are both curious and interesting, the whole letter shall be given in the
original orthography.

AUTHENTIC PAPER. Copy of a letter from Sir Henry Vane to Governor Winthrop.
Honored Sir,
I received yours by your son, and was unwilling to let him return without
telling you as much. The exercise and troubles which God is pleased to lay upon
these kingdoms, and the inhabitants in them, teaches us patience and
forbearance one with another, in some measure, though there be difference in
our opinions, which makes me hope that, from the experience here, it may also
be derived to yourselves, least, while the congregational way amongst you is in
its freedom, and is backed with power, it teach its oppugners here to extirpate
it, and root it out, from its own principles and practice.

I shall need say no^ more, knowing your son can acquaint you particularly
with our affairs.

Sir, I am, Your affectionate friend, And servant in Christ, H. VANE.
June 10 th, 1645. Pray commend me kindly to your wife, Mr. Cotton and his
wife, and the rest of my friends with you.




The mildness shown in this letter is the more remarkable, as Winthrop had
forced Sir Henry Vane to leave the Colony of the Massachusetts, and this letter
was written when Sir Henry's interest in Parliament was very great.

Next year a complaint was exhibited in England against the Colony, by a number
of members of the Church of England, for having taken the undue liberty of
presenting a petition to the General Court of the Massachusetts, praying,

That they might be allowed the free exercise of their religion, according to
their own mode of worship:

That they might be freed from the heavy Taxes imposed upon them:

That they might be freed from the illegal impresses made of them, their
children, and servants, into the war:

That the fundamental laws of England might be made the basis of their
Government, according to the Charter:

That they might be suffered to enjoy Civil and Religious Liberty.

This petition roused the wrath of the Pharisees and Tyrants of Massachusetts.
The petitioners were apprehended, tried, and convicted of the High crime of
presenting the petition. Their houses were rifled, their papers seized; Prophet
Mather thundered reproaches against them from the pulpit, calling them Hamans,
Judases, and sons of Korah; he entreated the Lord to confound them, and then,
as if he had received immediate inspiration from Heaven, he denounced the
judgments of God upon them. The consequence of their conviction was, heavy
fines and imprisonment, for the Saints of Boston always had a precious regard
for the money of those they oppressed; and they also secured their persons,
that they might not have an opportunity to complain.

Some of the petitioners, however, made their escape, and drew up a
representation of their case and sufferings, to which they added the following
queries:

Whether the patent of the Massachusetts was confirmed by Parliament, and
whether it was not necessary it should be?

Whether the Court may forfeit their Charter?

Whether, if treason be uttered in the pulpit, or in the Court, and not
questioned, the Court do not consent to that treason.

Whether it be not high treason, as well in New England as in Ireland, to
endeavor to subvert the fundamental laws of England, to take away the
liberties of the English nation, to say the Massachusetts is a free state?

Whether the oath of allegiance be not binding in New England?

Whether the Boston ministers may publicly vilify the English nation and laws,
and not be questioned?

Whether the petitioners ought to be hindered from settling in a church way,
according to the churches in England?

From the above petition, and the queries subjoined to it, the tyrannic and
rebellious acts of the venerable forefathers of the Bostonians clearly appear;
and it may not be unnecessary to add, that the present traitors are worthy of
such progenitors.

The Boston hypocrites instructed their agent to make the best defense he could
against these petitioners. The distracted state of England prevented any relief
being granted the petitioners, or any regulation undertaken for the better
government of that refractory Colony.

Soon after this, that tyrant, Governor Winthrop died, it was observed, that at
the first settlement of the Colony he was of a more tolerant and catholic
spirit than many of his associates, but that every day he grew more contracted,
bigoted, and persecuting. Under the cover of religious zeal and persecution, he
pushed all his political views. The man however had some virtues, the
Bostonians called him the father of the country; and though he put in execution
all their oppressive schemes, yet they at times both traduced and calumniated
him, which made a deep impression on his mind. The year before his death the
first witch was executed. On his deathbed he was struck with remorse for his
manifold oppressions and cruelties, and gave strong proof of it before he
expired, by refusing the Lieutenant Governor, who was pressing him much to sign
an order for the banishment of an heretic, saying, He had done too much of that
work already.

The modesty and the merit of some of the gentlemen who ^avour us with their
visits here from America are quite captivating. (...) some of them are
exceedingly laborious in instructing (...) politics, and daily assuring us,
that if the British Parliament raises one shilling in America, the ruin of
Britain must ensue; others come with a Parson in their train, and with uplifted
eyes, and hands in mendicant strains supplicate the good people of England,
liberally to bestow their charity for the worthy purpose of fattening and
enriching some rogues of American projectors. These enterprising gentlemen have
no notion of confining their genius, for Way and means, to their own
Hemisphere; they are more adventurous, and range the Globe in quest of prey: To
them a voyage of three thousand miles to the land of good nature is the
pleasantest of all employments; their heads teem with ideas of the riches they
shall acquire, and bags bursting wit^ money (...) before their eyes. Thus a
Person Wheelock will plan a Connecticut Indian College, and detach to England a
Whitaker, his confederate, along with his tawny Indian Occum, whom he had
taught to preach and to pray, as a juggler learns a dog to play at Cards, a
Monkey to walk a minuet, or a Bear to dance a hornpipe, in order to levy
contributions on the public. To see and hear a converted Heathen, a man in the
color of the Devil, speaking English and solemnly from the pulpit expounding
the sacred oracles, was altogether irresistible. The plan was well laid -- well
executed -- had its effect -- The White American preacher, and the Black
American preacher, after having ransacked England, Scotland and Ireland,
retreated happy with their plunder, leaving the inhabitants of three kingdoms
to wonder at their own folly. It would have saved the deluded people of this
country some thousands, if the sooty intepreter of the Scriptures and his
deceitful guide had met with the same fate which befell an ingenious Bostonian
artist many years before their pious and profitable expedition. This artist
toiled assiduously a whole twelvemonth in carving an image in wood of the
famous Mohawk, King Hendrick. When this great work was finished it was the
admiration of the Bostonians, and the ladies themselves viewed with rapture a
naked male figure nine feet high, though surrounded with the implements of
riot, murder, and war. To have circumscribed such a proof of genius, within the
continent of British America, would have been extremely injudicious; his own
countrymen would gape and wonder, but they never willingly part with the Cash
Warm therefore with hopes of an immense fortune, he embarked for England, and
in due time arrived at Plymouth, landed his wooden monarch, and distributed his
hand bills; but O dire misfortune! there happened to be a hot press. Mr Welsh
being threatened to be laid hold of as a vagrant, and forced against his
consent to serve his living Majesty King George the second, instead of
voluntarily exhibiting his deceased Majesty King Hendrick of America, thought
proper to decamp. But it would be great injustice to the Americans to rest all
their merits on their Indian preachers and their carvers of images; they are
possessed of many other talents; they are Merchants or Miners, whenever they
meet with any credulous gentlemen that will sell them goods, for which they
never will pay, or who will purchase of them shares of New England Mines, to
the amount of several thousands of pounds, which Mines never will be worked.
This will, no doubt, both surprise and shock many gentlemen, who have within
these three last years, advanced considerable sums to a supposed American Mine
proprietor. The Mines lay no where but in his tongue, and with that he
undermined them. It is true, he produced specimens of rich ore, but it was
easy, to speak in Doctor Franklin's (...), to "obtain" rich specimens of ore,
and much easier too, than to "obtain" private letters; for the specimens of ore
might be purchased in five thousand places, but the Letters could only be taken
from one place. But to return to the Creator of Mines, though really a thick
skulled fellow, he possessed infinite versatility, a great share of low cunning,
and no blush ever dawned on his impudent countenance. He was proprietor of all
sorts of Mines: If the person he was treating with wished to purchase a share
in a Copper Mine, he had the richest in the world; if another chose a Silver
Mine, the answer was the same; those who were for Lead or Gold, were also
accommodated: whether in London or in the Country, he diffused general
satisfaction; and, in a smaller degree, the South Sea and Missisippi schemes
were revived. In confirmation of all he said, his rich specimens were shown,
and he left his foolish purchasers indulging in golden dreams, whilst he
retired with their real property. With merchants he was a merchant, which some
will unhappily feel the effects of. In his tour through this island he
happened, at a large manufactoring Town, to meet in company a Merchant, who
intended to retire from trade as soon as he could sell off his stock: The
moment our Miner heard this, he was one of the most extensive merchants in
America; he dealt in every thing, and could dispose of any thing: Thus, the
Merchant being ready to sell, and the Miner as ready to buy, a bargain was soon
struck, and all the ware*house full of goods, to a very great amount, was
packed up, old and new, wholesale and retail: They were immediately after
shipped for America, but the remittances are yet to come. What has been given
above is with the best intention of informing the public of some past
impositions upon them, and that they be guarded against any present or future
deceptions To build and endow a College for the instruction of youth, the
advancement of knowledge, and the general good of a very distant country,
would, no doubt be a noble and laudable act, provided we could afford the
expense, and also provided the people preaching and praying for our assistance
were objects deserving our regard The amazing success of the Reverend White Mr.
Whitaker, and the Reverend Black Mr. Occum, has at this present time allured
into this kingdom two gentlemen from Philadelphia, a Physical Dr Williamson,
This Doctor was one of the Sage advisers to the destruction of the Tea at
Boston, and was rewarded with a gratis passage to England in one of their
Patriots ships.
and a curse of Souls the Reverend Mr. Ewing. The important business which
these gentlemen have taken the trouble to visit us upon, is, that at
Philadelphia, Dr. Franklin's residence, when in America, they have an
inclination to build a College, and to endow it; they do not want learned men
and Professors, for these are already prepared amongst themselves; they only
want magnificent apartments and good salaries; and to obtain these necessary
comforts of life, they have boldly risked the dangers of the Atlantic On week
days, the Physical gentleman is to talk us out of our money, if he can; and on
Sundays the Reverend gentleman is to preach us out of it, if he can. The
American AEscusapius is the leader and conductor of this great, wise, and
modest expedition; and of all men amongst the loyal and dutiful inhabitants of
Philadelphia, one more unfit could not have been found. He may, perhaps, be
quite profound in his profession, but however that may be, he is almighty in
politics: He holds it as incontrovertible, that England has no authority over
the Colonies: He talks with a sneer of contempt of the diminutiveness of this
Island, and with a tone of authority of the vast magnitude of America; he
speaks with feigned regret of the approaching downfall of Britain, and, with an
air of protection and triumph, offers its inhabitants shelter in the Colonies;
and, notwithstanding all this, he thinks that he acts with the greatest
prudence and circumspection, because he does not condescend to enter into an
argument: Reason he will not; but after delivering his sentiments with oracular
pomposity, he gathers himself up in his chair with an air of the greatest
importance, erects his head, and looks over his long nose at the rest of the
company, with a serenity and dignity of countenance only becoming a Gulliver
amidst his Lilleputians. Thus the loyal and consistent Constituents of Doctor
Franklin, at Philadelphia, who deny the authority of our supreme Legislature,
who refuse to contribute a farthing toward their own protection, who call us
tyrants and plunderers, and who, at this very time, are establishing illegal
Post-Offices, in opposition to those of Government, that they may lay their
hands on all our letters private as well as public, have sent over a couple of
their wise and holy men to abuse us to our faces, and then to beg our money;
which obtained, they will retire to their beloved America, and there with their
associates, they will wanton in luxury at the expense of English Generosity.

LETTER XXI.
IT has been the usual practice of the people of New England, when they were
called to account for their undutiful behavior and their disobedience to the
State, to instruct their Agent to crave further time, that they might be
enabled fully to clear themselves of the misdemeanors and crimes laid to their
charge. At the expiration of the period granted, the request was again renewed,
upon the pretense of their not being fully prepared; and their Agent was
desired, in the mean time, to make the best excuse he was able for them, and to
represent them as a pious, virtuous, and universally loyal people, and these
vague general declarations was all the defense they ever made.

They rested their exculpation on the chapter of accidents, hoping that a
change of Ministers might happen, or that England might be involved in a civil
commotion, or might be forced into a war; in any of which cases, their treasons
and cruelties might probably be overlooked, neglected, or forgotten; and
experience has proved, that in their conjectures they were generally in the
right.

During the time of the civil wars, they gave the same trouble to the
Commonwealth, that they have ever given this country under its Kings, as may be
seen from the following

STATE PAPER. Copy of a letter from Edward Winslow, Esquire Agent for the Province
of Massachusetts Bay, to the Commissioners of the United Colonies.
Gentlemen,
Yesterday, as I am informed, Mr. Coddington had something done for him at the
Council of State; which I believe was his Patent confirmed. The truth is, since
I perceived by letters from Plymouth, that, after another years warning,
nothing is likely to be done in reference to the old order of the Lords and
Commons sent over in 1647, as I take it, I looked upon it as a vain thing to
strive against the stream, when as indeed that was the material main objection,
above a twelvemonth since; and if I could not then answer it, how much less
now, after another year if not eighteen months expiration; but the will of the
Lord must be done! However, I suffer in my reputation here; to make so great a
bustle at first, and then to let all fall at last; had I not received
particular instructions from Plymouth herein, I had never stirred in it; but I
shall be more wary hereafter, how I engage in business of that nature; yet,
when I have said it, shall not dare to neglect the least service wherein any or
all of the United Colonies are concerned.

Here is great murmuring at the great provision of powder and shot; the several
shins get license for, year after year, forty barrels of powder, and fifty
barrels is an ordinary proportion to a ship, nay sometimes a hundred, and lead
and arms proportionable.

It is laid to our charge, that, being Custom free, we enrich ourselves by
furnishing Barbados and Virginia, though enemies, with that and other
commodities; and there has been, on that very account, a serious debate about
revoking our free Custom and Excise.

I have labored in it, and satisfied many of the Parliament and Council of
State of your care not to suffer any powder, more than ships store, to be
transported away; that we are fain to land all we bring hither, for fear of
firing the ships in the river, and we must get license for that also, upon
return; that the Master is forced to take license for more than he buys, that
he may bear out his passengers particular stores.

I have showed them, that we only had suffered with and for them; and, for
their sakes, were hated of all the English abroad.

This has made a present stop: But I assure you it concerns the country to
take notice of it, and be careful that our merchants, and such as trade
thither, abuse not the freedom we enjoy; nor know I better to whom to impart it
than to you, the Commissioners, that are Representatives of the united Colonies.

I pray God direct you herein, amongst other the weighty occasions of the
country.

Gentlemen, Your humble Servant, (Signed) EDW. WINSLOW, Agent.
London, April 17, 1651. (AUTHENTIC COPY.)

By this authentic letter we find, that the confederated New England Colonies
paid as little respect to the orders of the Lords and Commons, during the time
of the Commonwealth, as they now pay to Acts of Parliament. The orders of the
Lords were, to send home their Patent for a renewal, a^ an acknowledgment of
the powers then in being; and that all processes in the Colony should be in the
name of the Keepers of the Liberties of England The refractory Independents of
Massachusetts, however, complied with neither of these orders.

If this Agents of theirs was not the most clear and distinct writer, at least
he (...) regard for his reputation, and a due sense of honor, by his
complaints of the conduct of his constituents, even to themselves: But rightly
judging that his injured character would receive no reparation from them, like
an honest sensible man, he declares he will be more cautious, in future, how he
undertakes any business for them, and then, like a good Christian, rests his
case with the Lord.

Indeed, whenever their Agents implicitly followed their directions, they
always involved them in falsehoods, in dirty work, and in disgrace. They never
were so well provided in that respect as they are at present; they have got a
countryman of their own, and one of a mind congenial with themselves.

At this period of time Barbados and Virginia held out against the
Commonwealth, yet we find that the Bostonians supplied them with powder, shot,
and arms, which occasioned serious debates in Parliament, and the Council of
State, about revoking their free custom.

By their Charter they were only freed from paying or yielding any custom or
subsidy, either inward or outward, for the space of seven years, from its date,
which was March the 4th, 1629, so that their exemption from customs and
subsidies was expired about fifteen years.

Their Agent seems to have made a very ingenious excuse for their exporting
such great quantities of powder and other warlike stores, but unluckily
happened to be mistaken; for the Commissioners for the United Colonies confess,
in their reply, dated September 11th, in the same year, with respect to the
trade of powder, we cannot but fear it has been too exorbitantly managed by
some, though the welfare of the Colonies in many respects are deeply concerned
and hazarded.

If they were hated, as they tell us themselves, in the last century, by all
the English abroad, it may be said with the greatest truth, that in our days,
their general character is universally despised over all the Continent of
British America. Though the other Colonies will confederate with them against
the payment of taxes, yet that does not obliterate the contempt and detestation
which they entertain for the hypocritical Saints of Boston.

Their Agent takes leave with a very proper admonition to the merchants, not to
abuse the freedom which they enjoyed, and prays GOD to direct them. Instead of
taking his advice, they continued to break through all restraint, and have till
this hour continued refractory and rebellious.

LETTER XXI.
IN the days of Oliver, the Bostonian Pharisees and oppressors out canted that
long practiced and through paced Hypocrite himself. As they styled themselves
the family of God wrestling with the wants of a wilderness, in the ends of the
earth, Cromwell took compassion upon them, and having entirely conquered
Ireland he was very desirous of removing the dear Saints of God, from their
barren deserts, to the Irish Canaan, which he had just subdued.

Upon this occasion the Bostonian Hypocrites were caught in their own snare
Their complaints, concerning their poor and mean condition, were not designed
to obtain a removal and a new settlement, but were intended to impress the
state with an opinion of their poverty, in order that they might preserve
themselves from paying Customs and Taxes, as the years of their exemption from
both, by their Patent, were long expired.

The Family of God having thus, by their hypocritical whimpering, brought
themselves into such a dilemma, they were under the necessity of assembling
together, for the mortifying purpose of contradicting all their past
representations, on purpose to prevent their re-transportation. They
accordingly met, and drew up the following

STATE PAPER, Addressed to the Right Honorable His Excellency the Lord General
Cromwell.
Right Honorable,
We acknowledge ourselves in all duty bound, not only to take due notice of
that tender care and undeserved respect your Excellence has, upon all
occasions, vouchsafed unto the poor despised Colonie of the Massachusetts in New
England, but also to acknowledge ourselves ever obliged to serve you, and to
improve that interest which, through Grace, we have obtained in Jehovah, the
God of Armies, to prosper you, and your great and godly undertakings to his
glory and your everlasting comfort.

Your readiness, Right Honorable, to do us good, has occasioned these lines
to be presented to your Excellence, to the end, that no private information may
occasion your Honor, contrary to your aims and ends, to prejudice this
Colonie, by inviting over many of the inhabitants thereof to be transplanted
into Ireland; wherein, although we verily believe that your Honor aims at the
glory of God, and the welfare of this people, yet, with favor, we conceave it
will tend to the contrary, for these following reasons:

That we did profess we came into these remote parts of the earth to enjoy
the Liberties of the Gospel, in their purity, which hitherto, we have, through
the Grace of Christ, had, without restraint, these twenty-three years and above.

That God has blessed the country with plenty of food of all kinds,
generally through the land, insomuch that there are many thousands of bushels
of grain, and other provisions of beef and pork, yearly transported to other
places. And where there be any poor people, through age, or weakness, or losses
by fire, or other hand of God upon them, or their estates, the churches, or
towns, or both, do contribute to their wants. So that poverty cannot, truly,
be alleged to be a ground of remouall.

That God is pleased hitherunto to maintain unto us all his Ordinances, both
in Church and Commonwealth, whereby spreading errors in judgment are
suppressed.

That God has made this Colonie to be isntrumental in the Conversion of some
of the Natives amongst us: And that work is brought to this perfection
already that some of the Indians themselves can pray and prophecy, in a
comfortable manner, to the rest, with great gravitie, reverence, and zeal, and
can write and read English and Indian comfortably.

Furthermore, we humbly petition your Excellence to be pleased to show us what
favor God shall be pleased to direct you unto, on our behalf, to the most
honorable Parliament, unto whom we have now presented a petition. The copy of
it, verbatim, we are bold to send herewith, that, if God so please, we may not
be hindered in our comfortable proceedings, in the Work of God, here in this
wilderness. Wherein, as for other favors, we shall be bound to pray, that the
Captain of the Host of Israel may be with you, and your whole Army, in all
your great enterprises, to the glory of God, the subduing of his and your
enemies, and your everlasting peace and comfort in Jesus Christ. In whom we are,

Right Honorable, Your most obliged Servants, JOHN ENDICOT, Governor, In the
Name, of the Court.
(AUTENTIC EXTRACT.)
Supposing Oliver really to be an Enthusiast, the General Court of the
Massachusetts set out very artfully; they pretend, that through the holiness of
their life they had obtained great influence with the Almighty, the God of
Battles, and that out of Gratitude for Oliver's tender care of them, they would
use their interest with Jehovah, that all his great and godly undertakings
might prosper. Setting aside the blasphemous impudence of this pretension --
what could be better calculated to gain the favor of a religious and military
Enthusiast?

It has always been the practice of the people of the Massachusetts, when the
state here undertook to regulate them, to say, that the information, upon which
Government proceeded, was given by their enemies, when, in truth, it was
founded on their own authentic publications and public acts. At this time,
however, it was necessary for them to deny all that they had published of the
barrenness of the wilderness they inhabited, that they might, with the better
grace, decline the invitation given them of transplanting themselves to Ireland.

Now, therefore, the barren d^sart was instantly transformed into a land
flowing with milk and honey. God had blessed them with plenty of food of all
kinds, and that in such superabundance, that they yearly exported thousands of
bushels of grain, and other provisions of beef and pork. They could support all
their aged, their sick, and their poor. They could afford to re-establish all
those who suffered by fire, or other accidents, by contributions. So that
poverty could not truly be alleged as a reason for transplanting them. The
present Hypocrites and Rebels of Boston proceed exactly in the same manner at
this time. When Parliament lays a tax upon them, they cry out bitterly, that
the Revenue Officers are devouring monsters, who suck their very life blood
while it is streaming from their veins; and yet, soon after, they tell us, with
an air of disdain, that Parliament had better repeal the Tax, as the duty does
not pay the expense of raising it. A Bostonian never minds what contradictions
and falsehoods he utters, provided he can carry his point.

As to the Liberties of the Gospel, they might have enjoyed them in as great
purity in Ireland.

It is true, that they maintained all their Ordinances, both in Church and
Commonwealth, by fining, imprisoning, whipping, banishing, or hanging, all who
dissented form them in matters either civil or religious; which was their
method of suppressing errors in judgment.

Previous to Cromwell's invitation, whilst they were murdering the Indians for
the sake of their lands, they always (...) bewaild their own dangerous
situation, exposed, as they were, to the ravages and cruelties of the barbarous
Heathen Savages; but now, when a proposal was made for their removal to
Ireland, where there were no Indians, and where they could live in safety,
these bloody Barbarians of Indians were, in a moment, converted to the Religion
of Jesus Christ; they could read and write English comfortably; and they could
also pray and prophecy, in a comfortable manner, with great gravity, reverence,
and zeal.

As the Commonwealth Parliament had, at this very time, ordered, that all
processes should be in their name, and that the Massachusetts Patent should be
surrendered, and a renewal of it accepted, as a proof of the submission of the
Colony to their authority; the dear Saints of God enclosed, in their letter to
Oliver, a copy of their petition to Parliament, in which they refused to submit
to either to these orders, saying, that they did not discern the need of
obeying such injunctions: In order to ward off punishment for such an avowed
disobedience, they beseech Oliver to use his interest in their behalf, that the
Work of God in the Wilderness might not be obstructed, and, in return they
promise their interest with the Captain of the Host of Israel, the God of
Armies. Whether Cromwell, on account of this pretended interest with the God of
Battles, gave up his own project, and used his influence with the Parliament,
or whether the civil war, which still continued, and the other very important
objects they were engaged in, diverted their attention, cannot be said
positively, -- but as to this period we hear no more of transplanting the
Saints to Ireland, or of recalling their Patent.

IF your correspondent, who signs himself a White man, had attended to the very
first line of the Speculation relative to American Adventurers, he would not
have charged the Writer with general reflections on a whole country; for in
that first line, the modesty and merit of some of the American gentlemen are
mentioned; now some cannot mean the whole, and therefore cannot be a general
reflection. It is readily allowed, that there are many gentlemen of integrity,
abilities, and loyalty, in the various parts of British America, and especially
in the Massachusetts; but it is as certain, that, at Boston, these very great
and good qualities render them objects of factious rage and persecution. Of
this we have a recent instance in the treatment of Judge Oliver, whose
firmness, integrity, and abilities, would do honor to the first citizen of any
country.

Concerning the money-collecting expedition of the Reverend triumvirate, the
two White Parsons and the Black one, their design in raising contributions
might be pious, but the usefulness of it may be doubted The American Clergy
have been drawing money from this good natured country for more than a century
past, for the laudible purpose of Gospelizing the Heathen, and they have
indulged us, at last, with the single and singular exhibition of that Reverend
Divine Indian, the Sooty Mr. Occum. After all, it is not so much the
misapplication of the money when collected, that is found fault with, as the
folly of our having contributed to it. -- Respecting that "ingenius Impostor,"
the Miner, your correspondent of Saturday is probably mistaken, with regard to
that rogue's having no recommendations; for it is a certain fact, that he was
fitted out by that wise head of the Faction, Mr. Hancock, who also complimented
him with the use of the cabin of one of his vessels bound to this country: So
that we are obliged to that great Boston patriot for whatever honor and
advantage we received from the visit of his townsman, the American Phoenomenon.
If we had money to spare, if the Americans were dutiful, if all our own poor
were only provided with bread, exclusive of learning, Doctor Williamson and his
Reverend Companion (who is really a good sort of man) might have some plea for
asking subscriptions toward the establishment of a "Seminary of Literature" at
Philadelphia: But circumstanced as we are at present -- America in rebellion,
ourselves bending under the heavy load of taxes incurred in defense of America,
and numbers of the most industrious members of our community, with their
families, begging in the streets -- in such a situation to part with our money,
on purpose to institute a seminary of literature in America, would not be a
proof of our generosity and wisdom, but of our blindness and folly. -- That the
money, when collected, would be applied to the purpose for which it was raised,
need not be doubted: It is not the misapplication of the money, but the
collection of it which is dreaded. It is true that the Doctor and his Reverend
companion are out of England, because they are at present in Scotland, no doubt
with an intent, as the General Assembly is now siting, to procure its sanction
and recommendation to the Clergy of the different parishes throughout that
kingdom, that collections may be made in all the Churches, as was the case in
Whitaker and Occum's expedition. But if the Scotch, amidst the wreck of their
affairs, and whilst their very Banks are becoming bankrupt, contribute a
farthing toward the Doctor's scheme, we ought to rebuild the Roman wall, and
confine them with their folly and their paper credit, to their own barren
mountains That men, supposed to have common sense should plan such an
excursion, and think to succeed, considering our present situation with regard
to America is really unaccountable and marvelous. The Americans refuse to
contribute either to their own protection, or to the support of the State; and
yet they send off a party to beg our money for the institution of a College. If
all was right in America, it would be but just in us to assist them, even if by
that assistance we should be put to some difficulties ourselves. That such time
may soon arrive must be the sincere wish of every good subject. When peace and
unanimity are restored, every individual in the Mother Country will manifest
their affection for the Colonies; for the generosity and humanity of the
English nation are boundless as the heavens.

THE Saints professing loyalty and godliness at Boston, send us, by every
vessel from their Port, accumulated proofs of their treasons and rebellions.
That mighty wise Patriot, Mr. John Hancock, from the old South Meeting House,
has lately repeated a hash of abusive, treasonable stuff, composed for him by
the joint efforts of the Reverend Divine Samuel Cooper, that Rose of Sharon,
and by the very honest Samuel Adams, Clerk, Psalm-finger, Purlonier, and Curer
of Bacon. This great and honorable Master Hancock is very well known in London
to many; indeed, unfortunately for them, too well known; for they would now
esteem themselves happy, if they had never heard of him before this frantic
Oration. When he was in London about twelve years ago, he was the
laughing stock and the contempt of all his acquaintances: instead of attending
and pushing his mercantile interest, visiting the different curiosities in and
about Town, and forming reputable connections, as a young man of his great
fortune ought to have done, he kept sneaking and lurking about the kitchen of
his uncle's correspondent, drank tea every day with the house-maid, and on
Sundays escorted her to White Conduit House. People unacquainted with Mr.
Hancock's natural condition thought, that his close attendance and attention
arose from an amorous connection; but his old school-fellows and intimates
knew, that though nature had bestowed upon him a human figure, she had denied
him the powers of manhood. The girl was therefore in perfect safety, though
unconscious of it. The sense of his incapacity could not however hinder him
from thinking; perhaps the Fair Sex took possession of his head, and no doubt
he loved them as well as he was able. When he arrived in America, his uncle,
who knew his weakness and want of capacity, kept him at a distance form
company; but as soon as he died, Flatterers, Rogues, and Knaves of all ages and
all professions, flocked about him, as Vultures, Cormorants, and Carrion Crows
flock abaut a dead Carc^se: It is a melancholy consideration, that good natured
folly should be plundered and stripped by such a nest of Villains as he
associates with. His fortune has long been in the wane. Such is the character,
and such the situation of this simple Creature, who has been persuaded to form
the extravagant scheme of conquering England in the Pulpit of the Old South,
and in the Desk of the Boston Town Hall. This Bostonian Orator sets out with
telling the seditious Starers and Gapers around him, with what awe, their
attentive gravity, their venerable appearance, and the dignity on their
countenances, struck him! It will readily be believed that they were very
attentive to their own praise, with which it must be said he plentifully
beplastered (...); but it may be suspected, that the venerable appearances were
nothing more than the grins of gray headed folly. As to this dignity in their
countenances, it would have been an entertaining and highly ludicrous sight, to
have seen the greasy rebellious Rogues swelling themselves up, and struggling
to assume an air of consequence. We agree with the Orator, when he confesses
his want of ability and unworthiness, which is one of the few truths in his
traitorous Oration. This speechifying Fool assures his Rebel Audience, that it
would be to the last degree vicious and infamous in them to attempt to support
the Government of England; that a traitorous plot is devised by the mother
country against them; that Great Britain has omitted no means of procuring
their destruction; that Great Britain has declared she has full power to make
laws of sufficient validity to bind the Colonies; that she has exercised this
pretended right by imposing on them a Tax; that she has sent her fleets and
armies to enforce her mad pretensions; that he himself glories in publicly
avowing his eternal enimity to British tyranny; that he prays perpetual infamy
may be entailed upon that villain who advised the execrable measure of taxing
them, and of sending troops to enforce obedience to Acts of the British
Parliament, which neither God nor man ever empowered them to make: That the
Soldiers were unfeeling ruffians, who viciated their morals -- who broke in
upon their solemn devotions in their temples, on the day hallowed by Heaven,
and set apart by God himself for his peculiar worship -- who taught their youth
idleness and luxury, extravagance and effeminacy; and that he was compelled to
acknowledge that even the noblest, fairest part of all the lower creation did
not entirely escape the snare. -- Such a train of falsehood, madness, and
rebellion, needs neither commentary nor explanation. The ringleaders ought to
be taken up, and hanged round their own Town Hall; and, if there is a man in
this kingdom so infamous, and so lost to all sense of loyalty, as to stand
forth their champion, he ought to be treated as the parricide of his country.

When Orator Hancock, the nominal head, yet the wretched and plundered tool of
the Boston rebels, charged the Army with ensnaring their wives and daughters,
he ought to have established the fact, by producing, at least, one evidence of
the truth of it; but the truth is, that this aspersion was only thrown out to
abuse the troops, and to keep up the aversion of the people; for so far from
giving the Officers and Soldiers access to their houses, their wives, and their
daughters, the factious professing Saints would not even provide any kind of
quarters for the regiments -- no, not even a covering, not a common shed, from
the inclemencies of the weather. After a long, desultory, false, and
treasonable preamble, the prompted idiotic Orator proceeds to the transaction
which occasioned his appearance in the pulpit of Rebellion, on that dismal
night when Hell was suffered to take the reins, when Satan, with his chosen
band, opened the sluices of New England's blood, and sacraligiously polluted
the land with the dead bodies of her guiltless Sons. These guiltless sons were
five of the faction, who assembled with many hundereds of their confederate
rebels, to drive the soldiers out of town, and to plunder the Custom-House
chest of all the Revenue raised in America. One of them, who lived some days
after he was wounded, repeatedly and solemnly declared, on his death bed, that
he had often seen riots in Ireland, but that he had never in his life time seen
soldiers suffer such a violence of attack, and such an extremity of bad usage
so long, without firing. In short, the whole was a villianous plot of the
faction; they imagined that the troops would not dare to fire without the
orders of a magistrate, and therefore, that they would be able to turn them out
of Town without any danger. These guiltless Sons had knocked down some of the
soldiers, were wresting their muskets from them, and were pushing into the
Custom House at the time they were fired at; and one of these glorious,
immortal, freeborn sons of New England, was an able bodied Moiatto slave. The
faction at Boston, although they had fomented and conducted the insurrection
and attack on his Majesty's troops and Custom house, yet they endeavored, by
the evidence and perjuries of upwards of fifty of the rioters themselves, to
establish a proof that the soldiers were the aggressors; but the perjuries were
so contradictory, barefaced, and glaring, that they failed in this their wicked
attempt. Upon this failure they tried another attrocious villainy, which was to
prove against some Custom-house Officers, that during the assault on the
troops, several of the Officers had fired on the rioters from the Custom-house
windows, and for this damnable purpose they suborned several of their adherents
to perjure themselves; and likewise by threats, imprisonment, and promises of
reward, so intimidated a servant of one of the Revenue Officers, as to oblige
him to swear that his Master, and several others, fired from the windows of the
Board of Customs. But all these suborned and perjured evidences were
controverted, in the clearest, and most satisfactory manner, by positive proofs
being brought that the Officers charged, were long before the time of the
firing, at the time of the firing, and long after it, at a house half a mile
distant from the Custom-house: other witness a proved, that the Officers were
not in the Custom-house that night; and besides, several of the most
respectable merchants in Boston, one of whom was shot through the arm, gave in
evidence, "that they were ^ully satisfied no such firing could have happened
while the soldiers were there, without their observing it; that they stood
opposite to the Custom-house in full view of it, from the time the soldiers
first came down there, until all the guns were discharged; that they were
satisfied the whole firing was from the street, and that all above was quiet."
This strong, substantial, exculpatory proof was undeniable, more especially as
the subornation of perjury was positively proved against a principal leader of
the faction; in consequence of which, the principal evidence against the
Custom-house Officers, was sentenced to be whipped at the public whipping post.
But this punishment could not ^e inflicted for some time, on account of the
violence of the faction, till the Officers of Justice watched an opportunity on
a day not usual for public punishments, to execute in a hasty manner the
sentence of the law! Therefore, Orator Hancock's long rebellious Oration, in
commemoration of this traitorous insurrection, and of the shocking designed
villainy and perjury of the faction, only serves to keep alive the remembrance
of their own most detestable infamy and prostitution.

THE demons of Folly, Falsehood, Madness, and Rebellion, seem to have entered
into the Boston Saints along with their Chief, the Angel of Darkness. Their
Orator, Hancock, that almost natural fool, raves from his pulpit, that the
white and black rioters, who fell in the concerted attack they made upon the
Custom-house, were killed (...) pursuance of a plan laid by Lord Hillsborough.
The following are a few of the flowers which grace this frantic Oration, and
some of the polite epithets bestowed on the army, on the really loyal subjects
in Boston, on the Parliament, the King, and the whole English nation. Reader
attend! -- "Ye bloody butchers! ye villains high and low! ye wretches!
murderers! ye obdurate of heart! miscreant host! happy it is for you that your
naked bones are not now piled up an everlasting monument of Massachusetts
bravery: Ye dark designing Knaves! ye guilty villains! ye murderers! ye
patricides and traitors! ye common enemies! un^e^ling ruffians! sceptered
robbers! tyrants, unfit to live in civil society! ye serpents! ye adversaries!
ye of restless malice and disappointed ambition, of hypocrisy, of canning,
chicanery, and falsehood! ye debauche^s! ye cruel savages! ye unmannerly
pillagers! ye impudent thieves with dirty hands! ye inveterate enemies! ye
Philistines! ye ungrateful enraged tyrants! ye noxious vermin! ye den of
thieves!" If this mad rebellious Oration had not come to us fully authenticated
by themselves, being composed, spoken, printed, published, and transmitted to
us by their own desire, it would have been but a rational conjecture in us to
have doubted the genuiness of this outrageous production, and to have
considered it either as the composition of some arch rogue who intended to
ridicule them, or the effusions of some mad man's brains; but as it was
solemnly delivered in the pulpit of the Old South meeting house, by that modern
Demosthenes, Master John Hancock, to the men, brethren, and fathers of Boston,
who heard it with attentive gravity, venerable appearance, and dignified
countenances; and also printed and published, at the request of the freeholders
and other inhabitants of the Town of Boston, we cannot withhold our assent to
its authenticity. Having thus given the Bostonian opinion of the King,
Parliament, and English nation, we shall now proceed to give their character of
themselves, which is equally curious, impudent, and unjust. They tell us they
are "a generous people: that Boston was ever faithful to the British crown;
that they are moral, religious, and loyal; that they are solemn in their
devotions: that their ears have been unaccustomed to impious oaths and
blasphemies; that they knew nothing of idleness, luxury, extravagance, and
effeminacy, till the arrival of the troops; that great Souls and magnificence
of Spirit actuate their noble bosoms; that they are patriotic, humane, and
compassionate; endued with noble affections; that their hearts flutter no more
at the sou^^ of war, than did those of the immortal band of Persia, the
Macedonian phalanx, the invincible Roman legions, the Turkish Janes^ries, the
Gens d' (...) of France, or the well known Grenadiers of Britain; that no
militia ever appeared in a more flourishing condition than theirs; that they
had one common case to fight for, their houses, their lands, their wives, their
children, for their liberty, themselves, and their God; that they are a wise
and a brave people; they were possessed of an illustrious roll of reverend
patriots, whose names shall grace the annals of America; that they are virtuous
asserters of the rights of mankind; that they will play the man for their God,
and the cities of their God; and that they will pray, act, fight, and even die,
for the prosperity of their Jerusalem" Their character of the people of England
is as false and scurrilous as their character of themselves is meanly
ostentatious, ^alle, and impudent; and no wonder they were attentive when they
were so highly praised. They certainly display their bravery and the greatness
of their souls* by hundreds of them attacking a single Custom-house Officer,
and treating him more barbarously than ever savage beast was treated. It is
impossible for real courage to exist in people who are so ridiculously lavish
in their own praise. We still remember their pompous vauntings, blusterings,
and rhodomantadoes in the year 1768, before the arrival of the two regiments
from Halifax, and we also remember their abject pusilanimity on the landing of
these troops. Instead of putting their trust in the arm of flesh, they threw
the burden of their defense on the Lord; and on that dreadful day, when the
Philistenes, the English re^^ments, triumphed over Israel and the dear Saints
of God, the holy wariors, though they were far from being formidable in front,
were exceedingly offensive in the rear. On their day of prayer, set apart to
implore the Almighty to send his winds, his storms, and his tempests, to fight
their battles and to destroy their enemies, one of their congregational
parsons, Reverend Doctor Byles son.
a man of i^finite wit and humor, who knew their cowardice, and laughed at
their bravadoes, gave out to be sung in the afternoon that Hymn of Doctor
Watts, which begins, Whence do our mournful thoughts arise?
And where is our courage fled?


These mournful lines the intrepid Saints sung with great solemnity and
dejection, whilst their ingenious parson no doubt smiled at their humiliation.

The temper and abilities of the rebellious Saints in Boston, are easily
discoverable in Hancock's Oration, who at his delivery of it, was attended by
most of his Majesty's Council, the majority of the Representatives then at
Boston, the Select men, most of the Justices of the Peace, and the rest of the
rebellious herd of Calves, Asses, knaves, and Fools, which compose the Faction.
As to the foolish Orator himself, whenever and wherever he appears, he exhibits
a complete figure of idiotism personified.

LETTER XXII.
SOME time after the people of New England had declineed transplanting
themselves to Ireland, Cromwell conquered Jamaica; and upon this acquisition,
he again invited the people of Massachusetts to remove and settle on that
island; but the People of the Lord remained firm in their determination not to
depart out of their own Israel.

Cromwell's arguments to induce them to move were both curious and artful; he
endeavored to persuade them both by worldly and religious considerations;
Conversation between Cromwell and Leverett, the Massachusetts (...).
he apprehended that the people of New England had as clear a call from the
Lord to transport themselves from thence to Jamaica, as they had from England
to New England, in order to the bettering their outward condition, God having
promised his people should be the head and not the tail; besides the design had
its tendency to overthrow the man of sin. These ingenious reasons, however, had
no effect on the Saints; their Agent answered, that the body of the people, all
things considered, lived more comfortably like Englishmen than any of the rest
of the Plantations. There was now to talk of their Poverty in the howling
Wilderness. Whilst Cromwell and the Agent were canvassing this matter together,
a Member of the Council of State came in, and hearing the conversation
respecting New England, he expressed himself greatly against the ^rigidness and
persecutions there, and thought that his Highness ought to interpose his
authority.

At this time many complaints were made to the Protector against the Colony of
Massachusetts, for their violent and unjust encroachments and usurpations on
their neighbors, particularly in the eastern parts adjacent to New England,
where they had forcibly seized lands and provinces, which had been previously
granted to others by Patent.

In the General Court's letter to Oliver, excusing themselves from removing to
Jamaica, they seemed to be aware of these just complaints, which they styled
according to their present method, clamours and calumnies; and they promised
Oliver never to cease praying for him, provided he continued to believe all
they said, and to befriend them.

They also wrote a letter to Mr. Hopkins, a gentleman in great favor with
Oliver, assuring him, that though they had not hitherto returned him their
grateful acknowledgments for the many singular expressions of his faithful
love, yet their best desires at the throne of grace had not been wanting to
implore a rich recompense of reward on his head and heart, as well as on many
others whom the Lord had stirred up to wish well to his exiled ones in these
parts; that they were not without hope that the Lord would more and more
encourage him, according to the mercies he received; and that the Lord, who was
and would be a rich paymaster in the end, put into his hands opportunities of
acting for his service whilst here. They then beg his continued helpfulness and
assistance to Leveret, their Agent, in promoting their affairs with his
Highness the Lord Protector, and his honorable Council, and conclude with
telling him, that they offer up daily prayers for his prosperity.

Vindicating the oppressions and persecutions of the Pharisees of Massachusetts,
giving credit to the excellent character which they gave of themselves, and
refusing redress to the many just complaints preferred against them, was in
their opinion acting in the service of the Lord and the Lord's people.

As their usurpations were numerous, so were the representations against them.
This occasioned the General Court to draw up instructions to their Agent, some
of which are as follow:

You are desired to take the first convenient opportunity to present the Letter
from this Court unto his Highness, and upon all occasions to let his Highness
understand how thankfully we accept, and at all times readily acknowledge,
his Highnesses favor and clemency toward us, and to assure him of our real
and sincere affection toward his Highness, and readiness upon all occasions to
be serviceable to him to the utmost of our power and ability.

These professions of real and sincere affection and service, were only from
the teeth outward; for they scarcely ever obeyed any one of his commands.

That you also humbly desire, on our behalf, that as we have many enemies in
the world, that all complaints made against us by one or other, may take no
place in his Princiely breast, but be suspended from all belief till we may
have knowledge thereof and opportunity to answer for ourselves.

This has generally been the only answer they made to the many complaints
brought against them. They always craved time to reply, and after that was
expired, they continued to petition for further time, till the complaints were
forgot, or till war or other important business occasioned them to be neglected.

If peace be concluded betwixt England and France, and the French Forts, in
these parts, included therein, and that you find a propensity in his Highness
to gratify New England with the same, that you improve your best interest and
opportunity for the obtaining thereof, provided they be free from charges and
other engagements.

This is exactly their conduct in our times; rapacious to, seize every
advantage within their reach, but refusing to be at the smallest expe^ce, or to
submit to any engagement or, authority, but that of their own will and pleasure.

If any complaint be made of our entrenching upon what is called the Province
of Legoma, you may, for the present, make the best answer you can; which, if it
satisfy not, you may crave liberty for our further answer.

By the Court, Edward Rawson, Secretary.

Such replies and vindications as these to be sure are convincing. When they
seize a province to desire their Agent to make the best answer he can, and when
they invade every prerogative of Majesty to tell him to make the best excuse he
is able, was always their method of procedure, and when joined to their common
phrase, that they were a virtuous, godly and uninversally loyal People, was all
the defense they ever made for their many crimes and treasons.

THE Select men of Boston, who have fomented so many dagerous and traitorous
insurrections, and who have given such continued trouble to our supreme
legislature, are after all the most ignorant, assuming, and despicable fellows
in the Creation. One of them is a Bankrupt Merchant; a second a noble Tinman; a
third, an old retailer of Wine and Cider, but who now acts as Shopman to his
wife; a fourth, that poor plucked gawky, Orator Hancock; and a fifth, a
redoubtable Tailor, who shall be the subject for the day, This valiant Tailor
had the honor, a few years ago, to be Lieutenant Colonel of the Boston
Militia, whose ragged figures and aukwardness far outstrip our City Train
Bands. At that time an English gentleman in Boston had a curiosity to obtain a
list of certain Toasts, which were given in the Council Chamber on his
Majesty's Birth Day, and having some knowledge of this warlike Tailor, sent a
Card to him, requesting a copy of the Toasts in writing. The answer of this
Tailor, Soldier, and Select man, is exactly as follows:

Coll^. Marshall's compliments waits on Mr. -- to leet him know he cant give a
^ortin list of the tosts that pasd at the Council Board not being their abuse
15 minits, but heard, say, vizt, the King, the Queen and Royal Family; Onion
betwon Great Britton and hur Colloneys; his Majestys Ministers of State; the
Governor and Provence. when the Gards and Rigement and Train of Artilery ware
dismis after the firings the Capt. marchd. their respecktive Companys to their
own Houses whare they provided jonteel dinners for their Officers and other
Jontlemen of the Town and after dinner a number of Loyal Tofts, concluded the
day.

If you have a mind to be more perfecktly informed of To^t at the Council Board
Mr. Sherrif Greenleaf would inform you, their was not any body at Funevel Hall.

Such are the great abilities and learning of the mighty men of Boston, whom
their Agents tells us will overthrow the British Empire; and Jerathmeel Bowers,
Representative for Swanzey, whom the Faction have so often elected one of his
Majesty's Council, but who has been as often negatived much to the honor of
Goverors Bernard and Hutchinson, is yet still more deplorably ignorant, for he
can hardly read; and it is a most dreadful piece of business for him, when he
is under the necessity of trying to write his name. This favorite of the
Boston Faction is also singularly notorious, for many very extraordinary
mercantile exploits, both on the American Continent, and in the West India
Islands. In short, the whole of the Faction is composed of two Classes, the
foolish and the infamous.

TO induce us to submit to the knaves and rogues who lead or drive the geese,
calves, and asses, that compose the Boston Faction, their hoary hireling, the
learned Doctor Franklin, of Philadelphia, avers, that if we decline to
acquiesce in such measures as he shall dictate to us from his rebellious
constituents, that the Empire of Britain shall disappear from before the face
of other nations, like the baseless fabric of a vision, and that she shall
sink, never more to rise; yet according to this learned Gentleman, we may, in a
moment, not only make the rebels at Boston quiet, but affectionate; to restore
peace, force is unnecessary; as he tells us, in his "intended Speech before the
House of Lords," that we have only to indulge the Bostonians in doing whatever
they please, and then they will favor us with their good opinion; that by such
means we gained and long preserved their affection; and that we lost that
affection when we required them to pay a trifle toward their own support. Can
any thing be more reasonable than what this wise Philosopher asks for his
constituents; They will condescend to speak well of us, if we will be such
fools as to defend them against all their enemies, without insisting that they
shall pay any part of the expense. It is surely a conclusive argument against
taxing America, to tell us, that former Administrations never thought of it,
that England had always been liberal to the Americans, had granted bounties on
many of their commodities, had reimbursed them the expenses of last war, and
had, at all times, defended them against their enemies, at an expense ruinous
to herself: -- All these, on the contrary, are powerful reasons why the people
of America should not be allowed to remain any longer untaxed; nothing can be
more just and equitable, than that they should pay their due proportion toward
the support of the State (...) When it was recommended to them to raise a
revenue by their own Assemblies, many of them would not so much as send
Administration an answer, and those Assemblies which did, sent a negative It
would be political suicide in this country any longer to bend under a load of
taxes, incurred by the protection of America, without obliging them to
participate the burden. If, in England, a hard working, half-starved, Labourer
or Manufacturer, encumbered with a large family, makes Twenty Pounds a year,
one half, at least, goes in taxes; whi^st the turbulent American fattens in the
midst of plenty, and has, till lately, enjoyed a freedom from Taxation. The
speechifying Doctor is outrageous with Administration for withdrawing the
American Governors and Judges from the influence of the people; for this,
indeed, he has good reason, because, by this most necessary regulation, his
traitorous deceitful Constituents will now be forced to pay their debts, if
they are able; whereas formerly, when the Judges were under popular control,
they were reduced to the dismal necessity of losing their salaries, or of
deciding contrary to their consciences. Mr Rome's letter, published by the
foolish Traitors of Boston themselves, fully evinces, that an English Creditor
had no chance of obtaining a verdict against a New England Debtor, when the
Judges were chosen by the New England Debtors. Of this unjustifiable conduct
other instances may hereafter be given. -- The opinion that the Speechifier has
expressed, of our dishonesty, will certainly tend to make us believe, the more
readily, all his arguments: His Threats, Flatteries, Prayers, Prophecies, his
stating the Massachusetts as a separate nation and a powerful state, and his
many contradictions are so frequent, so glaring, and so ridiculous, that any
farther observation upon them, than this, is unnecessary -- That, on account of
the oppressive threepenny duty on Tea, Heaven is to interpose in favor of the
Boston Saints, and to punish us for our impiety, in presuming to tax the Seed
of Israel, the Chosen of the Lord, the Mighty in Battle -- In reply to this
anathema (as we, like, good Christians, ought to return blessings for curses,
and good for evil) we shall frequently pray, that Old Treachery, whose upper
story seems, by his writings, to be much out of repair, may, in God's own time,
be restored to his right mind; and that, when he has repented of all his
iniqu^ties he may take flight to the Regions of Bliss, and may rest for ever in
the Bosom of Abraham, Amen!

LETTERS from Boston observe, that the temper of the Sam^s may be easily
conceived from the apparent respect, with which they received General Gage, a
gentleman whom they had most scurrilously abused some years ago and whom their
Council, House of Assembly, and Town Meeting had passed the most virulent
public censures upon in their votes, charging him with being the author of
false, scandalous, infamous, virulent, malicious dangerous, pernicious,
incen^^ary libels upon the inhabitants of Boston, of the Province, and of the
Continent; and the Select men were directed to prosecute the wicked author, and
bring him to condign punishment. -- These are the exact words and polite
phraises of their votes; and all this scurrility, so disgraceful to the voters
of it, was thrown out against the General for an observation of his in a letter
to Lord Hillsborough, couched in these words. In truth, my Lord, there is very
little Government in Boston. The severity of this remark consisted in the truth
of it; for it is an indisputable fact, that there has been little or no
Government in that seditious town for these last ten years. Yet this Gentleman,
whom they had so illiberally and unjustly treated, and voted an enemy to their
Town, Province, and Continent, they have received with the utmost
demonstrations of respect and submission. Indeed, on his first appointment,
abstracted from his intimate and thorough knowledge of the Bostonians it was
thought a fine stroke of Policy, and a punishment in itself, in his Majesty to
make choice of a Gentleman to preside over that rebellious Province, which had
so unjustly abused him. Those who were best acquainted with the disposition of
the Boston Faction, and who have a regular correspondence with many in that
Colony, though they never imagined that the Bostonians would resist unto blood,
yet they as little thought that the new Governor would be received with every
appearance of joy and exultation, and that he would be complimented, and
treated at the expense of the rebellious Saints. Many sensible people in
England were afraid that some blood would be shed on the arrival of General
Gage; for they had no conception that people descended, from Englishmen would,
after so many dreadful rhodomontadoes, shrink into Bobadils: They were led into
this mistake by not knowing the education which the Holy Warriors of Boston
receive in their youth; the generality of the young Bostonians are bred up
hypocrites in religion, and pettifoggers in law, most of them are possessed of
a Bible, and a Provincial Law Book, and it is well known, that whenever
hypocrisy takes root, and is further supported by a constant practice of the
lowest and most infamous chicaneries, common to petty practitioners in law,
that all the good and manly qualities given us by nature are soon eradicated.
The most ancient Patriarch of New England, the Rev. Mr. Cotton, publicly
recommended and defended hypocrisy; "Hypocrites," said that holy man, "Give God
part of his due, the outward man." What has been said above only respects the
Faction, and is intended to illustrate their real character; for in Boston
there are many good, as well as many bad people; but unfortunately for the
former, the latter have always, borne sway. Neither is any reflection meant
against the study of the law: it is a noble, liberal profession; and men of
character ought not to be blamed, because they cannot keep knaves out of the
practice of it.

THE Writers in defense of the Bostonians, finding their News-paper
publications to have very little (...), have now changed their method of
procedure, and attack us in shilling and eighteen-penny pamphlets. One of those
ingenious productions the author has thought proper to entitle, A Speech
intended to have been spoken on the Bill for altering the Charter of the
Massachusetts Bay; and he has also chosen to circulate a report, that the
intended Speaker was, that Right Reverend Father in God the Bishop of St Asaph,
who last year, to the utter astonishment of the Society for the propagation of
the Gospel in foreign parts, delivered to them, from the pulpit of St. Mary le
Bow, a factious political sermon, instead of informing them of the progress of
the Church of England in America, and instead of instructing them by an
illustration of that portion of Scripture which he had taken for his text. It
is, however, more probable, that the intended Speech is the fruits of the
midnight labors of the great and loyal Doctor Franklin, who has only played
off the Bishop upon us, as a literary deception, in order to give the greater
currency and weight to his own wild reveries and lucubrations. The reasons for
imputing this intended speech to Doctor Franklin are, that it contains all that
low cunning which so peculiarly marks his writings; that affected moderation;
that feigned regard for peace; that compassion for the madness of Britain in
refusing to humble her neck to the feet of the Bostonian rebels; that grave
impudence, which always places America in the light of a separate, independent,
powerful State; that false prophesying, which croaks out threatenings of ruin
to our peace, commerce, and kingdom, if the smallest tax is laid on his darling
America; and that foolish assurance, which promises us more wealth and power,
and permanent greatness than the world ever saw, if we will only fall down and
worship his rebellious constituents -- For all these reasons the Speech shall
be considered as Doctor Franklin's. In the advertisement prefixed to the
Speech, the modest Author assures us, that, prompted by a warm desire of
serving his country, he will suggest some useful truths, which great men are
apt to overlook. The first useful truth he tells us is, that he has the
misfortune of differing in opinion from some men of as much virtue and ability
as this kingdom affords. To this useful truth we may readily subscribe; and we
may also naturally suppose that, respecting the late acts for regulating the
Massachusetts, the men of virtue and ability are in the right, and that our
Speechifier is in the wrong. He next suggests a doubt, whether any point ought
to be pursued, which cannot be carried by persuasion. When the legislative body
of Great Britain are converted to the religion of the Yeas and Nays, and have
taken their degrees at Philadelphia, we may then, and not till then, expect
them to be influenced by such a doubt. Mr. Greenville tried to persuade the
Americans so contribute a small pit^ance of their wealth toward the exigences
of the State, and gave them a whole year to consider of the proposal; but he
could not prevail by persuasion, and therefore passed the Stamp Act, which the
next administration most unwisely repealed. This doubting gentleman is really
exceedingly civil to us; we are only to persuade the Bostonians to pay a (...)
of the expenses of government, and if they refuse, as they have always done,
why then, for the sake of peace, and that those wordy wariors may not ruin us
we must continue their slaves ^ear the whole burden of their protection, and be
very subm^ssive, grateful, and obedient to them, least they should refuse to
pay us their debts, and least they should send a formidable squadron of their
dung-boats and fishing smacks, properly loaded, to tar and feather us. So much
for the Advertisement. -- Our author, in his Speech, sets out with telling us,
that he hopes to contribute something toward a reconciliation between the
Colonies and this unhappy country: And, gentle reader, what do you think his
charitable contribution amounts to? Just to this -- Repeal the taxation law;
the four acts passed the last Session or Parliament relating to the
Massachusetts; resolve never to tax America* let Britain continue to defend that
country, and be at all the charges of its Government; -- and, in return,
America, no doubt, will continue to trade with us, for what they cannot get any
where else; will; discharge their debts at their own time; and will continue a
nominal union with us, till they are able to erect themselves into an
Independent State. This is the principal subject of the useful truths, and
contributions of somethings, comprised in this impudent, intended Speech.

LETTER XXIII.
THE numerous and well-founded complaints laid before the King in Council soon
after the restoration, against the Colony of the Massachusetts, for their
various oppressions and murders, and also their contumacious disobedience and
resistance to every order and regulation of Government, occasioned the Agent of
that Colony to be asked, by the Lords of the Council, in the course of his
examination before them, Whether the Massachusetts if they durst, would not
throw off their allegiance and subjection to the Crown of England? To which
question he only replied, That his constituents were honest men; and that if he
entertained such a thought of them he should be very uncharitable.

When, likewise it was proved against him, upon oath, that he said the
Massachusetts, rather than allow of appeals from their Courts of Justice to
England, would sell their country to the Spaniards; the same Agent both denied
and confessed the charge; which drew the following observation from their
Lordships, that they did not consider the sentiment and speech so much his own,
as the spirit of New England.

When the Agent sent his constituents intelligence of this examination, and of
the opinions formed of their conduct in England, the General Court, dreading
that their Charter would be vacated, immediately proclaimed Charles the Second,
which they had not hitherto done; they a so voted an address to his Majesty,
and resolved to send home two additional Agents to attempt to varnish over
their crimes moral and political.

Their address is in the same canting hypocritical style of all their other
addresses.

His Majesty was the best of Kings; one of the Gods among men, who delighted to
conform himself to the God of Gods; they presented to his compassionate eye a
bottle full of tears washed in their Jeshimon; their Churches sat in sackcloth,
until he held forth to them the scepter of life; they prayed that God might
preserve his Majesty from all emissaries agitated by an infernal spirit; his
Majesty was enthronized in their consciences; he was their Lord and their
Savior; they were again poor Mephibosheth prejudicially misrepresented,
praying to be permitted still to sing the Lord's song in a strange land; they
appealed for their innocence to God, to Angels, to his Majesty, and to all good
men; and lastly, they prayed, that the Lord might be with his most excellent
Majesty, and make his throne both greater and better, than the throne of David.

The above vile nonsense the General Court voted to be sent home to his
Majesty, deeming it a sufficient exculpation of all their usurpations,
persecutions, and illegal acts.

The same year two Agents ( Mr. Bradstreet and the Rev. Mr. Norton) were sent
home to Petition, the Lord the King, for a confirmation of their privileges:
They were also to represent them as loyal and obedient subjects; to take off
all scandal and objections which had been, or should be made against them; to
do nothing prejudicial to the Patent; and to give a regular account of their
proceedings. These are the whole instructions given their Agents on their
departure; by which it is evident, that the Colony relied more upon the
abilities of their Agents, than upon any proofs or attestations of their
innocence -- of these last, indeed, they had none to send -- their whole plea,
in ex^enuation of their guilt, consisted of stale professions of loyalty and
Godliness.

Their Agents set out with fear and trembling, uncertain what would be their
fate when they arrived in England; in fact, they could hardly be prevailed upon
to embark. After many delays and objections, which were all obviated by the
Committee of the General Court, Parson, Norton, the most terrified of the two,
played off a most pious artifice; he feigned sickness; took to his bed, and
informed the Committee, "that his voyage as yet solely depended upon God." Upon
this the Committee drew up several letters, which they addressed to sundry
noblemen, and others in England, and apologized for not sending Agents
according to his Majesty's desire, with declarations, that after they had made
choice of two meet persons, it was the good pleasure of him who rules all
things, to frustrate their designs, by visiting one of the Messengers with
sickness; but it seems the second day after the Lord was wonderfully pleased to
encourage and strengthen the heart of the Reverend Mr. Norton, so that he was
persuaded to embark, and the vessel instantly sailed.

A few months after their Agents sailed, the General Court voted and published
what they called,

A Declaration of their Rights.
The General Court have full power and authority, both legislative and
executive, for the government of all people here, whether inhabitants or
strangers both concerning matters civil and ecclesiastical, and without appeals
to England.

This Government is privileged by all fitting means, yea If need be by force of
arms, to defend themselves both by land and sea, against all such person or
persons as shall at any time attempt the invasion, detriment, or annoyance of
the Plantation.

We conceive any imposition prejudicial to the country, to be an infringement
of their rights.

Nothing can be plainer than this declaration; though they were dreadfully
alarmed, they endeavored by their boastings, to carry their point regarding
appeals; and as to impositions, they means the payment of Customs, and the
regulations and restrictions they were laid under by the navigation act.

Their Agents met with a very favorable reception at Court, which far exceeded
their warmest expectation, and were, in a short time, sent back with a most
gracious letter from his Majesty.

Substance of his Majesty's Letter.
That although the license of the late ill times had an influence on the Colony
of the Massachusetts, in which they had swerved from the rules prescribed, and
even from the government instituted by the Charter, yet we do most graciously
rather impute their deviation to the iniquity of the time, than to the evil
intents of the hearts of those who exercised the government there.

And we do further publish and declare our free and gracious pardon to all our
subjects of that our Plantation, Provided always, and be it in our declared
expectation.

That all such Laws and Ordinances as are, or have been, made there, which are
contrary or derogatory to our authority and Government shall be annulled and
repealed.

That the rules and prescriptions of the said Charter for administering the Oath
of Alleigance, be henceforth duly observed.

That the administration of Justice be in our name.

That since the principle and foundation of that Charter was and is the freedom
of liberty of conscience, we charge you that liberty be given to all who desire
to use the Book of Common Prayer, and to perform their devotion after the
manner established in the Church of England; that they be admitted to the
Sacrament, and their children to Baptism.

That although we have declared that the Charter shall be observed, yet, if the
number of Assistants be found to be inexpedient, as we are informed it is, we
then dispense with the same, and declare our will, for the future, that the
number of the said Assistants shall not exceed eighteen, nor be less at any
time than ten.

That in the election of Governor and Assistants, consideration only be had of
the wisdom and integrity of the persons to be chosen, and not of any faction,
with reference to opinion and profession.

That all freeholders, though of different professions concerning Church
government, have their votes in the choice of all Officers, civil or military.

That this letter be published, that our subjects may know our grace and favor
to them,

And that we will be ready, upon application from them to advance the interest,
the good, and the trade of the Colony, presuming they will merit the same by
their duty and obedience.

Given at Hampton Court, June 28th, in the fourteenth year of our reign, By his
Majesty's command ED. NICHOLAS.


From this it appears, that they had broke through their Charter; but that his
Majesty pardoned them on condition that they repealed their illegal and
presumptuous Acts, which were derogatory to his prerogative and his authority
in Parliament; that they, in future, administered faithfully the Oath of
Alleigance; that they constituted their Courts of Justice in his name; that
they ceased persecuting the members of the Church of England; that they
acquiesced in the regulation of the number of their Counselors; that they
elected men of integrity, and not the adherents of Faction; that they allowed
all Freeholders to vote, and that they merited their conditional pardon, and
his future favor, by their duty and obedience.

Let us now see how well the Massachusetts deserved his Majesty's gracious
pardon for all their crimes, and how well they fulfilled the conditions of that
pardon.

It is true, they published the letter, but they not only put off the
consideration of the requisitions contained in it, but also subjoined to the
republication of it, the following cautionary remark; That inasmuch as the
letter has influence on the Churches as well as Civil State, all manner of
actings, in relation thereto, shall be suspended until the next General Court.

At the next Sessions of the General Court, all we find they did in compliance
with his Majesty's letter, was giving directions, that the administration of
Justice should henceforth be in his Majesty's name. And these grasping and
ungrateful independents of Massachusetts, because their Agents could not procure
them all the extraordinary and undue liberties, which, out of their great
modesty, they had chosen to demand, were so dissatisfied, that they censured
and reproached them with having laid the foundation of the ruin of their
liberties. This unmerited abuse greatly affected the Reverend Mr. Norton, whose
voyage to England had considerably enlightened him; he saw the evil spirit of
his countrymen, and told them in the General Court, that if they complied not
with the King's letter, the blood that should be spilt would lie at their door.
Soon after he grew melancholy, and died suddenly.

Every person, who was a good subject and a well-wisher to England and to this
refractory Colony, whether in or out of Office, seems to have been sensible of
the turbulence of the Massachusetts, and of the intention of that people to
throw off their dependence on the Crown of England. A gentleman ( Sir John
Wolstenholme) having occasion to write to the Secretary of the Massachusetts on
public business, respecting the Act of Navigation, against which the
Massachusetts grievously complained judiciously observes, that if we do not
maintain here the honor and reputation of his Majesty and the nation, which
must be by our navigation and shipping, which are our walls, the Plantations
will be subject to be devoured by strangers: and, therefore, he earnestly
desired them to preserve and keep them faithful to his Majesty's Crown, and in
subjection, as true English men to the civil government.

LETTER XXIV.
NOTWITHSTANDING the several acts of Parliament passed in the 12th 15th, 22d,
23d, and 25th years of the reign of Charles the second, for the better securing
the plantation trade to this kingdom, yet the Massachusetts, finding the breach
of these laws more profitable than the observance of them, still continued
their illicit trade with many of the nations of Europe.

To remedy this disorder, as well as many others, Mr. Randolph was dispatched
in 1676 to New England with a letter from his Majesty to the Governor and
Council of the Massachusetts, commanding them to send home agents to answer the
complaints made against them particularly those relating to their usurpations
of the province of May^e and New Hampshire, claimed by Mr. Gorges and Mr.
Masoa, With this command they thought it prudent partly to comply, and sent two
Agents to England.

The reception Mr. Randolph met with from the Governor and Council, will be
best shown by his own account transmitted to his Majesty, of which the
following is the substance:

STATE PAPER.
On his arrival at Boston, he immediately waited on the Governor, Mr. Leverett,
acquainted him with the cause of his coming, and that he had brought a letter
from his Majesty to the Magistrates of the colony.

The same day he attended the Governor and Council, and delivered his Majesty's
letter; after the perusal of which, the Governor observed to the Council, that
the matters therein contained were very inconsiderable things, and easily
answered, and it did no way concern the government to take any notice thereof.

Soon after his arrival, a report was artfully raised to amuse and distract the
people about domestic troubles in England, that the Duke of York and many of
the Nobility had left the Court discontented, had applied to the city for
assistance, and that all was in confusion at home: This intelligence was
reported with much confidence, was said to come from some very good people in
London, and therefore must be true.

The next visit he paid the Governor he told him, that several ships were
arrived at Boston from France, Spain, the Streights, and from other parts of
Europe, and also from the Canaries, contrary to his Majesty's laws for
encouraging navigation, and regulating the trade of the plantations.

To this the Governor made answer, that the laws made by his Majesty in
Parliament obliged them to do nothing but what consisted with the good of the
colony; that the legislative power rested solely in them, to act and make laws
by virtue of their charter; that all matters in difference were to be concluded
by their final determination, without any appeal to his Majesty; that his
Majesty ought not to retrench their liberties, but might enlarge them if he
pleased; and that his Majesty could do no less in reason than let them enjoy
their liberties and their trade.

About a month after his arrival at Boston he went into New Hampshire belonging
to Mr. M^son, where the whole country complained of the oppression and
usurpation of the Magistrates of Boston, for (...) ministers upon them, not
admitting them to the ^^crament denying baptism to their children, and liberty
of choosing their own Magistrater and officers, because they were not members,
of the congregational churches; that as a farther mark of the power and
sovereignty of Boston over them, Magistrates were sent twice a year from Boston
to keep courts for trying of causes; that these Magistrates laid what
impositions, fines and taxes they thought proper, upon their estates persons
and trade, contrary to the laws of England; that they earnestly expected to be
delivered from the oppressions of the Massachusetts Bay, and that his Majesty
would be graciously pleased to give them relief, according to the promises made
them by his Majesty's commissioners in 1665, who declared them not to be under
the government of Boston.

That the principal inhabitants of the province of Main, belonging to Mr.
Gorges, but now called Yorkshire, since seized by the Bostoners, made the same
complaints to him as those of New Hampshire; that they had entreated him to
represent their condition to his Majesty, several of them having been suffered
to be rui^ed by the Indians for having formerly expressed their duty to his
Majesty.

That he also visited the colony of New-Plymouth, at the request of Governor
Winslow, a gentleman of great courage, conduct and loyal principles, who
expressed great dislike at the carriage of the Magistrates of Boston toward
his Majesty's person and government; at their encroaching upon the rights,
trade, and possessions of the neighboring colonies; at their laying what rates
they pleased on the commodities and products of the other colonies imported
into their harbors; and their daily breach of his Majesty's laws concerning
trade and navigation; at their trading with and encouraging all nations to
trade with them, to the great prejudice and detriment of his Majesty and his
kingdom; and that New England could never be secure, flourish, nor be
serviceable to his Majesty, until the several colonies and plantations were
reduced under his Majesty's immediate government; and that the colonies of
New-Plymouth and Connecticut would readily and willingly submit to his
Majesty's pleasure and commands, in the disposal and settlement of their civil
government.

That, during his residence at Boston, the principal inhabitants complained of
the arbitrary government and oppressions of their Magistrates, and hoped his
Majesty would free them from their bondage, by establishing his royal authority
among them, and governing them according to his laws.

That upwards of an hundred of the principal inhabitants, about ten years ago,
had subscribed and presented to the General Court a petition, confessing his
Majesty's right of jurisdiction and sovereignty over them and praying
submission of the Court to his Majesty's orders; for which loyal petition they
received a severe check, their petition was voted scandalous, they were styled
the betrayers of the liberties of that colony, and ill affected to that
government; and some of them, for this petition, suffered greatly in their
estates, and ever since had been subject to many inconveniences, not being
admitted to any offices of the government, or to the choice of the Magistrates;
and that by desire of the chief persons, he had sent his Majesty a copy of this
petition.

That before his return to England, he waited on the Governor for his
dispatches, who entertained him with a sharp reproof for publishing the
contents of his Majesty's letters to the inhabitants of Boston, New Hampshire
and Main, telling him that he designed to make a disturbance and mutiny in the
country, and to withdraw the people from their obedience to the Magistracy of
that colony, and the authority thereof; that the Governor then gave him a
letter directed to the Right Honorable Mr. Secretary Coventry, saying to him,
that was the answer which the Council thought sit to give to his Majesty: So
that, although his Majesty had named him, in his royal letters, to solicit a
determination of the business depending, yet he must wholly refer to their own
letter, they not having acquainted him with the contents.

And that at his departure both the Governor and Magistrates severally
entreated him to give a favorable report of the country, and the Magistrates
adding, that those that blessed them God would bless, and those that cursed
them God would curse; and that whatever reports were raised against them by
wicked and evil-minded men, yet they were a people truly fearing the Lord, and
very obedient to his Majesty.

Few observations need be made on the above letter to his Majesty, it may only
be observed, that the Magistrates of the Colony of Massachusetts displayed the
same opposition to the laws and authority of the King in Parliament, which they
had uniformly made for near half a century before; and that on this occasion
they also showed their usual absurdity effrontery, and hypocrisy.

To say that his Majesty's commands were inconsiderable and easily answered,
and yet that it no way concerned the Colony to take any notice of them, was
acting consistently with themselves; their having usurped two Provinces was
quiet a trivial affair to them. Though the Governor and Magistrates treated his
Majesty's letter with such indignity, they voted to thank his Majesty for his
gracious letter, at the very time they refused to obey its contents.

False rumors from some very good people in London they continue to circulate
to this day, and these rumors always are true till experience contradicts
them* and then other reports are spread, adapted to the design of the factious.

The Massachusetts Governor was, at least, very open in denying acquiescence to
the Acts of Trade, and in asserting, that the Colony decisions were final
without appeal; but we cannot think him very modest for insisting, that his
Majesty in reason ought to allow them the enjoyment of their unlawful trade.

What opinion the neighboring Colonies entertained of their conduct, is
sufficiently obvious from the conversation with the Governor of New Plymouth,
and he seems, at that very distant period, to have been inspired with the same
salutary opinions which actuated Parliament during the last Sessions

It is not surprising that the Governor (...) Council, or Magistrates,
reprimanded Mr. Randolph severely for complying with his Majesty's
instructions, which they said, tended to raise a mutiny against their
authority; but it may well be wondered at, that after showing so much ill
humor, both with the message and the messenger of his Majesty they should have
the effrontery to entreat him to give a favorable report of them; to promise
him the rewards of Heaven if he granted their request, but if he refused, to
denounce against him the Curse of GOD; and to close the whole in their
impudent, hypocritical way, by assuring him, after their abuse and
disobedience, that they were a People truly fearing the Lord, and very obedient
to his Majesty.

Thus we see their own public Acts; the letters and remonstrances of their best
friends; the official papers of our different administrations; the examinations
and orders of the Lords of the Council; the Acts of Parliament, and the letters
of the Sovereign himself, all contributing to form a mass of incontestible
evidence, illustrating the turbulent and rebellious disposition of the people
of Massachusetts, from the (...) moment of their settlement of the present day.


