A PROCLAMATION FOR A PUBLIC THANKSGIVING.
ALTHOUGH in Consequence of the unnatural, cruel, and barbarous Measures, adopted
and pursued by the British Administration, great and distressing Calamities are
brought upon our oppressed Country, and on this Colony in particular; we feel
the dreadful Effects of Civil War, by which America is stained with the Blood
of her valiant Sons, who have bravely fallen in the laudable Defense of our
Rights and Privileges; -- Our Capital, once the Seat of Justice, Opulence and
Virtue, is unjustly wrested from its proper Owners, who are obliged to flee
from the Iron Hand of Tyranny, or are held in the unrelenting Arms of
Oppression: -- Our Seaports greatly distressed, and Towns burnt by the Foes,
who have acted the Part of barbarous Incendiaries. -- And although the wise and
holy Governor of the World, has, in his righteous Providence, sent Droughts
into this Colony, and wasting Sickness into many of our Towns; yet we have the
greatest Reason to adore and praise the Supreme Disposer of Events, who deals
infinitely better with us than we deserve; and amidst all his Judgments has
remembered Mercy, by causing the Voice of Health again to be heard amongst us;
-- Instead of Famine, affording to an ungrateful People a Competency of the
Necessaries and Comforts of Life; in remarkably preserving and protecting our
Troops, when in apparent Danger, while our Enemies, with all their boas^ed
Skill and Strength, have met with Loss, Disappointment, and Defeat; -- and in
the Course of his good Providence, the Father of Mercies has bestowed upon us,
many other Favors, which call for our grateful Acknowledgements.

Therefore, Twenty-third Day of November Instant, to be observed as a Day of
public THANKSGIVING, throughout this Colony; hereby calling upon Ministers and
People, to meet for religious Worship on said Day, and devoutly to offer up
their unfeigned Praises to Almighty GOD, the Source and benevolent Bestower of
all Good, for his affording the necessary Means of Subsistence, though our
Commerce has been prevented, and the Supplies from the Fishery denied us. --
That such a Measure of Health is enjoyed among us; that the Lives of our
Officers and Soldiers have been so remarkably preserved, while our Enemies have
fell before them: -- That the vigorous Efforts which have been used to excite
the Savage Vengeance of the Wilderness, and rouse the Indians to Arms, that an
unavoidable Destruc^ion might come upon our Frontiers, have been almost
miraculously defeated: -- That our unnatural Enemies, instead of Ravaging the
Country with uncontrouled Sway, are confined within such narrow Limits, to
their own Mortification and Distress, environed by an American Army, brave and
determined; -- That such a Band of Union, founded upon the best Principles,
unites the American Colonies: -- That our Rights and Privileges, both Civil
and Religious, are so far preserved to us, notwithstanding all the Attempts of
our barbarous Enemies to deprive us of them. --

And to offer up humble and fervent Prayers to Almighty GOD, for the whole
British Empire; especially for the UNITED AMERICAN COLONIES: -- That he would
bless our Civil Rulers, and lead them into wise and prudent Measures in this
dark, and difficult Day: -- That he would endow our General Court with all that
Wisdom which is profitable to direct: -- That he would graciously Smile upon
our Endeavor; to restore Peace, preserve our Rights and Privileges, and hand
them down to Posterity: -- That he would give Wisdom to the American Congress,
equal to their important Station: -- That he would direct the Generals, and the
American Armies, wherever employed, and give them Success and Victory: -- That
he would preserve and strengthen the Harmony of the UNITED COLONIES: -- That he
would pour out his Spirit upon all Orders of Men, through the Land, bring us to a
hearty Repentance and Reformation; purify and sanctify all his Churches: --
That he would make Our's Emanuel's Land: -- That he would spread the Knowledge
of the Redeemer through the whole Earth, and fill the World with his Glory.

And all servile Labor is forbidden on said Day.

GIVEN under our Hands at the Council Chamger, in Watertown, this Fourth Day of
November, in the Year of the LORD, One Thousand seven Hundred and Seventy-five.
By their Honor's Command, PEREZ MORTON, Dep'y. Secr'y. JAMES OTIS, W. SPOONER.
CALEB CUSHING. JOSEPH GERRISH, JOHN WHETCOMB. IEDEDIAH FOSTER, JAMES PRESCOTT,
ELDAD TAILOR, BENIA. LINCOLN. MICHAEL FARLEY, JOSEPH PALMER. SAMUEL HOLTEN,
IABEZ FISHER, MOSES GILL, BENIA. WHITE.

GOD SAVE THE PEOPLE.
WATERTOWN: Printed by Benjamin Edes, Printer to the Honorable COUNCIL, and
House of REPRESENTATIVES. M, DCC, LXXV.


