NO STANDING ARMY IN THE BRITISH COLONIES; OR AN ADDRESS TO THE INHABITANTS OF
THE COLONY OF NEW YORK. Against Unlawful Standing Armies.

NEW YORK: PRINTED by JOHN HOLT, at his PRINTING-OFFICE, in WATER-STREET.
MDCCLXXV.

AN ADDRESS, etc. Resolved, Nem. Con. Dic. That the keeping a Standing Army in
these Colonies, in Times of Peace, without the Consent of the Legislature of
the Colony in which such Army is kept, is against Law. Proc. of the Continental
Congress.
Brethren, Friends, and Countrymen.
THE sanguinary schemes of the present Administration have been sealed with the
approbation of the late ministerial Parliament. Every vessel that came to this,
or the neighboring ports, since the proceedings of our late Congress were
published in London, brought us fresh intelligence of the hostile measures
resolved on against us. -- More regiments are to be sent over, some of which
will be stationed in this metropolis, and in New Jersey, to support the King's
friends, to intimidate, and divide us, to be a check on the southern Colonies,
and if judged practicable, to prevent their relieving our suffering brethren of
the Massachusetts Bay.

These particulars, and many more have, doubtless, come to the knowledge of
that body, commonly styled our Representatives: -- And yet, amongst the objects
of real complaint, resolved as such by that Assembly, in their late catalogue
of grievances, we do not read any of the ruinous consequences of an act of
Parliament, which was solely machinated to extort the submission of all the
British Colonies to every parliamentary, or, what is synonimous, to every
ministerial mandate, though ever so ruinous! But it may be predicted that,
sooner or later, this act will have the intended effect, should its not
appearing to press upon us in a direct manner, render us so inattentive, or so
very selfish as to suffer its continuing to be enforced WITH IMPUNITY.

This introduction must point out to you, that the act, or rather edict here
alluded to, is THAT, which was made for extending to all the British Colonies
on this Continent, the acts of Parliament relating to mutiny and desertion in
Great Britain, as likewise, to maintain the discipline of his Majesty's army,
so styled, instead of its true descriptive name, the British, or National army:
-- An impropriety of the greatest importance to a free people, justly jealous
of their honor, and conscious of their real dignity! But, to the manifest
danger of the national Liberty, this is little attended to, by military men;
too many of whom, from a Field-Marshal to a drummer, mistake the true sense of
that phraseology, which, when at first used, was meant but as a compliment, and
appeared, as it really was, perfectly harmless, before our Kings kept a
standing army. Erroneous notions on this head are now big with ruin, it being
not unfrequent to find in the military order, a commissioned, as well as a
non-commissioned varlet, ignorant enough to believe, that he eats the King's
bread, and is bound, for that very reason, implicitly to obey any command he
receives from his superiors, who eat the same bread! As men of this stamp never
inquire with whose bread the King, himself, is fed, it is judged very
necessary, at this critical juncture, to awake the attention and sensibility of
many men of liberal principles, who serve in the British army and navy, some of
whom inadvertently mention the King, and even address him, as their master.

The enemies to our constitution, well knowing the fatal effects of the
illusion, which this old prejudice never fails to produce in the minds of the
vulgar, surreptitiously provided themselves with the extension edict, before
[though not long before] the late Parliament issued their inquisitorial
sentences against the people of the Massachusetts Bay. That edict demonstrates
to you, by what means the Ministry have determined to conduct their CONSPIRACY
against our Liberty. -- Surely, this is a grievance of the first magnitude!

The American news papers have informed you since that time, that
Courts-Martial have dared to decree various punishments, which have been
inflicted on soldiers in America; -- but, though such Courts Martial acted under
color of that same illegal edict* we do not learn that any of their members,
or the deluded victims that became their accomplices, by executing the
felonious sentences, have been indicted for their respective crimes! Nay, have
not such unlawful Courts-Martial been suffered in our metropolis, to exercise
the same illegal authority?

About the beginning of the last war, an Administration which had formed no
design against our liberty, acted on very different principles, to prevent the
mutiny and desertion of the British forces in North America! The minister sent
circular directions to most of the American Governors, for procuring temporary
Acts, which, as they manifestly tended to the welfare and safety of the whole
British empire, were cheerfully granted. The legislatures to which such
applications were made, extended to their respective territories, the acts of
Parliament for punishing mutiny and desertion, etc. Those acts, afterward,
received the royal assent: -- But the legal force of every such temporary act
has long since expired. They were granted with the same caution, that acts of a
similar nature pass in Great Britain, where the Lords and Commons know, that
the national liberty might be easily destroyed, should they declare acts of
such importance, PERPETUAL. The Legislature can give no lawful authority to
such acts of perpetual duration, any more than they can lawfully surrender the
liberties of the people. These have, in reserve, an unalienable right to
ratify, or annul, every act of their Delegates to legislative Assemblies.

The fair proceedings of the Administration above mentioned, are of public
notoriety. They not only prove, in the most authentic manner, that
Administration then believed the British Parliament had no right to bind us, in
all cases whatsoever -- but that the King and his Ministers were solicitous to
demonstrate the uprightness of their intentions -- that they would not violate
any of our constitutional rights, by attempting to bind us, in any case
whatsoever, without our legal consent.

The Anti-British junto, being sensible the legal expiration of those temporary
acts of the Colonies was an invincible obstacle to their projects of
depredation, so artfully conducted themselves in, and out of Parliament that
their dark designs were not suspected. For this reason, the patriotic Minority,
who did not think that more regiments were intended to be sent over to America,
made little or no opposition to the extension edict. -- This shows you, my
brethren, how cautious you ought to be of your friends, themselves. They may be
sincere -- but, they do not feel!

Let us see now, what our late venerable Congress did for us -- they who felt
with us, the innumerable evils, that are inseparable from a standing army, not
dependent on ourselves! -- Their ninth resolve expressly declares, that to keep
such army, is unlawful, and consequently proclaims the nullity of the extension
edict, in the comprehensive words, which are prefixed to this address, although
the consequence which results from the truth contained in them, being founded
on the self-evident principles of universal jurisprudence, that respectable
authority might have been omitted here, without the least danger. This
consequence is acknowledged by the uniform proceedings of every civilized
country relative to distributive justice, as well as in the judgment of every
person, who is not in a state of insanity. Whatever is done anywhere against
law, cannot be supported there, by law. It is a mere nullity.

We have often been astonished at the superlative effrontery of ministerial
hirelings; and yet, it is improbable any caviller of that tribe, will be so
irreverent and scurrilous as to urge, that the ninth resolve of the Congress
does not affect the Extension Edict. -- However, should you meet with that
wretch, read to him, and entrench yourselves within the tenth resolve in their
bill of rights, from which the following quotation is inserted here, to support
the ninth resolve, and several other parts of this Address; to wit,

"All and each of which," (that is to say, the rights mentioned in the nine
preceding resolves,) the aforesaid Deputies in behalf of themselves, and their
constituents, do claim, demand, and insist on, as their indubitable Rights and
Liberties; which cannot be legally taken from them, altered or abridged by any
power whatever, without their own consent, by their representatives, in their
several Provincial Legislatures.

In the course of our enquiry we find many infringements and violations of the
foregoing rights; which, from an ardent desire that harmony and a mutual
intercourse of affection and interest may be restored, we pass over for the
present, and proceed to state such acts and measures as have been adopted since
the last war, which demonstrate a system formed to enslave America.

Now, can a fair reasoner assert, that, notwithstanding the declared illegality
of the infringements alluded to in the preceding quotation, the declaration
implies, that the Congress admitted the legal operation of any such act, till
it should be repealed? -- That it is to be so understood, though the whole of
the proceedings shows, that it is feared there will be a civil war, unless they
be repealed? -- Though the repeal be solicited, not to annul such acts, they
being all illegal, and every one of them, whether enumerated or not, being
consequently null and void, -- BUT "to restore harmony," that is, to prevent
that civil war, which is justly feared, unless the violences which have been
already committed, to enforce those unlawful, illegal, and NULL acts, be
discontinued?

If those men, who solemnly appealing to God and the equity of mankind, for the
justice of our cause, declared to you and the other members of the British
nation, that "to keep a Standing Army in these colonies, without our consent,"
is against law, had justified the least suspicion of their admitting that it
was not against law to punish, without our consent, mutiny and desertion in
such unlawful Standing Army -- Believe me, my dear, devoted country men, the
most iniquitous Administration, that can be conceived -- the present
Administration itself, never would wish to obstruct their proceedings.

The Extension Act is unlawful, illegal and null, being made to support the
discipline of an unlawful standing army: And should a standing army be made
lawful in any colony, which God avert! the Extension Act would, nevertheless,
remain unlawful, illegal, and null in that colony, until the legislature should
have given it there, local lawfulness, legality, and therefore existence. But,
you have do reason to fear this; for self-preservation will effectually prevent
the most abandoned traitor from making a motion of that tendency, in any
American legislative assembly, against the safety of a people, protected by the
British constitution.

Regardless of every principle of justice and policy, the British Parliament
are trying against our Liberty, experiments which, if hazarded against the
people under their immediate legislative authority, would infallibly involve
Great Britain in a civil war, and might produce another revolution there. The
king is vested with the supreme command of all the forces of the nation,
wherever they may be stationed; but he has no legal coercive authority any
where, over the soldiers or sailors, otherwise than by local laws, made from
time to time, to that effect. And, as the safety of every constitutional right
depends on the limitation of that authority, the other branches of the
legislature grant him but temporary acts, for maintaining the discipline of the
Army and Navy, by coercive laws, and for restraining or enlarging the power of
Courts-Martial in both these departments, within the limits of that legislature
by which they are granted.

The limited duration of those laws being as short as it appears from
occasional circumstances, to be consistent with public safety, the treasonable
designs of Administration may be counteracted with more facility, than if such
laws were perpetual. After the legal expiration of those acts, the King's
lawful authority over the national forces, expiring of course, can he punish,
or detain any body in that service, since Courts-Martial are abolished by law,
as they now are in the British Colonies? And, if the King would attempt to
retain them in his own service, how could he accomplish it, before he had
usurped an arbitrary power over the purses of the people? -- Could he satisfy
capricious demands, which would increase in proportion to the knowledge that
every man in his army and navy would have of the embarrassments of their
master? -- No -- for, those salutary limitations are solely intended to
preserve inviolate, our rights of opening or shutting up our purses, as we
think fit. They have, till now, prevented such usurpations, which, to exercise
with safety, is the ultimate end of every other usurpation that ever was
exercised by any tyrant in the world. -- It was but to attain that end, the
selfish Parliament of Great Britain have so flagitiously exceeded the limits of
lawful power.

If you admit as lawful, the extension illegally decreed by a ministerial
Parliament, and machinated, but as a provisional edict, to insure the success
of measures resolved on, relatively to the proscription of the Bostonians, and
other proscriptions in petto. If you only tolerate its illegal operation any
longer, the king will not experience those difficulties, which would thwart his
arbitrary projects in Great Britain, were his usurpations to begin there. His
Parliament might pay us the compliment of renewing the Extension, and other
Temporary Acts of their own sole legislation, for the sole purpose of raising a
Revenue, to lighten their own burdens, which luxury and corruption have
already prodigiously increased, and which your tameness will increase to a
degree, which it is now beyond the power of calculators to ascertain. -- But,
you may rest assured that, in a very short time, Administration will sport with
your Liberties, and soon after, with those of the whole British Empire. -- The
opprobrious and degrading denomination of province, which now is but an
innocent and unmeant misapplication of a foreign word adopted in our language,
will significantly describe the real state of every British Colony, and indeed,
of every shire in Great Britain and Ireland! -- Never forget that about two
years ago, a Crowned Miscreant compelled the States of Sweden, the Parliament
of that Country, to release him from his Coronation Oath! His success may tempt
others to commit the same sacrilege.

Our enemies are now terrified at the superiority of strength, which the
justice of our cause gives us over them, in the present contest. They will be
amazed at the effect of their slimsey artifices, if, by tolerating the
Extension Edict, we stupidly subject ourselves to a set of men, upon whom we
can have no check; -- who having exempted themselves and their tools, from the
power of our tribunals, will drag before theirs, such of us, who may indicate
the least inclination to a better change. Then, our disguised friends, and our
open foes, united in the British Parliament, will, with iron hands and
unfeeling hearts, "bind us in all cases whatsoever." We shall be in the
condition of the Swedes, French, Spaniards, and most other nations, where now
and then, an honest man may regret the loss of his natural Rights, but where,
an attempt to recover them would be next to madness.

It will be a melancholy reflection to us, perhaps for many years! that no
strictures have yet been tendered, respecting the destructive tendency of the
Extension Edict. It is expected that the tried Patriotism of our ablest Writers
will inspire them to hold it to public view, in its most minute circumstances.
The silence now complained of dismays our friends, and secretly elates our
enemies, on the other side of the water: It may, in some measure, exculpate the
Magistrates and Grand Juries, who have not yet brought to justice, any of the
persons who are liable to be prosecuted in their respective Districts, for
crimes committed there, under the unlawful sanction of Parliamentary Edicts.

But, every such Edict, or illegal Act of Parliament, being void and null in
law, respecting its operation amongst us, it clearly follows, That all the
robberies and burglaries committed by Custom-house Officers and others, under
color of several Edicts of a similar nullity: -- That all the murders and
violences, perpetrated under the directions of illegal Courts-Martial. -- That
the oppression of the soldiers, who now are, legally, under the sole protection
of the civil power of the British Colonies on this continent, where they are
unlawfully stationed by a despotic Administration: And that, the enormities
which Custom-house Officers, and illegal Courts of Admiralty or Vice-Admiralty,
or which the deluded soldiery in the ministerial service, have already
committed, or may hereafter commit, shall be wholly chargeable to the
pusillanimous, or treasonable connivance of the Colonists themselves, if such
crimes remain unnoticed by those, whose sworn, and therefore, whose
indispensable duty it is to bring them to light and trial.

O my countrymen! Will you cease to incur the contempt of the world? Will you
no longer continue the jest of your enemies? -- Listen no more to trembling
delinquents, who artfully whisper to you, that your Courts of Justice would
quash such indictments. -- For God's sake! Do justice to the understanding and
integrity of your Judges. Consider, and you will clearly see that, were they as
corrupt as we know them to be otherwise, they would not dare, at this juncture,
to betray their iniquitous partiality. Nay, the most profligate member of our
Assembly, though he could depend on the concurrence of a majority, of the same
corrupt principles, would not dare now, to abuse representation so far, as to
move for a Bill, tending to skreen, directly or indirectly, under the illusory
declaration of your assent, manifested by them only, any of the obnoxious Acts,
which the late Congress reprobated, as demonstratory of "A system formed to
enslave America.

Timid well-wishers to their country may object, that our zeal will be
frustrated by an unprincipled Governor; that, not daring with a high hand, to
impede the prosecution of criminals, protected by himself, he will stretch
prerogative, even to the pardon of irremissible crimes, none of which are more
so than those, by which our sacred constitution is endangered. But, may not the
well-known fate of a PORTEUS check traitors, by convincing them, that they
cannot always shelter themselves under the wings of prerogative? And, should
this prove ineffectual, our holy religion teaches us, that no worldly
consideration ought to deter the just from doing his duty. Our committees, and
what is much safer, Colonial Conventions, vested with discretionary powers,
will, at last, baffle the arts of ministerial tools, and work our political
salvation.

If there be amongst us a conscientious lawyer, he certainly will point out to
the officers of the unlawful standing army, stationed in the British colonies,
the imminent danger they run, by detaining soldiers in North America, under the
illegal extension edict. As to pettifoggers, we know they are seduced by the
prospect of a plentiful harvest; and that, self-interest, not justice,
determines them to act, whatever side they undertake to defend. If the minister
do not value these enough to retain them in his service, for supporting the
unlawful acts, they will, of course, rejoice at the almost innumerable actions
of a civil nature, which may be grounded on the local nullity of parliamentary
edicts, and commenced by soldiers, for unjust detention, loss of time, and
unpaid labor; or for various trespasses, unjustifiable before tribunals, which
follow the British system of law.

All injuries sustained by any person in this colony, in consequence of the
same unlawful sanction, may be redressed, and the same offenses will be
prevented for the future, if we have but sense and firmness enough to apply as
we should, and where we should. It is never too late to do our duty; let us
trust the event to the omnipotent ruler of the universe, and he will reward our
perseverance.

If through ignorance, or inattention, any of you ever gave a verdict, in
contradiction to the fundamentals of justice; if he admitted the force of any
act of Parliament, to which your own colonial laws have given no such force,
that man must be very unhappy, whenever he reflects on the injustice he has
occasioned; but he is guiltless -- he deserves compassion. -- It is far
different with jurymen, who knew the local nullity of acts of Parliament, and
by their verdicts, authorized their illegal operation! -- Those jurymen, and
the judges who designedly suffered it -- who have suppressed the warnings and
instructions which they ought to have given, and strengthened with their
eloquence, have been bribed. Whether hope, fear avarice, or any other worldly
motive influenced such judges and jurymen -- they have been bribed. -- They
stand guilty, before God and man, of wilful and corrupt perjury.

Do not believe, my dear countrymen, that infatuated as the junto may be, they
hope that the Continental Association can be dissolved, by the external, the
seeming defection of any colony, were it even ours, which is nearly central,
and the most liable to such suspicions. A Governor may bribe the majority of an
assembly, who fancy that they represent a people, not virtuous enough to
exercise their rights of choosing their representatives and elective officers,
by ballot. Illegal warrants may be issued, and remain unquashed, for a
considerable time, to bewilder the bulk of the people with the innumerable
doubts, which, it is evident, will arise from the untried illegality of those
proceedings; -- to intimidate and oppress, till the bench determine the
question; -- and, in the mean while, to deter the injured from prosecuting such
daring conspirators.

He may bribe a few trading justices, and seduce other sons of corruption and
power, who hold, or expect to hold magistracy, or other offices, during
pleasure, and are as much afraid of colonial conventions, as the minister is of
Continental Congresses: -- But he cannot bribe the body of the people, in whom,
originally, and finally, lies the sovereign power* represented for their
benefit only, by one single person.

All the Colonies, nay, the internal force of any single colony can punish a
few venal officers, for abusing the authority with which they are entrusted by
their superiors, who are, themselves, subordinate to another superior, likewise
entrusted by, and, as glorious experience shows, accountable, as well as every
one of his dependents, to the people at large, whether they meet in one single
spot, or in their respective districts. The patriotic spirit of the American
Britons cannot be subdued. They will exercise their constitutional right to
hold conventions for their safety; a right, which cannot be questioned, without
openly denying the legal title of the Hanoverian line of our Kings, to the
British crown. Therefore, my dear countrymen, do not basely relinquish that
sacred right, when you ought to exercise it. You know that, should you be
oppressed by a wicked knot of traitors, you will be delivered by your happier
neighbors, as soon as their assistance is required.

The arch-fiend to our constitution knows all this: The Colonies which
delegated members to the late Congress, have already appalled him, that
insolent, cruel, and cowardly wretch, who, a year ago, declared by his wicked
trumpet, that he would not relent, "till he saw you prostrate at his feet!"
Your Congress made him stoop to proposals, which he well knows you will reject
with disdain. He means but to divide and betray you, whom he despairs to
subjugate by force. However, he will send more troops, more indeed, than he
thinks it is prudent now to divulge. But it is not solely in that reinforcement
he confides. Will you believe it, my dear, devoted countrymen, it is in his
opinion of your folly! I shall reveal to you his grand secret -- the only
resource left him to extort your compliance.

Now that the vices of the nation have reduced to a state of impotence, the
small portion of virtue which still remains in the British Parliament, he hopes
that a superstitious reverence for that body, degenerate as it is, will
continue to betray you into absurdities, and an inconsistent passiveness! He
still hopes that your inattention to the Extension Edict will enable him at
last to defeat your united forces. Your supineness justifies him in believing,
and persuading his associates, that you will always tolerate the operation of
that destructive Edict, which is sufficient in itself, to put all the others in
force.

Can we, without feeling the severest stings of self-reproach, reflect on the
many crimes, which, since the Extension Act was quietly enforced, our
inattention has emboldened Custom-house Officers, and other sons of tyranny to
commit? Oh! had criminal prosecutions been instituted in that country, where
the first felony, or the first degradation of human nature was committed, in
defiance of our laws, and under the usurped authority of Courts-Martial, or
rather, immediately after their first unwarrantable sentence was known! -- Had
soldiers been duly protected against their tyrannical masters, robberies and
murders might have been prevented; our brethren at BOSTON could not be
dragooned; we might long ago have defied the combinations of the parricidal
junto, whose aim is to destroy our constitution! -- We should no longer fear
their dethroning our King, and fixing his Crown on the head of a race of
tyrants, whom a patriotic Parliament justly proscribed, about ninety years ago,
as irreconcilable foes to the natural rights of the British Nation! With truth
and security we might tell the arch-fiend "What do you think of Venal
Parliaments NOW?"

Since no sophistry can delude an incorrupted American Jury; since the joint
efforts of the Ministerial hirelings cannot, without our connivance, hold up
before the eyes of the soldiers, the veil which hides from them the knowledge
of their civil rights, let us instruct those deluded victims; let us openly
protect them against their oppressors. If we adopt this pacify mode of
resistance, which no political casuist, who has subscribed to the revolution
Creed, can disapprove, the minister may send over as many regiments as he
pleases; the intended instruments of our ruin will but add to our strength add
prosperity. As soon as they know it is against law to detain them in the army,
the ministerial army, there will be no obstacle to their desertion. Then, but
not before, Sycophants, paid to calumniate and betray the British colonies,
will in vain attempt to persuade the instructed, and less credulous soldiers,
that we shall deliver them up to facilitate our reconciliation with the British
Parliament, who will not hear of any proposal of accommodation, unless this,
their sine qua non condition, be first complied with. If we adopt this generous
measure, we shall enjoy the purest pleasure that can affect freemen -- that of
rescuing our fellow creatures, our brethren, from disgraceful bondage. And, if
experience can teach us wisdom, we shall so cautiously grant temporary acts,
for preventing mutiny and desertion, should ever the safety of the British
Empire make it again necessary to grant such acts, that the abominable project
of reducing us into a state of Slavery, by the means of a standing army, cannot
enter the head of any future minister.

The virtuous part of the British Officers, themselves, impatiently wait for
this manifestation of our prudence. They will secretly rejoice, as Britons, at
the mutiny and desertion of whole Battalions, whatever they may do in their
public character, to the contrary. And General Gage, whom his weakness and
incapacity recommended to a perfidious Administration, who emulously extol his
abilities, though they would not have employed him, if a sensible man of an
established military reputation, had accepted the dishonorable command -- That
General, whom they have decorated but as a bound victim, may be brought to
justice, and answer for the many crimes, which his thirst of power, inspired
him to perpetrate, or patronise, as the most acceptable offerings, which could
propitiate to him his tutelar Deity at St. James's.

It is not yet too late to pursue this plan of philanthropy and self-defence;
but we must exert ourselves with activity and constancy. If we lose time, the
soldiers, not knowing the local nullity of an Edict, made for the purpose of
detaining them against law, on an unnatural service which they abhor, will be
afraid of being treacherously delivered up, in case they desert. They will not
cease to be awed by illegal Courts-Martial, though if they were properly
instructed, they would not fear, but despise the authority usurped by those
Courts; and the soldiers who have been injured by them, or by any military
officer, would obtain legal redress, should they make proper application.

If we suffer them to be misled by a sacrilegious interpretation of their
military oath, from which they are released as soon as the army is kept against
law: If we scandalously forsake them, in vain shall we cry out to them, in the
strain of the Roman Patriot, Quo quo Scelesti ruitis?
Non ut superbas invidae Carthaginis
Romanus Arces ureret --
Sed ut secundum vota Parthorum,
Urbs haec periret Dextera!
HOR. Epo. 7.
Whither, Oh! whither do you madly run?
It Is not that Britons with avenging flame,
Might burn the rival of the British name:
But that the STUARTS should their vows enjoy,
And GEORGE, with impious Hand, himself destroy!


When they are ordered to butcher us, and destroy our habitations, then, they
will not listen to us; self-preservation, and even revenge, must impel them to
imbrue their hands in our blood; and our destruction, or slavery, attended with
the curses of posterity, may be the fatal consequences of our infatuation, in
neglecting to seize an opportunity to vanquish our enemies, without shedding
the blood of our friends.

AN ANTIDESPOT.


