SOME STRICTURES UPON THE SACRED STORY RECORDED IN THE BOOK of ESTHER SHOWING
The Power and Oppression of STATE MINISTERS tending to the Ruin and Destruction
of GOD's People: -- And the remarkable Interpositions of Divine Providence, in
Favor of the Oppressed; IN A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT NEWBURY-PORT, NORTH
MEETING HOUSE, MARCH 8th, 1775. IN COMMEMORATION OF THE MASSACRE AT BOSTON,
MARCH the FIFTH, 1770.

By OLIVER NOBLE, M. A. And Pastor of a Church in NEWBURY.

PREACHED AT THE Request of a Number of Respectable Gentlemen of said Town, AND
NOW Published at the General Desire of the Hearers.

He disappointeth the devices of the crafty.
SO THAT their hands cannot perform their enterprise.
ELIPA^^ And often. supported so as shall AMAZE,
-- Their PROUDEST PERSECUTORS.
MILTON. NEW BURY-PORT, New England: Printed by E. LUNT and H. W. TINGES.
MDCCLXXV.

To the Reader.
EVERY intelligent reader, will be very sensible, that in handling subjects of
this nature -- Time to plan and digest the subject, and care to express with
spirit, and yet with decent propriety are requisite; especially in times like
ours. -- The author, sensible of his own inequality to a performance of this
kind, and ^^ving but four days allowed him for the composition, and that amidst
a variety of avocations: Has felt exquisitely, while writing and delivering the
ensuing sentiments. And new, they being very suddenly, and unexpectedly
demanded for the pre^s, he is no less ^ensibly touched* under a consideration
of those inaccuracies, and indiscretions, that are likely to have droped from
his pen in this hasty production: Some of which, would have been prevented, if
more time had been allowed him. -- Nothing but, the importunity of the
demandants, (for whose judgment he has a value) and a sense, that the public
has just right to require every aid, of every member, for the public good in
this difficult day, could have induced him to the publica^ion. These
considerations will entitle him to the candor o^ friends to their country;
but, from those of a different character, he is sensible he cannot expect equal
favor. As this, is designed not to cast any personal reflection whatever, but
to exc^te in the minds of my countrymen, a prudent STEADFASTNESS ^n the ca^^e
of Liberty, and a pious trust in GOD, under oppression, and to express the most
loyal he^rt, to his king, and unfeigned love to, and deep concern for his
country: So if these ends are in the least degree answered, it rises to the
highest expectations, and fulfills the warmest wish of the

AUTHOR.

SOME STRICTURES, etc.
That passage of Inspiration, which I take for the motto of this Discourse, is
in the Book of Esther, Chap. viii. Ver. 11. Wherein the King granted the Jews
which were in every city, to gather themselves together, and to stand for their
life, to destroy, to stay, and to cause to perish all the power of the people
and province that would assault them.


SUCH is the accursed nature of lawless ambition, that the greatest misfortunes
of kingdoms, and states, as well as of lesser communities, and individuals,
have arisen from, and are owing to an insatiate lust of power in me^ of
abilities, and influence.

Voracious like the grave, they can never have enough, i. e. of power and
wealth: And are therefore prompted on by restless desires, to seek the means of
accumulating these, and that by expedients, however profitable to themselves,
are destructive to their country.

Such false, designing, and detestable patriots have in every age, nation, and
country in the world, at one time or other, led their blind confiding
countrymen, into the very jaws of slavery, vassalage, and ruin.

The lust of power has in all nations, combined the worst passions of the human
heart, and the worst projects of the human mind, in league against the
liberties of mankind. -- From hence, has arisen so many absolute monarchies in
the world, that have considered and treated their subjects, as then ca^^le;
that have reduced thousands and millions, to a brutal vassalage, unworthy the
rational and immortal nature of man; to gratify the insatiable ambition, and
luxury of a crafty designing few.

Yea, such often, has been the influence, of a combined in^o of courtiers and
state-jobbers, that the reigning monarch, though naturally of a compassionate
and benevolent h^^rt, has been by such instruments, brought into a state of
magnificent servitude, and sp^ended vassalage; and made acce^^ary to the
blackest desings.

It is always the policy of such court-locusts, if possible, to shut fall the
eyes, and to seal up the understanding of the^e prince, both with respect to
his interest and danger; the latter of which, consists in court favorites,
growing too powerful, and the former in the hearty love and good will, of a
numerous, brave and free people.

These designing men, this kind of patriots, always lay their plan with a view,
to sculk behind the king's authority; if their oppression rouses the nation to
assert their right, to screen them from deserved vengeance; or if their
sovereign's eyes should be opened to discover their black designs, and his own,
and the nations true interest, and his ears to better councils, to depose, or
destroy him. -- In a word, if they see they are like to be cash^e^ed, and the
plunder of mank^^d wrested from their unrighteous hands, and he will not give
them his authority, to suck the blood and treasure of their fellow subjects,
they aim that his own shall pay for it.

But an holy, and omnipotent GOD, in his righteous providence, often
disappoints these aspiring tyrants, these plagues of mankind, these pes^s to
all society; and causes them to be taken in their own craftiness.

A very striking instance of this we have in the history of this bo^k. -- The
sacred story concerning Ahas^erus a Persian king, potent in arms, great in
extent of territoty, mighty in wealth and power, -- and Haman his haughty
prime-minister, -- and his ju^^o of court parasites, -- their influence upon
the king, in obtaining from him that horrid decree to slaughter the Jews in all
the provinces, -- the disappointment of the scheme, -- the manner how, -- and
the remarkable interposition of diivine providence therein, -- is worthy our
no^ice and will afford us matter of instruction suitable to the present
occasion.

This king Ahasuerus, appears to be the same with Darius Hysta^pes, according
to the best, and most ancient historians. And indeed, the subject of this piece
of history appears to be soon after the union of the Babylonish, with the
Persian empire. This agrees, best with the reign of the before mentioned
prince: For at this time the empire covered the greatest part of Asia, both the
Indias, Ethiopia, and most of Africa. The kingdom now was in its zenith of
greatness and glory -- besides, Heredotus an ancient and good historian,
observes of this prince that his Queen's name was Harossa, which, is the same
with Haddassab, the Hebrew name of Esther; the same historian observes, as also
Xen^phon in his life of Cyrus, that the character of this king was mild and
gentle, benevolent and vastly liberal, and greatly disposed to make his
subjects happy; but his foibles were, an unbounded ambition, and a great
propensity to luxury and sensuality.

As this monarchy had gained the summit of its glory, extent and wealth, it was
now at peace with its neighbors abroad, yet luxury and riot began to rage
within. It now became prolifi^ in the production of cockatrices and vip^rs,
that began to prey upon the bowels of the empire. It was with this kingdom,
just as it is now, and always has been, with states under like circumstances.

Political bodies resemble the human; they have their birth, their youth, their
manhood or full strength, their decline, their old age, infirmities and death.
Th^s it was with Greece and Rome, and other kingdoms; so it will be with the
British, and every other kingdom and state in the world. -- As it is with the
human body, when every joint, ligament, muscle and fiber h^ -- e come to their
full strength, and maturity, it stays not long in that state, it is then fixed
for the seizure of disease, for gradual decline; it is weakened by
impercept^ble strokes, until disease rages and death ensues. The first strokes
that a state, or political body receives, after its arrival to the summit of
its glory and strength; is usually from the venality and rapine, of its
overgrown members: Under the covert of law, and show of justice. -- When a
state, by the influence of minions, and court parasites, those blood-suckers of
the constitution, begins, and goes on, to establish unrighteousness by law; --
and legislative authority is prostituted, to the iniquitous, and low purpose of
aggrandizing individuals, instead of the good of the whole, then it receives a
mortal blow; of which wound it will certainly perish, unless timely healed. --
For one set of humors will flow in after another, till the juices of the
political body are consumed -- and death is the consequence: Chicanery and
craft, will be played backward, and forward, by designing and ambitious men,
for places of profit and honor, until the wealth of a kingdom is exhausted,
until its strength is at first weakened, then destroyed, as with a deluge -- and
poverty and misery come upon its honest industrious inhabitants, like the
breaking in of mighty waters. If old Harpies, are ousted, the public gets
nothing by the change; a new set of the same character and conduct succeed, ut
unda supervenit undam; as in a rolling sea, wave urges wave; until convulsions
shake the state, it to^ters, and then falls. To accomplish this dreadful havoc
of their species, STATE JOBBERS practice upon the imb^cilities of princes,
sometimes upon the best: (For all men have their weaknesses and foibles, and
happy is the man that has the fewest of them.) These, find the blind side of
their prince, they court him, not to his own safety, they flatter him not to
the advantage of his subjects; but their own: Which by the way is never
consistent with the true interest of the prince, or prosperity and happiness of
his subjects. For a great part of the wealth of a state, must in this case,
fall a prey to their insatiable avarice.

Thus did the prime minister in the Persian empire, that makes such a figure in
the sacred history now under consideration. He flattered his credulous and
ambitious prince, that he was something more than human -- till he really made
him something less -- till he caused him counter to his natural disposition --
to conduct with savage cruelty, in that bl^^dy edict obtained against the
innocent Jews;

HAMAN that arch-courtier, was ambitious like his master, but without his
benevolence and good nature; yet subtle and crafty to compass his black designs
-- he, (as Xenophon observes Xenopo^^^ life of Cyrus.
) places his master among the Gods, that he might be de^^ed himself; and the
sacred text intimates as much. -- For no doubt this is the homage that Mordecai
refuse^ him.

It is very unlikely that a royal decree should be necessary to procure civil
respect, to the prime minister, and so great a court favorite; and it is as
unlikely that a man of Mordecai's good sense and piety, would deny it to him --
but the HOMAGE that was decreed him, no doubt was that of worship. This, a
crowd of fawning, expecting, ^ringing SYCOPHANTS paid him; but Mordecai bowed
not. He that could obtain this from his duped prince, might get any thing.

And, now behold! His haughty heart lifted him up! -- How it dilates with
pride! -- But, Oh! mortifying sight Morde^ai denies him homage. Mordecai was a
Jew, and had learned that divine lesson, thou shall worship the Lord JEHOVAH,
and him only shall thou serve. And Haman an Amale^ite, of the royal seed of
AGAG, whom the Lord had bidden them to abhor, and detest. And no wonder, that
he, with firmness refuses the demanded homage: For this, the haughty minister
determined his ruin.

But it was too small a thing with this PREMIER, to rise up against a single
man and take away his life; this was below his supposed dignity -- this was too
little a sacrifice to his vanity this would not sufficiently gratify either his
ambition or revenge; he therefore devotes an whole people to the sword, as
objects of his vengeance. A vast number, not l^ss than eight-hundred-thousand
souls, (as an ancient historian observes Herodot^s.
) are marked out as objects of his hellish FURY -- these a very useful and
industrious people, were serviceable both to the trade and manufactures of the
kingdom, as well as in agriculture; in the destruction of whom, both the king
and state must have suffered immense LOSS. He asks, and obtains the royal
assent, and signature, to butcher them all in a day. Horrid massacre! Shocking
to humanity! The picture of insernals! What baseness! What turpitude, is not
the human mind capable of, when under the power of ambition and revenge? " Man
lest of God, without heaven't restraint, is more savage, than the savage brute;
his vile ferocity rises in proportion to his capacity."

But how did this incarnate DEMON, get this inhuman, this blo^^y DECREE? Why
just as overgrown tyr^nts, and their creatures, do now, and always have done;
by malicious lies and slanders against the honest and useful members of
SOCIETY, whom they mark out as objects of their vengeance, that they may take
their spoil for a ^^^Y.

This wicked Haman found means to keep the KING in ignorance of the character,
state, and condition of his own subjects, he scarce knows who, or what these
Jews are? Much less their importance to him -- he had to learn their character
from his court favorite -- from Haman the Jews implacable ENEMY. And no wonder
that the king thinks ^^l of them -- no wonder they stand in a bad light with
him -- no wonder he considers them as a public nuisance -- no wonder that when
he had given up his senses and understanding to a tyranni^ blood-thirsty
MINISTER OF STATE -- that he should give into his hands the objects of his
vengeance. This is no new thing under the son, for greedy courtiers to
misrepresent, to their prince, those of their fellow subjects, that they would
plunder and destroy; that by the help of his authority, they may compass their
oppress^ve designs, and spread ruin and devastation through the empire, that
they and their tools may fatten upon the plunder.

And HAMAN said unto the King there is a certain people, scattered abroad, and
dispersed among the people in all the provinces of thy kingdom, and their laws
are diverse from all people; neither keep they the King's laws. Therefore it is
not for the King's profit to suffer them, if it please the King let it be
WRITTEN THAT THEY MAY BE DESTROYED, and I will pay into the King's Exchequer
Ten Thousand Talents of Silver -- What horrid lies! What abominable slander! He
represents to the king, that they were not only a mean contemptible people, but
a strange odd set of mortals, not worthy of notice; that might be cut off
without noise, crushed without tumult in the state. And yet at the same time so
important, as to endanger the state, by corrupting its subjects with their
independent principles, as disobedient to the laws of the realm. Now it was
well known that they were a peaceable people, differing in nothing but their
religion, and form of the ^orship, and were good subjects. How false -- how
inconsi^^ent with itself is this account; notwithstanding Haman, (as all
designing courtiers do) insinuates himself into the king's favor, by such
inconsistent slanders, under great pretense of friendship to the king, and
devotedness to his interest, that he had no other view but to secure the king's
personal safety, and the public good. And how? Why by cutting off eight or
nine-hundred thousand of its industrious and honest subjects: A true picture
this of court china^ery and ministerial flattery! And to clinch the whole, and
to secure the king's command for his horrid project, he promises to pay Ten
Thousand Talents to the king: -- An enormous sum! Enough to have star^led a
wise prince, (had he not been duped by his courtiers) to find that a single
subject should be able to pay such a prodigious sum -- This should have
awakened his attention to the manner of his amassing such wealth, and excited
his jealousy of oppression in the overgrown minister, and made him cautious of
his councils for the future. How is it possible a single minister should
advance the modest SUM of five-million-six-hundred and ninty-one-thousand
pounds As Mord^ca^ the Jew was doubtless the sacred historian, it is most
likely they were Hebrew talents, about 189 lb. 8 oz. 15 a^^^ 18 gr. (...) each
talent worth 509 l. 3 s. 9 d at 5 s. sterling. per oz nearly, ten thousan^ of
which g^ves the sum total, viz. 50918^ l. 4 s. 2 d. But Mr. Crud^a computs at
something less, worth 450 l. ten-thousand of which wo^^ 450000 l. (...).
, sterling, and yet have sufficient for his own private use, and to purchase
tools and creatures throughout the kingdom, to carry on his black designs. Is
not this astonishing! But the riddle is explained, the mystery is un^olded when
we consider that he had the public Exchequer at command, and a vast and wealthy
Empire to squeeze and plunder at pleas^re.

This shows us how dangerous overgrown ministers and courtiers are, both to
kings and states, which every wise prince will forever guard against, and every
state sound in pol^^^s always prevent.

But now behold the DECREE obtained! The bloody PLAN ripened! Vast numbers
devoted, as sheep to the slaughter! The day appointed for the horrid execution!
Letters posted with speed throughout the empire, to ministerial tools, and
creatures of his power, to be in readiness on the day appointed, to execute the
shock^^g MASSACRE; and no doubt the haughty minister exulting in the triumphs
of his glory and success.

But who were the partners of his joy? Who rejoiced with him? Who was glad? Was
the Persian empire exulting with joy, in the prospect of soon being rid of a
public nuisance? No, not a word of this! Not only the devoted Jews, were in
sorrow, clothed with sackcloth; but HORROR and deep concern, sat brooding on
every countenance; a solemn gloom covers the metropolis, the royal city
SHUSHAN, all in deep mourning, but the cruel per^^trators of the horrid PLO^,
and a banditti of ministerial tools through the provinces, dependent on the
breath of the minister, breathing the same spirit, and with him hoping to share
the PLUNDER. In this situation, divine providence saw fit to continue that
great affair for about two months. Every thing wore a gloomy aspect; and no
doubt every creature of power was busy in preparing for the bloody scene, Haman
not excepted.

HAMAN prepares a gallow^ of extraordinary structure, for Mordecai, as
principal among the Jews, and chief object of his vengeance, all things
promised to turn out to his mind -- and he thought he was just ready to satiate
his thirst for B^ood.

But behold! An omnipotent GOD " reigns, let the Earth rejoice, let the
multitude of Isles be glad. The Lord reigns, let OPPRESSORS tremble." A
merciful GOD heard the cries of this oppressed people, he looked down from the
habitation of his GLORY and laughed at the haughtiness, and had in derision the
PLOT of the MAN that exalted himself against GOD, and conspired the destruction
of his people: And was determined to bring him low, and magnify his great Name
in punishing the cruel Oppress^^. And therefore, now the Lord appears in the
cr^^s and ext^emity of the (...), that his hand might be the better seen, and
acknowledged. -- Behold! the scene changes, and the counsels and devices of the
wicked, are turned upon their own heads.

It is now worth while to pause a minute -- and attend to the temper and
conduct of GOD's people, in this critical juncture and dilemma of their
affairs. It was a serious and solemn time with them, and no doubt their danger
lay with due weight upon their minds. But they did not despair, they did not
give themselves over for lost; they firmly believed the being of a GOD, and
that he was their covenant God, and that he was higher than the highest, and
that he could with infinite ease, extricate them out of their sore distress;
that his arm was not shortened that he could not save, neither his ear heavy
that he could not hear. They now humbled themselves before the Lord their
Maker, they cried unto him for help in this dist^ess; they caught hold of, and
improved every probable human means within their power for their safety; but
they put their trust only in the Lord their GOD.

They ask counsel of, and are guided by their wisest and be^^ men, in the same
peri^s. MORDECAI, the principal among the Jews, and object of Haman's most
inveterate hate, conducts with uncommon wisdom and courage.

The first object of his attention, is (after seeking divine help and aid) to
open the King's eyes, which were blinded by court flatterers, and ministerial
intrigues; that he might know the truth, and understand his own true interest,
and that of the empire: -- An expression this of true loyalty, and a good
example for others in similar circumstances; -- and the good Lord in his kind
providence ordered a favorable opportunity for this, by advancing ESTHER his
neice, of the seed of the Jews to be Queen of the Realm, and the King's
favorite.

Mordecai, treats her with respect, according to her dignity, but talk^ to her
with his usual plainness and authority; he bids her interceed in earnest for
the LIFE of her people; and reminds her that her place at court, was not
certain to screen her from the impec^ (...).

She pauses, she considers, and at last resolves; but a great embarrassment
arises in her way, she had not been called into the king's presence for thirty
days, and uncertain when she should; besides, a cruel statute, (and unsafe for
all princes, as well as there subjects) like a flaming sword, stands in the way
of her approaching the throne. For by a statute of the realm no person might
approach the throne, uncalled upon pain of Death.

In this, we have an exact picture of court parasit^s, and ministerial TYRANTS:
They make Princes prisoners of state, and shut out (if possible) from the royal
presence all persons but themselves, and their creatures, and all petitions but
those of their own prefering, or that reach the royal ear through the channel
of their favor.

There policy in this, is, to keep the groans, and COMPLAINTS of those subjects
whom they oppress, from moving the compassion of the royal HEART; that, by his
ignorance, of their villainy they may secure to themselves his favor, and
escape the punishment due to their atrocious Crimes: And so go on, to pillage
and oppress mankind with impunity. -- But if a torrent of murmures, and general
complaints, should at any time arise, too mighty for their strength to
encounter, or wisdom to quiet, if possible they will throw the public odium
upon their master; and screen themselves behind his abused authority: or
perhaps in this case, they may sacrifice a few of their obsequious tools, those
lesser villains, those Jackals, that have barked after the Lions, to still the
popular rage, and to save their own BACON.

But how much more safe, and happy would it be, for both princes and their
subjects, if (like Pharamond an ancient prince of France, who had a court gate,
that was called The Gate of the Distressed, because there he heard in person,
the complaints of the meanest of his subjects) their palaces and ears were open
to the complaints of the oppressed, without the parade of state, or ministerial
gloss or disguise, against the greatest of their servants.

But Queen ESTHER and Mordecai, strengthened by a firm says in GOD, and clothed
with heroic fortitude, were determined to surmount all th^se difficulties and
dangers, t^ bring their complaint and petition to the royal ear at the peril of
their lives, to give him the true state of their affairs, and to acquaint the
king with the whole of the hellish plot formed against them at all adventures.

Nothing can discover greater human wisdom, a more thorough acquaintance with
men and things, or more 2 fortitude of soul, than is discovered in the
management of this great, delicate and difficult AFFAIR. They seem to be under
a divine efflat^s of wisdom and policy.

Thus while they, like men, used the most probable means For their safety, the
Lord JEHOVAH was working for them; and in a remarkable manner paved the way for
the destruction of Haman the Jews enemy, by advancing the devoted Mordecai to
honor and dignity, and that through the very means by which Haman thought to
aggrandize himself. Of the circumstances of the king's not sleeping, and how he
was directed to turn over Court RECORDS for his amusement, and there find that
Mordecai had saved his life, and Haman's advice on this affair with a view to
his own honor; I need not remind you: -- These where surprising interpositions
of GOD's providence, in favor of his oppressed people, and ladly morti^ying to
the Persian PREMIER. -- And had not his heart been callous to a sense of guilt
and shame, as well as to the feelings of humanity (like all others of the same
stamp) he must have been filled with horror, and trembling seized him, for fear
of a sad reverse of fortune.

But, now the important hour comes! And Haman the TYRANT and MURDERER present!
When the King's ear was to be opened to hear the cries of the distressed, and
his heart to pity, and afford them help. -- ESTHER the Queen brings her request
to the royal ear, -- instead of half the kingdom it is only this! Let my life
be given me at my petition, and my people at my request, for we are sold to be
slain, and to perish. And Haman thou art the man that has done this -- brought
up the rear, in this heavy complaint.

Now the king's understanding is for once unloosed, and his eyes opened, he is
cut to the heart with shame, at the reproof given him, which was wisely couched
in the petition: (...) at the instigation of the Minister it was the that King
told them, and Haman had only bought them, as Minister of ^tate with the King's
money. -- Thus were they bought and ^old as cattle for the slaughter. -- Here
we see despotism epi^^mised!

But the king stung with remorse, that he had been blinded and fooled by an
haughty minister, and shock^d at his own conduct in that affair, justly devotes
the deceiver and murderer to ruin; for bringing guilt and odium upon his
Prince, and fear and distress upon his subjects; by slanders and cruel ^^use of
his power, and influence with him.

Such an example, one would be ready to think, would be sufficient to make all
crowned heads cautious of giving implicit faith to courtiers and place-men;
sufficient to make them ever jealous of aspiring ambitious ministers, and
s^v^re in scrutinizing into their public conduct, and careful to w^tch their
motions in all their actions respecting public affairs; and as effectual in
punishing every fraud and deceit of this kind, that tends to alienate the
affections of their loyal subjects from them, and to six upon them the odium of
cruelty and OPPRESSION. -- O that Princes were wise, that they (...) this!

But now behold! the bloody Decree reversed! reversed did I say? no, it was
not; but rather in a sort superceded by another. -- To such a pitch of pride,
folly, and madness, had the Persian court arrived, that they had assumed (...)
and omniscience, essential perfections of JEHOVAH; for it had become a Statute
of the realm, that their Laws should not be repealed, or their Decrees revoked.
-- Egregious folly! And how is it copied, in the conduct of most cour^s in all
great empires; though the principle may not be op^nly avowed. And thus it comes
to pass, that rather than honestly to r^tract one error, known and fully
discovered, they go on to comm^t an hundred more, as remedies of the former,
until the REMEDY is worse than the DISEASE; until their inexplicable turnings,
and political windings, have thrown the affairs of the nation, into such an
amazing suarl, and labyrinth, as that it is, next to impossible for human
wisdom to unravel them: And thus by such designing selfish politics, the state
often trembles, and some times the crown to^^ers; or what is worse, if such
traitors and tyrants continue their influence, the nation will be Enslaved, and
dwindle to barbarism and brutality. How the remedy would have operated in the
case before us, had not divine wisdom and power interposed, is hard to say; but
the LORD overruled it well; the Lord JEHOVAH is able to bring good out of
evil, light out of darkness, and did so now! And is abl^ and ready to do it
again.

ESTHER and Mordecai obtain a decree in favor of the Jews, and with a view to
their salvation. But let us attend a minute, to the tenor of the decree, and
let us see what mighty BOON! Is the former decree reversed? No: Are the bloody
orders countermanded? No, not a word of this. What does the whole amount to?
Why, only to what GOD and Nature allowed them, yea, demanded of them before --
To arise, to gather themselves together in EVERY CITY, and to stand for their
LIFE, and to destroy, and to cause to perish; Whom? And what persons? Was it
their honest neighbors, that had no hand in the plot? No verily; but all the
power and persons, that would ASSAULT them.

The grant amounted to this, and no more, that they might stand on their
defense against all court tools, and ministerial creatures and minions, that
taking the advantage of the former decree should be found in arms to assault
them. And who would not (unless it be a coward or a fool) defend himself, if
possible from the assault of a banditti of villains that would cut his throat.

But here let us attend to the sequel, and well notice the issue. -- By this
last decree the innocent Jews (just now represented, as a contemptible mean
spirited set of mortals) and their haughty enemies were put upon an equal
footing. Now let us see the personal bravery of ministeral blood-suckers and
TYRANTS, and the whole GANG of their dependant bravadoes, through all the
provinces of this vast empire. For no doubt Haman the Premier, and his junto of
court favorites, flatterers, and dependants in the royal city, together with
governors of provinces, counselors, bo^^ds of trade, commissioners and their
creatures, officers and collectors of REVENUE, sollic^tors* assistants,
searchers and inspectors, down to tide-waiters, and their scribes, and the good
Lord knows whom, and how many of them, together with the coach-men and servants
of the whole Not that I am certain the Persian state, had all these officers,
either as to name, or thing, or that the under officers of state rode in
coaches or chario^s: Neither do I suppose that all the officers abovementioned
are illegal, or inconsistent with the spirit of Liberty in a free state:
Neither do I conceive it likely, that in a well regulated state, under a just
administration, these l^sser officers should arise to such grandeur, but as the
Persian monarchy was despotic, and the lives and fortunes of the subjects, at
the disposal of the Emperor; it is highly probable, that offices and places of
profit were prodigiously multiplied, and great pensions added to them; and it
is probable that if AMERICA should ever be enslaved, and government here become
in like manner absolute, the ^east officer employed for the regulation of
trade, and about the collection of Revenue, will soon be a formidable
magistrate, with a stipend of four or five hundred sterling a year: And offices
and salaries increased, as fast as millions of American slaves increase, and
can earn for them with sweat and hard labor. Far would I be from casting the
least reflection, upon any office, or officer, known to the constitution of my
Country, and consistent with the Freedom and Charter Privileges of this
Province. These are to be respected, according to their several trusts, and
supported, in the faithful discharge of the duties of their station, by every
Son of Liberty, and Friend to his Country. But the moment they become
unconstitutional and inconsistent with Liberty, they are to be detested and
opposed with firmness. Was my Father the man that held an office inconsistent
with the Liberty of his Country; as my Father would I love and honor him, yea,
and pity him; but as a Tyrant I would abhor him -- as an enemy to his Country I
would detest and oppose him. Every kind of love should be absorbed in the love
of Liberty, except the love of GOD, which, indeed, is connected with, and
involved in it.
made a formidable number through that great empire, all dependant upon the
breath of Haman the court favorite, and with him breathing the same spirit,
and expecting to share with him some part of the spoil. Do these bold usurpers,
this crowd of officers and sworms of their dependants, arise and quit
themselves like men? Do they, who (just now armed with royal authority and
favor) could represent a brave people, as no more important, than a swarm of
flies, or a covey of grasshoppers, unworthy of public notice, farther than to
destroy them? Do these sons of thunder arise, and put their foot, or finger
upon them, and crush them? Not a word do we find of this! Brave Heroes! Fit
only to Filth Treasure, by unright^ous establishments out of the honest and
industrious. Like all others of the same stamp and character, when it come^ to
the pinch, and when on but equal ground, like cowards they creep into holes,
they ^r^mble and fall before the people, whom they had barbarously devoted to
ruin. True courage is found only with the opp^e^sed, they destroy their
implacable enemies and obtain salva^ion.

Now, in this instance, we see the true spirit, genuine courage, and personal
bravery of all such oppressive tyranny men, divested of Fleets, and striped of
arms, those executioners of their black designs against the liberty and
property of their fellow-men. For now the scale of power and influence was
turned in the Pe^sian court, and Mordecai had the direction of these; but
without liberty or instruction, to make use of them, either for the protection
of the Jews, or dest^uction of their enemies. There is not a word in the decree
itself, or in the sacred story, that in the least intimates, that the Jews had
any help from the army of the empire; but now they and their enemies stood on
equal ground, and were to try it out by personal bravery; -- and we have before
taken notice of the consequence.

It is true that the Jews were the LORD's covenant people, and that they
humbled themselves before the Lord their Maker and Redeemer, and earnestly
sought his he^p, while they stood o^ their own defense. And it is as true, that
the Lord was on their side, and wrought wonderfully in every circumstance, by
which their salvation was accompl^shed; and they piously acknowledged the hand
of their GOD in the whole. -- But the Lord helped them, in a way of means, in a
wise and prudent attempt to help themselves, while they stood on their defense,
the Lord omnipotent, appeared for them, and wrought for their salvation. And
this is the way in which GOD always has, and ever will deliver his people out
of their distresses, and from the hand of Violence and OPPRESSION. They have no
reason to expect the mighty hand of GOD working for them, while like Asses they
couch down, to take on them Burdens.

Are not the people of America, also GOD's covenant people? And is not the Lord
of Hosts their covenant GOD? God is the same yesterday, today, and forever! He
is as able and as ready to appear for his distressed covenant people now, as
then; and they may hope for, and expect salvation in the same way.

The example of GOD's ancient covenant people, when on the brink of ruin may
afford us instruction, under present distress; while on the one hand, it
admonishes us, of the necessity and importance of fervent prayer and deep
humiliation, and a th^rough breaking of our sins by righteousness, and our
iniquities by turning to the Lord; on the other, not to dispond or despair, but
commit our cause to GOD, and stand FAST.

All human prudence, and wisdom, are to be exercised, yet if called by divine
providence, (which we pray heaven to prevent) we must, we ought, as they did in
the case before us, to improve the grant that every man has from the King of
Heaven, "to arise, and stand for his Life, to kill and destroy all that ASSAULT
them" -- but none other!

Our case to human appearance, is nothing so deplorable as was the case of the
Jews in the instance before us, (though distressing enough) -- they did not
despair, they conducted like men of wisdom and fortitude, they put their trust
in the Lord and were saved. So in this way we also may hope that GOD will arise
and plead our cause, and his OWN, against the oppressor -- For the Cause of
Liberty is the Cause of GOD; it is the gift of GOD to man in his very creation,
and what he has fitted him for, as a summary of his terrestrial happiness: And
whosoever gives it up, and tamely submits to Slavery, like a foolish or wanton
Heir, spends the PATRIMONY of his Heavenly Father's giving, and is a rebel to
GOD and NATURE.

The CAUSE of AMERICA (now in controversy) is the cause of GOD, never did Man
struggle in a greater, or more glorious CAUSE, It will, it must appear, to
Heaven and Earth, that we are not the aggressors in this sad controversy! we
ask, we contend for nothing more, than what God and nature gave us, to enjoy
our OWN, without rapine or robbery. This we hold not only by the Law of Nature,
but by the Faith, and Contract of KINGS stipulated in the most Solemn CHARTERS
under their Sign and Seal Manual This is the Tenure, by which Americans hold
their property and possessions in this land, especially in New England. They
hold the Foe and Dominion under GOD alone, the great Sovereign and Proprietor
of all things; and no other being, or number of beings in the universe, have
the least right to wrest them from their hands. Our fathers fled into this
wilderness, in an arbitrary reign; and from the iron hand of oppression at
home, that they might enjoy civil and religious Liberty, her^ undisturbed, and
hand down the invaluable treasure to the latest posterity. This hope carried
them through all the amazing dangers and hardships that attended the
enterprise; this supported them in all their unparalleled conflicts. They aimed
at the North part of Virginia, but divine providence cast them into Plymouth
harbor, they settled the town called Plymouth, from thence they spread; this
may be called the root of the New England settlements. They found the country
possessed by, and under the dominion of a number of independent states, who
held it under the of GOD of Nature -- it was their own -- and our fathers had
no right to dispossess them of it: Our pious fathers well knew this, and
therefore they purchased of them both the soil and dominion. Now they were in a
state of nature, independent of any state or kingdom in the world, and at
liberty to choose what form of government they pleased, and might have put
themselves under the protection of any of the powers of Europe. But they being
Britons, and emigrants from that isle, they made choice of the British King for
their Protector, on account of their connexions, and the conveniences of
British protection, and not on account of any dominion Britain had over them:
Accordingly, the British King made a Contract with them, and they with him; he
promised in his part of the Contract that he would protect them, etc. -- and
they promised on their part, allegiance to him as their king, ( i. e.) to
subject themselves to him so far, as they had stipulated in the Contract, as
therein expressed, and no further. Now this Contract between the British king,
and the First settlers of this land, was called a CHARTER. This, and this only
is the measure of the connection there is between the two Englands. This, and
this only, can with justice determine, in what cases, and to what purposes the
king of England has dominion here, and how far we owe obedience. The true
meaning and intent of the first Contract or Charter, is the original bond of
union between this province, and our king; how far our original rights were
altered by the second Charter -- I leave for politicians to determine. Most
people in the province, I presume, are acquainted with the shipwreck of our
Charter, in the time of Andross. In that tyranny reign, there was a violent,
and general wreck of Charters, and ours, (for what reason I know not) wa^ the
only one that suffered in the restoration, at the Revolution; but so it was,
and our original Charter Rights and Privileges were much curtailed, and the
People of the Province, had but the shadow of authority left them, in
comparison of the former. The most material Privilege left us, was that of
raising our own money, or in other words the Exclusive right of Taxing
ourselves, that our purses and property should be under our own direction. This
sacred PALLADIUM, a British parliament, would now wrench from us with violence,
which if they accomplish, with us, property is no mo^e, the very ideas of
Liberty and Property are lost, and we are SLAVES; but we have an origin^al
^ight, an ^herent right, to the same privileges, with our sister Colony of
Connecticut. For this, is the spirit of the first, the original Contract,
between the king of England and us; upon which this Province was settled, at
the amazing expense and labor of our fathers, and without cost to the crown of
England. I consider the parliament of Great Britain, as (of right) having no
kind of dominion over us, or concern with us, for they were no party in the
Contract, there exists not, nor ever did, any kind of Contract or Bargain
between us and them; we never chose them to legislate for us, they do not, they
cannot represent us; therefore instead of the shocking Claim to bind us, by
their Acts in ALL CASES WHATSOEVER, they have no right to bind us in ANY CASE
WHATEVER: We are, it is true bound to the king, and he to us, according to the
spirit and design of the Charter Contract, which we ^ver have been, and are
still willing to fulfill on our part to a jot and tittle, and have right to
expect his protection, in the peaceable enjoyment of all our natural Rights and
Charter Privileges; -- and the moment the Charter Contract is violated on the
other part, we are again in a state of nature, and have a right to set out
anew, but the interest of both parties is to maintain the connection inviolate
-- and may heaven prevent a disunion. The notion that some maintain in the
controversy, ^s so absurd and childish that it scarce deserves a refutation:
That the allegiance of a British subject, (and the authority of parliament too,
^f they mean any thing to the purpose in the present controversy) follows him
wherever he goes, even to the ends of the earth. This, if it proves any thing,
proves unspeakably too much; upon this supposition, if a number of Britons
should take it into their heads to purchase a large tract of land in France,
Spain, China, or Japan, and remove there with their families, they would be
still subject to the British king, and be yet under parliamentary authority,
they must carry their code of British laws with them, and be subject to them
however counter to the laws of the state where they reside; the absurdity of
this is obvious to common understandings. No less ridiculous, is another tenet,
advanced in the present controversy -- That New England was first discovered by
subjects of the crown of England, and therefore ought to be considered as part
of the realm, and subject to all its acts, laws and regulations; but suppose it
is fact that an English merchant-man, sailed within sight of Cape Cod, or what
is more likely some western Cape, or head land, and saw the shore at a
distance, would the consequences follow from it? By no means. Supposing an
Indian of New England (as it is now called)* should have been so luckly as to
have crossed the Atlantic in his birch canoe, and should have discovered
England, or some part of the European continent; would that have given the
Sachem of his tribe propriety in the soil, or right to the dominion of those
countries? As much and no more than in the case before us; the truth of the
matter is, that the relation of this country, to England was merely ideal, till
our fathers purchased it, took possession of it, and connected it with Britain
by Charter and solemn Compact. This Charter and Compact, is therefore the only
rule, by which our dependanc^ upon, and subjection to Great Britain must of
right be determined, set aside this, and of right we are absolutely independent
of them, or any other state. But this CHARTER connection is of the last
importance to both sides the water and ought to be inviolably maintained, and
sacredly adhered to by both Englands.
. Our fathers, have earned and we their children have deserved what we contend
for, Liberty and Property; to enjoy our own, without molestation. When I say
we, and our fathers have deserved these blessings, I mean not from the hand of
GOD, we have forfeited them into the hand of his justice, by our backsliding
from him, and covenant breaking, and GOD is holy and righteous in his present
controversy with us, and we ought to humble ourselves before him, and implore
his mercy; -- but we have deserved from the hand of Great Britain better usuage
-- we have deserved their protection, in the enjoyment of our Natural and
Charter Privileges; instead of an attempt to wrest both from our hands. Every
attempt to ^rest Liberty and Property from us must be exceeding unrighteous,
and fraught with peculiar turpitude, for we have never forfeited one ^ota of
our Charter Rights, we have been as fast friends to our mother country, as
loyal to our king, and as peaceable and governable a people as any under
heaven, and have afforded to Great Britain immense wealth. -- But they are
angry with us, because we WILL NOT BE SLAVES. -- Angry did I say, Who are
angry? The good people in general of Great Britain -- I hope not, we have
reason firmly to believe they are not; all the pains taken to blind their eyes
and to prejudice their minds with regard to us, by crafty designing men,
notwithstanding. But who are angry? Who, but a set of designing HAMAN's, and
their creatures who want to take our estates, if not our lives for a prey, that
they may riot up the SPOILS; and prompted by this stimulus, they have used
every artifice to blind the nation, and to prejudice our king against us, that
they might not see their true interest, that justice and right judgment, might
be hid from the king and nation, that they might aggrandize themselves at the
expense of the king and nation, and by the ruin of AMERICA.

And if our King is angry with us, it is because Men of the beforementioned
Character have imposed upon him, by sordid Slanders and infamous lies against
the good people of America, and of this Province in particular. Therefore his
wrath cannot be against the true character of these Colonies, but a false
PICTURE drawn by our enemies, with a view to aggrandize themselves, and promote
their black design of enslaving AMERICA. But could our kind and benevolent
SOVEREIGN, but look through America with his own eyes, could he visit every
COLONY in Person, could he know the fervor of their love and loyalty, could he
see, and personally take notice of their amazing patience and fortitude, under
unparalleled indignities and sufferings cast upon them by his tyranny and
oppressive servants, could he see their heroic virtue, resolution, and prudent
Steadfastness in the Cause of LIBERTY, could he be acquainted with the
greatness of their souls, and firm and unshaken resolution, not to survive the
loss of the rights of nature, and their Charter Privileges; and could he but
know the inexpressible MEANNESS as well as falsehood and malice of their
adversaries, in all their calumny against us, with which they have wounded the
royal ear: I say if he had a just view of these things, how would his royal
heart melt with pity at our oppressions! What noble sentiments of Americans,
would arise in his mighty soul! What affection! What parental tenderness! How
would his heart dilate with joy to find, that he had so many noble spirited
subjects in this part of the world, Fired equally with love to their King and
Country. Who so well understand the nature of true Liberty, and spirit of good
government, and who can so well defend them, and how firm would his
determination be, that those should have Liberty, that so well understand it,
so prudently enjoy it, and so bravely defend it; and how would he frown
Indignant, upon American enemies, that have so basely betrayed their trust, and
abused their Sovereign.

And I yet firmly believe, and humbly trust in that GOD, that turned the
slander and falsehood of wicked Haman* and his accomplices, against the innocent
Jews; upon their own heads; -- that he will speedily appear for us, and plead
our righteous CAUSE, against all those, that have so falsely accused us, so
unjustly reproached us, and sought to enslave us. That a merciful GOD will open
the eyes of the King, and Nation, to see their true interest, and thoroughly to
perceive the baleful influence of present counsels, and destructive tendency of
present MEASURES; and the King's ear to hear, and his heart graciously to
receive, the just complaints, of his oppressed American subjects; and that the
slander and falsehood of our enemies (and some of them the most unnatural and
ungrateful) will yet be turned upon their own heads.

But it is OURS, to be up and doing; like Esther and Morde^ai, to be resolute
to let the King know the TRUTH at all ADVENTURES; and in this way to counteract
the fraud and malice of our enemies; and to follow him with incessant cries,
and complaints against the Men that are the cause of this general trouble; and
to convince him, if possible, of both his, and our danger from designing,
crafty avaricious men: And that these CONVULSIONS, must, and will, shake the
whole Empire unless an effectual remedy is speedily applied.

And to this end no pains are to be spared, in order to engage wise, prudent
and influential men, at home, in the glorious cause of Freedom. And we have
reason to hope, yea, firmly to believe, that GOD will so dispose the heart of
the King, and raise us up friends, that shall be able, and effectual, to put a
stop to the reign of present men, and measures, without shedding of blood.
Nothing but our sins, and impenitence can prevent this, our cause is so just,
and the affair so important and interesting to the nation, it must, and will
prevail, unless for our sins we are given up of GOD: -- But after all our
greatest dependence is upon our GOD, and under him, upon the exertions of our
own virtue and fortitude.

Americans by this time, no doubt are generally acquainted with the question in
controversy between us and the court of Great Britain; in short, it is this,
the parliament of Britain, at present claim a right of binding us by their laws
in ALL CASES WHATSOEVER, i. e.) to tax us at their pleasure; the Colo^ies de^y
their ^ight to taxation in any case whatever, and affirm that to submit ^o the
claim would reduce them to absolute Slaver^. If they have right to lay on us
one tax, they have another, if they have right to take one shill^ng from us
without our con^ent, they have as good right to take all, and strip us naked of
every thing; though the robbery would not be so great i^ the first, as in the
latter case, yet it partakes of the same nature. If Ministers of State, and
court dependants at any time want money to support their luxury, or to buy
creatures, to increase their power and to strengthen their influence, it is but
to apply to a Parliament smuggled up by venality, grouped to either by
ministerial BRIBERY, whose interest it is, to serve their CREATOR, and grant
all their demands; and Americans must be taxed without mercy, to pay it. But if
we complain or oppose, we are to be taught submission by the point of the
Sword; armed mercinaries, at the beck of an haughty wanton Minister of State,
are to enforce the decree, and we are to pay them for pillaging our substance
and spilling our BLOOD.

Can it be any longer a secret, that a PLAN has been sytematically laid, and
persued by the British ministry, near twelve years, for enslaving America; as
the STIRRUP by which they design to mount the RED HORSE of TYRANNY and
DESPOTISM at home?

Well did despots at home know, that if Charming FREEDOM spread her olive
branches in America, emigrations from them to us, would soon go near to
depopulate their own country; weakening them and strengthening us, until America
became invincible; and therefore open strides of arbitrary power, were first to
appear in the Colonies, while the mines were laying at home; that when we were
subdued, they might open their batteries with safety against British Liberty;
and Britons be made to feel the same oppressive hand of despo^e Power.

Besides it would then be in the power, and it would be the policy of haughty
ministers, to make America a nursery of mercinary troops for their service,
supported by the sweat of Americans, and called home upon any emergency,
necessary to promote their despotic purposes.

And then not a murmur, not a complaint must be heard from poor servile
Americans, or it must be stopped with axes and scaffolds, gibb^s and the
halter: Or perhaps in great tenderness so^e might be permitted to die by powder
and ball, sword or bayonet. Armed mercenaries must be the instruments of
st^^ling all complaints, and the officers to collect from us all our treasure;
and in case of the least resistance, we are to expect Massacre and Death.

These are thy Blessings, this thy legacy, O AMERICANS! bequeathed thee by
those in power in thy parent state -- This thy reward for thy warmest duty, and
filial affection! This the return for all the blood and treasure of thy fathers
expended in settling and defending this large and fertile territory, and hereby
enlarging the commerce of Great Britain, and adding sinews to her strength!
These thy wages, for the blood of thy young men sp^^t, and thy treasure largely
and cheerfully spent, in the conquest of Lo^isb^^rg, Nova Scotia, and Canada,
only for the benefit of thy King, and to increase the wealth, and enlarge the
territories of the British nation In that large expense of the money and blood
of these colonies the last war, the crown alone had the profit; we su^plied men
and money much b^yond our proportion, and the balance we bore in the s^^le of
national stre^g^h and wealth, was to conquer, not for ourselves, but the crown;
not a foot of the lands conquered have fell to our share; not a ship stationed
upon our coast* for our defense in a time of war to protect our trade, the
whole of the opera^^ons in America, were with a view to their own advantage,
without any regard to our interest; yet none but a colonist can conceive of the
ardour and zea^ w^^h which these colonies put to their shoulders, what
treasures expended, and what number of lives lost, in the several enterprises
in which they were engaged; and yet not they, but others have the profit. The
crown has taken possession of the late acquisitions in America, to which the
colonies so largely contribu^ed, our estates have depreciated, by the conquest,
while the wealth of the British ^^tion has amazingly increased. -- Good
heaven's! -- must all this be forgot by those who have had the profit of our
toils and BLOOD; -- and now in a time of peace must we have ships and troops in
plenty, not to protect, but to ENSLAVE us.
. These thy returns, for all thy rich treasures, cast in abundance into thy
mother's LAP. -- Oh! Heaven attend to our oppression, and hear our cries -- Oh!
Almighty Father, -- awake in thy Righteousness and in thy Strength, -- and
avenge our just controver^^* upon the heads of the contrivers of so fatal a
plan; -- (...) mercy LORD, spare thy covenant people! -- O AMERICANS! awake,
arise, and stand for your life: You have a grant to do so, against all that
assault you, from the King of Heaven; from NATURE and from NATURE'S GOD.

To repel armed force, by force of the same kind, is LAWFUL by Heaven's decree.
Therefore be of good courage, nothing is lost that is not given over for lost.
-- STANDING ARMIES MUST BE REMOVED, or they will reduce us to a State of
SLAVERY worse than DEATH. -- But the time when, and manner how, I leave with a
merciful GOD, and the wisdom of our political fathers.

That GOD who delievered his people of old, when brought to the brink of ruin
by a wicked Minister of State, can deliver us. And is there not reason to hope,
yea firmly to believe that he will remove the MONSTER of a standing ARMY from
our land? Has he not amazingly united the Colonies, in the grand cause of
Liberty? Notwithstanding all the bribery and craft practiced in order to
disunite them? Has not GOD been wo^king for us, while we have made (as yet) a
noble stand against oppression? And is he not raising us up friends at home? We
trust he is; and that he will save us from Destruction, when by our trials he
has prepared us for mercy. And who knows but GOD in mercy suffered so early a
TRAGEDY and CARNAGE of our brethren in the Metropolis, that by awakening us out
of lethargy, to assert our invaded rights, and uniting us in the general cause
before it was too late, he might prevent greater destruction.

But while I mention our slaughtered Brethren in BOSTON whose funeral
obsequ^es, we this day with sympathy commemorate and lament; my blood ferments,
my passions kinale, my heart burns, and every power of my soul is on the
stretch, in the love and for the cause of Liberty! With what ardour, firmness,
and resolution, should we defend this glorious cause, Men and brethren, our
brothers blood cries to us from the ground, and the voice is like that in the
motto, Arise and stand for your lives against all that would assault you.

You are called upon by repentance and amendment to engage the Lord on your
side, to exert yourselves like men that fear their maker, and ye shall stand
proof against a flood of ministerial vengence; your GOD will remarkably appear
for you, and you shall yet be safe and free.

But hark! methinks I hear the Ghost of GRAY, or one of his associates in
death, sounding in mine ear, with a plaintive voice, Oh! Americans will ye not
take warning by our untimely fate? Will ye not resent our FALL? Will ye not
shake off the yoke? Will ye open your bosoms to the fatal lead, and pointed
steel? Will not our warm blood reaking from the hands of armed mercenaries
mingled with the dust of your metropolis? Will not the groans, sighs, and
tears, of our bereaved wives, children and friends, rouse you to heroic valor,
and inspire you with the temper, and form you to the character of the tribe of
Judah, and arm you with martial virtue in the cause of GOD, and in the cause of
drooping Liberty; in our cause and in your OWN? By our untimely death learn
your own fate if tyranny should prevail; you will soon be hourly exposed to
fall by an armed assassin, and he escape with impunity. Will not these
plaintive groans from the Dead awaken every virtue of the human soul, and call
forth all its vigor, to expel from the land the power by which we fell? If ye
do not ye are Slaves But is their no Lightning in the hidden stores of Heaven,
red with uncommon wrath to blast the men, that have called these mercenaries to
your land, the ungrateful men that abet the despotic plan, and would owe their
greatness to their COUNTRY'S RUIN? Is it not real, or is it all illusion; the
voice is indeed illusion: But are not the sentiments real and just. The
sentiments of all wise men, the patriots of every country, the experience of
all ages, bare TESTIMONY against a standing ARMY, as inconsistent with LIBERTY.
When ever there exists a power in the state sufficient, to trample upon or
control its LAWS, THAT STATE IS NO LONGER FREE.

An ingenious author Mr. HUME, who ever would see more of the destructive
tendency of Standing A^mies, le^ him consult, Mr. Hume, and the Lords Pr^^ell,
the celebrat^d American Fa^mer, but in particular Mr. Qui^^y's la^e
observati^ns etc. then which nothing can be wrote with more spirit and life,
and yet with greater ju^tnes^.
speaking of a standing army in England, says, "It is evident that thi^ is a
mortal distemper in the British government, of which at last, it must
inevitably perish;" since which, this disease has amazingly increased, but of
this, no more need be said. We feel the balef^l influence, we hear the monster
roar, he shows his pointed teeth, fierce and red, we have felt, and still feel
a touch of his iron CLAW, and shall we not believe our senses? But we hope, and
have great confidence, that this unhappy controversy will be settled without
bloodshed and liberty yet be triumphant with us, without the contention of
swords; that the eyes of the nation will soon be opened, by our steady
perseverance in the peaceable measures adopted by the whole continent If the
resolves of the Continental Congress are strictly adhered to, together wi^h the
n^n-importation, and cons^mption agreements, there is but little doubt of the
desired effects, which will save the calamities of a civil war, he therefore
that violates them, language cannot express his baseness, for want of a worse,
we will call him by his own proper name, as fraught with the greatest
conc^iveable terpitude. My DEAR COUNTRYMEN, let nothing but a total repeal of
all oppressive Acts of Parliament respecting American FREEDOM, remit the le^st
degree of your zeal, and prudent firmness and perseverence in the measures
adopted in support of your liberty, be not deceived with flattering hopes, and
false pretenses, least a snake in the grass bite you at unawa^es.
and our w^ongs righted, and fr^endship again restored; which may Heaven grant,
according to the earnest prayer of every lover of this country, or of the
interest of Great Britain. But have we not every admonition, and every motive
to prepare for the worst, to stand ready for the onset, to stand for our lives
against all that assault us, and if our enemies drive us to it (which may the
Lord prevent) to contend for the immortal prize sword in hand. Awake! arise
Americans! and prepare for the event, by no means strike the first, but be
ready to strike the second blow, to advan^age. Had we not better ^ie gloriously
in the cause of GOD, of Liberty and our Country, than to dishonor GOD and
human nature by submitting to ignoble slavery, than to die like dogs by meagre
famine or the halter. Behold yonder the SHACKLES forging* and perhaps traitors
to their King and Country, hoping to put them on: Upon whom? The good Lord
knows, but we fully trust that our God will disapp^^nt them; and that with
regard to our wearing of them, it shall remain an unanswerable question, who
shall put them on. Let them remember who it was that occupied the gallows
prepared for innocent Mordecai. I mention this not to discourage you, ^ut to
animate your souls, and to warm your hearts, and to call forth every manly
passion, and christian virtue. Let your spirits be cool, your opposition to
tyranny prudent, yet steadfast and persevering, and let this thought support
you, that when wicked men are nearest their hopes, the godly are farthest from
their fears. I close in the words of the ingenious Mr. Quincy. Yet be not
amused, my countrymen! the extirpation of bondage, and the reestablishment of
freedo^ are not of easy acquisition. The worst passions of the human heart, and
the most subtle projects of the human mind are leagued against you; and
principalities and powers have acceded to the combination. Trials and conflicts
you must, therefore, endure; -- hazards and jeopardies -- of life and for^une
-- will attend the struggle. Such is the fate of all noble exertions for public
liberty and social happiness -- Enter not the lists without thought and
consideration, lest you arm with timidity and combat with ^rr^solution. Having
engaged in the conflict, let nothing discourage your vigor, or repel your
perseverance: -- Remember, that submission to the yoke of bondage is the worst
that can befall a people after the most fierce and unsuccessful resistance.
What can the misfortune of va^quishment take away, which despoti^^ and rapine
would spare? It had been easy (said the great lawgiver Solon to the
Athenians,) * to repress the advances of tyranny, and prevent i^'s
establishment, but now it is established and grown to some h^ight it would be
MORE GLORIOUS to demo^ish it. But nothing glorious is accomplished, nothing
great is attained, nothing valuable is secured without magnanimity of mind and
dev^tion of heart to the service -- BRUTUS-LIKE, therefore, dedicate yourselves
at this day to the service of your Country; (and let me add, to the fear and
service of your GOD) and henceforth live A LIFE OF LIBERTY AND GLORY: Which may
God in infinite mercy grant, through JESUS CHRIST.

AMEN.
ERRATA.
Page 7, 3d line from the bottom, for "fixed" read filled -- page 11, line 12,
for "chinanery" read chicanery -- in Marginal Note page 11, (...) line, for
"450000" read 4500000 -- page 16, line 2, for "the (...) king" read the king
that -- page 19, line 1, for " filth" read filch -- page 24, line 3, for
"(...)" read upon.


