THE SPEECH, OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE EARL OF CHATHAM, IN THE HOUSE OF
LORDS, JANUARY 20th, 1775.

On a MOTION for an ADDRESS to His MAJESTY, to give immediate orders for
removing his TROOPS from BOSTON forthwith, in order to quiet the minds and take
away the apprehensions of His good SUBJECTS in AMERICA.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOHN DUNLAP, IN MARKET-STREET. M, DCC, LXXV.

THE SPEECH OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE EARL OF CHATHAM, etc.
MY LORDS,
AFTER more than six weeks possession of the papers now before you, on a
subject so momentous, at a time when the fate of this nation hangs on every
hour; the Ministry have at length condescended to submit to the consideration
of this House intelligence from America, with which your Lordships and the
Public have been long and fully acquainted.

THE measures of last year, my Lords, which have produced the present alarming
state of America, were founded upon misrepresentation -- they were violent,
precipitate and vindictive. The nation was told, that it was only a faction in
Boston, which opposed all lawful government; that an unwarrantable injury had
been done to private property, for which the justice of parliament was called
upon, to order reparation; -- that the least appearance of firmness would awe
the Americans into submission, and upon only passing the Rubicon we should be,
sine clade victor.

THAT the people might choose their Representatives under the impression of
those misrepresentations, the Parliament was precipitately dissolved. Thus the
Nation was to be rendered instrumental in executing the vengeance of
Administration on that injured, unhappy, traduced people.

BUT now, my Lords, we find, that instead of suppressing the opposition of the
faction at Boston, these measures have spread it over the whole continent. They
have united that whole people, by the most indissoluble of all bands --
intolerable wrongs. The just retribution, is an indiscriminate unmerciful
proscription of the innocent with the guilty, unheard and untried. The
bloodless victory, is an impotent General with his dishonored Army, trusting
solely to the pick-axe and the spade, for security against the just indignation
of an injured and insulted people.

MY Lords, I am happy that a relaxation o^ my infirmities permits me to seize
this earliest opportunity of offering my poor advice to save this unhappy
country, at this moment tottering to its ruin. But, as I have not the honor of
(...)ccess to his Majesty, I will endeavor to transmit to him through the
constitutional channel of this House, my ideas on American business, to rescue
him from the misadvice of his present Ministers. I congratulate your Lordships
that that business is at last entered upon, by the noble Lord's (Lord
Dartmouth) laying the papers before you. As I suppose your Lordships are too
well apprised of their contents, I hope I am not premature in submitting to you
my present motion (reads the motion) I wish my Lords not to lose a day in this
urging present crisis: An hour now lost in allaying the ferment in America, may
produce years of calamity; but for my own part, I will not desert for a moment
the conduct of this mighty business from the first to the last; unless nailed
to my bed by the extremity of sickness; I will give it unremitting attention: I
will knock at the door of this sleeping, or confounded Ministry, and will rouse
them to a sense of their important danger. When I state the importance of the
Colonies to this country, and the magnitude of danger hanging over this country
from the present plan of misadministration practiced against them, I desire not
to be understood to argue for a reciprocity of indulgence between England and
America: I contend not for indulgence, but justice, to America; and I shall
ever contend that the Americans justly owe obedience to us, in a limited
degree; they owe obedience to our ordinances of trade and navigation; but let
the line be skilfully drawn between the objects of those ordinances, and their
private, internal property: Let the sacredness of their property remain
inviolate; let it be taxable only by their own consent, given in their
provincial assemblies, else it will cease to be property: As to the
metaphysical refinements attempting to show that the Americans are equally free
from obedience to commercial restraints, as from taxation for revenue, as being
unrepresented here, I pronounce them futile, frivolous and groundless. --
Property is in its nature, single as an atom. It is indivisible, can belong to
one only, and cannot be touched but by his consent. The Law that attempts to
alter this disposal of it annihilates it.

WHEN I urge this measure of recalling the troops from Boston, I urge it on
this pressing principle -- that it is necessarily preparatory to the
restoration of your peace, and the re-estab(...)ishment of your prosperity. It
will then appear that you are disposed to treat amicably and equitably, and to
consider, revise and repeal, if (...)t should be found necessary, as I affirm
it will, (...)hose violent acts and declarations which have (...)isseminated
confusion throughout your empire. Resistance to your acts, was as necessary as
it was just; and your vain declarations of the om(...)ipotence of Parliament,
and your imperious doctrines of the necessity of submission, will be (...)ound
equally impotent to convince or enslave (...)our fellow subjects in America,
who feel that (...)yranny, whether ambitioned by an individual (...)art of the
Legislature, or by the bodies which (...)ompose it, is equally intolerable to
British (...)rinciples.

As to the means of enforcing this thraldom, they are found to be as ridiculous
and weak in practice, as they were unjust in principle. Indeed I cannot but
feel with the most anxious sensibility, for the situation of General Gage and
the troops under his command; thinking him, as I do, a man of humanity and
understanding, and entertaining, as I ever shall, the highest respect, the
warmest love, for the British troops. Their situation is truly unworthy,
pen(...) up, pining in inglorious inactivity. They are an army of impotence.
You may call them a(...) army of safety and of guard; but they are in truth an
army of impotence and contempt -- and to render the folly equal to the
disgrace, they are an army of irritation. I do not mean to censure the
inactivity of the troops. It is a prudent and a necessary inaction. But it is a
miserable condition, where disgrace is prudence and where it is necessary to be
contemptible This tameness, however disgraceful, ought no(...) to be blamed, as
I am surprised to hear is don(...) by these Ministers. The first drop of blood
shed in a civil and unnatural war, would be a immedicabile vulnus. It would
entail hatre(...) and contention between the two people, fro(...) generation to
generation. Woe be to him, wh(...) sheds the first -- the unexpiable -- drop of
bloo(...) in an impious war, with a people contending i(...) the great cause of
public Liberty. I will te(...) you plainly, my Lords, no son of mine, nor
an(...) one over whom I have influence, shall ever dra(...) his sword upon his
fellow subjects.

I THEREFORE urge and conjure your Lordships immediately to adopt this
conciliatory measure. I will pledge myself for its immediately producing
conciliatory effects, from its being well timed. But if you delay, till your
vain hope of triumphantly dictating the terms shall be accomplished -- you
delay forever. And even admitting that this hope, which in truth is desperate,
should be accomplished, what will you gain by a victorious imposition of amity.
You will be untrusted and unthanked. Adopt then the grace, while you have the
opportunity of reconcilement, or at least prepare the way; (...)llay the
ferment prevailing in America, by removing the obnoxious hostile cause.
Obnoxious (...)nd unserviceable; for their merit can be only (...)naction. "Non
dimicare est vincere." Their (...)ictory can never be by exertions. Their force
would be most disproportionately exerted, (...)against a brave, generous and
united people; with arms in their hands and courage in their (...)earts; three
millions of people, the genuine (...)escendants of a valiant and pious
ancestry, (...)riven to these deserts by the narrow maxims of superstitious
tyranny. And is the spirit of ty(...)annous persecution never to be appeased?
Are (...) brave sons of those brave forefathers to in(...)erit their
sufferings, as they have inherited (...)eir virtues? Are they to sustain the
inflictions (...) the most oppressive and unexampled severity, (...)eyond the
accounts of history or the description (...) poetry? "Rhadamanthus habet
durissima (...)gna, Castigatque auditque." So says the wisest (...)tesman and
politician. But the Bostonians have been condemned unheard. The
indiscriminating hand of vengeance has lumped together innocent and guilty:
with all the formalities of hostility, has blocked up the town, and reduced to
beggary and famine 30,000 inhabitants. But his Majesty is advised that the
union of America cannot last. Ministers have more eyes than I, and should have
more ears, but from all the information I have been able to procure, I can
pronounce it a union solid, permanent and effectual. Ministers may satisfy
themselves and delude the public with the reports of what they call commercial
bodies in America. They are not commercial. They are your packers and factors;
they live upon nothing, for I call commission nothing; I mean the ministerial
authority for their American intelligence. The runners of government, who are
paid for their intelligence. But these are not the men, nor this the influence
to be considered in America, when we estimate the firmness of their union. Even
to extend the question, and to take in the really mercantile circle, will be
totally inadequate to the consideration. Trade indeed increases the wealth and
glory of a country; but its real strength and stamina are to be looked for
among the cultivators of the land. In their simplicity of life is found the
simplicity of virtue, the integrity and courage of freedom. Those true genuine
sons of the earth are invincible; and they surround and hem in the mercantile
bodies; even if those bodies, which supposition I totally disclaim, could be
supposed disaffected to the cause of Liberty. Of this -- general spirit
existing in the American nation, for so I wish to distinguish the real and
genuine Americans from the pseudo-traders I have described: of this spirit of
independence animating the nation of America, I have the most authentic
information. It is not new among them; it is, and ever has been their
established principle, their confirmed persuasion; it is their nature and their
doctrine. I remember some years ago when the repeal of the Stamp Act was in
agitation, conversing in a friendly confidence with a person of undoubted
respect and authenticity on this subject; and he assured me with a certainty
which his judgment and opportunity gave him, that these were the prevalent and
steady principles of America: that you might destroy their towns, and cut them
off from the superfluities, perhaps the conveniences of life, but that they
were prepared to despise your power, and would not lament their loss, whilst
they had, what, my Lords? -- their woods and liberty. The name of my authority,
if I am called upon, will authenticate the opinion irrefragably.

IF illegal violences have been, as it is said, committed in America, prepare
the way, open a door of possibility, for acknowledgment and sa(...)isfaction.
But proceed not to such coercion, (...)uch proscription: Cease your
indiscriminate in(...)ictions, amerce not thirty thousands, oppress (...)ot
three millions, for the faults of forty or fifty. (...)uch severity of
injustice must for ever render in(...)rabble the wounds you have already given
your (...)loonies; you irritate them to unappeaseable rancour. What though you
march from town to town, and from province to province? Though you should be
able to force a temporary and local submission, which I only suppose, not
admit, how shall you be able to secure the obedience of the country you leave
behind you in your progress? To grasp the dominion of 1800 miles of Continent,
populous in Valor, Liberty and Resistance? This resistance to your arbitrary
system of taxation might have been foreseen; it was obvious from the nature of
things and of mankind; and above all, from the Whiggish spirit flourishing in
that country. The spirit which now resists your taxation in America, is the
same which formerly opposed, and with success opposed, Loans, Benevolences, and
Ship Money in England -- the same spirit which called all England on its legs,
and by the Bill of Rights vindicated the English Constitution -- the same
spirit which established the great fundamental and essential maxim of your
Liberties, that no subject shall be taxed, but by his own consent. If your
Lordships will turn to the politics of those times, you will see the attempts
of the Lords to poison this inestimable benefit of the Bill, by an insidious
proviso: You will see their attempts defeated, in their conference with the
Commons, by the decisive arguments of the Ascertainers and Maintainers of our
Liberty: You will see the thin, inconclusive and fallacious stuff of those
enemies to Freedom, contrasted with the sound and solid reasoning of Sergeant
Glanville and the rest, those great and learned men who adorned and enlightened
this country, and placed her security on the summit of Justice and Freedom. And
whilst I am on my legs, and thus do justice to the memory of those great men, I
must also justify the merit of the living by declaring my firm and fixed
opinion, that such a man exists this day. [looking toward Lord Camden] This
glorious spirit of Whiggism animates Three Millions in America, who prefer
Poverty with Liberty, to Golden Chains and Sordid Affluence; and who will die
in defense of their Rights, as Men -- as Freemen. What shall oppose this
spirit? aided by the congenial flame glowing in the breast of every Whig in
England, to the amount, I hope, of at least double the American numbers!
Ireland they have to a man. In that country, joined as it is with the cause of
the Colonies, and placed at their head, the distinction I contend for, is and
must be observed. This country superintends and controuls their trade and
navigation; but they tax themselves. And this distinction between external and
internal control, is sacred and insurmountable; it is involved in the abstract
nature of things. Property is private, individual absolute. Trade is an
extended and complicated consideration; it reaches as far as ships can sail, or
winds can blow. It is a great and various machine -- To regulate the numberless
movements of its several parts, and combine them into effect for the good of
the whole, requires the superintending wisdom and energy of the supreme power
in the empire. But this supreme power has no effect toward internal taxation
-- for it does not exist in that relation. There is no such thing, no such idea
in this Constitution as a supreme power operating upon property.

LET this distinction then remain forever ascertained. Taxation is theirs,
commercial regulation is ours. As an American I would recognize to England her
supreme right of regulating commerce and navigation: As an Englishman by birth
and principle, I recognize to the Americans their supreme unalienable right in
their property; a right which they are justified in the defense of, to the last
extremity. To maintain this principle is the common cause of the Whigs on the
other side of the Atlantic, and on this. It Is Liberty, to Liberty engaged, that
they will defend themselves, their families and their country. In this great
cause they are immovably allied. It is the alliance of God and Nature --
immutable, eternal, fixed as the firmament of Heaven! To such united force,
what force shall be opposed! What, my Lords; a few regiments in America, and 17
or 18000 men at home! The idea is too ridiculous to take up a moment of your
Lordships time -- nor can such a national principled union be resisted by the
tricks of office or ministerial maneuvers. Laying papers on your table, or
counting noses on a division, will not avert or postpone the hour of danger. It
must arrive, my Lords, unless these fatal Acts are done away; it must arrive in
all its horrors: And then these boastful Ministers, 'spit(...) of all their
confidence and all their maneuvers shall be forced to hide their heads. But it
is no repealing this Act of Parliament, or that Act o(...) Parliament, -- it is
not repealing a piece o(...) parchment that can restore America to your
bo(...)some. You must repeal her fears and her resent(...)ments, and you may
then hope for her love an(...) gratitude. But now insulted with an armed force
posted in Boston, irritated with an hostile array before her eyes, her
concessions, if you could force them, would be suspicious and insecure: They
will be, irato animo: They will not be the sound, honorable pactions of
Freemen; they will be the dictates of fear and the extortions of force. But it
is more than evident that you cannot force them, principled and united as they
are, to your unworthy terms of submission. It is impossible. And when I hear
General Gage censured for inactivity, I must retort with indignation on those
whose intemperate measures and improvident councils have betrayed him into his
present situation. His situation reminds me, my Lords, of the answer of a
French General in the civil wars of France, Monsieur Turenne I think. The Queen
said to him with some peevishness, I observe that you were often very near the
Prince during the campaign, why did you not take him? -- The Marshall replied
with great coolness, -- J' avois grand peur, qui Monsieur le Prince ne me pris,
-- I was very much afraid the Prince would take me.

WHEN your Lordships look at the papers transmitted us from America, when you
consider their decency, firmness and wisdom, you cannot but respect their
cause, and wish to make (...)t your own -- for myself I must declare and
(...)vow that in all my reading and observation, and (...)t has been my
favorite study -- I have read Thucidydes, and have studied and admired the
master states of the world, -- that for solidity and reasoning, force of
sagacity, and wisdom of conclusion, under such a complication of different
circumstances, no nation or body of men can stand in preference to the general
Congress at Philadelphia. -- I trust it is obvious to your Lordships, that all
attempts to impose servitude on such men, to establish despotism over such a
mighty continental nation -- must be vain -- must be fatal. -- We shall be
forced ultimately to retract, whilst we can, not when we must. I say we must
necessarily undo these violent and oppressive Acts: -- they must be repealed --
you will repeal them: I pledge myself for it you will in the end repeal them: I
stake my reputation on it: I will consent to be taken for an Idiot if they are
not finally repealed. -- Avoid then this humiliating disgraceful necessity. --
With a dignity becoming your exalted situation, make the first advances to
concord, to peace and happiness, for that is your true dignity, to act with
prudence and with justice. That you should first concede is obvious from sound
and rational policy. Concession comes with better grace and more salutary
effect from the superior power. It reconciles superiority of power with the
feelings of men; and establishes solid confidence in the foundation of
affection and gratitude. So thought the wisest Poet and perhaps the wisest man
in political sagacity, the friend of Maecenas, and the eulogist of Augustus. To
him, the adopted son and successor of the first Caesar, to him, the master of
the world, he wisely urged this conduct of prudence and dignity, Tuque prior
etc.

VIRGIL.

EVERY motive therefore of justice and of policy, of dignity and of prudence,
urges you to allay the ferment in America, by a removal of your troops from
Boston, by a repeal of your Acts of Parliament, and by demonstration of
amicable dispositions toward your Colonies. On the other hand, every danger,
and every hazard, impend to deter you from perseverance in your present ruinous
measures: Foreign war hanging over your heads by a slight and brittle thread:
France and Spain watching your conduct, and waiting for the maturity of your
errors; with a vigilant eye to America and the temper of your Colonies, more
than to their own concerns, be they what they may.

To conclude, my Lords, if the Ministers thus persevere in misadvising and
misleading the King, I will not say that they can alienate his subjects from
his Crown, but I will affirm that they will make the Crown not worth his
wearing: I shall not say that the King is betrayed, but I will pronounce that
the Kingdom is undone.

FINIS.

