ARGUMENTUM AD HOMINEM: BEING AN EXTRACT FROM A PIECE ENTITLED, ENGLAND's
present INTEREST considered, WITH HONOR TO THE PRINCE, AND SAFETY TO THE
PEOPLE.

In ANSWER to this one QUESTION: What is most Fit, Easy and Safe at this
Juncture of Affairs to be done, for quieting of Differences, allaying the Heat
of contrary Interests, and making them subservient to the Interest of the
Government, and consistent with the Prosperity of the Kindom?

BY WILLIAM PENN, FOUNDER of the Province of PENNSYLVANIA.

TO WHICH ARE ADDED, Some EXTRACTS from the WRITINGS of diverse AUTHORS, more
particularly recommended to the Notice of the PEOPLE called QUAKERS.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED in the Year M,DCC,LXXV.

PREFACE.
AT a time when the rights of men are deeply and confessedly violated, it
certainly behooves every member of the community to stand forth, and as there
may be, and no doubt are many sober and conscientious people, who at heart are
real friends to their country and wish well to its cause, yet through a modest
deference toward those in authority, or for fear of acting inconsistent with
their religious profession, are, amidst a variety of sentiments, somewhat at a
loss what step to take in these times of public difficulty: The following
extract from the select works of William Penn, as lately reprinted in London
by order of the people called Quakers, it is thought may be a means of removing
from their minds those scruples which may have suspended their judgments, and
held them in uncertainty; as we may hereby see, that a declaration and public
vindication of the people's natural and legal right to liberty and property
inviolate, was not inconsistent with the judgment, or contrary to the practice
of this universally approved, wise, learned, prudent and pious man, who living
much nearer a past era of national difficulty than the present, and at a time
when liberty to dissenters was not fully established, nevertheless was not
restrained from asserting with manly and Christian boldness, what he was
convinced to be the truth, uninfluenced by human fear, human favor, or any
apprehension of offense to God.

INTRODUCTION.
"THERE is no law under Heaven, which has its rise from nature or grace, that
forbids men to deal honestly and plainly with the greatest, in matters of
importance to their present and future good: On the contrary, the dictates of
both enjoin every man that office to his neighbor; and from charity among
private persons, it becomes a duty indispensible to the public: Nor do worthy
minds think ever the less kindly of honest and humble monitors; and God knows,
that oftentimes Princes are deceived, and Kingdoms languish for want of them."

W. P.

Of English rights, in the British, Saxon and Norman times. Particularly of
Liberty and Property. Of L^gislation. Of Juries. That they are fundamental to
the Government, and but repeated and confirmed by the Great Charter. The
reverence paid them by Kings and Parliaments, and their care to preserve them.
The curse and punishment that attend^d the violaters. More general
considerations of property, etc. The uncertainty and ruin of interests, where
it is not maintained: Diverse presidents: That it is the Prince's interest to
preserve it inv^olably.
THERE is no government in the world, but it must either stand upon will and
power, or condition and contract: The one rules by men, the other by laws. And
above all kingdoms under Heaven, it is England's felicity to have her
Const^tu^ion so impartially just and free, as there cannot well be any thing
more remote from arbi^rariness, and zealous of preserving the laws, by which
its rights are maintained.

These laws are either fundamental, and so immutable; or more superficial and
temporary, and consequently alterable.

By Superficial Laws, we understand such acts, laws or statutes, as are suited
to present occurrences, and emergencies of state; and which may as well be
abrogated, as they were first made, for the good of the kingdom: For instance,
those statutes that relate to victuals, clothes, times, and places of trade,
etc. which have ever stood whilst the reason of them was in force; but when
that benefit, which did once redound, fell by fresh accidents, they ended,
according to that old maxim, Cessante ratione legis, cessat lex.

By Fundamental Laws I do not only understand such as immediately spring from
Synteresis. (that eternal principle of truth and sapience) more or less
disseminated through mankind, which are as the corner-stones of humane
structure, the basis of reasonable societies, without which all would run into
heaps and confusion; to wit, Hones^e vivere, alt^rum non loedere, jus suum
cuique tribuere, that is, To live honestly, not to heart another, and to give
every one their right, (excellent principles and common to all nations) though
that itself were sufficient to our present purpose: But those Rights and
Privileges, which I call English and which are the proper Birthright of
Englishmen, may be reduced to these three.

I. An ownership, and undisturbed possession: That what they have, is rightly
theirs, and nobody's else.

II. A voting of every law that is made, whereby that ownership or propriety
may be maintained.

III. An influence upon, and a real share in that judicatory power that must
apply every such law, which is the ancient, necessary and laudable use of
juries: If not found among the Britains, to be sure practiced by the Saxons,
and continued through the Normans to this very day.

That these have been the ancient and undoubted right of Englishmen, as three
great roots, under whose spacious branches the English people have been wont to
shelter themselves against the storms of ARBITRARY GOVERNMENT, I shall
endeavor to prove.

I. An Ownership and Undisturbed Possession.
This relates both to title and security of estate, and liberty of person from
the violence of ^^^^^rary Power.

It Is true, the footsteps of the British Government are very much over grown
b^ time. There is scarcely any thing remarkable left us but what we are
behold^n to strangers for: Either their own unskilfulness in letters, or their
depopulation and conquests by invaders, have deprived the world of a particular
story of their laws and customs, in peace or war. However Caesar, Tacitus, and
especially Dion, say enough to prove their nature and their government to be as
far from slavish, as their breeding and manners were remote from the education
and greater skill of the Romans: Beda and M. Westminster say as much.

The law of Property they observed, and made those laws that concerned the
preservation of it.

The Saxons brought no alteration to these two fundamentals of our English
government; for they were a free people, governed by laws, of which they
themselves were the makers: That is, there was no law made without the consent
of the people, de m^jorib^s omnes, as Tacitus observes, of the Germans in
general. They lost nothing by transporting of themselves hither; and doubtless
found a greater consistency between their laws, than their ambition. For the
learned collector of the British councils tells us, that Ethel^ton the Saxon
King, pleading with the people, told them, "Seeing I. according to your law,
allow what is yours, do ye so with me." Whence three things are observable.
First, That something was theirs, that no body else could dispose of. Secondly,
That they had property by their own law, therefore they had a share in making
their own laws. Thirdly, That the law was umpire between king and people;
neither of them ought to infringe: This, ^na, the great Saxon king, confirms.
"There is no great man," says he "nor any other in the whole kingdom, that may
abolish written laws." It was also a great part of the Saxon oath, administered
to the Kings, at their entrance upon the government, "To maintain and rule
according to the laws of the nation."

Their Parliament they called Micklemote, or Wittangemote. It consi^^ed of
King, Lords, and People, before the Clergy interwove themselves with the Civil
Government. And Andrew Horn^ in his Mirror of Justice, tells us, that "the
Grand Assembly of the kingdom in the Saxon time, was to confer of the
government of God's people, how they might be kept from sin, in quiet, and have
right done them, according to the customs and laws."

Nor did this law end with the Saxon race: William the Conq^eror, as he is
usually called, quitting all claim by conquest, gladly stooped to the laws
observed by the Saxon Kings, and so became a King by leave; valuing a title by
election, before that founded in power only. He therefore, at his coronation^
made a solemn covenant, to maintain the good, approved, and ancient laws of
this kingdom, and to inhibit all spoil and unjust judgment.

And this Henry the first, his third son, among other his titles mentioned in
his charter, to make Ely a Bishopric, calls himself "Son of William the Great,
who by hereditary right, (not conquest) succeeded King Edward (called the
Confessor) in this kingdom."

An ancient chronicle of Lit^hfield, speaks of a Council of Lords that advised
William of Normandy, to call together all the Nobles and wise men throughout
their counties of England, that they might set down their own laws and customs;
which was about the fourth year of his reign: Which implies that they had
fundamental laws, and that he intended their confirmation.

And one of the first laws made by this King, which, as a notable author says,
"may be called the first Magna C^arta in the Norman times" (by which he
reserved to himself nothing of the FREEMEN of this kingdom, but their
FREE-SERVICE) in the conclusion of it, says, "That the lands of the
inhabitants of this kingdom were granted to them in inheritance of the King,
and by the Common Council of the whole kingdom;" which law does also provide,
"That they shall hold their lands and tene^ents well or quietly, and in peace,
from all unjust tax and tillage;" Which is farther expounded in the laws of
Henry the First, chap. 4. "That no tribute or tax should be taken, but what was
due in Edward the Confessor's time." So that the Norman King^ claim no other
right in the lands and possessions of any of their subjects, than according to
English law and right.

And so tender were they of p^^perty in those times, that when justice itself
became importunate in a case, no distress could issue without public warrant
obtained: Nor that neither, but upon three complaints first made. Nay, when
rape and plunder were rise, and men seemed to have no more right to their own,
than they had power to maintain, even^ then was this law a sufficient sanctuary
to the oppressed, by being publicly pleaded at the bar against ^surpation;
though it were under the pretense of their conqueror's right itself; as by the
case of Edwi^ of Sharnbo^rn in Cambden's Britannia, plainly appears.

The like obligation to maintain this fundamental law of PROPERTY with the
appendent Rights of the People, was taken by William Rufus, Henry the First,
Stephen, Henry the Second. Richard the First, John, and Henry the Third: Which
brings me to that famous law, called Magna Charta, or the Great Charter of
England, of which more anon; it being my design to show, that nothing of the
essential rights of Englishmen was thereby, de novo, granted, as in civility to
King Henry the Third it is termed; but that they were therein only repeated and
confirmed. Wherefore ^ shall return to antecedent times, to fetch down the
remaining rights.

The second part of this first fundamental is liberty of person. The Saxons
were so tender in the point of imprisonment, that there was little or no use
made of it: Nor would they so punish their bondmen, vinculis coercere rarum est.

In case of debt or damage, the recovery thereof ^as either by a delivery of
the just value in goods, or, upon the sheriffs sale of the goods, in money; and
if that satisfied not, the land was extended: And when all was gone, they were
accustomed to make their last seizure upon the party's arms, and then he was
reputed an undone man, and cast upon the charity of his friends for
subsist^nce: But his person was never imprisoned for the debt: No, not in the
King's case. And to the honor of King Alfred be it spoken, he imprisoned one
of his judges for imprisoning a man in that case.

We find among his laws this passage, Qui imm^rentem Paganum vinculis
constrinxerit, december s^lidis noxam sarcit^: That if a man should imprison his
vassal or bondman unjustly, his purgation of that offense should not be less
than the payment of ten shillings; a sum very considerable in those days, more
than ten pounds now.

Nor did the revolution from Saxon to Norman drop this privilege: For besides
the general confirmation of former rights by William, surnamed the Conqueror,
his son Henry the First, particularly took such care of continuing this part of
property inviol^ble, that, in his time, no person was to be imprisoned for
committing of mortal crime itself, unless he was first attainted by the verdict
of twelve men; that is, ^a jury, which was to be of the neighborhood.

Thus much for the first of my three fundamentals, right of estate, and liberty
of person; That is to say, I am no man's bondman, and what I possess is
ABSOLUTELY MINE OWN.

II. A Voting of every Law that is made, whereby that Ownership or Property may
be maintained,
This second fundamental of our English Government, was no incroachment upon
the Kings of more modern ages, but extant long before the Great Charter made in
the reign of Henry III. Even as early as the Britains themselves; and that it
continued to the time of Henry III. is evident from several instances.

Caesar, in his commentaries, tells us, that it was the custom of the British
cities, to elect their General, or Commander in Chief, in case of war. Dion
assures us, in the life of Severus the Emperor, that in Britain the people held
a share in power and government; which is the modestest construction his words
will bear. And Tacitus, in the life of Ag^ippa, says, "They had a Common
Council, and that one great reason of their overthrow by the Romans, was, their
not consulting with, and rely^ng upon their Common Council." Again, both Beda,
and Mat. Westminster tell us, that the Britains summoned a Synod, chose their
moderator, and expelled the Pelagian creed. All which supposes POPULAR
ASSEMBLIES, with power to order national affairs.

And indeed the learned author of the British Councils gives some hints to this
purpose, that they had a Common Council, and called it Kyfr-ythen.

The Saxons were not inferior to the Britains in this point, and story
furnishes us with more and plainer proofs. They brought this LIBERTY along
with them, and it was not likely they should lose it, by transporting
themselves into a country where they also found it. Tac^tus reports it to have
been generally the German liberty; like unto the Concio of the Athenians and
Lacedaemonians.

They called their freemen Frilingi, and these had votes in the making and
executing the general laws of the kingdom.

In E^helbert's time, after the monk Austin's insinuations had made his
follower's a part of the government^ the Commune Consilium was tam C^ri quam
Populi, as well Clergy as People. In Ina's time, Suasu and insti^uto
Episcoporum, omnium Senatorum and natu majorem Sapientum Popu^i; Bishops, Lords
and wise men of the People. Alfred, after him, reformed the former laws,
c^nsulto Sapientum, by the advice of the Sages of the kingdom. Likewise matters
of public and general charge, in case of war, etc. we have granted in the
assembly, R^g^, Baron^bus, and Populo, by the King, Barons, and People. And
though the Saxon word properly imports the meeting of wise men, yet all that
would come might be present, and interpose their like or dislike of the present
proposition: As that of Ina, in magna servorum Del frequentia. Again, Commune
Consilium seniorum and populorum totius r^gni; the Common Council of the
Elders, or Nobles, and People of the whole kingdom. The Council of Winton, Ann.
855, is said to be in the presence of the Great Men, ali^ru^^que ^idelium
infinita multitudine; and an infinite multitude of other faithful people; which
was nigh four hundred years before the Great Charter was made.

My last instance of the Saxon age shall be out of the Glossary of the learned
English Knight, H. Spelman: The Saxon Wittangemote or Parliament, said he, is a
convention of the Princes, as well Bishops as Magistrates, and the free People
of the kingdom: And that the said Wittange^ote consulted of the common safety
in peace and war, and for the promotion of the common good.

William of Normandy chose rather to rely upon the PEOPLE's CONSENT, than his
own power, to obtain the kingdom. He swore to them to maintain their old laws
and privileges; they to him obedience for his so governing of them: For, as a
certain author has it, "He bound himself to be Just^ that he might be Great;
and the People to submit to Justice, that they might be Free." In his laws, c.
55. We, by the Common Council of the whole Kingdom, have granted the People's
Lands to them in Inheritance, according to their ancient Laws.

Matters of general expense upon the whole body of the people, were settled by
this great Council, especially in the charge of arms imposed upon the subject.
The law says it to have been done by the Commune Consilium of the kingdom.

So W. Rufus and Henry the First were received by the common consent of the
people. And Stephen's words were, Ego Stephanus, Dei grati^, assensu Cleri and
Populi in Regno Angliae electus, etc. I Stephen by the Grace of God, and
consent of the Clergy and People, chosen King of England, etc. So King John was
chosen, Tam Cleri quan Populi unanimi consensu and favore, By the favor and
unanimous consent of the Clergy and People: And his Queen is said to have been
crowned de communi consensu and concordi vo^untate Archiepiscoporum, Comitum,
Baronum, Cleri et P^puli t^tius R^gni, By the common assent and unanimous
good will of the Archbishops, Bishops, Counts, Barons, Clergy and People of
the whole Kingdom. King Edward the First, also desired of the Commune
Consilium, or Parliament, As you have given in my time, and that of my
Progenitors, Kings, etc. All which shows, that it was antecedent to the Great
Charter, not the rights therein repeated and confirmed, but the act itself.

And King John's resignation of the Crown to the Pope, being questioned upon
some occa^^on in Edward the Third's time, it was agreed upon, that he had no
power to do it, without the consent of the Dukes, Prelates, Barons and Commons:

And as paradoxical as any may please to think it, it is the great interest of a
Prince, that the People should have a share in the making of their own laws;
where it is otherwise, they are no Kings of FREEMEN, but SLAV^^, and those
their enemies, for making them so. Leg^^ null^ ^ha ^^^sa nos tenent, quam quod
judici^ po^uli receptae sunt, The laws, says Ulpian, do therefore oblige the
people, because they are allowed of by their judgment. And Gratian, in Dec.
distinct. 4. " Tum demum (...) leges ^abent vim suam, cum fueriat non mode
institu^ae, sed e^iam firmatae Approbatione Communitates:" ^t is then (says
he) that human laws have their due force, when they shall not only be devised,
but confirmed by the approbation of the people."

I. (...) ^^kes men diligent, and increases trade, which advances the revenue:
For where men ARE NOT FREE, they will not seek to improve, because they are not
sure of what they have, and less of what they get.

II. It ^^ees the Prince from the jealousy and hate of his people; and
consequently the troubles and danger that follow, and makes his province easy
and safe.

III. If any inconvenience attends the execution of any law, the Prince is not
to be blamed; it is their own fault that made it.

I shall now proceed to the third Fundamental, and by plain evidence prove it
to have been a material part of the government, before the Great Charter was
enacted.

III. The People have an Influence upon, and a great share in the Judicatory
Power, etc.
That it was a British custom I will not affirm, but have some reason to
suppose: For if the Saxons had brought it with them, they would also have left
it behind them, and in all likelihood there would have been some footsteps in
Saxony of such a law or custom, which we find not. I will not enter the lifts
with any about this: This shall suffice me, that we find it early among the
Saxons in this country, and if they, A FREE PEOPLE in their own country,
settling themselves here as a new planted colony, did supply what was defective
in their own government, or add some new freedom to themselves, AS ALL PLANTLRS
ARE WONT TO DO, which are as those first and corner stones, THEIR POSTERITY,
with all care and skill, are to build upon, that itself will serve my turn to
prove it a fundamental: That is, such a first principle in our English
Government, by the agreement of the people, as ought not to be violated. I
would not be understood of the number, but of the way of trial: I mean, that
men were not to be condemned but by the votes of the freemen.

N. Bacon thinks that in ruder times the mu^ti^de ^ried all among themselves;
and fancies it came from the Grecians, who determined controversies by the
suffrage of 34, or the major part of them.

Be that as it will, juries the Saxons had; for in the laws of King Etheldred,
about three hundred years before the entrance of the Norman Duke, we find
enacted, in singulis centuriis, etc. thus Englished, In every Hundred let there
be a Court, and let twelve ancient Freemen, together with the Lord of the
Hundred, be sworn, that they will not condemn the Innocent, or acquit the
Guilty. And so strict were they, of those ages, in observing this fundamental
way of judicature, that Alfred put one his judges to death, for passing
sentence upon a verdict (corruptly obtained) upon the votes of the jurors,
three of twelve being in the negative. If the number was so sacred, what was
the Constitution itself?

The very same King executed another of his judges, for passing sentence of
death upon an ignoramus returned by the jury; and a third for condemning a man
upon an inquest taken ex offi^i^, when as the delinquent had not put himself
upon their trial. More of his justice might be mentioned even in this very case.

There was also a law made in the time of Eth^ldred, when the Britains and
Saxons began to grow tame to each other, and intercommon amicably, that says,
"Let there be tweve men of understanding, etc. six English and six Welsh, and
let them deal justice both to English and Welsh.

Also in those simple times, if a crime extended but to some shameful
punishment, as pillory or whipping (the last whereof, as usual as it has been
with us, was inf^icted only upon their bondmen) the penance might be reduced to
a ransom, according to the nature of the fault; but it must be assest in the
presence of the judge, and by the twelve, that is the jury of frilingi, or
freemen.

Hitherto stories tell us of trials by juries, and those to have consisted, in
general terms, of freemen: But per pares, or by equals, came after, occasioned
by the considerable Saxons neglecting that service, and leaving it to the
inferior people, who lost the bench, their ancient right, because they were not
thought proper company for a judge or sheriff: And also from the growing pride
of the Danes, who slighted such a rural judicature, and despised the fellowship
of the mean Saxon freemen in public service. The wise Saxon King perceiving
this, and the dangerous consequence of submitting the lives and liberties of
the inferior (but not less useful) people to the dictates of any such haughty
humor; and on the other hand, of subjecting the nobler sort to the suffrage of
the inferior rank, did, with the advice of his Wittangemote, or Parliament,
provide a third way, more equal and grateful, and by agreement with Gunthurn
the Dane, settled the law of Peers, or equals; which is the envy of nations,
but the famous privilege of our English people: One of those three pillars the
fabric of this ancient and free government stands upon.

This benefit gets strength by time, and is received by the Norman Duke and his
successors; and not only confirmed in the lump of other privileges, but in one
notable case, for all, which might be brought to prove that the fundamental
privileges mentioned in the Great Charter, 9 of Hen^ III. were before it. The
story is more at large delivered by our learned Seldom: Butthus, William having
given his brother Odo a large territory in Kent, with the ^arldom, and he he
taking advantage at the King's being displeased with the Archbishop of
Canterbury, to possess himself of some of the lands of that See, Lankfrank,
that succeeded the Archbishop, informed hereof, petitioned the King for
justice, secundum legem terrae, according to the law of the land: Upon which
the King summoned a County Court, where the debate lasted three days, before
the freemen of Kent, in the presence of Lords and Bishops, and others skilful
in the law, and the judgment passed for the Archbishop, upon the votes of the
freemen.

By all which it is, I hope, sufficiently and inoffensively manifested, that
these three principles, viz.

I. That Englishmen have THE ALONE RIGHT of possession and disposition of what
is theirs.

II. That they are parties to the laws of their country, for the maintenance
thereof.

III. That they have an influence upon, and a real share in the judicatory
^ower, that applies those laws^ have been the ancient rights of the kingdom;
and common basis of the government: That which Kings, under all revolutions
have ^worn to maintain, and History affords us so many precede^ts to confirm.
So that the Great Charter made in the 9th of Hen. III. was not the nativity,
but restoration of ancient privileges from abuses. No grant of new rights, but
a new grant, or confirmation rather, of ancient laws and liberties, violated by
King John, and restored by his successor, at the expense of a long and bloody
war; which showed them as resolute to keep, as their ancestors had been careful
to make those excellent laws.

And so I am come to the Great Charter^ which is comprehensive of what I have
already been discoursing, and which I shall briefly touch upon, with those
successive statutes that have been made in honor and preservation of it.

I shall rehearse so much of it as falls within the consideration of the
foregoing matter (which is a great deal in a little) with something of the
formality of grant and curse; that this age may see, with what REVERENCE and
circumspect o^ our ^ncestors governed themselves in confirming and PRESERVING
of it.

Henry by the Grace of God King of England, etc. To all Archbishops, Earls,
Barons, Sheriffs, Provosts, Officers, unto all Bailiffs, and our faithful
Subjects, who shall see this present Charter, greeting, Know ye, that we, unto
the honor of Almighty God, and for the salvation of the souls of our
Progenitors, and our Successors, Kings of England, to the advancement of Holy
Church, and amendment of our Realm, of our m^re and free will have given and
granted to all Archbishops, etc. and to all Freemen of this our Realm, these
Liberties underwritten, to be holden and kept in this our Realm of England for
evermore.

Though in honor to the King, it is said to be out of his mere and free will,
as if it were his mere favor, yet the qualification of the persons he is said
to grant the ensuing LIBERTIES to, shows, that they are terms of formality,
viz. To all Freemen of (...). Watch supposes there were freemen before this
grant; and that character also implies they must have had laws and liberties:
Consequently, this was not an infranchising of them, but a confirming to
freemen their just privileges they had before. The words of the Charter are
these:

A Freeman shall not be amerced for a small Fault, out after (...) quantity of
the ^ault, and for a great Fault, after the manner thereof, saving to him his
Contenements or Freehold: and a Merchant likewise shall be amerced, saving to
him his Merchandise; and none of the said Amerceme^ts shall be assessed, ^ut by
the Oath of good and honest Men OF THE VICINAGE.

No ^reeman shall be taken or imprisoned, nor be disseized of his Freehold or
Liberties, or free Customs, or be outlawed or ^xiled, or any other ways
destroyed^ nor we shall not pass upon (...), nor condemn him, but by lawful
Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land. We shall sell to no Man, we
shall deny or defer to no Man, either Justice or Right.

I stand amazed, how any man can have the confidence to say, these privileges
were extorted by the Barons wars, when the King declares, that what he did
herein was done freely: Or that they were new privileges, when the very tenor
of the word proves the contrary: ^or freehold, liberties, or free customs, are,
by the Charter itself supposed to be in the possession of the freemen at the
making and publishing thereof. ^or observe, "No Freeman shall be taken or
imprisoned:" Then he is free: This liberty was his right. Again, "No Freeman
shall be di^seised of his Freehold, Liberties, or free Customs." Then certainly
he was in possession of them: And that great Doctor in the laws of England,
Chief Justice Cook, in his proem to the 2d part of his Institutes, tells us,
that these laws and liberties were gathered and observed, amongst others, in an
entire volume, by King Edward the Confessor; confirmed by William, surnamed the
Conqueror; which were afterward ratified by Henry the First; enlarged by Henry
the Second, in his constitutions at Clarendon; and after much contest, and
blood spilt, between King John and the Barons concerning them, were solemnly
established at Running-Mead by Stanes: And lastly, brought to their
former-station, and published by this King Henry the Third, in the 9th year of
his reign.

And though evil counselors would have provoked him to void his father's act
and his own, as if the first had been the effect of force, the other of
nonage; yet it so pleased Almighty God, who has ever been propitious to this
ungrateful island, that in the 20th year of his reign he did confirm and
complete this Charter, for a PERPETUAL establishment of liberty to all
freeborn Englishmen, and their heirs FOR EVER: Ordaining, Quod contravenie^tes
per domin^m Regem, cum convicti fuerin^, graviter puniantur, i. e. "That
WHOSOEVER should act any thing contrary to these Laws, upon conviction, should
be grievously punished by our Lord the King." And in the 22d year of his reign,
it was confirmed by the statute of Marleb, chap. 5. And so venerable an esteem
have our ancesters (...) for this Creat Charter, and so INDISPENSIBLY NECESSARY
have they thought it to their own and posterity's felicity, that it has been
above thirty times ratified and commanded, under great penalies, to be put in
execution.

Here are the three fundamentals comprehended and expressed, to have been the
RIGHTS and PRIVILEGES of ENGLISHMEN.

I. Ownership, consisting of LIBERTY and PROPERTY. In that it supposes
Englishmen to be free, there is liberty; Next, that they have freeholds, there is
property.

II. That they have the voting of their own laws: For that was an ancient free
custom, as I have already proved, and all such customs are expressly confirmed
by this Great Charter: Besides, the people helped to make it.

III. An influence upon, and a REAL SHARE in the judicatory power, in the
execution and application thereof.

This is a substantial part, thrice provided for in those sixteen lines of the
Great Charter before rehearsed: 1. "That no amercements shall be assessed, but
by oath of good and honest men of the vicinage." 2. "Nor we shall not pass upon
him, nor condemn him, but by lawful judgment of his Peers." 3. "Or by the law
of the land:" Which is syno^mo^s, or a saying of equal signification with
lawful judgment of Peers: For, law of the land, and lawful judgment of Peers,
are the propri^m qu^rt^ m^d^, or essential qualities of these chapters of our
Great Charter; being communicable omni, soli and semper, to all and every
clause thereof alike.

Chief Justice Cook well observes, in his second institutes, that per lege^
terrae, or by the law of the land, imports no more than a trial by process, and
writ originally at common law; which cannot be without the lawful judgment of
equals, or a common jury: therefore per legale judicium parium, by the lawful
judgment of Peers, and per legem terrae, by the law of the land, plainly
signify the same privilege to the people. So that it is the judgment of the
freemen of England, which gives the cast, and turns the scale in English
justice.

These being so evidently proved by long use, and several laws, to have been
the first principles or fundamentals of the English free government, I take
leave to propose this question: May the free people of England be justly
di^^e^^ed of all, or ANY of these fundamentals without their consent
collectively?

Answ. With submission, I conceive, NOT; for which I shall produce, first my
reasons, then authorities.

I. Through the British, Saxon, and Norman times, the people of this (...) have
been reputed and called freem^n by Kings, Parliaments, records and histories:
And as a son supposes a father, so freemen suppose FREEDOM. This qualification
imports an ABSOLUTE RIGHT: Such a right as NONE has right to dissei^e or
dispossess an Englishman of: Therefore an unalterable fundamental part of the
government.

II. It can never be thought that they entrusted any representatives with these
CAPITAL PRIVILEGES, farther than ^o use their be^^ ^^ill to secure and maintain
them. They never so delegated or empowered any men, that a^ jure, they could
deprive them of that qualification. And a f^ct^ ad jus non valet a^gumentum:
For the question is not, What may be done? but What ought to be done? Overseers
and stewards are empowered, not to al^^nate, but preserve and improve other
men's inheritances. No owners deliver their ship and goods into any man's hands
to give them away, or run upon a rock; neither do they consign their affairs to
agents or factors without limitation. All trusts suppose such a fundamental
right in them (...) give them, and for whom the trusts are, as is altogether
indissolvable by the trustees. The trust is the LIBERTY and PROPERTY of the
people; the ^mitation is, that it should NOT BE INVADED, but INVIOLABLY
preserved, according to the law of the land.

III. If salus populi be s^pr ma lex, the safety of the people the highest law,
as say several of our ancient famous lawyers and law books; then since the
aforesaid r^^hts are as the sinews that hold together this free body politic,
it follows, they are at least a part of the supreme law, and therefore ought to
be a rule and limit to all subsequent legislation.

IV. The estate goes before the steward, the foundation before the house,
people before their representatives, and the creator before the creature. The
steward lives by preserving the estate; the house stands by reason of its
foundation; the representative depends upon the people, as the creature
^^^sists by the power of its creator.

Every representative may be called the creature of the people, because the
people make them, and to them they owe their being. Here is no
transessentia^ing or transubstantiating of being, from people to
representative, no more than there is an absolute transferring of a title in a
letter of att^rney.

The very term representative is enough to the contrary; wherefore as the house
cannot stand without its foundation, nor the creature subsist without its
creator; so can there be no representative without a people, no^ that people
FREE, which all along is intended as inherent to, and inseparable from the
English people) WITHOUT FREEDOM; nor can there be any freedom without something
be fundamental.

In short, I would fain kn^w of any man how the branches can ^ut up the root of
the tree that bears them? How any representative, that has not only a mere
trust to preserve fundamentals, the people's inheritance; but that is a
representative that makes laws by virtue of this fundamental law, viz. that the
people have a power in legislation (the second principle proved by me) can have
a right to REMOVE or DESTROY that fundamental? The fundamental makes the people
free, this FREE PEOPLE makes a representative; Can this creature unqualify its
creator? What spring ever rose higher than its head? The representative is, at
best, but a true copy, an exemplification; the FREE PEOPLE are the original,
not cancellable by a transcript: And if that fundamental which gives to the
people a power of legislation, be not nullable by that representative, because
it makes them what they are; much less can that representative disse^^e men of
their LIBERTY and PROPERTY, the first great fundamental, that is, parent of
this other; and which intitles to a share in making laws for the preserving of
the first inviolable.

Nor is the third fundamental other than the necessary production of the two
first, to intercept arbitrary designs, and make power legal: For where THE
PEOPLE have not a s^are in judgment, that is, in the application, as well as
making of the law, the other two are imperfect; open to daily invasion, should
it be our infelicity ever to have a violent Prince. For as PROPERTY is every
day exposed where those that have it are destitute of power to hedge it about
by law-making; so those that have both, if they have not a share in the
application of the law, how easily is that hedge broken down?

And indeed, as it is a most just and necessary, as well as ancient and
honorable custom, so it is the Prince's interest: For still the people are
concerned in the inconveniences with him, and he is freed from the temptation
of doing arbitrary things, and their importunity; that might else have some
pretense for such addresses, as well as from the mischiefs that might ensue
such actions. It might be enough to say, that there are above fifty statutes
now in print, besides its venerable antiquity, that warrant and confirm this
legale judicium parium suorum, or the trial of Englishmen by their equals.

But I shall hint at a few instances: The first is, the Earl of Lancaster, in
the 14th of Edw. II. adjudged to die without lawful trial of his Peers: And
afterward Henry, Earl of Lancaster, his brother, was restored. The reasons
given were two: First, Because the said Thomas was not arraigned and put to
answer. Second, That he was put to death without answer, or lawful judgment of
his Peers. The like proceedings were in the case of john of Gaunt, p. 39 coram
Rege. And in the Earl of Arundel's case, Rot. Parl. 4. Edw. 3, N. 13. Also in
Sir John Alee's case 4. Edw. III. N. 2. Such was the destruction committed on
the Lord ^astings in the tower of London, by Richard III. But above all, the
attainder of Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex, who was attainted of high treason,
as appears Rot. Parl. 32, Hen VI^ ^. of which says Chief Justice Cook, as I
remember, "Let oblivion take away the memory of so foul a fact, if it can; if
not, however, let silence cover it."

It Is true, there was a statute obtained in the 11th of Hen. VII. in defiance
of the Great Charter, which authorized several exactions, contrary to the free
custom of this realm: Particularly in the case of juries, both assessing and
punishing, by justices of assize and of the peace, without the fining and
presentment of twelve freemen. ^mpson and Dudley were the great actors of those
oppressions; but they were hanged for their pains, and that illegal statute
repealed in the 1st of Hen. VIII. chapter 6.

The consequence is plain; that fundamentals give rule to acts of Parliament,
else Why was the statute of the 8th Edw. IV. chapter 2. Of liveries and
information, by the discretion of the judges, to stand as an original, and this
of the 11th of Hen. the VII. repealed as illegal? For, therefore, any thing is
unlawful, because it transgresses a law. But what law can an act of Parliament
transgress, but that which is fundamental? Therefore trial by juries, or lawful
judgment of equals, is by acts of Parliament confessed to be a fundamental part
of our government. And because Chief Justice Cook is so generally esteemed an
oracle of the law, I shall in its proper place present you with his judgment
upon the whole matter.

V. These fundamentals are UNALTERABLE by a representative, which were the
result and agreement of English freemen, collectively, the ancienter times not
being acquainted with representatives: For the^ the freemen met in their own
persons. In all the Saxon story we find no mention of any such thing; for it
was the King, Lords and Freemen: The Elder and People. And at the Council of
Winton, in 855^ is reported to have been present, the great men of the kingdom,
and an infinite multitude of other faithful people. Also that of King Ina, the
Common Council, of the Elders and people of the whole kingdom: That is, the
most or generality of the freemen of the kingdom; for all might come that
pleased. It is not to be doubted but this continued after the Norman times, and
that at Running Mead, by S^anes, the Freemen of England were personally present
at the confirmation of that Great Charter, in the reign of King John. But as
the ages grew more humane, and free with respect to ^illains and retainers, and
that the number of freemen increased, there was a necessity for a
representative; especially, since fundamentals were long ago agreed upon, and
those CAPITAL PRIVILEGES put out of the reach and power of a little number of
men to endanger. And so careful were the representatives of the people, in the
time of Edward III. of suffering their liberties and free customs to be
infringed, that in matters of extraordinary weight, they would not determine,
till they had first returned to, and conferred with their several counties or
boroughs that delegated them. Thus the Parl. rolls of his time.

Several Authorities in confirmation of the Reasons beforementioned.
So indubitably are these fundamentals the PEOPLE's RIGHT, and so necessary to
be preserved, that Kings have successively known no other safe or legal passage
to their crown and dignity, than their solemn obligation inviolably to maintain
them. So sacred were they reputed in the days of Hen. III that not to continue
or confirm them, was to affront God, and to damn the souls of his progenitors
and sucessors; and to depress the Church, and deprave the realm: That the Great
Charter comprehensive of them, should be allowed as the common law of the land,
by all officers of justice, that is, the lawful inheritance of all commoners:
That all statute laws or judgments whatsoever, made in opposition thereunto,
should be null and void: That all the Ministers of State, and officers of the
realm, should constantly be sworn to the observation thereof. And so deeply did
after Parliaments REVER^NCE IT, and so careful were they to preserve it, that
they both confirmed it by thirty-two several acts, and enacted copies to be
taken and lodged in each cathedral of the realm, to be read four times a year
publicly before the people: As if they would have them more obliged to their
ancestors for redeeming and transmitting those privileges, than for begetting
them: And that twice every year, the Bishops, apparelled in their pontificials,
with tapers burning, and other solemnities, should pronounce the greater
excommunication against the infringers of the Great Charter, though it were but
in word or counsel; for so ^aith the statute. I shall, for farther
satisfaction, repeat the excommunication or curse, pronounced both in the days
of Hen. III. and Edw. I.

The Sentence of the Curse given by the Bishop, with the King's Consent against
the Breakers of the Great Charter.
IN the year of our Lord 1253, the third day of May, in the great hall of the
King at Westminster, in the presence, and by the consent of the Lord Henry, by
the Grace of God King of England, and the Lord Richard, Earl of Cornwall, his
brother; Roger Bigot, Earl of Norfolk, Marshal of England; Humphrey^ Earl of
Oxford; John, Earl Warren; and other estates of the realm of England; We
Boniface, by the Mercy of God, Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of England, F.
of London, H. of Ely, S. of Worcester, E. of Lincoln, W. of Norwich, P. of
Hereford, W. of Salisbury, W. of Durham, R. of Exce^ter, M. of Carlisle, W. of
Bath, A. of Rochester, T. of St. David's, Bishops apparelled in pontificials,
with tapers burning, against the breakers of the church liberties, and of the
liberties and other customs of this realm of England, and namely these which
are contained in the Charter of the common liberties of England, and Charter of
the Forest, have denounced sentence of excommunication in this form: By the
authority of Almighty God, the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, etc. of the
blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, and of all Apostles, and of all Martyrs, of
blessed Edward King of England, and of all the Saints of Heaven; We
excommunicate and accurse, and from the benefit of our Holy Mother the Church,
we sequester all those that hereafter willingly and maliciously deprive or
spoil the Church of her right; and all those that by any craft or willingness
do violate, break, diminish, or change the Church liberties, and free customs
contained in the Charters of the common liberties, and of the Forest granted by
our Lord the King, to Archbishops, Bishops, and other Prelates of England, and
likewise to the Earls, Knights, and other freeholders of the realm; and all
that secretly and openly, by deed, word, or counsel do make statutes or observe
them being made, or that bring in customs, to keep them, when they be brought
in, against the said liberties, or any of them, and all those that shall
presume to judge against them; and all and every such person before mentioned,
that wittingly shall commit any thing of the premises, let them well know, that
they incur the aforesaid sentence, ipso facto.

The Sentence of the CLERGY against the Breakers of the ARTICLES
beforementioned.
IN the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Amen. Whereas our
Sovereign Lord the King, to the Honor of God, and of Holy Church, and for the
common profit of the realm, has granted for him, and his heirs for ever, these
articles above-written, Robert, Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all
England, admonished all his province once, twice and thrice, because that
shortness will not suffer so much delay, as to give knowledge to all the people
of England, of these presents in writing: We therefore enjoin all persons, of
what estate soever they be, that they, and every of them, as much as in them
is, shall uphold and maintain these articles granted by our Sovereign Lord the
King, in all points: And all those that in any point do resist or break, or in
any manner hereafter procure, counsel, or in any wise assent to resist or break
those ordinances, or go about it, by word or deed, openly or privily, by any
manner of pretense or color; We, the aforesaid Archbishops, by our authority
in this writing expressed, do excommunicate and accurse, and from the body of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and from all the company of Heaven, and from all the
sacraments of Holy Church do sequester and exclude."

We may here see, that in the obscurest times of Popery, they were not left
without a sense of JUSTICE, and a care of FREEDOM; and that even Papists, whom
many think no friends to liberty and property, under dreadful penalties, enjoin
an inviolable observance of this Great Charter, by which they are confirmed.
And though I am no Roman Catholic, and as little value their other curses
pronounced upon religious dissenters, yet I declare ingeniously, I would not,
for the world, incur THIS CURSE, AS EVERY MAN DESERVEDLY DOES, that offers
violence to the FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOMS thereby repeated and confirmed.

Give me leave to remind a sort of active men in our times, that the cruel
infringers of the people's liberties, and violaters of these noble laws, did
not escape with bare excommunications and curses; for such (...) the venerable
esteem our ancestors had for these great privileges, and deep solicitude to
preserve them from the defacings of time, or ^surpation of power, that King
Alfred executed forty judges for warping from the ancient laws of the realm,
Hubert de Burgo, Chief Justice of England, in the time of Edw. I. was sentenced
by his Peers in open Parliament, for advising the King against the Great
Charter. Thus the Spencers, both father and son, for their arbitrary rule and
evil counsel to Edward 2d, were exiled the realm. No better success had the
actions of Tr^nsilian and Belknap: And as for Empson and Dudley, though persons
of Quality, in the time of King Henry the 7th, the most ignominious death of
our country, such as belongs to theft and murder, was hardly satisfaction
enough to the kingdom, for their uncharteral proceedings. I shall choose to
deliver it in the words of Chief Justice Cook, a man, whose learning in law
has, not without reason, obtained him a venerable character of our English
nation.

"There was," says he, "an act of Parliament made in the 11th year of King
Hen. VII. which had a fair FLATTERING PREAMBLE, pretending to avoid diverse
mischiefs, which were first, to the high displeasure of Almighty God. Secondly,
the great let of the Common Law. And, Thirdly, the great let of the wealth of
this land. And the purven of that act, tended in the execution, contrary, ex
diam^tro, viz. To the high displeasure of Almighty God, and the great let, nay,
the utter subversion of the Common Law, and the great let of the wealth of this
land, as hereafter shall appear; the substance of which act follows in these
words.

THAT from henceforth, as well Justices of Assize, as Justices of the Peace, in
every county, upon information for the King, before them made, without any
finding or presenting by twelve men, shall have full power and authority, by
their discretion, to hear and determine all offenses, as riots, unlawful
assemblies, etc. committed and done against Act or Statute made, and not
repealed, etc."

"By pretext of this law Emp^on and Dudley did commit upon the subject
insufferable pressure and oppressions; and therefore this statute was justly,
soon after the decease of Hen. VII. REPEALED at the next Parliament, by the
statute of 1 Hen. VIII. chap. 6.

"A good caveat," says he, "to Parliaments, to leave all causes to be measured
by the golden and strait metwand of the law, and not to the uncertain and
crooked cord of discretion." He goes on,

"IT IS ALMOST INCREDIBLE TO FOR S^E, WHEN ANY MAXIM, OR FUNDAMENTAL LAW OF
THIS REALM IS ALT^^ED (as elsewhere has been observed) WHAT DANGEROUS
INCONVENIENCES DO FOLLOW: Which most expressly appears by this most unjust and
strange act of the 11th of Hen. VII. For hereby not only Empson and Dudley
themselves, but such Justices of Peace (corrupt men) as they caused to be
authorized, committed most grievous and heavy oppressions and exactions:
Grinding the faces of the poor subjects by penal laws (be they never so
obsolete or unfit for the time) by information only, without any presentment or
trial by jury, being the ancient birthright of the subject; but to hear and
determine the same by their discretions; inflicting such penalty as the
statutes, not repealed, imposed These, and other like oppressions and
exactions, by the mean of Empson and Dudley, and their instruments, brought
infinite treasure to the King's coffers, whereof the King himself, at the end,
with great grief and compunction repented, as in another place we have observed.

"This statute of the 11th of Hen. VII. we have recited, and showed the just
inconveniences thereof; to the end that the like should NEVER hereafter be
attempted in any court of Parliament; and that OTHERS might avoid the fearful
end of those two time-servers, Empson and Dudley, Qui eorum vestigiis
insistant^ exitus perhorrescant." Thus much Chief Justice Cook.

I am sure, there is nothing I have offered in defense of English law-doctrine,
that rises higher then the judgment and language of this great man, the
preservation and publication of whose labors, became the care of a great
Parliament. And it is said of no inconsiderable lawyer, that he should thus
express himself in our occasion, viz. "The laws of England were never the
dictates of any conqueror's sword, or the placita of any King of this nation;
or, (^aith he) to speak impartially and freely, the results of any Parliament
that ever fat in this land."

Thus much for the nature of English rights, and the reas^^ and justice for
their INVIOLABLE maintenance. I shall now offer some more general
considerations for the PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY, and therein hint at some of
those mischiefs that follow spoiling it, for conscience sake, both to Prince
and People.

I. The reason of the alteration of the law, ought to be the discommodity of
continuing it; but there can never be so much as the least inconveniency in
continuing that of LIBERTY AND PROPERTY; therefore there can be no just ground
for INFRINGING much less ab^ogating the laws that secure them.

II. No man in England is born SLAVE to another; neither has one right to
inherit the sweat of the others brow, or reap the benefit of his labor, BUT BY
CONSENT; therefore NO MAN should be deprived of his PROPERTY, unless he injure
another man's, and then by legal judgment.

III. Where LIBERTY and PROPERTY are VIOLATED, there must always be a state of
force: And though I PRAY GOD that we never need those cruel remedies, whose
calamitous effects we have too lately felt, yet, certainly, SELF-PRESERVATION
is of all things dearest to men; insomuch that being not conscious to
themselves of having done an ill thing, they, to defend their unforfeited
privileges, cheerfully hazard all they have in this world: So very strangely
vindictive are the sons of men, in maintenance of their rights. And such are
the cares, fears, doubts and insecurities of that administration, as render
empire a SLAVERY, and dominion the worst sort of bondage to the possessor. On
the contrary, nothing can give greater cheerfulness, confidence, security and
honor to any Prince, than ruling by law; for it is a conjunction of title with
power, and attracts love as well as it requires duty.

Give me leave, without offense (for I have God's evidence in my own
conscience, I intend nothing but a respectful caution to my superiors) to
confirm this reason, with the judgment and example of other times. The
Governors of the ELEANS held a STRICT HAND over the people; who, despairing of
relief at h^me, called in the Spartans, and by their help FREED all their
cities from the SHARP BONDAGE of their natural Lords.

The state of SPARTA was grown powerful, and oppressed the Thebans; They though
but a weak people, whetted by despair, and the prospect of greater miseries,
did, by the Athenians, dedeliver themselves from the Spartan Yoke.

Nor is there any other considerable reason given for the ruin of the
CARTHAGINIAN state, than avarice and severity. More of this is to be found in
Rawleigh's history of the world, l. 3 who has this witty expression in the
same story, l. 5. of a severe conduct. When a forced government, says he,
shall decay in strength, it will suffer, as did the old lion, for the
oppression done in his youth; being pinched by the wolf, goar'd by the bull,
and kicked also by the ass: The senseless mob.

This lost CAESAR BORGIA his (...) and great conquests in Italy. No better
success attended the SEV^RE HAND held over the people of NAPLES by Alphonso and
Ferdinand. 'Twas the undue severity of the SICILIAN Governors that made the
Syracusians, Leontines, and Messenians so easy a conquest to the Romans. An
harsh answer to a (...) PEOPLE lost Rehoboam t^ntribes. On the contrary, in
^ivy, Dec. 1. l. 3. we find, that Petilia, a city of the Brutians in Italy,
ch^se rather to endure all extremity of war from Ha^^oal, than upon any
condition to desert the Romans, who had cove^^ed them moderately, and BY THAT
GENTLE CONDUCT procured their love; even than, when the Romans sent them word,
they were not able to relieve them, and wished them to provide for their own
safety.

N. Machiavel in his discourses upon Livy, p. 542. tells us, that one act of
Humanity was of more force with the conquered (...), than many violent acts of
hostility: Which makes good that saying of Seneca, Mitius imperanti melius
paretur, They are best obeyed that govern most mildly.

IV. If these ancient FUNDAMENTAL LAWS, so agreeable with nature, so suited to
the dispositions of our nation, so often defended with BLOOD and TREASURE, so
carefully and frequently ratified by our ancestors, shall not be, to our great
pilots, as stars or compass for them to steer the vessel of this kingdom by, or
limits to their legislature; no man can tell HOW LONG he shall be secure of his
ceat, enjoy his house, have bread to give his children, liberty to work for
bread, and life to eat it. Truly, this is to justify what we condemn in Roman
Catholics. It is one of our main objections, that their church assumes a power
of imposing religion, thereby denying men the liberty of walking by the rules
of their own reason and conscience, and precepts of holy writ: To whom, we
oppose both. We say, the church is tied to act nothing contrary to reason; and
that holy writ is the declared law of Heaven, which to maintain, power is given
to the true church. Now let us apply this argument TO OUR CIVIL AFFAIRS, and it
will certainly end in a reasonable limitation of our legislators, that they
should not impose that upon our understandings, which is inconsistent with them
to embrace; nor offer any THE LEAST VIOLATION TO COMMON RIGHT. Do the Romanists
say, Believe as the Church Believes? Do not the Protestants, and which is
harder, legislators say so too? Do we say to the Romanists, at this rate, your
obedience is blind, and your ignorance is the mother of devotion? is it not
also true of our selves? Do we object to them, This makes your religion
uncertain, one thing to day, and another tomorrow? Does not our own case
submit us to the like variation IN CIVILS? Have we not long told them, that
under pretense of obeying the Church, and not controuling her power, she has
raised a superstructure inconsistent with that foundation she pretends to build
upon. And are not we the men IN CIVILS, that make our privileges rather to
depend upon men, than laws, as she does upon Councils, not Scripture? If this
be not POPERY IN TEMPORALS, what is?

It is humbly beseeched of superiors, that it would please them to consider
what reflection such severity justly brings upon their proc^edings; and
remember, that in their ancient delegations, it was not to define, resolve, and
impose matters of religion, and sacrifice civil privileges for it; BUT TO
MAINTAIN THE PEOPLE'S PROPERTIES, ACCORDING TO THE ANCIENT FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF
THE LAND, and to add such statutes only, as were consistent with, and
preservative of those fundamental laws.

THEREFORE, we hope and desire, that you, the King's Justices for time to come,
when any informers shall come to any of you, with an information against any of
us, will hear us and our accusers, face to face, that none may suffer for what
they are not guilty. For Pilate the Governor heard Christ and his accusers with
the witnesses that were brought against him, face to face, before they
condemned him. Acts vii. The Roman Captain heard Paul and his accusers, face to
face, Acts xxiii. Felix the Governor heard Paul and Annanias, the high Priests
and the Elders, who accused Paul, face to face. Acts xxiv. And when the high
Priests and chief of the Jews, accused Paul to Festus, he heard Paul and his
accusers and them, who witnessed against him, face to face. Acts xxv. Does the
law of God, or did the Roman law, or does the law of the land judge any man
before he and his accusers, and they who witness against him, be heard, face to
face?

George Fox to the Magistrates of London, page 553.

The law gives no property, but protects the Possessor in it against violence.
The first property a man has, is his person, life and liberty; and as these
are from God, and the right of all men, so he has provided means for the
support of them unto all. The means of support of person and life, is food and
raiment, arising either naturally from the fruits of the earth, spontaneously
growing, animal creatures, or by the personal labor or industry of man. Cain,
it is said, was a tiller of the ground, and Abel, a keeper of sheep. When Cain
had cleared and cultivated a piece of ground and propagated useful things
thereon, that and those became the property of Cain, by his personal labor, in
which the law of natural reason will protect him against any thing but personal
violence; and Abel, taking under his care and management some of the creatures
he found most proper for his use and purpose, they became his property, by his
care, labor, and pains, in which he was protected by the same law, and all
just laws are no other than right reason declared by way of compact upon that
principle of reason constituent of our being. But when the earth was filled
with violence, God, by the element of water, destroyed the world, save Noah and
his family, by whom he replenished it. In process of time, Nimrod became a
mighty hunter before the Lord, that is, his hunting was of that nature and
tendency, as that God took notice of him therein; for he, with his company,
first hunting wild beasts, became also wild themselves, and then hunted after
the Liberties and Prop^rties of other men, invading them by force and numbers,
till the rest of mankind, in their own just defense, entered into reasonable
Compacts against unreasonable Invasions.

Thomas Story's Conference with Lord Lon^dale.

Edward Borough, in answer to some Queries, thought to have been proposed by
Edward, Earl of Clarendon, says, It is my judgment, that there was very great
oppression and vexation under the Government of the late king Charles II. which
the Lord was offended with, and many good people oppressed by, for which cause
the Lord might and did justly raise up some to oppose and strive against
oppressions and injustice, and to press after reformation in all things.

In the Lord's absence, lamentable injustice, cruelty, unmercifulness, TYRANNY
and OPPRESSION has been exercised in civil state upon the inhabitants, and the
"poor creatures have been held in great SLAVERY by their rulers; and all this
he has suffered, not as though he gave toleration for it, for his messengers and
his witness in people's consciences have been reproving their ungodly ways."
ALACK, I must be plain with you, my Lord has been utterly exiled and greatly
dishonored by reason of such proceedings, as have been in this nation for
these many years, through the corruption of all sorts of men in place and
power; and though there was in this nation a day of great troubles, and wars, and
contentions, and the wasting of much blood and earthly treasures, none of these
things, I must tell you, fell without the ordering of my Master's hand.
Wherefore, that you may be warned, I advise you to relieve the oppressed, break
down all unjust laws, AND SET ALL PEOPLE FREE from unjust burdens, and let all
oppression cease both in Church and Civil State, and all unjust judges and evil
men in power, let all these be removed, and the nation clean quitted and
discharged even from all men and laws whatsoever, that have held under
oppression, the persons, estates and consciences of the good people of this
land, and let the nation be corrected, and all orders and places of men, and
laws, and decrees, be purified; and let just, righteous and meek men, and such
as have the fear and wisdom of God in them, without acceptance of birth, or
otherwise, let such men have the power and judgment committed to them, to
determine in things between man and man. Down with all the false hearted
flatterers, that have ruled for man and not for God, and for themselves and not
for the good of the people; cast out all such from amongst you; -- down with
all that judge for rewards, and those that will not serve places of trust
without so large stipends; -- away with all these things out of the land, for
they are heinous oppressions unto men, and great abominations in the sight of
God; and though the land has long groaned under the weight and burden of these
things, and the earth is weary of them, and my Lord requires their utter
desolation, as being iniquities fully ripe, and having the guilt of so much
cruelty, injustice and oppression lying upon the nation because hereof,
therefore this is the Lord's season to destroy them, and remove them out of the
land, which, if you be the instruments in such a work, it will be your greatest
crown and your perpetual honor; (but on the contrary, as E. B. previously
declared to them) if they neglected such things, and regarded them not, then
shall you be cast aside with shameful disgrace, and the heavy hand of the Lord
shall be upon you in judgment, your estates shall not be spared from the
spoiler, nor your persons from the violence of men, no, nor your necks from the
axe.

Edward Burrough's Message to the Rulers of England.

God has done great things for thee, he has sufficiently shown thee, that it
is by him PRINCES rule, and that he can pull down and set up at his pleasure.
He has often faithfully warned thee by his servants, since he restored thee to
thy ROYAL DIGNITY, that thy heart might not wax wanton against him, to forget
his mercies and providence toward thee, whereby he might permit thee to be
soothed up, and lulled asleep in thy sins, by the flattering of COURT
PARASITES, who, by their fawning, are the ruin of many Princes. Thou have
tasted of prosperity and adversity, thou know what it is to be banished thy
native country, to be overruled, as well as to rule and fit upon the throne,
and being oppressed, thou have reason to know, how hateful the oppressor is,
both to God and man.

Robert Barclay's Dedication of his Apology for the people, called Quakers to
King Charles II.
Diverse other Testimonies might have been added, but it is thought the
foregoing may be sufficient to show, that the most eminent and worthy members
of this Society, even these who were in the station of ministers amongst
Friends, were neither ashamed or afraid, plainly and publicly, to declare
against injustice and oppression in civil as well as religious affairs, no
doubt believing, with one of the ancients, Qui libere veritat^^ non pronuntias,
pr^ditor est veritatis. -- That He who does not freely declare the truth, is a
betrayer of the truth. -- Which, if you allow, and believe the saying of
Lactantius to be just, Qui videt aliquem periturus, et potest succurrere, et
non vult, occidit. -- That he who sees another about to perish, and can relieve
him, but will not, destroys him. Shall we not then, (especially after so many
notable examples of integrity) be highly culpable and accessory, if we permit
that which is unjust to take place, without an exertion of those faculties and
powers with which providence has favored us?

FINIS.

