SERMON, PREACHED TO THE SOLDIERS, WHO WENT FROM WEST-HARTFORD, IN DEFENSE OF
THEIR COUNTRY. DELIVERED THE 2d OF JUNE, 1775. Being the Day before they
marched from that Place. PUBLISHED AT THE DESIRE OF THE HEARERS.

By NATHAN PERKINS, A. M. Pastor of the fourth Church in HARTFORD.

HARTFORD: Printed by EBEN. WATSON, near the Great Bridge.

PREFACE.
THE only apology for the publication of this SERMON is the desire of those who
heard it. And if the perusal of it, should afford either entertainment or
instruction to them, or others, into whose hands accident may throw it, my
labor will be amply compensated. The inaccuracies of style which may be found
in it, will, I hope, find favor from the candor of the public, and its defects
not be weighed in the balance of severe criticism.

PSALM, cxl.1, 2. Deliver me, O LORD, from the evil Man: preserve me from the
violent Man. Which imagine Mischief in their Heart; continuually are they
gathered together for War.


MY BRETHREN,
THE pulpit is devoted to more important purposes, than the fate of kingdoms,
even the instruction of mankind in the way to everlasting life. But, when
necessity calls, it may with propriety, address us on civil liberty; and at
once instruct and warm those who are willing to hazard their lives, in the
defense of the privileges of their country. On this affecting occasion, when
some present, soon expect to go into the service of the colonies, on whose
account we are now assembled in the house of God, your solemn attention is
earnestly solicited to the passage of holy writ, just read.

THE text, taken as a detached passage without a critical regard to its
circumstances and connection, may be divided into three branches, each of which
will be a distinct topic of discourse.

I. MISCHIEFS are imagined against us by evil men. II. To make these mischiefs
take effect, war is begun. III. DELIVERANCE and preservation must be sought
from the Lord.
I RETURN to the first of these. Mischiefs are imagined against us, by evil men.

To paint the distresses of our native land in colors sufficiently bright, is
a task to which I own myself unequal. However, a few words on this subject,
will be pertinent, and not unentertaining to you. Our forefathers purchased our
invaluable liberties at the expense of their blood and treasure. To enjoy their
religion, their God, and their consciences, and to transmit an unembarrassed
worship, untaxed inheritance and fair freedom, with her happy train of numerous
blessings, down to future generations; they left their pleasant, native soil,
the other side of the atlantic, relinquished friends and near connexions,
braved all hardships and despised all dangers. At the expense of their blood,
at the hazard of their fortunes, without the least charge to the country from
whence they came, by unwearied endeavors and an intrepid spirit, they effected
settlements in the distant and inhospitable wilds of America, then filled with
savage barbarians. Propitious heaven smiled on their arduous attempts, and
crowned their bold enterprises with unexpected success. How soon did this
country after their settlement in it, change its appearance! the huts of
savages were converted into the dwellings of christians. That dark, blind
ignorance, which sat brooding over the minds of the aborigines was gradually
chased away. Now fair science dawns, and the arts of life are cultivated
diligently and are brought to a tolerable perfection. Where satan was once
worshipped, now the true God is served. Where superstition once raged, now the
purest form of worship on the face of the earth is established, and the sacred
rights of conscience maintained. In a word, the glorious light of christianity
has dispelled the dark glooms of paganism. And as America was sought as an
asylum for civil as well as religious freedom, so governments, vested with
perfect legislatures were erected by royal leave, and a friendly correspondence
established between the colonies and the kingdom from whence they derived their
origin. The mutual advantages of this union were great beyond expectation. From
this source the exceeding increase of the wealth and fame, strength and
navigation of the realm arose. America was peculiarly happy under the shadow of
the wings, and in the enjoyment of the friendship of Britain. Indeed no people
more happy, more free, more virtuous could be found wherever the circling sun
performs its destined course. But alas, short is the date of human felicity!
forgetful of the ties of blood, hardened against the bonds of obligation, and
unfeeling to the sentiments of gratitude, the parent state envies the
liberties, rising glory, increasing greatness, and growing riches of the
dutiful daughter. On these she fixes her malignant eye. Over these oppression
longs to stretch her iron rod. Fair LIBERTY, offspring of virtue, trembles at
the sight of the hated monster. Despotism assumes the specious name of
government; would push coercive measures under the colorable pretense of wise
commercial regulations, and calls absolute servitude, just submission to
parliament.

ABSURD as are the principles and notions on which the doctrine of arbitrary
power is established, there have been ever in Great Britain found many to adopt
it. The vulgar are liable at all times to be deceived; as they are now by the
plausible argument used with them to persuade them, every shilling raised by
taxes in America will so much lighten their burden; by which artifice the
Premier has secured on his side the landed interest; and the nation has ever
produced a number of bad citizens, who prone to be corrupted, have been the
ready tools of wicked ministers, and the zealous partisans in a cause big with
the ruin of the state. It is justly remarked by an able writer, that there may
be a faction for the crown as well as against it, and conspiracies against
freedom as well as against prerogative. Whoever attempts to remove the
limitations necessary to render monarchy consistent with liberty, are rebels in
the worst sense, rebels to the laws of their country, the law of nature, the
law of reason, and the law of God. Was the question to be put, could there be
such wretches? we should be ready to answer, it cannot be. But the British
annals have a shameful tale to tell, that such lovers of arbitrary power have
ever existed in the state from the earliest period of the constitution. They
have not only prevented the establishing any regular system for securing and
improving the liberties of the subject and fixing the line of prerogative, but
always lie in wait for every opportunity, which the imperfections of the
constitution may give them to destroy those rights which have been purchased by
the toil and blood of the most exalted individuals who ever adorned humanity.
Having carried their despotic plan to enormous lengths, by the influence of
bribery at home, since the accession of the present King, they have taken large
strides, in the same plan, in America. Indeed, if we but for a moment look over
our land, and glance a reflection on the cruel, unjust, and oppressive measures
of the ministry at home, we shall be struck with horror at the mischiefs
imagined against us. The sum of them all is in the statute, which declares
parliament can of right, make laws to bind us in all cases whatever. Did ever
more arbitrary statute disgrace the annals of the British nation, even in the
most arbitrary reigns? -- They have undertaken to give and grant our money
without our consent -- they show no regard for our persons or rights. -- But
why do I stand to enumerate particulars? No conquered province was ever dealt
more hardly by. -- Our precious liberties are invaded -- Our sacred charters
violated -- Our property taken from us -- foreign troops, the bane of
government, quartered among us in times of profound peace. -- The cruel
superstition of popery established, protistanism only tolerated, and a
despotism dangerous to the last degree to us, erected in a large neighboring
province. Gracious God! what mischiefs are imagined against us! Never, never
did so dark, so gloomy, so alarming, so terrible calamities hang over America
as the present. Who that is zealous in the cause of liberty, and attached with
a fervent devotion to the civil rights of his country, but must weep over her
fate? Cruel as are the mischiefs imagined against us, fleets and armies are
sent over to enforce them.

II. To make them take effect, or to bring us to submission, war is begun.
"Continually are they gathered together for war." Had man continued in a state
of innocence, war had never been known. But now, alas the fatal effects of
apostasy, in every age of the world, and among all nations killing one another
has been taught and practiced by mankind, as a science. In this state of sin
and imperfection, war is many times, not only absolutely necessary, but
strictly lawful. It can only be lawful, either consonant to the dictates of
reason or permitted by the precepts of chrisstianity, when an invasion is made
upon us. It is true, according to the peaceable maxims of policy in our blessed
Savior's kingdom, we are to love our enemies, bless them that curse us, do
good to them that hate us, and pray for them who despitefully use us. And
according to the apostles doctrine are to be subject to the powers that be.
From these passages to support arbitrary principles and to argue against the
lawfulness of opposing force by force, would be to draw absurd and dangerous
conclusions, from the gentle and condescending laws of the religion of Jesus.
To draw the sword and shed human blood for the sake of conquest, must, in the
judgment of reason, be deemed a horrid crime. An offensive war can therefore
never be either necessary or justifiable. To enlarge empire, feed vain glory,
exalt pride, reward favorites, support luxury, and gratify pestilential
ambition, must be wretched motives in a Prince to engage in a war. And all the
blood shed, horrors felt, and distresses endured, must be laid at the doors of
the aggressors. The wretches who compose the army of a tyrant, are associated
by folly in the service of rapine and murder; and that men should imagine they
were deserving of honor by the massacre of their fellow creatures or fellow
subjects merely to flatter ambition with a new tittle or to enforce oppressive
measures, is, perhaps as inscrutable a mystery as any that has perplexed
reason, and as gross an absurdity as any that has disgraced it. It is equally
to punish vice and prevent misery, that I wish always to see it branded with
infamy: For even the successes of vice terminate in the anguish of
disappointment. As to Alexander, the fruit of all his conquests was tears, so I
wish not only the tears of disappointment, but the tears of repentance to those
who want to have America sacrificed to the lust of domination. A vast variety
of weighty and invincible arguments might easily be produced to prove the
iniquity of an offensive war, for the sake of the acquisition of honor or
addition of territory. But to plunder under sanction of law, to strip a people
of the blessings of peace, to raise a revenue out of the fruits of their honest
industry, to involve in distress, and to reduce them to the hard necessity of
either giving up their liberty, or of appealing to arms is a crime of which
words cannot describe the blackness, and which must fill us with painful
sentiments to think humanity is depraved enough to commit. How nearly this is
the case with us and Great Britain is too plain not to be seen by all. We have
reasoned -- we have remonstrated -- we have prayed -- we have even wearied the
royal ear with our cries -- we have persued every respectful, every gentle
measure. -- But all in vain. We must be scourged into vassalage like slaves. We
have been dragged reluctantly into an unnatural civil war. -- Hostilities are
commenced, and the kings troops, the instruments of tyranny, were the
aggressors. Witness the battle at Lexington, shameful in every view, to the
British arms! We are reduced to the sad, deprecated necessity of defending our
rights at the point of the sword. We must either resist unto blood or be
slaves. No other alternative is left us. As our's is then a defensive, it must
be a righteous war. Should a ruffian meet me on the road, demand my purse with
a dagger at my throat, or pistol at my breast, if by any means I could strike
him dead, I should think myself warranted to do it, by the laws of God and man.

WHEN therefore our money is demanded of us, by the gentle arguments of fleets
and armies, or with the boyonet at our breasts, we are warranted by all laws
human and divine, to defend ourselves by the hardest, and appeal to heaven for
the justice of our cause. Tamely and unresistingly to give up the liberties,
with which God and nature have blessed us, and which we hold dear as men, and
sacred as christians, must be a crime in us. Nay, I may venture to affirm you
have no more right to give up your life and liberties, than your neighbor has
forcibly to take them from you. We may therefore with humble confidence in the
mercies of the impartial judge and supreme ruler of the universe, devoutly
commit our righteous cause to him, and fervently implore his compassionate
interposition for our deliverance. For,

III. DELIVERANCE is to be sought from the Lord. When David prays, as he does
in the text, it is not because he was a coward; for he was as distinguished a
warrior as eminent saint. As he appeared in Zion, fervent in devotion, so he
proved himself undaunted in fortitude in the field of battle. His fear of the
omnipotent God, was the best security against an unbecomeing fear of man. While
therefore he complains of the injustice of his enemies, he implores the
merciful interposition of heaven for deliverance and is concerned to engage the
presence of the God of battles with him.

SEEKING deliverance from the Lord implies a feeling sense of our absolute
dependence on -- conviction of the almighty power of -- continued application
by prayer to the mercy of God, and repentance of sin. To seek deliverance from,
is to feel our dependence on God. Mankind are naturally filled with pride and
self-dependance; unwilling to own their subjection to the disposal of him, who
is their Lord and Maker. But the truth is, both as individuals and as a people
we are entirely dependant for life, and breath, and being, and all things,
upon, and absolutely at the disposal of a sovereign God. Whether we realize it
or not, it is true, God could with infinite ease cut us down and send us to
endless misery. It is therefore of great moment to have our minds deeply and
seriously impressed with an habitual conviction of our constant dependence on
God the great creator and moral governor and supreme lawgiver of the universe,
from whom alone we may hope for deliverance, and who justly claims from all
rational creatures, the highest esteem, most ardent love, and unremitted
obedience.

FURTHER, we must be convinced (...) the almighty power of God, in order to
seek acceptably deliverance. The supreme being chooses to have his people
acknowledge his power. When God interposes in behalf of any, he will have his
arm made bare in such a manner as to convince all it is his, both those for
whom, and those against whom it is made bare. We must then realize his almighty
power; believe and rest assured he can do every thing; that nothing is too hard
for omnipotence; that as he made, so he governs the world with unering
rectitude; that he can ride forth conquering and to conquer for his people; can
strike dead all that oppose his people, and work deliverance for them by
unthought of means; he can turn their adversity into prosperity, their
affliction into joy, their troubles into blessings, and cut of darkness bring
forth light.

Again, WE must continually apply to his mercy by prayer. God has in gracious
condescension styled himself a prayer hearing God. He permits such worms of the
dust as we are, to approach his sacred presence; to spread our requests before
and make known our wants to him through Jesus Christ, by whose atonement alone
our sins can be pardoned and our cries heard. Now the word of God abounds with
proofs of the Almighty's pleasure to make his power, as it were, tributary to
the prayers of his faithful people. Thus the prayer of Joshua stopped the sun
in his course; and that of Elijah, though a man of like passions with ourselves
opened and shut the springs which water the earth. The prayer of the three
children preserved them in the fiery furnace from being hurt, and that of
Daniel from the devouring lions. The time would fail me to mention what we find
recorded in scripture of the wonders wrought through the powers of prayer.
There is indeed no age without a cloud of witnesses of the infaliable efficacy
of prayer. Let us then begin, let us persevere in calling upon the Lord for
deliverance in this dark and alarming day. Real christians must value prayer,
and be constant and unwearied in it; so will the same bountiful God, whose ears
are ever open to the prayers of his faithful people, open in the end, heaven to
receive their persons. He will give them an abundant entrance into that
kingdom, where petitions are no more; because neither weakness, nor want, nor
fear, nor trial, remain, but all the soul feels is perfect felicity, and all it
expresses, perfect praise.

Lastly, WE must repent of sin, or we do not seek a right for deliverance from
the Lord. In true repentance, sin itself becomes the greatest burden and object
of aversion; sorrow springs from an affecting humbling sense of the dishonor
and injury the penitent feels he has done unto God; not from a selfish concern
for his own safety, but from a regard to God, to which he was before a
stranger; from a conviction that his whole deportment and the ruling tempers of
his heart at all times have been evil and desperately wicked. Now the
generality among us seem to be concerned for our distressed country, and are
ardently desirous to contribute something to save it from ruin. They are
willing to sacrifice much to the cause of freedom. But there is one kind of
sacrifice by which you could do more essential service to your country, than to
give all your goods to feed its suffering poor. A sacrifice, in one view, of
the cheapest kind. A sacrifice which will cost you nothing. Do you ask what it
can be? It is the sacrifice of your sins to the cause of liberty. If you would
give up your sins, slay them, and, so to speak, offer them on the altar of
liberty as bleeding victims; it will be the best thing you can do for your
country, for liberty, and for yourselves.

A short improvement will close the present discourse.

IN the first place, from what has been said, we see the justice of our cause.
-- The obstinacy and cruelty of our foes have obliged us to appeal from reason
to arms. There is no choice left us but slavery or civil war. England, whose
constitution has been the glory, admiration, and envy of surrounding states --
England as famous for arts as for arms -- England, which has shed the blood of
her best citizens in the glorious cause of liberty, has now sat down herself
to forge the arbitrary chains. The laws of reason and self-preservation will
justify the most strenuous opposition, nay duty calls on us to buckle on the
harness and march out into the field and if we must give up our liberties, give
them up at the point of the sword.

IN the second place, we may with humble confidence implore the merciful
interposition of Almighty God for our deliverance. All who have an interest in
heaven are loudly called upon, to besiege the throne of grace, as constant and
devout supplicants. Every argument that can operate on the human heart, urges
to this duty. A fervent attachment to the civil rights of your country, must
irresistably force you to cry mightily to God. Let us therefore devoutly
recommend our bleeding country's righteous cause, to the pitying eye of a
compassionate God, through a divine Savior, and piously crave his blessing on
our rulers, on the measures that may be adopted, for success to our arms, and
the divine presence to be with those, that are going from among us, in this
place, into the service of the colonies, an address to whom will wind up the
present discourse.

MY FRIENDS,

IT is at your desire I now address you from this sacred desk; you will
therefore allow me to use the utmost freedom, and to give you my parting advice
with the greatest plainess. It will be comprehended in the following
particulars, which I wish you to remember and by which I wish you to act. -- Be
courageous -- be orderly -- be sober, and fear the Lord.

Be courageous. Cowardice is as unseemly in a soldier, as ignorance is in a
statesman As the skill of a pilot in a storm, and the worth of a christian in a
time of trial, so the valor of a soldier is best seen in a day of battle. You
know not how you will feel when called into an engagement, to give back then
will brand you with the odious name of a coward. The most of you are strangers
to the dreadful horrors of battle. An army drawn up in battle array, the
roaring of cannon, the smoke and confusion, the cries of the wounded, groans of
the dying, and all the dreadful horrors of battle are things to which you have
not been accustomed. He is the brave soldier who at such an awful juncture, has
entire self-possession and presence of mind. You have every thing to inspire
you with undaunted fortitude. You fight not for your daily bread -- not for
four-pence sterling a day, but for your lives, your property, your native land,
your dearest friends, your just rights, all you hold dear as men and sacred as
christians, your ALL. If these motives do not fire your souls in your country's
cause, what can! Indeed you have every thing before you to rouse up the
soldier, warm the man and animate the christian. Play the men therefore for
your God, your people, and the cities of your God.

BE orderly. Nothing is more beautiful in a soldier than the most exact
attention, scrupulous regard and punctual obedience to order. Orderly troops
are infinitely more likely to gain honor to themselves, victory to their arms,
and triumph for their country, than a confused rabble. If, in the day of
battle, you do not obey strictly orders and keep in ranks, defeat will most
certainly ensue. Well diciplined and orderly forces, history abundantly
evinces, carry the greatest terror with them, and are generally successful. I
must therefore enjoin upon you, the most punctual attention to orders.

BE sober. Temperance and sobriety are fine ornaments to the soldier whose life
exposes him to numberless dangers, throws him in the midst of temptation and
hardens him in the commission of sin. No two professions so full of danger, as
the sailor and soldier, and none so loose and wicked. Extravagant mirth, vain
levity and universal forgetfulness of decency of deportment will sit with a
very ill grace on those, who pretend to sacrifice life to the cause of freedom
and their country. As I would not have you lay aside the man, when you assume
the soldier, so I would not have you forget the duties of religion in the noise
of a camp. Let compassion, tenderness, kindness and benevolence to all, be your
companions. Do not imagine you may put on the unfeeling fierceness of a
barbarian, and divest yourselves of humanity. Wherever you may be posted, and
in all your marches remember the sabbath day to keep it holy. Remember all the
duties of devotion and sink not down into stupid neglect or thoughtless
contempt of them. Let it appear that the camp and religion, commonly great
strangers to each other, are not inconsistent. With you, instead of profanity,
let there be reverence of divine things; and instead of oaths and curses, the
cries of prayer.

LASTLY. Fear the Lord. I do not mention this part of the advice, last in
order, because it is last in importance; for it is the one thing needful and of
infinite moment. He that fears God the most, will be the least likely to fear
man; for the fear of God is the (...) security against cowardice, and the good
man will make the ^^st soldier; and if you are never to return to your friends,
the fear of the Lord will be a sure passport to eternal honors. Life, you
know, is very uncertain, you are going into danger, and ought solemnly to be
reminded of a dying hour. Do not think then when you have on the harness of
war, the instruments of death, you are completely equipped. There is another
kind of armor of infinite moment and absolute necessity, the armor of
righteousness. Take then, the girdle of truth -- the breast plate of
righteousness -- the shield of faith -- the helmet of salvation -- and the
sword of the spirit, and you will be completely armed, prepared to meet your
fate, either to conquer, or die in battle.

To conclude. WE wish you the divine presence -- we wish you the divine
blessing -- we wish you success, may you be secured from temptation, preserved
from sickness, shielded from danger, and saved from death. But if we never see
one another's faces again in the land of the living, may we all be so happy as
to meet in that world, where there will be no war, nor rumors of war, but where
peace serene shall fill every breast, love divine glow in every heart, and
hosanna's exalted sound from every tongue.

AMEN.

