THE SPEECH Of the Right Honorable The Earl of Chatham, In the House of Lords,
Jan. 20, 1775.

Lord Chatham's Speech On the following Motion made by his Lordship, viz. "That
an humble Address be presented to his Majesty, most humbly to advise and
beseech him that, in order to open a Way toward an happy Settlement of the
dangerous troubles in America by beginning to allay ferments, and soften
animosities there; and above all, for preventing, in the mean time, any sudden
and fatal catastrophe at Boston, now suffering under the daily irritation of an
army before their eyes, and posted in their town: It may graciously please his
Majesty, that immediate orders be despatched to General Gage for removing his
Majesty's forces from the town of Boston, as soon as the rigor of the season,
and other circumstances indispensable to the safety and accommodation of the
said troops, may render the same practicable."
MY LORDS,
I RISE with vast astonishment to see these papapers The whole of the American
papers just then delivered in at the table by Lord Dartmouth, at the command of
his Majesty.
brought to your table in so late a period of this business; papers, I am sure,
the contents of which are already known, not only to every noble Lord in this
House, but almost to every person in this kingdom, who has made American
affairs in the least an object of inquiry; yet now, in the very tail of this
business, when measures should be long since determined on, we are furnished
with an empty parade of parchments -- to tell us what? Why, what all the world
knew before -- that the Americans, sore under injuries, and irritated by
wrongs, stripped of their inborn Rights and dearest Privileges, have resisted,
and entered into associations for the preservation of that blessing to which
life and property are but secondary considerations.

Give me leave to ask you, my Lords, how these associations have been formed?
Has the tide of corruption yet flowed in upon their elections? Have those
delegates been suborned? Or have great interest, great power, or great threats
been used (as is too much the case in this our boasted mother country) to
crayon out what conduct they should adopt? No -- nothing like this has
appeared; the electors seem to be prompted by no other motive than that
glorious, and exalted one, the preservation of their common Liberties; and
under this idea they have been induced to appoint men competent to so great an
undertaking; men of tried and sound principles, embarked in the same great
cause, and, from similar sentiments, taught to pity the miseries of the whole.

Invested then with this right (the choice of a free people) these delegates
have deliberated with prudence, wisdom, and spirit; and, in consequence of
these deliberations, have addressed the justice, and honor of this country.
This is their fault; this is their crime; petitioning for that, without which a
free people cannot possibly exist; -- yet, for asking this boon, this
unalienable privilege of Englishmen, are they reprobated, and stigmatized with
the epithets of ingrates -- traitors -- and rebels.

Had the early situation of the people of Boston been attended to, my Lords, it
would not have come to this -- but the infant complaints of Boston were
literally treated like the capricious squalls of a child, who, it was said, did
not know whether it was aggrieved, or not. -- But full well, my Lords, I knew,
at that time, that this child, if not redressed, would soon assume the courage,
and voice of a man. The Bostonians did not then complain upon slight, or
temporary evil; but on an evil which sapped the very vitals of their
constitution, and reduced all the great blessings of life to chance,
equivocation, and insecurity. Full well I knew that the sons of ancestors, born
under the same free constitution, and once breathing the same liberal air as
Englishmen -- ancestors, who even quitted this land of Liberty, the moment it
became the land of Oppression, and, in resistance to bigoted councils, and
oppressive measures, tore themselves from their dearest connexions; I say, my
Lords, full well I knew that the offspring of such ancestors would resist upon
the same principles, and on the same occasions.

It has, however, gone abroad, that the resolutions, and petitions, of the
Congress are not the real resolutions and petitions of the sober, respectable,
and dispassionate; but the very dregs and refuse of the people; and to
circulate this report the better, letters are handed about from some very
respectable merchants (as they are called) from the different provinces. But
well I know how to describe such merchants -- little paltry, peddling fellows,
venders of twopenny wares, and falsehoods, who under the idea of trade, sell
every thing in their power -- Honor, Trust, and Conscience.

These fellows (for such is the lot of humanity) are ever to be found in all
countries -- and are always in great plenty when their country is at stake,
who, without ever regarding consequences, and that general ruin might ensue,
press forward to the goal of lucre, and cut out the shortest passage to their
own interests.

Yet these are the men, who are held out to us to take a true state of the
country from; Men who act, upon the most illiberal principles, children of the
world; who have no fixed residence -- no lasting attachments, but to the shrine
of Mammon. But it is not such that ever speak the voice of a people -- it is
the proprietors, and tillers of the ground -- men who have a permanent --
natural right in the place -- and who from being nursed in the bosom of
cultivation, form strong and honorable attachments to their country; -- it is
to these, credit and authority are to be given, and from these our best
informations are to be drawn.

Much, my Lords, has been said about the authority of Parliament in these
cases, and when men are driven for want of argument, they fly to this as their
last resource -- "Acts of Parliament (say their advocate) are sacred, and
should be implicitly submitted to; for if the supreme power does not lodge
somewhere operatively and effectually, there must be an end of all
legislation." But my Lord, they who argue, or rather dogmatize in this manner,
do not see the whole of this question on great, wise, and liberal grounds; for
in all tree states the constitution is fixed, and all legislative power and
authority, wherever placed, either in collective bodies or individually, must
derive under that constitution who framed them. -- Acts of legislation,
therefore, however strong and effective they may be, when they are framed in
the spirit of this constitution, yet when they resist, they attack their own
foundation; for it is the constitution, and it alone, that limits both
sovereignty and allegiance.

This doctrine, my Lords, is no temporary doctrine, taken up on particular
occasions to answer particular purposes, it is involved in no metaphysical
doubts and intricacies -- but clear, precise, and determined. It is recorded in
all our law books, it is written in the great volume of nature -- it is the
essential, unalterable right of Englishmen -- it accords with all the
principles of justice and civil policy, which neither armed force on the one
side, nor submission on the other, can upon any occasion whatever eradicate.

It was this doctrine that was the great guide and spirit to the framers of the
bill of rights, at the period of the glorious revolution -- men of the greatest
accuracy, wisdom, and honesty; and, without any disparagement to the present
day, few such counselors are now to be seen. Recollect, my Lords, for a
moment, the arguments used by these men -- and see how wise, liberal, and
constitutional they were; turn then to their opponents, and how flimsy, thin,
and unprovided they appear! if then we applaud our ancestors for obtaining such
liberties for us, at a time when all the rights of Englishmen were trampled
upon, and despotism had trodden down the laws, surely we cannot, in reason,
deny that portion of liberty (so hardly and honorably obtained) to our own
brethren -- brethren by the same common parent, and who are unquestionable
heirs of the same glorious inheritance.

The facts being then, my Lords, as I have stated them, what has government
done? they have sent an armed force, consisting of above seventeen thousand
men, to dragoon the Bostonians into what is called their duty, and for the
chastisement of a small rabble, consisting of the necessitous and characterless
in doing an unlawful act, have involved above thirty thousand inhabitants in
the greatest difficulty, oppression, and consternation. Is this the way to win
men to their duty, and recover in them the principles of affection and British
allegiance? Do you think, that men who could be roused to forego their profits,
their pleasures, and the peaceable enjoyment of their dearest connections --
all for the sake of liberty, will be whipped into vassalage like slaves? Why,
my Lords, this conduct in government is so fantastical and aerial in practice,
that it by far exceeds the boldest wing of poetry; for poetry has often read
pleasing, as well as instructive lessons to mankind; and though it sometimes
amuses herself in fiction, that fiction, to please, should be founded on
verisimilitude. But in this wise system there is nothing like truth, nothing
like policy, nothing like justice, experience, or common sense.

But, my Lords, government, so far from once turning its eyes to the policy and
destructive consequence of this scheme, are constantly sending out more troops;
and we are told, in the language of menace, that if seventeen thousand men wont
do, fifty thousand shall. It Is true, my Lords, with this force they may ravage
the country; waste and destroy as they march; but in the progress of seventeen
hundred miles, can they occupy the places they have passed? Will not a country,
which can produce three millions of people, wronged and insulted as they are,
start up like Hydras in every corner, and gather fresh strength from fresh
opposition? Nay, what dependence can you have upon the soldiery, the unhappy
engines of your wrath? They are Englishmen; who must feel for the privileges of
Englishmen; and their carrying muskets and bayonets about them, surely does not
exclude them the pale of civil community. Do you think that these men, then,
can turn their arms against their brethren? -- Surely no -- a victory must be
to them a defeat -- carnage -- a sacrifice.

But, my Lords, it is not merely three millions of people, the produce of
America, we have to combat with, in this unnatural struggle; many more are on
their side, dispersed over the face of this wide empire. Every Whig in this
country is for them. Ireland is with them to a man; nay, even those Englishmen,
who may be now temporarily inactive, when they once come to be rouzed to a
sense of recollection; when they come to weigh the great line of right, which
their brethren in America are contending for, the sense of their own danger
will instruct them to range themselves on their side.

Who then, in the name of Heaven! could advise this measure? or who can
continue to give this strange and unconstitutional advice? I do not mean to
level at one man, or any particular set of men; but thus much I will declare,
that if his M -- continues to hear such counselors, he will not only be badly
advised, but undone. He may wear his C -- n indeed, it is true, but it will not
be worth his wearing: Robbed of so principal a jewel as America, it will lose
its luster, and no longer beam that effulgence which should irradiate the brow
of M -- y. What then is become of this boasted country of England, once so
renowned in arts, as well as arms? What is become of her constitution, that has
hitherto been the wonder as well as the envy of surrounding nations! has she
changed her civil power, and salutary laws for a military code? Or has she
transferred her seat of empire to Constantinople? -- Has she, who has often
shed her dearest blood in the manly resistance of despotism, now not only
tamely submitted to it, but sat down herself to forge the arbitrary chains?

But our present governors, alas! think so little of this matter, that I hear
General Gage has been thought to have acted too tardy in this business -- that
he has not been swift enough to execute vengeance, and sheath the sword in the
bowels of his countrymen. I really pity the unfortunate situation of that
gentleman, who has approved himself on many occasions a gallant soldier, and
humane man; for what, from being under the disagreeable predicament of doing
his duty on the one side, and his own feelings of justice and policy on the
other, what a conflict must he have! his situation, my Lords, puts me in mind
of a similar transaction in the civil wars of France, when the great Conde on
one side, and Marshal Turenne on the other, commanded different armies; the
latter conscious what terrible consequences a victory must produce to himself
and country, though often in his power, avoided blows as much as possible.
After the affair was over, the Marshal was thus reprimanded at court for not at
least taking the Prince; pourquoi ne l'avez vous pas pris? but that great
General very sensibly replied, parceque, Sire, si je l'avois fait tout Paris en
revanche m'auroit pris. "Should I take him, please your Majesty, I was afraid
all Paris would take me."

In this alarming crisis, this distracted view of affairs, I come, my Lords,
with this paper in my hand (holding out his motion) to offer you the best of my
experience and advice, which is "to beseech his Majesty that he would be
graciously pleased to give immediate orders to Genesis Gage to withdraw his troops
from before the town of Boston, in order to open the way for a plan of concord
and reconciliation;" and this, my Lords, upon the most mature and deliberate
grounds, is the best advice I can give you at this juncture. Such a conduct
will convince America that you mean to try her cause in the spirit ot freedom
and inquiry, and not in letters of blood; it will be a pledge to her that you
mean nothing more than friendship and equity, and she, I trust, will meet you
half way. But how can she trust you with the bayonet at her breast? Nay, how
does she know, but after having submitted to the sword, you mean to forge for
her heavier chains, the general consequence of ferocious victory.

I have crawled, my Lords, to this house to day, to tell you so -- I think it
my duty to give the whole of my experience, and council to my country at all
times, but more particularly, when she is in so much need of it; and having
thus entered on the threshold of this business, I will knock at your gates of
justice, and never stop, except infirmities shall nail me to my bed, until I
have, at least, tried every thing in my power to heal those unhappy divisions.

There is no time to be lost -- every hour is big with danger -- perhaps even
whilst I am now speaking, the decisive blow is struck, which may involve
millions in the consequence; and believe me, the very first drop of blood that
is spilled, will not be a wound easily skinned over -- it will be irritabile
v^lnus; a wound of that rancorous and festering kind, that, in all probability,
will mortify the whole body.

Let us then, my Lords, instantly begin with this business, but let us not act,
as hitherto has been acted -- taking it up by bits and scrapes, as exigencies
pressed, without any regard to general relations, and dependencies. What
signifies merely repealing this, or that particular act? This is but meanly
sneaking out of one difficulty perhaps to get into a worse, and can never
answer the purposes of a wise, amicable, and constitutional system. The more
annihilation of a few, little, dirty shreds of parchment -- can never produce
any lasting effect on the happiness, and commerce of three millions of people,
hitherto ground down with miseries and wrongs, and in hourly dread of having
them occasionally rehearsed.

We must look on this great business in one large connected view, work on it,
step by step, with caution, and liberality, and never lose sight of it until it
is accomplished; -- this is the way, not only to obtain confidence for the
present, but solid and lasting happiness for the future: The line thus drawn,
the Americans will have something to (...) to -- and we shall be taught not to
transgress that line. -- Thus mutual confidence will be begun, and mutual
benefit must follow. I know that it has been in circulation, that if the stamp
act had never been repealed, we should be at this hour in peace and quietness
with America; and from this many people urge the danger, as well as inefficacy
of conciliating measures at present. But though I could readily confute the
falsehood, and absurdity of this assertion, by appealing to the very official
letters from your American Govenors at that period -- I shall wave this ground,
and only mention to your Lordships a circumstance, which will set this matter
in a full clearer light, and show you the temper, firmness, and complexion of
the Bostonians on that occasion.

Sometime after the repeal of that act, I happened to be in company (at the
house of a mutual friend above 100 miles from this town) with one of the most
considerable, and intelligent merchants in this country; in a conversation I
had with him upon this subject, I begged him to be as explicit as possible in
giving me his opinion on the repeal. This gentleman then told me, and confirmed
his account by several written and respectable evidences, that the people of
Boston, previous to the repeal, waited in fullen silence the deliberations of
the British parliament, and were p^s^^vely determined, if that (...) victory
had not been obtained, immediately to abandon the town, their residence, and
all the benefits of commerce; to the country they were determined to retire
with their families and friends, more happy to be freemen though tillers of the
earth, than slaves under the greatest prosperity. Does this resolution look
like tamely submitting to indignities? Or does it show that it is owing to this
just relaxation of government, that they have been taught to act with that
firmness, and perseverance, they have since that period pursued?

I would not, however, wish, my Lords, by this to encourage America to proceed
beyond the line of right -- I reprobate as much as any of you those acts of
violence which a few of her mobility have committed; but when her inherent,
constitutional rights are invaded, those rights she has an equitable claim to
the full enjoyment of, by the fundamental laws of the English constitution, and
ingrafted on that constitution by the unalterable laws of nature; then I own
myself an American; and feeling myself as such, shall, to the verge of my life,
vindicate her Rights. If America, however, should, at any time lose sight of
this Line, I shall be an Englishman, and defend those Rights against any power,
under Heaven, that would oppose them. --


