AN ALARM to the LEGISLATURE OF THE Province of New York, OCCASIONED BY The
Present Political Disturbances, IN NORTH AMERICA: ADDRESSED To the Honorable
Representatives IN GENERAL ASSEMBLY CONVENED.

Salus populi suprema lex esto. NEW YORK: Printed for JAMES RIVINGTON, M, DCC,
LXXV.

AN ALARM TO THE LEGISLATURE, etc.
Honorable Gentlemen,
WHEN you reflect upon the present confused and distressed state of this, and
the other colonies, I am persuaded, that you will think no apology necessary
for the liberty I have taken, of addressing you on that subject. The unhappy
contention we have entered into with our parent state, would inevitably be
attended with many disagreeable circumstances, with many and great
inconveniences to us, even were it conducted on our part, with propriety and
moderation. What then must be the case, when all proper and moderate measures
are rejected? When not even the appearance of decency is regarded? When nothing
seems to be consulted, but how to perplex, irritate, and affront, the British
Ministry, Parliament, Nation and King? When every scheme that tends to peace,
is branded with ignominy; as being machination of slavery! When nothing is
called FREEDOM but SEDITION! Nothing LIBERTY but REBELLION!

I will not presume to encroach so far upon your time, as to attempt to point
out the causes of our unnutural contention with Great Britain. You are well
acquainted with them. -- Nor will I attempt to trace out the progress of that
infatuation, which has so deeply, so miserably, infected the Colonies. You
must have observed its rise, and noted its rapid growth. But I entreat your
patience and candor, while I make some observations on the conduct of the
Colonies in general, and of this Colony in particular, in the present dispute
with our mother country: By which it will appear, that most, if not all the
measures that have been adopted, have been illegal in their beginning,
tyrannical in their operation, -- and that they must be ineffectual in the
event.

It is the happiness of the British Government, and of all the British
Colonies, that the people have a right to share in the legislature. This right
they exercise by choosing representatives: and thereby constituting one branch
of the legislative authority. But when they have chosen their representatives,
that right, which was before diffused through the whole people, centers in
their Representatives alone; and can legally be exercised by none but them.
They become the guardians of the lives, the liberties, the rights and
properties, of the people: And as they are under the most sacred obligations to
discharge their trust with prudence and fidelity, so the people are under the
strongest obligations to treat them with honor and respect; and to look to
them for redress of all those grievances that they can justly complain of.

But in the present dispute with Great Britain, the representatives of the
people have not only been utterly disregarded, but their dignity has been
trampled upon, and their authority contravened.

A COMMITTEE, chosen in a tumultuous, illegal manner, usurped the most (...)
authority over the province. They entered into contracts, compacts,
combinations, treaties of alliance, with the other colonies, without any power
from the legislature of the province. They agreed with the other Colonies to
send Delegates to meet in convention at Philadelphia, to determine upon the
rights and liberties of the good people of this province, unsupported by any
Law. They issued notifications to the several supervisors through the colony,
desiring them to assemble the people, in order to choose committees, to choose
Delegates to represent them in the Congress. They directed, or encouraged, or
abetted a mob, in perpetrating a crime, which the laws of the province forbid,
under the severest penalty, viz: the robbing Captain Etherington, an Officer in
his Majesty's service, of a number of sheep, which he had purchased, to carry
with him to St. Vincent's. They had the insolence to direct the manner in which
the Delegates should be chosen in the counties: And the greater insolence, to
count all the friends to order and good government, -- those namely, who did
not choose to obey their seditious mandate, -- as being of their party, and as
acquiescing in the New York choice.

When the Delegates had met at Philadelphia, instead of settling a reasonable
plan of accommodation with the parent country, they employed themselves in
censuring acts of the British parliament, which were principally intended to
prevent smuggling, and all illicit trade; -- in writing addresses to the people
of Great Britain, to the inhabitants of the colonies in general, and to those
of the province of Quebec, in particular; with the evident design of making
them dissatisfied with their present government; and of exciting clamours, and
raising seditions and rebellions aganist the state; -- and in exercising a
legislative authority over all the colonies. They had the insolence to proclaim
themselves A FULL AND FREE REPRESENTATION of -- HIS MAJESTY'S FAITHFUL SUBJECTS
IN ALL THE COLONIES FROM NOVA SCOTIA TO GEORGIA; and, as such, have laid a tax
on all those colonies, viz. the profits arising from the sales of all goods
imported from Great Britain, Ireland, etc. during the months of December and
January: Which tax is to be employed for the relief of the Boston poor. They
adopted a mad set of resolves, framed by an arch rebel, who has since fled his
country, for fear of being apprehended, and imposed afterward upon the deluded
people of the county of Suffolk in the province of Massachusetts Bay; approving
their wisdom and fortitude, and recommending a perseverance in the same firm
and temperate conduct, as expressed in the said resolves, -- notwithstanding
those resolves entirely unhinged the civil government of that province,
fomented a spirit of dissatisfaction to Great Britain, and of rebellion against
the state; and declared that the people of that county would not act always on
the defensive, against the King's troops.

I must beg leave to enumerate a few of the effects of the measures of the
Congress -- The government of Rhode Island have dismantled the fort in their
harbor, and carried off the cannon, in order to employ them against his
Majesty's forces. The inhabitants of New Hampshire have, under the command of
Major SULLIVAN, one of the Delegates, attacked, and by force of arms taken a
FORT at Portsmouth, belonging to his Majesty, and carried off all the powder
and small arms found in it. The people of Maryland have had a provincial
Congress who have assessed that colony in the sum of L.10,000, to be expended
in arming and disciplining the inhabitants, to fight against the King. The
people in New England are raising, arming and disciplining men, for the same
loyal and christian purpose. The people of New York have, in obedience to the
Congress, chosen a new Committee, consisting of no less than SIXTY persons; to
act, first, in the capacity of tax-gatherers, to collect the duties imposed by
the Congress for the benefit of the Boston poor, by distress and sale of the
goods imported during the last and the present month: and secondly, as spies
and informers; to see that the non-importation, non-consumption, and
non-exportation schemes, decreed by the Congress, be carried into due execution.

By the first of these schemes, we are in danger of being deprived of many of
the comforts, and of some of the necessaries of life. We lie at the mercy of
the merchants, who may strip us of every farthing, by demanding what they shall
think only a reasonable profit on their goods. By the second, our very mode of
living is made subject to their inspection; and we shall probably soon see
these lordly Committee Men condescend to go pimping, and peeping, and peering,
into tea-canisters and molasses jugs. By the third scheme, an embargo is to
take place, after the tenth of September next, on all the farmers produce of
EVERY KIND. So that should their whole plan be carried fully into execution,
the laborious, necessary and numerous body of FARMERS would soon be reduced to
distress and beggary.

The state to which the GRAND CONGRESS, and the subordinate Committees, have
reduced the colonies, is really deplorable. They have introduced a system of
the most oppressive tyranny that can possibly be imagined; -- a tyranny, not
only over the actions, but over the words, thoughts, and wills, of the good
people of this province. People have been threatened with the vengeance of a
mob, for speaking in support of order and good government. Every method has
been used to intimidate the printers from publishing any thing, which tended to
peace, or seemed in favor of government; while the most detestable libels
against the King, the British parliament, and Ministry, have been eagerly read,
and extravagantly commended, as the matchless productions of some heaven-born
genius, glowing with the pure flame of civil liberty. They not only oblige
people to pay the tax assessed on their goods for the benefit of the Boston
poor, but they also oblige them to say, that they are willing to do it; when it
is notorious, that many, if not most of them, would refuse if they dared.

Behold, Gentlemen, behold the wretched state to which we are reduced! A
foreign power is brought in to govern this province. Laws made at Philadelphia,
by factious men from New England, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia,
and the Carolinas, are imposed upon us by the most imperious menaces. Money is
levied upon us without the consent of our representatives: which very money,
under color of relieving the poor people of Boston, it is too probable will be
employed to raise an army against the King. Mobs and riots are encouraged, in
order to force submission to the tyranny of the Congress. A very respectable
gentleman, who serves his King in an honorable employment, has been threatened
with ASSASSINATION, by the SONS OF LIBERTY, only for -- doing his duty; -- for
securing a number of muskets, illegally imported, and which were intended to
arm the people of New England against their lawful Sovereign.

To YOU, Gentlemen, the good people of this province look for relief: on YOU
they have fixed their hopes: from YOU they expect deliverance from this
intolerable state of slavery. They have chosen YOU to be the guardians of their
rights and liberties. You have hitherto executed the important trust committed
to you, with such fidelity and prudence, as entitle you to their most grateful
acknowledgments, and encourage them to depend upon you with the utmost
confidence. They know well that all the insidous arts that evil-minded and
designing men can possibly make use of, will be employed, to lead you away from
that rectitude of conduct, which has hitherto marked all your actions; and
they anxiously wait the issue of your deliberations. If you assert your own
dignity -- If you maintain your own rights and privileges, we shall again be a
free and happy, and, I trust, not an ungrateful people: but if you prostitute
the dignity of your House; -- if you betray the rights of your constituents, by
confirming the decrees of the Congress; -- you will thereby introduce a foreign
power to govern and tax this province, and we shall be, of all men, the most
wretched. -- If laws made, and decrees passed, at Philadelphia, by the
enthusiastic republicans of New England and Virginia, are to bind the people of
this province, and extort money from them, why, Gentlemen, do you meet? Is it
barely to register their edicts, and to rivet the fetters of their tyranny on
your constituents? Your constituents, in that case, would be better without
you. You would be an useless burden upon them: worse than useless; a snare and
a trap to them. Your duty requires you to interpose your authority, and to
break up this horrid combination of seditious men, which has already enslaved
this province; and which was intended to draw the faithful subjects of our most
gracious Sovereign into REBELLION and a CIVIL WAR. The CONGRESS address
themselves to the people of this province, among others, in the following
words: We think ourselves bound in duty to observe to you, that the schemes
agitated against the colonies have been so conducted, as to render it prudent,
that you should extend your views to mournful events, and be in all respects
prepared for every contingency. They had war in their hearts when this
sentiment was conceived, and rebellion dictated the expression.

What, I beseech you, will be the consequence of pursuing the mode of conduct,
which they have delineated? It will procure the redress of no one grievance we
complain of. It will not intimidate the people of Great Britain. We see no
appearance of fear on their part; but every circumstance shows a settled design
to assert the supremacy and vindicate the authority of the empire. The measures
of the Congress will irritate them, but never can conciliate their affections.
Should they in some degree distress their trade and manufactures, they will
distress us much more severely. The schemes of the Congress will, from their
very nature, operate but slowly against the government and people of
Great Britain; and before they can produce their full effect, the present
contention will probably be settled. The very next summer will finish the
dispute, either peaceably, or by force of arms. Should we oblige them to recur
to this latter mode of acting, the Parliament will probably make a constitution
for us, without consulting our inclinations; and force us to accept it, at the
mouths of their cannon. Is it not better to make some reasonable proposals, to
take some prudent step toward an accommodation, before matters come to this
dreadful extremity? Suppose you do not; but adopt the mad measures of the
Congress; or suffer them to proceed, and bring their delirious machinations to
effect: The consequence will be, that you will establish the most ignominious,
and abominable tyranny over your constituents, and over yourselves, that ever
was invented. They have already made, and are now, by means of the New York
Committee of sixty, executing laws which contravene your authority. They are
levying money on your constituents, without your consent. They have impudently
encroached on the PRIVILEGES OF YOUR HOUSE, by dictating to your Agent, EDMUND
BURKE, Esquire how he shall act in this dispute, without ever asking your advice,
or waiting for your opinion. See their Letter to the Agents of the several
Colonies. But here let it be remarked, That the General Strictures on the
Congress, are far from being levelled against the Delegates from New York;
whose pacific dispositions, and wise endeavors to accommodate, though
unsuccessful, ought not to be unnoticed.
Their abettors and supporters are frequently insinuating the incapacity and
inability of the Honorable House of Assembly, to do any thing of real
consequence toward settling this unnatural contention.

Now, if they treat the Representatives of the province in this disrespectful
manner, what are the people to expect? We shall not dare to eat, or drink, or
sleep, or act, or speak, or think, but in the precise mode which they shall
direct. They have already regulated our trade and commerce, our manner of
living, and our diversions; and, if their VINDICATOR is to be credited, the
next Congress is to regulate our courts of justice. -- Then will their tyranny
be established; a tyranny of the most dreadful kind; -- which makes laws and
executes them without check or control. Then will our happy constitution be
destroyed, and a REPUBLIC be raised on its ruins. Then will YOU, Gentlemen,
become an useless body; and it will be a matter of no consequence whether you
ever meet again, or not.

There is one consideration which, in particular, I must mention; and which, I
think, ought to have great weight with you, and with every person. The people
in New England have wrested the command of the MILITIA from their Governors,
which they are diligently training, and forming for action. Whatever may be
their ostensible reason, the real one undoubtedly is, to oppose the King's
troops, and to support a rebellion against their Sovereign. The people of
Maryland, and of the Lower Counties on Delaware, are following their example.
The Pennsylvanians are calling together a Provincial Congress, to meet the 23d
instant. They have taken this step even while their Assembly is sitting. But I
wonder not at this: That Assembly, by approving, and, as far as their power
extends, confirming the measures of the GRAND CONGRESS, have prostituted their
own dignity, and betrayed the rights of their constituents; and unless some
superior power interposes, they will shortly find themselves absolutely
controlled by these grand Continental, and petty Provincial CONGRESSES.

The design of the projectors of this provincial congress in Pennsylvania, is
undoubtedly to concert a plan for embodying a militia, to act in concert with
the New-Englanders, Marylanders. etc. Take care, Gentlemen, that this procedure
does not spread, and infect this province by the contagion of its example! I
cannot conceive a worse state of thraldom, than a military power in any
government, unchecked, and uncontrollable by the civil power. And this must be
the case, with respect to a militia upon such an establishment as that of
Maryland and New England. The laws of the congress, not the laws of the
province, will be the rule of its conduct. Enthusiastic delegates, and
brainsick committee men, will be its commanders; and the friends of order and
good government, the devoted victims of its power.

We have been taught to consider the colonies, as being of the utmost
consequence to Great Britain. We have been told that her very existence, as a
sovereign state, depends upon them. Let us suppose this to be true. Let us also
suppose that Great Britain views the colonies in the same light that we do; the
consequence will be, that she will exert her utmost ability to retain them
under her dominion. She will send every man, and every ship that she can spare,
rather than suffer them to be torn from her. A considerable army of British
troops is already in America. All accounts from England agree in affirming that
a larger body will be sent hither early in the spring.

Suppose our opposition to the British government should bring on a war, and
that the power of Great Britain, as is most probable, should prevail; will she
immediately recall her troops? Will she subject herself to the expense of
transporting another army to America, a few years hence? Will she not think it
more prudent to keep a considerable military force in this country, to support
the civil power, and to prevent the American republicans from throwing all into
confusion again, that they may accomplish their rebellious purposes?

Suppose 20,000 men should be fixed upon an American establishment; who is to
cloathe, feed and pay them? Great Britain or the Colonies? By driving matters
to extremity, we shall oblige Great Britain to do the very thing that we are
endeavoring, at least are pretending to endeavor, by our mad schemes, to
prevent. We shall oblige her to raise a revenue upon us to support an army, to
retain us in our dependence on her imperial authority.

If the other colonies run madly into such measures as must bring ruin upon
them, are we obliged to imitate and follow them? If the people of New England
will kindle a fire, and then rush into it, have we no way to show our regard
and affection for them, but to jump in after them? Let us rather keep out, that
we may have it in our power to pull them out, before they are burnt to death. A
little scorching I believe will not hurt them. It may do them good: it may make
them dread the fire hereafter; for, like children, they seem incapable of
learning from any experience but their own.

We, Gentlemen, have no alternative left, but either to join the other colonies
in a war against Great Britain, or to make the best terms that we can, for
ourselves. The former may have the most old Oliverian glory in it, but the
latter is certainly the most prudent course. It will save this province, and
probably the whole continent, from desolution and destruction.

On you, Gentlemen, it depends, under the good providence of Almighty God,
whether this war meditated by the Congress, shall blaze out in America, or not.
All the Colonies in New England, and same to the southward, have run
headlong, under the influence of the Congress, into such measures, as
evidently tend to a war against our mother country, and our gracious Sovereign.
This province, as yet, has taken no decisive step. You have it in your power
to establish it in peace and felicity; to secure it by a firm constitution; to
make it the mediatrix with Great Britain, for all the other Colonies, and to
prevent the rage of slaughter, and the effusion of human blood.

Act now, I beseech you, as you ever have done, as the faithful representatives
of the people; as the real guardians of their Rights and Liberties. Give them
deliverance from the tyranny of the Congress and Committees: Secure them
against the horrid carnage of a civil war: And endeavor to obtain for them a
FREE AND PERMANENT CONSTITUTION.

You know whether, and how far, the people of this province are aggrieved by
any acts of the British Parliament; and we look to you to procure us such
relief as you shall think effectual. We know of no representatives but you,
whom we have legally chosen. On your wisdom and integrity we can rely. We have
long known, and often tried you. From you alone we expect the means of
redessing our grievances, and of guarding our happy form of government, against
all oppression from without, and all violence and insidious innovations from
within. From you, we expect some plan of accommodating our unhappy disputes
with our mother country, and of preventing a renewal of them, by obtaining such
a line of government as shall establish the sovereign authority of
Great Britain over all the British dominion; and at the same time secure the
rights and liberties of the Colonists: And your prudence and abilities we know
are equal to the case.

Be assured, Gentlemen, that a very great majority of your constituents
disapprove of the late violent proceeeings, and will support you in the pursuit
of more moderate measures, as soon as You have delivered Them from the tyranny
of Committees, from the fear of violence, and the dread of mobs. Recur boldly
to your good, old, legal and successful way of proceeding, by petition and
remonstrance.

Address yourselves to the King and the two Houses of Parliament. Let your
representations be decent and firm, and principally directed to obtain a solid
American Constitution; such as we can accept with safety, and Great Britain can
grant with dignity. Try the experiment, and you will assuredly find that our
most gracious Sovereign and both Houses of Parliament will readily meet you in
the paths of peace. Only show your willingness toward an accommodation, by
acknowledging the supreme legislative authority of Great Britain, and I dare
confidently pronounce the attainment of whatever YOU with propriety, can ask;
and the LEGISLATUAS of GREAT BRITAIN with honor concede.

New York, January 17, 1775.
FINIS.
The following Pamphlets, relating to the present Controversy between
Great Britain, and the Colonies, are to be had of JAMES RIVINGTON, Who, upon
application to him, by Letters, Post paid, will immediately send orders
completely executed to any part of America, and the West Indies.

1 Free Thoughts on the Proceedings of the Continental Congress, Held at
Philadelphia, Sept. 5, 1774. WHEREIN their Errors are exhibited, the Reasonings
confuted, and the fatal Tendency of their Non-Importation, Non-Exportation, and
Non-Consumption Measures, are laid open to the plainest Understandings: and the
only Means pointed out for preserving and securing our present happy
Constitution. By the FARMER, A.W.

2 A full Vindication of the Measures of the Continental Congress: IN ANSWER TO
Free Thoughts on the Proceedings of the said Congress: In which his Sophistry
is exposed, his Cavils confuted, his Artifices detected, and his Wit ridiculed.
In a General Address To the Inhabitants of America.

3 The Congress Canvassed. OR, An Examination into the Conduct of the
Delegates, At the Grand Continental Congress, Addressed to the Merchants of
New York. By the FARMER, A. W.

4 A Friendly Address to all Reasonable Americans, On the Subject of Our
Political Confusions.

5 The Other Side of the Question: Or, A Defense of the Liberties of
North America. IN Answer to a late Friendly Address to all Reasonable
Americans, on the Subject of Our Political Confusions.

6 Strictures on A Pamphlet, entitled, A "Friendly Address to all Reasonable
Americans, on the Subject of our Political Confusions." Supposed to be Written
by General Lee.

7 Considerations on the Nature and the Extent of the Legislative Authority of
the British Parliament.

8 The Causes of the present Distractions in America explained.

9 Short Advice to the Counties of New York. By a COUNTRY GENTLEMAN.

10 Dr. Priestley's Address on Public Liberty in General, and American Affairs
in Particular.

11 The Poor Man's Advice to his Poor Neighbors, On the Publication 'the
Proceedings of the Congress, A Ballad, to the Tune of Chevy-Chace

12 A Dialogue between a Southern Delegate and his Spouse, on his Return from
The GRAND CONTINENTAL CONGRESS. Inscribed to the married Ladies of America.

13 In the Press, and Speedily will be Published, What think ye of the CONGRESS
Now? OR, An Enquiry how far the Americans are bound to abide by, and execute
the decisions of the late Congress.

Large allowance will be made to the Purchasers by the Dozen, of the above
articles, to give away.


