A SERMON ON THE PRESENT SITUATION OF AMERICAN AFFAIRS. PREACHED IN
CHRIST-CHURCH, JUNE 23, 1775. At the Request of the OFFICERS of the THIRD
BATTALION of the City of Philadelphia and District of Southwark.

BY WILLIAM SMITH, D. D. PROVOST OF THE COLLEGE IN THAT CITY.

WILMINGTON, PRINTED AND SOLD BY JAMES ADAMS, IN High Street, M, DCC, LXXV.

PHILADELPHIA, June 25, 1775.
AT a Meeting of the Officers of the 3d Battalion, of the City of Philadelphia
and District of Southwark -- agreed that Dr. SMITH be thanked for his excellent
Sermon, preached at their Request the 23d Instant; and that he be requested to
furnish a Copy of the same for Publication; as, in their opinion, it will
promote the Cause of Liberty and Virtue.

Signed by Order, JOHN CADWALADER, Colonel.

PREFACE.
THE following Sermon was drawn up on a few days notice, and without any view
to the press, at the request of some of the Author's worthy Friends, to whom he
could refuse nothing of this kind. At their request, it is now likewise
submitted to the Public, as it was preached, without varying or suppressing a
single sentiment or material expression; and with the addition only of a few
lines, and three or four explanatory notes.

The Author considered that, although he was called to this office by a
particular body, yet he was to address a great and mixed assembly of his
fellow-citizens, and a number of the first characters in America, now met in
consultation, at a most alarming crisis.

Animated with the purest zeal for the mutual interests of Great Britain and
the Colonies; ardently panting for the return of those Halcyon-days of harmony,
during which both countries so long flourished together, as the glory and
wonder of the world; he thought it his duty, with the utmost impartiality, to
attempt a state of the unhappy controversy that now rends the empire in pieces;
and to show, if peradventure he might be permitted to vouch for his fellow
citizens, so far as he has been conversant among them, that the idea of an
independence upon the Parent-country, or the least licentious opposition to its
just interests, is utterly foreign to their thoughts; that they contend only
for the sanctity of charters and laws, together with the right of granting
their own money; and that our rightful Sovereign has no where more loyal
subjects, or more zealously attached to those principles of government, under
which his family inherits the Throne.

These, with a few things which seemed necessary respecting the church at this
time, are the topics handled in the following Sermon. If the principles it
contains are but thoroughly felt, the Reader will not regret that the limits of
a single discourse would not allow a particular application of them. They will
lead to their own application; or, at least, that field is left open to
succeeding Preachers.

Upon the whole, if the kind expectations of the Author's Friends can be in any
degree answered; if what he has delivered shall tend "to promote the Cause of
Liberty and Virtue;" and particularly, if it could find its way to the closets,
or rather to the hearts, of the Great, and (after all the arguments they have
heard from others) could in the least induce them to juster and more benevolent
sentiments concerning their American brethren -- he would account it among the
happiest circumstances of his life.

Enough has surely been attempted, by way of experiment, to be convinced that
the people of this country know their rights, and will not consent to a passive
surrender of them -- It is, now at least, time to pursue another mode, and to
listen to some plan for averting the dreadful calamities which must attend a
hostile prosecution of this unnatural contest. The author's wishes for the
accomplishment of such a plan, have been so frequently expressed as to subject
him perhaps to suspicions which he would not wish to merit, either here or else
where. But still, if he could see it take place, upon a just and permanent
foundation, he would be content, if it were required, to sing his " nunc
dimittis," and to take a final leave of earthly concerns.

SERMON, etc.
JOSHUA xxii.22. The Lord God of Gods -- the Lord God of Gods -- He knows,
and Israel he shall know -- if it be in Rebellion, or in Transgression against
the Lord -- Save us not this Day.


THESE Words, my Brethren, will lead us into a train of reflections, wholly
suitable to the design of our present meeting; and I must beg your indulgence
till I explain, as briefly as possible, the solemn occasion on which they were
first delivered; hoping the application, I may afterward make of them, may
fully reward your attention.

THE two tribes of Reuben and of Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh, had
chosen their inheritance, on the Eastern side of Jordan, opposite to the other
tribes of Israel. And although they knew that this situation would deprive them
of some privileges which remained with their brethren on the other side, and
particularly that great privilege of having the place of the Altar and
Tabernacle of God among them; yet, as the land of Canaan was judged too small
for all the twelve tribes, they were contented with the possession they had
chosen. And thus they spoke to Moses --

IT is a land of cattle, and thy servants have much cattle. Wherefore, if we
have found grace in thy sight, let this land be given to us for a possession,
and we will build sheepfolds here for our cattle, and cities for our little
ones; and we ourselves will go ready armed before our brethren, the children of
Israel, -- and will not return into our houses, until they have inherited every
man his inheritance. --

AND Moses said unto them -- If you will do this thing, and will go all of you
armed over Jordan before the Lord, until he have driven out his enemies from
before him; and the land (of Canaan) be subdued (for your brethren;) then
afterward ye shall return, and this land (of Gilead) shall be your possession
before the Lord

-- Numb. 32. THIS, then, was the great original contract, under which these
two tribes and a half were allowed to separate from the rest, and to dwell on
the other side of Jordan. They were to assist their brethren in their necessary
wars, and to continue under one Government with them -- even that of the great
Jehovah himself -- erecting no separate altar, but coming to perform their
sacrifices at that one Altar of SHILOH, where the Lord had vouchsafed to
promise his special presence.

THOUGH this subjected them to inconveniences, yet as Uniformity of Worship
and the Nature of their Theocracy required it, they adhered faithfully to their
contract.

IN the fear of God, they bowed themselves at his altar, although not placed in
their own land; and, in love to their brethren, they supported them in their
wars, "till there stood not a man of all their enemies before them;" and at
last, JOSHUA, their great leader, having no farther need of their assistance,
gave them this noble testimony -- That they had in all things obeyed his voice
as their general, and faithfully performed all that they had promised to Moses
the servant of God. Wherefore, he blessed them, and dismissed them to return to
their own land with much riches, and with cattle, and with silver, and with
gold, and with much raiment.

No sooner, therefore, had they entered their own country, than in the fullness
of gratitude, on the banks of Jordan, at the common passage, over against
Canaan, they built an high or great Altar, that it might remain an eternal
monument of their being of one stock, and entitled to the same civil and
religious privileges, with their brethren of the other tribes.

BUT this their work of piety and love was directly misconstrued. The cry was
immediately raised against them. The zealots of that day scrupled not to
declare them Rebels against the living God, violators of his sacred laws and
Theocracy, in setting up an altar against his holy altar; and therefore the
whole congregations of the brother-tribes, that dwelt in Canaan, gathered
themselves together, to go up to war against their own flesh and blood; in a
blind transport of unrighteous zeal, purposing to extirpate them from the face
of the earth, as enemies to God and the common wealth of Israel!

IN that awful and important moment (and oh my God that the example could be
copied among the brother-tribes of our Israel, in the parent land) I say, in
that awful and important moment, some milder and more benevolent men there
were, whose zeal did not so far transport them, but that, before they
unsheathed the sword to plunge it with unhallowed hand into the bowels of their
brethren, they thought it justice first to enquire into the truth of the charge
against them. And, for the glory of Israel, this peaceable and prudent council
prevailed.

A MOST solemn embassy was prepared, at the head of which was a man of sacred
character, and venerable authority, breathing the dictates of religion and
humanity; PHINEHAS the son of Eleazer the high Priest, accompanied with ten
other Chiefs or Princes, one from each of the nine tribes as well as from the
remaining half tribe of Manasseh.

GREAT was the astonishment of the The two tribes and a half are here briefly
and generally denominated Gileadites, from the name of the land they had chosen.
Gileadites on receiving this embassy, and hearing the charge against them. But
the power of conscious innocence is above all fear, and the language of an
upright heart superior to all eloquence. By a solemn appeal to Heaven for the
rectitude of their intentions, unpremeditated and vehement in the words of my
text, they disarmed their brethren of every suspicion.

"THE Lord God of Gods," say they (in the fervency of truth, repeating the
invocation) "the Lord God of Gods," -- He that made the heavens and the earth,
who searches the hearts, and is acquainted with the most sacred thoughts, of
all men -- "He knows, and all Israel shall know," by our unshaken constancy
in the religion of our fathers, -- that this charge against us is utterly false.

THEN turning from their brethren, with unspeakable dignity of soul and
clearness of conscience, they address the almighty Jehovah himself --

OH thou sovereign Ruler of the universe -- our God and our Fathers God -- "if
it be in Rebellion or in transgression against thee," that we have raised this
monument of our zeal for the commonwealth of Israel -- "SAVE US NOT THIS DAY!"
If the most distant thought has entered our hearts of erecting an independent
altar; if we have sought, in one instance, to derogate from the glory of that
sacred Altar which thou have placed among our brethren beyond Jordan, as the
common bond of union and worship among all the tribes of Israel -- let not this
day's sun descend upon us, till thou have made us a monument of thine avenging
justice, in the sight of the surrounding world!

AFTER this astonishing appeal to the great God of Heaven and Earth, they
proceed to reason with their brethren; and tell them that, so far from
intending a separation either in government or religion, this altar was built
with a direct contrary purpose -- That it might be a witness between us and
you, and our generations after us; that your children may not say to our
children in time to come, ye have no part in the Lord. We were afraid lest in
some future age, when our posterity may cross Jordan to offer sacrifices in the
place appointed, your posterity may thrust them from the altar, and tell them
that because they live not in the land where the Lord's tabernacle dwells,
they are none of his people, nor entitled to the Jewish privileges.

BUT while this altar stands, they shall always have an answer ready. They will
be able to say -- Behold the pattern of the altar of the Lord which our fathers
made. If our fathers had not been of the seed of Israel, they would not have
fondly copied your customs and models. You would not have beheld in Gilead, an
altar, in all things an imitation of the true altar of God, which is in Shiloh;
except only that ours is an high "or great altar to see" from far. And this may
convince you that it was not intended as an altar of sacrifice (for then it
would have been but three cubits in height, as our law directs) but as a
monumental altar, to instruct our generations for ever, that they are of the
same pedigree with yourselves, and entitled to the same civil and religious
privileges.

THIS noble defense wrought an immediate reconciliation among the discordant
tribes. The Words, (when reported) pleased the children of Israel -- they
blessed God together for preventing the effusion of kindred blood, and did not
go up to destroy the land where their brethren, the children of Reuben Though
for brevity, the sacred text, in this and other places, only mentions Reuben
and Gad, yet the half tribe of Manasseh is also supposed to be included.
and Gad, dwelt.

THE whole history of the Bible cannot furnish a passage more instructive than
this, to the members of a great empire, whose dreadful misfortune it is to have
the evil Demon of civil or religious discord gone forth among them. And would
to God, that the application I am now to make of it could be delivered in
accents louder than Thunder, till they have pierced the ear of every Briton,
and especially their ears who have meditated war and destruction against their
brother-tribes of Reuben and Gad, in this our American Gilead. And let me add
-- would to God too that we, who this day consider ourselves in the place of
those tribes, may, like them, be still able to lay our hands on our hearts in a
solemn appeal to the God of Gods, for the rectitude of our intentions toward
the whole common wealth of our BRITISH ISRAEL. For, called to this sacred
place, on this great occasion, I know it is your wish that I should stand
superior to all partial motives, and be found alike unbiased by favor or by
fear. And happy it is that the parallel, now to be drawn, requires not the
least sacrifice either of truth or virtue!

LIKE the tribes of Reuben and Gad, we have chosen our inheritance, in a land
separated from that of our fathers and brethren, not indeed by a small River,
but an immense Ocean. This inheritance we likewise hold by a plain original
contract, entitling us to all the natural and improvable advantages of our
situation, and to a community of privileges with our brethren, in every civil
and religious respect; except in this, that the throne or seat of Empire, that
great altar at which the men of this world bow, was to remain among them.

REGARDLESS of this local inconvenience, uncanker'd by jealousy, un-depress'd
by fear, and cemented by mutual love and mutual benefits, we trod the path of
glory with our brethren for an hundred years and more -- enjoying a length of
felicity scarce ever experienced by any other people. Mindful of the hands that
protected us in our youth and submitting to every just regulation for
appropriating to them the Benefit of our trade -- our wealth was poured in upon
them from ten thousand channels, widening as they flowed, and making their poor
to sing, and industry to smile, through every corner of their land. And as
often as dangers threatened, and the voice of the British Israel called our
brethren to the field, we left them not alone, but shared their toils, and
sought by their side, till there stood not a man of all their enemies before
them. Nay, they themselves testified on our behalf, that in all things we not
only did our part, but more than our part for the common Good, and they
dismissed us home loaded with silver and with gold, The parliamentary
reinbursements for our exertions in the late war; similar to what Joshua gave
the two tribes and a half on the close of his wars.
in recompense for our extraordinary services.

So far you see the parallel holds good. But what high altars have we built to
alarm our British Israel; and why have the congregations of our brethren
gathered themselves together against us? why do their embattled hosts already
cover our plains? will they not examine our case, and listen to our plea?

"THE Lord God of Gods -- he knows" and the whole surrounding world shall yet
know, that whatever American altars we have built, far from intending to
dishonor, have been raised with an express view to perpetuate the name and
glory of that sacred altar, and seat of empire and liberty, which we left
behind us, and wish to remain eternal, among our brethren, in the parent land!

ESTEEMING our relation to them our greatest felicity; adoring the providence
that gave us the same progenitors; glorying in this, that when the new-world
was to be portioned out among the kingdoms of the old, the most important part
of this continent fell to the sons of a protestant and free nation; desirous of
worshipping for ever at the same altar with them; fond of their manners, even to
excess; enthusiasts to that sacred plan of civil and religious happiness, for
the preservation of which they have sacrificed from age to age; maintaining,
and always ready to maintain, at the risque of every thing that is dear to us,
the most unshaken fidelity to our common Sovereign, as the great center of our
union, and guardian of our mutual rights; -- I say, with these principles and
these views, we thought it our duty, to build up American altars, or
constitutions, as nearly as we could, upon the great British model.

HAVING never sold our birthright, we considered ourselves entitled to the
privileges of our father's house -- "to enjoy peace, liberty and safety;" to be
governed, like our brethren, by our own laws, in all matters properly affecting
ourselves, and to offer up own our sacrifices at the altar of British empire;
contending that a forced devotion is idolatry, and that no power on earth has a
right to come in between us and a gracious sovereign, to measure forth our
loyalty, or to grant our property, without our consent.

THESE are the principles we inherited from Britons themselves. Could we depart
from them, we should be deemed bastards and not sons, aliens and not brethren.

THE altars therefore which we have built, are not In this respect, our plea is
even stronger than that of the two tribes and a half. For, till an explanation
was given, the height of their altar, like those of the heathen, who loved to
sacrifice on lofty places, might create a suspicion of their lapsing into
idolatry; either intending to worship other Gods, or the God of Israel in an
unlawful place and manner. Bp. PATRICK.
high or rival altars to create jealousy, but humble monuments of our union and
love; intended to bring millions yet unborn, from every corner of this vast
continent, to bend at the great parent-altar of British liberty; venerating the
country from which they sprung, and pouring their gifts into her lap when their
countless thousands shall far exceed hers.

IT was our wish that there should be an eternal "Witness between our brethren
and us; that if at any future period, amid the shifting scenes of human
interests and human affections, their children should say to our children --
"Ye have no portion" in the birthright of Britons, and so seek to push them
from the common shrine of Freedom, when they come to pay their homage there;
they might always have an answer ready -- "Behold the pattern of the altar
which our Fathers built." Behold your own religious and civil institutions, and
then examine the frames of government and systems of laws raised by our fathers
in every part of America! Could these have been such exact copies of your own,
if they had not inherited the same spirit, and sprung from the same stock, with
yourselvs.

THUS far you see the parallel yet holds good, and I think cannot be called a
perversion of my text; if you will allow that the supreme power of an empire,
whether theocratical, monarchical, or howsoever distributed, may be represented
under the figure of one common altar, at which the just devotion of all the
subjects is to be paid.

BUT it is said that we have of late departed from our former line of duty, and
refused our homage at the great altar of British empire. And to this it has
been replied, that the very refusal is the strongest evidence of our veneration
for the altar itself. Nay, it is contended by those charged with this breach of
devotion, that when in the shape of unconstitutional exactions, violated rights
and mutilated charters, they were called to worship idols, instead of the true
divinity, it was in a transport of holy jealousy, that they dashed them to
pieces, or whelmed them to the bottom of the ocean.

THIS is, in brief, the state of the argument on each side. And hence, at this
dreadful moment, ancient friends and brethren stand prepared for events of the
most tragic nature.

HERE the weight of my subject almost overcomes me; but think not that I am
going to damp that noble ardor which at this instant glows in every bosom
present. Nevertheless, as from an early acquaintance with many of you, I know
that your principles are pure, and your humanity only equaled by your
transcendent love of your country, I am sure you will indulge the passing tear,
which a preacher of the Gospel of Love must now shed over the scenes that lie
before us -- Great and deep distress about to pervade every corner of our land!
millions to be called from their peaceful labors by "the sound of the trumpet,
and the alarm of war! Garments rolled in blood," and even Victory itself only
yielding an occasion to weep over friends and relatives slain! These are
melancholy prospects; and therefore you will feel with me the difficulties I
now labor under -- forsaken by my text, and left to lament alone that, in the
Parent-land, no PHINEHAS has prevailed; no Embassy It is acknowledged with
gratitude that many great and exalted characters have pled the cause of
America; and, previous to all coercive measures, advised an enquiry or hearing,
similar to that for which Phinehas was appointed. What is here lamented, and
will be long lamented, is that this council could not take place. If brethren
could come together in such a temper as this, the issue could not fail to be
for their mutual glory and mutual happiness.
of great or good men has been raised, to stay the sword of destruction, to
examine into the truth of our case, and save the effusion of kindred blood. I
am left to lament that, in this sad instance, Jewish tenderness has put
Christian benevolence to shame.

OUR Brethren, the house of our Fathers, even they have called a multitude
against us. Had an enemy thus reproached us, then perhaps we might have borne
it. But is was you, Men our equals, our guides, our acquaintance, with whom we
took sweet council and walked together into the house of God. Or had it been
for any essential benefit to the commonwealth at large, we would have laid our
hands on our mouths and bowed obedience with our usual silence. But for DIGNITY
and SUPREMACY! What are they when set in opposition to common utility, common
justice, and the whole faith and spirit of the Constitution? True Dignity is to
govern Freemen, not Slaves: and true Supremacy is to excel in Doing Good.

IT is time, and indeed more than time, for a great and enlightened people to
make names bend to things, and ideal honor to practical safety? Precedents and
indefinite claims are surely things too nugatory to convulse a mighty empire.
Is there no wisdom, no great and liberal plan of policy to reunite its
members, as the sole bulwark of liberty and protestantism; rather than by their
deadly strife to increase the importance of those states that are foes to
freedom, truth and humanity? To devise such a plan; and to behold British
Colonies spreading over this immense Continent, rejoicing in the common rights
of freemen, and imitating the Parent State in every excellence -- is more glory
than to hold lawless dominion over all the nations on the face of the earth!

BUT I will weary you no longer with fruitless lamentations concerning things
that might be done. The question now is -- since they are not done, must we
tamely surrender any part of our birthright or of that great charter of
privileges, which we not only claim by inheritance, but by the express terms of
our colonization? I say, God forbid! For here, in particular, I wish to speak
so plain that neither my own principles, nor those of the church to which I
belong, may be misunderstood.

ALTHOUGH, in the beginning of this great contest, we thought it not our duty
to be forward in widening the breach, or spreading discontent; although it be
our fervent desire to heal the wounds of the public, and to show by our temper
that we seek not to distress, but to give the parent state an opportunity of
saving themselves and saving us before it be too late; nevertheless, as we know
that our civil and religious rights are linked together in one indissoluble
bond, we neither have, nor seek to have, any interest separate from that of our
country; nor can we advise a desertion of its cause. Religion and liberty must
flourish or fall together in America. We pray that both may be perpetual.

A CONTINUED submission to violence is no tenet of our church. When her
brightest luminaries, near a century past, were called to propagate the court
doctrine of a dispensing Power, above Law -- did they treacherously cry -- "
Peace, Peace," when there was no Peace! Did they not magnanimously set their
foot upon the line of the constitution, and tell Majesty to its face that "they
could not betray the public liberty," and that the Monarch's only safety
consisted "in governing according to the laws?" Did not their axample, and
consequent sufferings, kindle a flame that illuminated the land and introduced
that noble system of public and personal liberty, secured by the revolution?
Since that period, have not the avowed principles of our greatest divines been
against raising the Church above the State; jealouse of the national rights,
resolute for the protestant succession, favorable to the reformed religion,
and desirous to maintain the faith of Toleration? If exceptions have happened,
let no society of christians stand answerable for the deviations, or
corruptions, of individuals.

THE doctrine of absolute NON-RESISTANCE has been fully exploded among every
v^^^uous people. The freeborn soul revolts against it, and must have been long
debased, and have drank in the last dregs of corruption, before it can brook
the idea that a whole people injured may, in no case, recognize their trampled
Majesty. But to draw the line, and say where submission ends and resistance
begins, is not the province of the ministers of Christ, who has given no The
author, in a sermon first published 20 years ago, on 1 Peter ii, 17. delivered
his sentiments fully on this point -- in the following words, viz. -- "It would
be absurd to argue as some have done, that the apostle here meant to enjoin a
continued submission to violence -- The love of mankind, and the fear of God,
those very principles from which we trace the divine original of just
government, will lead us, by all probable means, to resist every attempt to
enslave the freeborn soul, and oppose the righteous will of God by defeating
the happiness of men. Resistance, however, is to be a last resource, and none
but the majority of a whole people, can determine in what cases it is
necessary. In the Scriptures, therefore, obedience is rightly inculcated in
general terms. For a people may sometimes imagine grievances they do not feel,
but will never miss to feel and complain of them where they really are, unless
their minds have been gradually prepared for slavery by absurd tenets."
rule in this matter, but left it to the feelings and consciences of the
injured. For when pressures and sufferings come, when the weight of power grows
intolerable, a people will fly to the constitution for shelter, and, if able,
will resume that power which they never surrendered, except so far as it might
be exercised for the common safety. Pulpit-casuistry is too feeble to direct or
control here. God, in his own government of the world, never violates freedom;
and his scriptures themselves would be disregarded, or considered as perverted,
if brought to belie his voice, speaking in the hearts of men.

THE application of these principles, my brethren, is now easy and must be left
to your own consciences and feelings. You are now engaged in one of the
grandest struggles, to which freemen can be called. You are contending for what
you conceive to be your constitutional rights, and for a final settlement of
the terms upon which this country may be perpetually united to the Parent State.

LOOK back, therefore, with reverence look back, to the times of ancient virtue
and renown. Look back to the mighty purposes which your fathers had in view,
when they traversed a vast ocean, and planted this land. Recall to your minds
their labors, their toils, their perseverance, and let their divine spirit
animate you in all your actions.

LOOK forward also to distant posterity. Figure to yourselves millions and
millions to spring from your loins, who may be born freemen or slaves as Heaven
shall now approve or reject your councils. Think that on you it may depend,
whether this great country, in ages hence, shall be filled and adorned with a
virtuous and enlightened people; enjoying LIBERTY and all its concomitant
blessings, together with the RELIGION of JESUS, as it flows uncorrupted from
his holy Oracles; or covered with a race of men more contemptible than the
savages that roam the wilderness, because they once knew the things which
belonged to their happiness and peace, but suffered them to be hid from their
eyes.

AND while you thus look back to the past, and forward to the future, fail not,
I beseech you, to look up to "the God of Gods -- the Rock of your Salvation. As
the clay in the potter's hands," so are the nations of the earth in the hands
of Him. the everlasting JEHOVAH! He lifts up -- and he casts down -- He
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble -- He will keep the feet of
his saints -- the wicked shall be silent in darkness, and by strength shall no
man prevail.

THE bright prospects of the Gospel; a thorough veneration of the Savior of
the world; a conscientious obedience to his divine laws; faith in his promises;
and the steadfast hope of immortal life through him; these only can support a
man in all times of adversity as well as prosperity. You might more easily
"strike fire out of ice," than stability or magnanimity out of crimes. But the
good man, he who is at peace with the God of all peace, will know no fear but
that of offending him, whose hand can cover the righteous so that he needs not
fear the arrow that flees by day, nor the destruction that wastes at
noonday; for a thousand shall fall beside him, and ten thousand at his right
hand, but it shall not come nigh to him; for he shall give his angels charge
over him to keep him in all his ways

ON the omnipotent God, therefore, through his blessed Son, let your strong
confidence be placed; but do not vainly expect that every day will be to you a
day of prosperity or triumph. The ways of providence lie through mazes, too
intricate for human penetration. Mercies may often be held forth to us in the
shape of sufferings; and the vicissitudes of our fortune in building up this
American fabric of happiness and glory may be various and checkered.

BUT let not this discourage you. Yea rather let it animate you with a holy
fervor -- a divine enthusiasm -- ever persuading yourselves that the cause of
virtue and Freedom is the CAUSE of GOD upon earth; and that the whole theater
of human nature does not exhibit a more august spectacle than a number of
Freemen, in dependence upon Heaven, mutually binding themselves to encounter
every difficulty and danger in support of their native and constitutional
rights, and for transmitting them wholly and unviolated to their posterity.

IT was this principle that inspired the heroes of ancient times; that raised
their names to the summit of renown, and filled all succeeding ages with their
unspotted praise. It is this principle too that must animate your conduct, if
you wish your names to reach future generations, conspicuous in the roll of
glory; and so far as this principle leads you, be prepared to follow -- whether
to life or to death.

WHILE you profess yourselves contending for Liberty, let it be with the temper
and dignity of freemen, undaunted and firm, but without wrath or vengeance, so
far as grace may be obtained to assist the weakness of nature. Consider it as a
happy circumstance, if such a struggle must have happened, that God has been
pleased to postpone it to a period, when our country is adorned with men of
enlightened zeal; when the arts and sciences are planted among us to secure a
succession of such men; when our morals are not far tainted by luxury,
profusion or dissipation; when the principles that withstood oppression, in the
brightest era of the English history, are ours as it were by peculiar
inheritance; and when we stand upon our own ground, with all that is dear
around us, animating us to every patriotic exertion. Under such circumstances
and upon such principles, what wonders, what achievements of true glory, have
not been performed!

FOR my part, I have long been possessed with a strong and even enthusiastic
persuasion, that Heaven has great and gracious purposes toward this continent,
which no human power or human device shall be able finally to frustrate.
Illiberal or mistaken plans of policy may distress us for a while, and perhaps
sorely check our growth; but if we maintain our own virtue; if we cultivate the
spirit of Liberty among our children; if we guard against the snares of luxury,
venality and corruption; the GENIUS of AMERICA will still rise triumphant, and
that with a power at last too mighty for opposition. This country will be free
-- nay, for ages to come, a chosen seat of Freedom, Arts, and heavenly
knowledge; which are now either drooping or dead in most countries of the old
world.

To conclude, since the strength of all public bodies, under God, consists in
their UNION; bear with each other's infirmities, and even varieties of
sentiments, in things not essential to the main point. The tempers of men are
cast in various molds. Some are quick and feelingly alive in all their mental
operations, especially those which relate to their country's weal, and are
therefore ready to burst forth into flame upon every alarm. Others again, with
intentions alike pure, and a clear unquenchable love of their country, too
steadfast to be damped by the mists of prejudice, or worked up into
conflagration by the rude blasts of passion, think it their duty to weigh
consequences, and to deliberate fully upon the probable means of obtaining
public ends. Both these kinds of men should bear with each other; for both are
friends to their country.

ONE thing further let me add, that without order and just subordination, there
can be no union in public bodies. However much you may be equals on other
occasions, yet all this must cease in an united and associated capacity; and
every individual is bound to keep the place and duty assigned him, by ties far
more powerful over a man of virtue and honor, than all the other ties which
human policy can contrive. It had been better never to have lifted a voice in
your country's cause, than to betray it by want of Union; or to leave worthy
men, who have embarked their all for the common good, to suffer, or stand
unassisted.

LASTLY, by every method in your power, and in every possible case, support the
LAWS of your country. In a contest for liberty, think what a crime it would be,
to suffer one Freeman to be insulted, or wantonly injured in his liberty, so
far as by your means it may be prevented.

THUS animated and thus acting -- We may then SING with the prophet --

Fear not O land! be glad and rejoice, for the Lord will do great things. Be
not afraid, ye beast of the field, for the pastures of the wilderness do spring
-- The tree bears her fruit -- the fig tree and the vine yield their fruit.

THUS animated and thus acting -- we may likewise PRAY with the prophet --

O LORD be gracious unto us -- we have waited for thee. Be thou our arm every
morning, our salvation also in time of trouble. Some trust in chariots and some
in horses, but we will remember the name of the Lord our God -- O thou hope of
Israel, the Savior thereof in time of need -- thou art in the midst of us and
we are called by thy name -- LEAVE US NOT. Give us one heart and one way, that
we may fear thee for ever, for the good of ourselves and our children after us
-- We looked for peace, but no good came; and for a time of health, but behold
we are in trouble -- Yet will we trust in the Lord for ever; for in the Lord
Jehovah is everlasting strength -- He will yet bind up the brokenhearted, and
comfort those that mourn -- even so, oh our God, do thou comfort and relieve
them, that so the bones which thou has broken may yet rejoice. Inspire us with
a high and commanding sense of the value of our constitutional rights! may a
spirit of wisdom and virtue be poured down upon us all; and may our
Representatives, those who are delegated to devise and appointed to execute
public measures, be directed to such, as thou in thy sovereign goodness shall
be pleased to render effectual for the salvation of a great empire, and
re-uniting all its members in one sacred bond of harmony and public happiness!
Grant this, oh Father, for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake; to whom, with thee and
the holy Spirit, one God, be Glory, Honor and Power now and forever! AMEN.


