

A CONCISE NATURAL HISTORY OF East and West FLORIDA; CONTAINING An Account of
the natural Produce of all the Southern Part of BRITISH AMERICA, in the three
Kingdoms of Nature, particularly the Animal and Vegetable.

LIKEWISE, The artificial Produce now raised, or possible to be raised, and
manufactured there, with some commercial and political Observations in that
part of the world; and a chorographical Account of the same.

To which is added, by Way of Appendix, Plain and easy Directions to Navigators
over the Bank of Bahama, the Coast of the two Floridas, the North of Cuba, and
the dangerous Gulf Passage. Noting also, the hitherto unknown watering Places
in that Part of America, intended principally for the Use of such Vessels as
may be so unfortunate as to be distressed by Weather in that difficult Part of
the World.

By Captain BERNARD ROMANS.

Illustrated with twelve COPPER PLATES, And Two whole Sheet MAPS.

VOL. I.

NEW YORK: Printed for the AUTHOR, M,DCC,LXXV.

REASON without experience can do nothing; being no more than the mere dreams,
phantasms, and meteors of ingenious men, who abuse their time.

There is need of much diligence and labor, before man can be thoroughly
instructed.

LINNEUS. All things contained in the compass of the universe declare, as it
were with one accord, the infinite wisdom of the Creator; for whatever strikes
our senses, whatever is the object of our thoughts, is so contrived, as to
assist in manifesting the divine glory (i. e.) the ultimate end which God
proposed in all his works. Whoever duly turns his attention to the things on
this our terraqueous globe, must necessarily confess, that they are so
connected, so linked together, that they all tend to the same end, and to this
end a vast number of intermediate ends are necessary.

ISAAC BIBERG. Man, the servant and explainer of nature, observes and practices
as much as he has learned, concerning her order, effect, and power; further he
neither knows nor can do.

BACON. TO JOHN ELLIS Esquire Fellow of the Royal Societys of LONDON and ^^^SAL
Agent for the Province of West Florida.

This Work is (...) most humbly Dedicated by His Most Obedient Humble Servant
Bernard Romans.

INTRODUCTION.
PREFACES, at this present day, become such impertinent things, that it is
almost improper to offer one without an apology.

The many different reports, which have prevailed in America, since the cession
af the Floridas, concerning their state, situation and soil, joined to the
natural desire of those concerned, to see a good account of those so celebrated
countries, i hope will be apology enough in the present case.

Conscious of being, from experience, sufficiently enabled to give a just
account of them, i have undertaken the following sketch, or out-lines of a
future natural history of those countries, in hopes that some abler hand may be
thereby induced to take up the pen, and furnish the world with a complete work
of that kind for these provinces; being well assured, that no part of British
America will furnish the naturalist with more variety.

I offer this humble attempt without any recommendations, or praises, of my
own; only i beg to assure my reader, that i have, through the whole, adhered so
strictly to truth, as to make no one deviation therefrom willingly, or
knowingly; guarding on the one hand against the misrepresentations, wherewith
the authors of the numerous and noted puffs, concerning these provinces, have
so plentifully interlarded their labors; and on the other, against the
prejudices of those, who have taken so much pains to render this country
undeservedly despised.

No elegance of style, nor flowers of rhetoric, must be expected from a person,
who is conscious that he is not sufficiently acquainted with the language, to
write in such a manner as will please a critical reader, and if he has wrote so
as to be intelligible, he hopes the candid will excuse such inaccuracies in
composition as it is difficult for a foreigner to avoid.

LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS TO THIS WORK.
A.
MR. Benjamin Andrews, Boston, Capt. Samuel Andrews, Newbury-Port, John Antill,
Esquire New York, Capt. Vincent P. Ashfield, ditto, Mr. Thomas Aylwin, Boston, Mr.
Thomas Allen, New London.
B.
MR. Theophilact Bache, New York, Mr. Isaac Beers, New Haven, Charles Bernard,
Esquire East Florida, 3 copies, Capt. Robert Bethell, Philadelphia, George Bethune,
Esquire Boston, Mr. Clement Biddle, Philadelphia, Mr. Owen Biddle, ditto. Captain
John Blake, Boston, Mr. William Bradford, Philadelphia, Mr. Anthony L. Bleeker,
New York, Honorable James Bowdoin, Esquire Boston, Dirk Brinkerhoff, Esquire New York,
Lieutenant Brudenell, of the Navy, Capt. Ashbel Burnham, Middletown, Thaddeus
Burr, Esquire Fairfield, Adam Babcock, Esquire New Haven.
C.
CAptain Richard Carry, Boston, Chamber of Commerce, 12 copies, His Excellency
Peter Chester, Esquire Governor of West-Florida, Matthew Clarkson, Esquire for the
Library Company, Philadelphia, Captain Benjamin Cobb, Boston, Captain Tristram
Coffin, Newbury-Port, Honorable Commissioners of his Majesty's Customs,
Boston, Capt. W. Coombs, Newbury Port, Capt. James Creighton, jun. New York,
Captain William Curtis, New York, Messieurs Cox and Berry, Boston.
D.
CAPT. Benjamin Davis, New York, Mr. James Davis, ditto, Lieut. Dawson, of the
Navy Capt. Patrick Dennis, New York, Mr. Gerardus Duyckink, ditto, Mr. Timothy
Dwight, jun. Yale College.
E.
JOHN Ellis, Esquire F. R. S. London, George Erving, Esquire Boston, John Ewing, D. D.
Philadelphia.
F.
EDmund Fanning, Esquire Secretary to Governor Tryon, Capt. Nicholas Fletcher,
New York, John Fothergill, M D. F. R. S. London, Mr. Philip Francis,
Philadelphia, Mr. David Frazier, Sussex, New Jersey, Capt. Benjamin French,
Lansingburgh, Capt. Joseph French, New York.
G.
DR. Sylvester Gardener, Boston, Capt. Martin Gay, ditto, John Gibson, Esquire
Philadelphia, Capt. John Gore, Boston, Joseph Green, Esquire Boston, John Griffith,
Esquire New York, Mr. Anthony Griffiths, do. The right Noble Gronovius, one of the
Deputies from the ancient city of Leyden, to the Chambers of Finances at the
Hague.
H.
MR. Reuben Haines, Philadelphia, His Excellency Major General Frederick
Haldimand, Esquire Mr. Willis Hall, Boston, Jonathan Hampton, Esquire Elizabeth-Town,
Honorable John Hancock, Esquire Boston, Ditto for Harvard College, Capt. J.
Harrison, of the Ship Queen, S. Caro. Capt. William Henderson, Middletown,
Samuel Holland, Esquire Surveyor General for the Northern District, Stephen Hooper,
Esquire Newbury-Port, Thomas Howell, Esquire New Haven, Capt. Francis Hutcheson, 60th
Regiment, Lieutenant Hunter, of the Navy, Capt. John Hylton, New York.
I.
CAPT. Jabez Johnson, New York, Evan Jones, Esquire Pensacola, Mr. Ralph Isaacs,
New Haven.
K.
MR. Henry Knox, Boston.
L.
JAmes de Lancey, Esquire New York, Mr. John Landon, Boston, Mr. William Lewis,
New York, Leonard Lispenard, Esquire do. Mr. Abraham Livingston, jun. do. Hon.
Philip Livingston, Esquire Pensacola, Mr. James Lockwood, New Haven, John Lorimer
Esquire M. D. Pensacola, Mr. Samuel London, New York, John Lukens, Esquire
Philadelphia, 6 copies, Mr. Char. Lukens, York-Town, Pennsylvania, Thomas
Lynch, Esquire Charlestown, S. Caro. Christopher Leffingwell, Esquire Norwich.
M.
MArine Society, New York, Marine Society, of Boston, Marine Society, of Salem,
Marine Society, of Newbury-Port, Mr. Edward M'Michael, Sussex, New Jersey,
Capt. Alexander M'Dougall, New York, Mr. William Malcom, ditto, Richard Martin,
Esquire Rio Bueno Jamaica, Thomas Martin, Esquire Portsmouth, N. Hampsh, Mr. Charles
Marshal, Philadelphia, Mr. Samuel Miles, ditto, Capt. Magnus Miller, ditto, Mr.
John Minshall, New York, Hon. J. Montague. Esquire Rear Adm. of the Blue. Capt.
Montrefor, as Successor to Capt. T. Sowers, six Copies for the Engineers
Office, America, Capt. Thomas Moore, New York, Mr. Ph. Moore, Philadelphia,
Capt. Roderick Morrison, Newbury Port, Robert Morris, Esquire Philadelphia.
N.
J. M. Nesbitt, Esquire Philadelphia, Capt. Samuel Newhall, Newbury Port, Capt.
Downham Newtown, N. Providence, Capt. James Nicoll, Newbury-Port, Capt. Silas
Nowell, ditto.
P.
MAjor Adino Paddock, Boston, Mr. Z. Parsons, Springfield, M. Timothy Penny,
Boston, Mr. Isaac Green Pearson, Newbury Port, Mr. Joseph Pemberton,
Philadelphia, William Philips, Esquire Boston, Mr. Samuel Philips, ditto, John
Pitts, Esquire ditto, Mr. Peter le Pool, Charlestown, South Carolina, 6 Copies,
William Powell, Esquire Boston, Capt. Job Prince, ditto, Mr. John Perrit, Norwich.
R.
CAPT. Thomas Randall, New York, Mr. Gerrit Rapalje, do. John Rapalje, Esquire do.
Messieurs Read and Yates, do. Capt. John Rionson, Boston, Mr. Huybertus Romans,
Amsterdam, John L. C. Room, Esquire New York, P^r^ Ross, Esquire N. Providence, John
Row, Esquire Boston, Thomas Russel, Esquire Charlestown, New England,
S.
CAPT. Giles Sage, Middletown, Daniel Sargeant, Esquire Cape Ann, Mr. Elias
Shipman, New Haven, Joseph Sherburne, Esquire Boston, Jonathan Simpson, Esquire ditto.
Major John Small, ditto, Mr. Christopher Smith, New York, Mr. Archibald
Stewart, Suffex, New Jersey, Mr. H. W. Stiegel, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
6 Copies, Ebenezer Storer, Esquire Boston, Capt. Symonds, of the Navy, Mr.
Nathaniel Shaw, jun. New London.
T.
MR. Nathaniel Tracey, Newbury-Port, 2 Copies, Mr. John Tracy, Newbury Port,
Mr. Robert Tracey, ditto, His Excellency William Tryon, Esquire Governor of N.
York, William Todd, Esquire York, in Old England, Capt. Samuel Tuder, New York.
V.
MR. Anthony Van Dam, for the New York Insurance Office, Mr. John Van
Rensselaer, jun. Albany, William Vassal, Esquire ditto. John Vassal, Esquire ditto,
W.
CAPT. Jeremiah Wandsworth, Middletown, Hon. Hugh Wallace, Esquire New York, Mr.
Joshua Wallace, Philadelphia, Oliver Wendell, Esquire Boston, Mr. Joseph Webb,
Weathersfield, Mr. Samuel Webb, ditto, Edmund Rush Wegg, Esquire Pensacola, Joseph
Wharton, Esquire jun. Philadelphia, 3 Copies, Hon. Thomas Willing, Esquire ditto, Capt.
Erasmus Williams, New York, Mr. Jonathan Williams, tertius, Boston, Mr. Thomas
C. Williams, Philadelphia, Mr. William Wilson, New-Providence, Capt. Edward
Wigglesworth, Newbury-Port, Capt. Aaron Willard, Boston, Capt. Is. L. Winn,
New York, Mr. Joshua Winslow, Boston, Mr. Joseph Whitall, Philadelphia, Capt.
James Wright, New York, Capt. William Wire, Newbury Port.
Y.
RObert William Yates, Esquire Albany, Dr. Thomas Young, New-Port, Rhode Island.
SUBSCRIBERS FOR THE BOOK ONLY.
MR. John Adams, Boston, Mr. Joseph Barnell, ditto, Mr. Samuel Blagden,
New Haven, James Burrows, Esquire Boston, Rev. Mr. Carey, ditto, Messieurs Cox and
Berry, ditto, 25 Copies, Mr. Thomas Fanning, ditto, Mr. D. S. Franks, Quebec,
Dr. John Greenleaf, Boston, Mr. Roger Haldane, New Haven, Mr. William Kennedy,
Boston, Mr. Henry Knox, ditto, 50 Copies, Mr. James Lockwood, New Haven, 25
Copies, Mr. William Molineaux, Boston, Mr. Henry Pelham, ditto, Capt. Rufus
Putnam, Brookfield, 6 Copies, Dr. Isaac Rand, Boston, Hector St. John, Esquire Gray
Court, Mr. William Tuder, jun. Boston.
A CONCISE NATURAL HISTORY OF East and West-Florida.
A DESCRIBER of countries, ought in a great measure, to imitate a building
Engineer, in first laying before those, whom he will employ, accurate and
distinct plans of his intended work, thereby enabling them to judge more
distinctly of the execution thereof. I think that in a work of this nature, i
could not do this better that by directing my readers to the charts or plans
accompanying it, in which they will undoubtedly find materials to form just
ideas of the places herein described.

To reduce my work to some regularity, i shall proceed from the East, Westward,
and begin with the Peninsula, dividing it into two parts, which i will call
climates, the one beginning at Amelia or St. Mary's inlet, in latitude 31: and
extending Southward to the latitude of 27:40: this will include the rivers St.
Mary, Nassau, St. John's or Ylacco, and the Musketo Lagoon (for surely no one
can call this last a river) besides several smaller ones, which will be
mentioned in their places; these all empty themselves on the Eastern side of
the Apalachicola (the boundary between the two Floridas) the Oskaulaskna the
Apalachian, St. Juan de Guacaro, vulgarly called little Seguana, the river
Amaxura, and the Manatee, which last falls into the bay of Tampe, or harbor of
Spirito Santo, and which i have first discovered.

The other, or Southern climate, beginning at the latitude 27:40: and extending
Southward to the latitude of 25, on the main, or to 24:17: including the keys;
this contains a large river, which empties itself into the new harbor, of
which i am the first explorer, we have given it the name of Charlotte harbor,
but neither harbor nor river have been described by the Spaniards in their
maps, and the Spanish fishermen distinguish the place by the names of its
inlets, which are five, and will hereafter be described; next is Carlos bay and
Carlos harbor, into which the river Coloosahatcha empties itself; further
South are not any more deserving the name of rivers, but such as they are, i
shall give them a place also; on the East side is only the river St. Lucia,
with its Southern branch, the river Ratones, and the Lagoon, known by the name
of Aisa Hatcha, Rio d'ais, or Indian river, some others can scarcely be ranked
among rivers, but will likewise be more particularly mentioned hereafter.

After this general division of the country, i think it is not improper to
begin with an account of the air, which this province enjoys very pure and
clear fogs are seldom known any where except upon St. John's river, but the
dews are very heavy, the spring and summer are in general dry, the autumn very
changeable; the beginning of winter wet and stormy, but the latter part very
dry and serene; from the end of September to the end of June, there is perhaps
not any where a more delightful climate to be found, but all July, August, and
most of September are excessively hot, yet the changes from hot to cold are not
so sudden, as in Carolina, and frost is not frequently known, the noon day's
sun is always warm, the severest cold ever known there affects not the tender
china orange trees, which grow here to a very great perfection, i scruple not
to say, that this fruit here exceeds in goodness every other of the kind i have
yet seen, however the change from the middle of this climate, to the Northern
part of it is much more perceptible from heat to cold, than it was to the
southward from cold to heat, in the year 1770 and 1771. I felt very severe
weather about the river Nassau, and to the southward of the town of St.
Augustine, the climate changes so gradually, that it is not perceivable to the
above named lat. of 27:40: where there is no frost at all, and which I have
always set down as the line of no frost. From this line to the southern extent
is a most charming climate, the air almost always serene; on the east side the
common trade wind, and on the west side the Apalachian sea breeze from the west
to the north-west, refresh this delighful Peninsula during the summer; here we
find all the produce of more northern climes mixed with the inhabitants of the
Tropics, and this as well in the water as on the land, nor is there ever so
great a cold as to destroy the fruits of the south, nor so great a heat as to
parch the produce of the north; in all this Peninsula it is remarkable, that
^ain is always prognosticated one or two days before it falls, and this by
either an immoderate dew or no dew at all, so that if a very heavy dew falls,
it is a certain sign of rain, and the same if on a calm fine night, there be no
dew, but i cannot account for this phenomenon.

The winds are not so very changeable here as they are further to the
northward, but are during the greatest part of spring, the whole summer, and
beginning of autumn, generally between the east and south east, and during the
last of autumn, and first part of winter, they are commonly in the north east
quarter; the latter part of the winter, and first of spring they are more
generally west and north west, the autumnal equinox is to be dreaded here, as
well two or three weeks before, as two or three months after it, great storms
will then happen, and many vessels are drove on shore, or otherwise disabled: I
have never heard of much mischief in the vernal equinox, and if a hurricane was
ever known in this Peninsula, it was on the 29th of October 1769, when there
was a terrible gust between the lat. 25:10, and 25:50, which blew many trees
down, and drove the Snow Ledbury a shore, where she remained dry on a key, now
distinguished by her name, but heretofore considered as a part of what was
improperly called by the name of Key Largo.

The fatal hurricane of August 30, 31, September 1, 2, 3, anno 1772, was
severely felt in West Florida, it destroyed the woods for about 30 miles from
the sea coast in a terrible manner, what were its effects in the unsettled
countries to the eastward, we cannot learn; in Pensacola it did little or no
mischief except the breaking down of all the whart^ but one; but farther
westward, it was terrible; at Mobile every thing was in confusion, vessels,
boats, and loggs were drove up into the streets a great distance, the gullies
and hollows as well as all the lower grounds of this town were so filled with
loggs, that many of the inhabitants got the greatest part of their yearly
provision of firewood there; all the vegitables were burned up by the salt
water, which was by the violence of the wind, carried over the town, so as at
the distance of half a mile, it was seen to fall like rain; all the lower
floors of the houses were covered with water, but no houses were hurt except
one, which stood at the water side, in which lived a joiner, a schooner drove
upon it, and they alternately destroyed each other; but the greatest fury of it
was spent on the neighborhood of the Pasca Oocolo river; the plantation of Mr.
Krebs there was almost totally destroyed, of a fine crop of rice, and a large
one of corn were scarcely left any remains, the houses were left uncovered, his
smith's shop was almost all washed away, all his works and out houses blown
down; and for thirty miles up a branch of this river which (on account of the
abundance of that species of cypress Cupressus Thyoides.
vulgarly called white cedar) is called cedar river, there was scarce a tree
left standing, the pines were blown down or broke, and those which had not
entirely yielded to this violence, were so twisted, that they might be compared
to ropes; at Botereaux's cow pen, the people were above six weeks consulting on
a method of finding and bringing home their cattle; twelve miles up the river,
live some Germans who, seeing the water rise with so incredible a rapidity,
were almost embarked, fearing an universal flood, but the water not rising over
their land, they did not proceed on their intended journey to the Chactaw
nation. At Yoani, in this nation, i am told the effects were perceivable; in
all this tract of coast and country the wind had ranged between the south south
east and east, but farther west its fury was between the north north east and
east, a schooner belonging to the government having a detachment of the
sixteenth regiment on board, was drove by accident to the westward as far as
Cat Island, where she lay at an anchor under the west point, the water rose so
high, that when she parted her cables, she floated over the island, the wind
north by east, or thereabout she was forced upon the Free masons islands, and
lay about 6 weeks before she was got off, and if they had not accidentally been
discovered by a hunting boat, the people might have remained there and died for
want, particularly as water failed them already when discovered; the effect of
this different direction of the current of air or wind was here surprising, the
south easterly wind having drove the water in immense quantities up all the
rivers, bays, and sounds to the westward, being here counteracted by the
northerly wind, this body of water was violently forced into the bay of Spirito
Santo at the back of the Chandeleurs, grand Gozier, and Breton Isles, and not
finding sufficient vent up the rigolets, nor down the outlets of the bay, it
forced a number of very deep channels through these islands, cutting them into
a great number of small islands. The high island of the Chandeleur had all the
surface of its ground washed off, and i really think, had not the clay been
held fast by the roots of the black mangrove, and in some places the myrtle
(Myrica) there would have been scarce a vestige of the island left; at the
mouth of Missisippi all the shipping was drove into the marshes; a Spanish brig
foundered and parted, and a large crew was lost, some of the people were taken
from a piece of her at sea, by a sloop from Pensacola a few days after; in the
lakes at Chef Menteur, and in the passes of the rigolets, the water rose
prodigiously and covered the low islands there two feet; at St. John's Creek,
and New Orleans, the tide was thought extraordinary high, but at all these last
places there was no wind felt, being a fine serene day with a small air from
the eastward.

The most extraordinary effect of this hurricane was the production of a second
crop of leaves and fruit on all the mulberry trees in this country, a
circumstance into which i very carefully enquired, but could not learn from the
oldest and most curious observers that this had ever happened before; this
tardy tree budded, foliated, blossomed, and bore ripe fruit with the amazing
rapidity of only four weeks time immediately after the gust, and no other trees
were thus affected.

The south and south west winds make a thick heavy air, and are in my opinion
hurtful to the lungs; they also occasion the sultry weather, so much complained
of in July and August. The winds from the eastern quarter every where between
the south east and the north east, are cool and moist, and they cause the
frequent showers, by which the very sand of this climate is endued with so
prodigious a vegetative power that it amazes every one. The winds from the east
to the north are agreeably cool, and from the north to the north west, occasion
what is here called cold weather; i have frequently kept thermometrical
journals, but have none left now for inspection.

I remember the general height of the mercury on Fahrenheit's scale, to have
been, in the shade where the air was not prevented circulating freely about it,
between 84 and 88 and on some sultry hot days in July and August, i have known
it to rise up to 94, when at the same time by carrying it out and exposing it
to the sun, it will rise in a very short time up to 114, nor can i remember
ever to have seen it above one or two degrees below the freezing point; it is
impossible for one to imagine how inexpressibly temperate the weather is here
from the latter end of September to the latter end of June; the western part of
this northern division is not so very hot in summer, as the whole eastern shore
of the Peninsula is, but its sea shore is much more exposed to the bleak winter
winds.

In the southern division i have never seen the mercury in Fahrenheit's
thermometer below the temperate point, and i cannot remember ever to have seen
it higher than in the northern division.

This southern part of the Peninsula is in the months of May, June, July, and
August very subject, on its west side, to dreadful squalls, and there is a
certainty of one or more of these tornadoes every day, when during that season,
the wind comes any where between the south south east, and south west, but they
are of very short duration; then also thunder and lightning is frequent, but
nothing near so violent as in Carolina and Georgia, nor do i remember any more
than one instance of damage occasioned by it, when it made a large hole in a
stone wall of a house at St. Augustine; yet very few electrical conductors are
made use of there.

Before i quit this subject of the air, i cannot help taking notice of a
remark, which i have read some where, made by Dr. James McKenzie, which is that
dampness or discoloring of plaster, and wainscoat, the soon moulding of bread,
moistness of sponge, dissolution of loaf sugar, rusting of metals, and rotting
of furniture, are certain marks of a bad air; now every one of those marks
except the last, are more to be seen at St. Augustine, than in any place i ever
was at, and yet i do not think, that on all the continent, there is a more
healthy spot; burials have been less frequent here, than any where else, where
an equal number of inhabitants is to be found, and it was remarked during my
stay there, that when a detachment of the royal regiment of artillery once
arrived there in a sickly state, none of the inhabitants caught the contagion,
and the troops themselves soon recruited; i also know of several asthmatic and
consumptive subjects, who have been greatly relieved there; the Spanish
inhabitants lived here to a great age, and certain it is, that the people of
the Havannah looked on it as their Montpelier, frequenting it for the sake of
health; i therefore ascribe the above circumstances to the nature of the stone,
wherewith the houses are built.

Haloes, or as they are vulgarly called circles round the sun and moon, are
very often seen, and are sure forerunners of rain if not wind storms; those of
the sun are less frequent, but they are always followed by very violent gales
of wind; it is remarkable, that if in those haloes a break is observed, that
break is always toward the quarter, from whence the wind begins; water spouts
are often seen along this coast, but i cannot learn that they ever occasioned
any mischief, nor could i learn, that earthquakes have ever been experienced in
this part of the world.

Of West Florida, there needs scarce any thing more to be said, with regad to
the article of climate, or air, than what i have said of my northern division
of East Florida, it agreeing in every respect therewith, except that the winter
is something more severe, it often killing tender fruit trees; In 1771-2, it
killed apple and pear trees.
however, as the sickness of 1765 at Mobile, has been a subject of much
discourse, and as it has been set up (by people who would if possible prevent
the population of so fine a country) as a scarecrow to such, as are easily
deceived by appearances, and never enquire deeper than external shows; this
fatal disorder has been followed by the entire ruin of Mobile, and had nearly
spoiled the reputation of Pensacola, which though situate in as fine, airy, dry
and healthy a site as any on the continent, and at least at a distance of sixty
miles from Mobile, had yet the misfortune to be confounded with it, and to be
thought liable to the same misfortunes; i will give as faithful an account of
that illness, as has come within the verge of my knowledge.

Mobile was originally built by the French, after they had left their old Fort
Conde, thirty miles higher up the Tombecbe, having found that situation very
inconvenient; they now made at least as injudicious a choice in another
respect, by placing themselves at a distance from good water, on low ground,
and directly opposite to some marshy islands, at the division between the salt
and fresh water, a situation well known in America not to be eligible for the
sake of health, but the convenience of the navigation up to it being the best
in their possession at that time, its being a barrier against the Spaniards,
and the easy communication with the Chactaw and Upper Creek nations, as well as
with the Mississippi, made people forget the evils attending it, and it soon
became, from a fort, a pretty town, with some very good houses built in no
inelegant taste, yet the French inhabitants duly observing the inconveniences
of this unhealthy spot, adapted their constitutions to it, by a regular sober
life, being uncommonly careful to get their drinking water from a rivulet at
the distance of three miles, where it is very good, neither did they give into
excess of drinking spirituous liquors and wine, and at the season, when the
continued heat caused a putrefaction of the water in pools, and exhaled the
moisture of this low ground, thereby filling the air with noxious vapors, and
thus occasioning the acute epidemical disorders (that proved so fatal in the
year 1765) those prudent inhabitants retired to their plantations up or down
the river, some even at a small distance, there to enjoy a freer circulation of
a less putrified air, thus also by the depopulation of the town, the remaining
inhabitants suffered less by being less crowded together, and there were such
instances of longevity here as are not to be outdone in any part of America.
Let me beg leave to mention among many others, one more commonly known, it is
the Chevalier de Lucere's family, who are now all very old, and whose mother
not many years since died by breaking one of her legs, that had been so much
calcarizated by the gout, that it snapped by stepping into bed, she died aged
far above one hundred years. One other i shall mention, more familiar to me,
which is that of one Mr. Francois, who lives now about five miles below the
river Poule: In September 1771, i called there, the old man told me he was then
past eighty three years of age, that the old woman, whom i saw putting bread
into the oven, was his mother; and that she was one of the first women that
came from France to this country; i saw her about her domestic business in
many ways; in a very cheerful manner, singing and running from place to place
as briskly as a girl of twenty; Mr. Francois told me, that at the age of sixty
he fell out of a pine tree, above fifty feet high, with his loins over a fallen
one, that he with difficulty recovered, and that had it not been for that
accident, he would not, as he thinks, yet have been sensible of the heavy hand
of time; that he was still a hearty cheerful old man, was evidently to be seen;
when i came to the river Poule in October 1772, i met the same old gentleman
fishing at the mouth of the river, on my asking him whether this diversion was
agreeable to him, he told me; that his mother had an inclination to eat fish,
and he was come to get her a mess; he was then on foot and had five miles to
come to this place, and as much back with his prey, after catching it; a very
dutiful son this at eighty five! He lives comfortably at an agreeable place,
and on the produce of a midling large stock of cattle.

Many more of this kind might be mentioned, but these two being more
universally known, i chose to relate them only. Far otherwise was it with our
sons of incontinence, who upon their arrival, and after their first taking
possession of this country, lived there so fast, that their race was too soon
scampered over; midnight carouzals, and the converting day into night, and
night into day was all the study of those gay, those thoughtless men, who
sported with their lives; as with a toy not worth esteeming; the fatal effects
of their debauches; joined to the consequences of the situation of their
residence, made their lives indeed comparable to grass, flourishing to day, and
withering to morrow; but as if a punishment for this abandoned life, was not
sufficiently inc^rred by its own fatality, in the year 1765 arrived a regiment
(i think the twenty first) from Jamaica, with them they brought a contagious
distemper; contracted either in the island, or on their passage; these men,
like most soldiers; lived a life of intemperance, and besides, drank the water
out of the stagnated pools, which i myself have even in the winter, seen such
as to fill a man with horror at the thought of making use thereof, this and
other inconveniences of a soldier's life, joined to their arriving in a bad
season, swept them off so as scarce to leave a living one to bury the dead. See
there the true reason of the sickly character of the climate, and of the
destruction of this once flourishing town, whose situation by far exceeds that
of Savannah in Georgia, in every respect.

It is an almost invariable rule for people, who intend going to a different
climate, to consult some friend or acquaintance on the manner of life, he would
advise him to lead, i have never yet heard of one going to Florida, who was not
told by his friend, that a free glass was necessary; how true this is, i shall
not pretend to say, but certain it is, that the advice is almost always too
freely followed, the free glass generally degenerating into a glass of excess.

Notwithstanding all i have above asserted, it is not to be denied, that during
the hot months, the air is not so wholesome as in the other seasons, but even
then it does not so much affect careful strangers, and new comers, as those who
have been some time there and live irregular lives.

The night air is not so much to be dreaded here, as in countries where the sun
is vertical, or nearly so, and consequently, by its long absence, makes a
chilling penetrating night follow a burning day, but here it is not long enough
absent to cool the atmosphere sufficiently to hurt the unweary sleeper, who
during the first heat of a sultry night perhaps has exposed his open pores to
the mercy of the air.

The atmosphere is, during this season, so burning hot, that undoubtedly very
sudden rarefactions of the humors are often experienced, which cause such
abundant perspiration, that water, as soon as drank, penetrates the open pores,
so that the human skin seems to be comparable to a wet sponge when squeezed;
yet although the water is here very cool (and if it has not this quality
naturally, it is artificially made to acquire it) we never hear of the fatal
effects of water drinking, so often experienced in the cities of New York and
Philadelphia, the reason perhaps is, that it is seldom if ever drank unmixed.

I will however venture to foretell, that on opening the woods of this country
for cultivation, which will naturally drain ponds, gullies, etc. the air will
be here very little affected by those pernicious vapors, which have so
uncommon an influence over the humors and fibrous parts of the human frame, as
to destroy their harmonious concordance (may i be admitted the phrase?) and
occasioning them to relax, and thereby producing weaknesses, lassitudes, and
finally dangerous and fatal disorders.

If we consider the effects of heat and humidity on the hardest substances,
such as wood, and even metals, which are thereby expanded, and have the union
of their solid parts relaxed, it may give us an idea, how much more their
effects must be felt in the animal economy at times, when fire and water unite
their dissolving powers to act on all nature.

A very dry hot air, though less dangerous to the body, than a hot moist one,
has yet very nearly the same effects, as it partially dries the Ponds, Marshes,
Swamps, etc. leaving the remaining water and mud to exhale, and spread their
noxious vapors through the atmosphere.

Every inhabitant of any part of America knows, that the sudden transitions
from cold to heat so prevalent on that continent, are much more to be dreaded,
than any of the above named causes of immoderate heat, cold, moisture, and
drought.

I am now to consider the nature and appearance of the earth, which in this
part of America, may be divided into six different sorts, much the same as in
Carolina, with this distinction, that it is much more unequally divided.

I shall treat of them by the names of pine land, Hammock land, savannahs,
swamps, marshes, and bay, or cypress galls.

First the pine land, commonly called pine barren, which makes up the largest
body by far, the Peninsula being scarce any thing else; but about an hundred
miles toward the north west from St. Augustine, and about two hundred from the
sea in West Florida, carry us entirely out of it. This land consists of a gray,
or white sand, and in many places of a red or yellow gravel; it produces a
great variety of shrubs or plants, of which i shall hereafter describe some,
the principal produce from whence it derives its name is the pinus foliis
longissimis ex una theca ternis, or yellow pine and pitch pine tree, which i
take to be a variety of the same species, both excellent and good timber.

Also the chamoerops frondibus palmatis plicatis stipitibus serratis, of whose
fruit all animals are very fond.

It is on this kind of land, that immense stocks of cattle are maintained,
although the most natural grass on this soil is of a very harsh nature, and the
cattle not at all fond of it, it is known by the name of wire grass; and they
only eat it while young; for the procuring it young or renewing this kind of
pasture, the woods are frequently fired, and at different seasons, in order to
have a succession of young grass, but the savannahs that are interspersed in
this kind of land furnish a more plentiful and more proper food for the cattle.

Some high pine hills are so covered with two or three varieties of the quercus
or oak so as to make an underwood to the lofty pines; and a species of dwarf
chestnut is often found here; another species of a larger growth is also found
in the lower parts, particularly in the edges of the bay or cypress galls.

This barren and unfavourable soil in a wet season bears many things far beyond
expectation; and is very useful for the cultivation of peach and mulberry
orchards; this land might also be rendered useful for many other purposes, but
either the people do not choose to go out of the old beaten track, or content
themselves with looking elsewhere for new land improveable with less cost; the
method of meliorating it is certainly obvious to the meanest capacity, as it
every where, at a greater or less depth, covers a st^ff marly kind of clay,
which i am certain, was it properly mixed with the land; would render it
fertile, and this might be done with little expense, the clay laying in some
places within half a foot or a foot of the surface; in most places it is found
at the depth of three, four, or five feet, consequently not very hard to come
at. In East Florida, in the southern parts, this kind of land is often very
rocky, but especially from the latitude 25:50, southward to the point, where it
is a solid rock, of a kind of lime stone covered with innumerable small, loose
and sharp stones, every where.

In West Florida the pine land is also frequently found rocky, with an iron
stone, especially near where the pines are found growing in a gravelly tract,
which is frequently the case here,

The hammock land so called from its appearing in tufts among the lofty pines;
some small spots of this kind, if seen at a distance, have a very romantic
appearance; the large parcels of it often divide swamps, creeks, or rivers from
the pine land, this is indeed its most common situation; the whole of the up
lands, remote from the sea in the northern parts, is this kind of land, its
soil is various, in some places a sand of diverse colors, and in East Florida,
often a white sand; but the true hammock soil is a mixture of clay and a
blackish sand, and in some spots a kind of ochre, in East Florida some of this
is also sometimes found rocky; on every kind of this land lays a stratum of
black mould, made by the decayed leaves etc. of the wood and other plants
growing upon it; the salts contained in this stratum render it very fruitful,
and when cleared this is the best; nay the only fit land for the production of
indigo, potatoes, and pulse; the first crops, by means of the manure above
mentioned, generally are very plentiful, but the salts being soon evaporated,
if the soil over which it lay, should prove to be sand, it is not better than
pine land; the other sort bears many years planting; its natural produce is so
various in this climate, that the complete description of all, would be more
work than one man's life time would be sufficient for, the principal however
are the following:

Quercus alba Virginiana. Virginian white oak. Quercus alba pumilis. Dwarf
white oak, or post oak. Quercus, foliis oblongis non sinuatis, semper virens.
Evergreen oak with oblong entire leaves, or live oak. Quercus nigra, folio non
serrato, in summitate quasi triangulo. Black oak, with leaves serrated, and
their tops almost triangular. Quercus nigra foliis cunei forma, obsolete
trilobis. Black oak, with wedge shaped leaves, and having imperfectly three
lobes. Quercus nigra Marilandica, folio trifido, ad sassafras accidente: Black
Maryland oak, with trifid leaves resembling sassafras. Quercus rubra
Carolinensis, virens muricata. Carolina red oak, prickly when young. Quercus
castaneae foliis, procera arbor. Chestnut leaved oak of a large size. Juglans
alba, fructu ovato compresso profunde insculpio durissimo, cavitate intus
minima. White walnut, or hickory with egg shaped fruit closely grasped, and
buried, in a very hard shell, with the smallest inward cavities Juglans
Virginiana alba minor. Small Virginian hickory tree. Nux juglans nigra. Black
walnut. Fagus humilis (seu castanea, pumila) racemosa fructu parvo; in capsulis
echinatis, singulo. Smallest fagus (or dwarf chestnut) having the fruit in
bunches, and contained singly in a prickly pod, vulgo chinkapin. Fagus foliis
lanceolatis ovatis, acute serratis subtus tomentosis, amentis filiformi
nodosis, fructu in capsulis echinatis, duplice. Fagus, with leaves between egg
and spear shaped, sharply serrated and woolly underneath, slender knotty
catkins, and a double fruit in a prickly pod. Morus foliis subtus tomentosis
amentis longis, dioecis. Mulberry with the under part of the leaves woolly,
having long catkins; and trees of different sexes. Morus, loti arboris instan,
ramosa; foliis amplissimis. Mulberry resembling the lote-tree full of branches;
and large leaves. Morus foliis palmatis, cortice filamentosa, fructu nigro,
radice tinctoria. Mulberry with hand shaped leaves a thready bark, black fruit,
and the root containing a dye. Diospyros guajacana. Parsimmon. Liquidambar,
styraciflua; aceris folio. Maple leaved liquidamber, yielding storax or sweet
gum. Borassus frondibus palmatis (seu) palma coccifera latifolio, fructu atro
purpureo, omnium minimo. Borassus, with hand or fan shaped leaves (or) scarlet
yielding palm, with broad leaves, and a deep purple fruit which is the least of
all. Palma humilis (seu) chamaeriphis. Dwarf palm, or chamaeriphis. Laurus
foliis acuminatis, baccis caeruleis, pedicellis longis rubris insidentibus.
Laurel, with pointed leaves, and blue berries, sitting on long red foot stalks.
Laurus (seu cinnamomum sylvestre) Americana. The wild American cinnamon Laurel.
Laurus (seu) cornus mas odorata, folio trefido, margin plano, sassafras dicta.
The male scented cornel or laurel tree, with a trifid leaf, having plain edges,
called sassafras. Liliodendron tulipifera, tripartito, aceris folio, media
lacinia velut abscissa. Tulip bearing liliodendron, with a tripartite maple
leaf, having the middle piece seemingly cut off. Magnolia maximo store, foliis
subtus ferrugineis. Magnolia, with the largest flower, and the lower side of
the leaves ferrugineous. Magnolia glauea laurifolio subtus albicante. Magnolia,
with a gray laurel leaf whitish below. Magnolia flore albo, folio majore
acuminato baud albicante. Magnolia, with a white flower, a larger pointed leaf,
and not whitish. Magnolia tripetala amplissimo flore albo, fructu coccineo.
Magnolia, with a very large white flower of three petals; and a scarlet fruit.
Citrus (seu) malus aurantia acida. The sour orange. First found growing near
Pensacola, by a free Negro (Pompey) formerly belonging to Chief Justice
Clifton, which Negro in his own way is a curious herba^st.
Illicium floridanum (seu) anisum stellatum. Starry anniseed, or skimmi.
Kalmia, foliis glabris lanceolatis; et corolla campanulae lypocraterique forma.
Kalmia, with smooth lanceolate leaves, and a corolla between salver and bell
shaped. Ficus Americana, citri folio, fructu parvo purpureo. American fig, with
a citron leaf and a small purple fruit. Coccoleba (seu) prunus maritima
racemosa, folio subrot^ndo, ve^oso fructu caeruleo quasi purpureo. Coccoloba,
or sea side plumb, growing in bunches, an almost round veined leaf, and the
fruit blue, inclined to purple. Coccoloba foliis oblongis ovatis venosis, uvis
mineribus corinthiacis. Coccoloba, with oblong egg shaped veined leaves, with
pointed grape like fruit less than currants. Zantoxylum spinosum album, quasi
fraxini folio, evonymi fructu capsulari. Tooth ach tree, with white spines
almost an ash leaf, and the capsulum like the fruit of the spindle tree.
The savannah's are in this country of two very different kinds, the one is to
be found in the pine lands; and notwithstanding the black appearance of the
soil, they are as much a white sand as the higher lands round them; true it is
that clay is very often much nearer to their surface, than in the higher pine
lands; they are a kind of sinks or drains to those higher lands, and their low
situation only prevents the growth of pines in them. In wet weather the roads
leading through them are almost impassable. On account of their producing some
species of grass of a better kind than the wire grass, they are very often
styled meadows, and i believe, if they could be improved by draining them,
without taking away all their moisture, very useful grass might be raised in
them; but on draining them completely, they prove to be as arrant a sand as any
in this country. These savannahs often have spots in them more low than common,
and filled with water; they are over grown with different species of the
crataegus, or hawthorn, as also very often a species of shrub much resembling
the Laurus in appearance, but a^ i never had an opportunity of seeing it in
blossom, i cannot describe it, so as to ascertain the genus it belongs to; in
its fruit it is widely different from any of the laurel kind, that have fallen
under my inspection; it is a bacca with several cells full of an agreeable acid
like the common lime from the West Indies; it is of the size of a large
pigeon's egg, but more oblong; we also find it on the low banks of rivers in
Georgia, and know it by the name of the Ogeechee lime. The other savannahs
differ very widely from these, and are chiefly to be found in West Florida,
they consist of a high ground often with small gentle risings in them, some are
of a vast extent, and on the west of Mississippi, they are said to be many days
journey over, the l^rgest within my knowledge is on the road from the Chactaw
to the Chicasaw nation, and is in length near forty miles over from north to
south, and from one end to the other, a horizon, similar to that at sea,
appears; there is generally a rivulet at one or other, or at each end of the
savannahs, and some come to the river banks; in one or two of them i have seen
some very small remains of ancient huts, by which i judge, they were formerly
inhabited by indians; the soil here is very fertile; in some i have seen fossil
shells in great numbers, in others, flint, in others again, some chalk and
marl; it is remarkable, that cattle are very fond of the grasses growing here;
the Chicasaw old field, as it is termed, is a clear demonstration of this, for
the cattle will come to it from any distance, even when the grass scarcely
appears; and in all the circumjacent tract, are abundance of both winter and
summer canes to be found, on which they might more luxuriously feed. In these
savannahs if a well or pond is dug, the water has a very strong nitrous taste.
I have seen some very curious plants in this kind of ground, but there was no
time for my examining any of them, except a nondescript of the genus Tagetes of
a fine crimson color. I shall in some measure describe and give the figure of
this plant. The only high growth i have seen in these savannahs are some
willows and other aquatic plants, by the side of rivulets, in or near them;
some of the smaller kind of oaks and a few small junipers are also to be seen
in those places, the fragaria or strawberry is very common in them.

Swamps are also found of two kinds, river and inland swamps, those on the
rivers are justly esteemed the most valuable, and the more so, if they are in
the tide way, because then the river water may be at pleasure let on or kept
out, with much less labor and expense than in the other kinds; these lands are
the sources of riches in these provinces, because where they lay between the
sandy pine barrens, they produce that valuable staple Rice, and on the
Mississippi (where much of this river land is situated a great deal higher,
than the common run of it in Carolina, and other similar countries) this soil
is the best adapted for corn and indigo, yet known; some of these grounds are
clay, others sand, and others again partake of both; when used for rice, it
matters not which of these soils they are made up of, but I believe, were the
sandy ones to be quite drained, they would prove barren enough; the use of
water on rice is more to suppress the growth of noxious weeds and grass, which
would otherwise stifle the grain, than for promoting the growth of the rice
itself, for none of the grasses can stand the water, but rice does, as long as
it is not totally immersed, therefore it is, that after weeding, the planter
(if he has it convenient) lets on water to about half the height of his grain;
by swamps then in general is to be understood any low ground subject to
inundations, distinguished from marshes, in having a large growth of timber,
and much underwood, canes, reeds, wythes, vines, briars and such like, so
matted together, that they are in a great measure impenetrable to man or beast;
the produce of these swamps if sandy is more generally the cypress tree, which
is here of three species; two of these grow in this kind of land; the common
sort grows to an enormous size, but none so large, as what is seen on or near
the banks of the Mississippi, the other kind vulgarly miscalled white cedar, is
in great quantities near Pensacola, particularly in the swamps of Chester
River; this likewise grows to a tree which may be ranked among those of the
first magnitude: If these swamps are not altogether sand, but mixed with clay,
and other earth, their produce is in general.

Cupressus Americana foliis deciduis. American deciduous cypress Cupressus
semper virens seu cupressus Thyoides. Evergreen cypress, vulgo white cedar.
Quercus alba aquatica salicis folio breviore. White swamp oak, with a short
willow leaf, vulgo water oak. Quercus folio longo angusto salicis. Oak with a
long narrow willow leaf, vulgo willow oak. Quercus alba foliis superne
latioribus, opposite sinuatis, sinubus angulisque obtusis. White oak, with the
upper leaves broad, oppositely sinuated, the sinusses having obtuse angles, or
the true white oak. Ilex floridana, foliis dentatis, baccis rubris. Floridan
holly, with indented leaves and red berries. Acer foliis compositis, floribus
racemosis. Maple, with composite leaves and the flowers in bunches. Acer foliis
quinque partito palmatis acuminato dentatis. Maple, with a palmated leaf of
five parts sharply indented. Acer foliis quinquelobis subdentatis, subtus
glaucis pedunculis simplissimis aggregatis. Maple, with a five lobed leaf
faintly indented, their lower part of a blue cast, with simply aggregate flower
stalks. Fraxinus floridana, foliis angustioribus utrinque acuminatis pendulis.
Floridan ash, with narrow hanging leaves on both ends pointed. Nyssa foliis
latis acuminatis et dentatis fructu aeleagui majore. Tupelo, with broad pointed
and indented leaves, with a fruit like the largest wild olive. Populus alba
majoribus foliis subcordatis. Great white popular, with almost heart shaped
leaves. Populus nigra folio maximo, gemmis balsamum odoratissimum fundentibus.
Black popular, with the largest leaves, whose buds exude an odoriferous gum or
balsam. Platanus occidentalis foliis lobatis. Western plantane, with lobated
leaves (vulgo button wood, water beech, or sycamore. Salix folio angustissimo,
longissimo subtus albo. Willow, with narrow long leaves, being white below.
Bignonia foliis simplicibus cordatis, flore sordide albo, intus maculis
caeruleis et purpureis irregulariter adspersis; silique longissima et
angustissima. Bignonia, or trumpet flower, with single heart shaped leaves,
flowers of a dirty white, through whose inside blue and purple spots are
irregularly scattered, having a long and narrow seed pod (vulgo) catalpa.
Bignonia, fraxini foliis. Bignonia, with an ash leaf. Laurus foliis acuminatis,
baccis caeruleis; pedicellis longis rubris insidentibus. Laurel, with a pointed
leaf, blue berries sitting on long footstalks. Crataegus fructu parvo rubro.
Hawthorn, with a small red fruit. Genista capsulo aromatico. Broom, with an
aromatic seed pod. Vitis nigra, vulpina dicta. Black vine, called fox grape.
Vitis foliis api, uva corymbosa purpura minore. Parsley leaved vine, with small
purple grapes in a corymbus. Vitis vinifera silvestris. Wild wine vine. Betula
nigra foliis rhombeis ovatis acuminatis duplicato serratis Black birch; with
ovate rhomboid leaves, being doubly serrated. Coriaria foliis gladiatis
serratis (seu) nicotiana Indiorum. Shumac, with serrated sword like leaves, or
Savages tobacco, Rhus vernix (seu) toxicodendron foliis alatis fructu
rhomboide. Shumac or poison tree, with winged leaves, and a rhomboidal fruit.
Juglans alba aquatica, cortice glabro, arbor humilis; fructu amaro. White swamp
hickory, with a smooth bark being a dwarf tree and a bitter fruit. Sambucus
racemosa-acinis nigris, caula herbacea. Elder, with bunches of black berries,
and an herbaceous stalk. Sambucus cymis quinquepartitis foliis subpinnatis.
Elder, with the cyma of five parts and imperfectly winged leaves. Magnolia,
glauca lauri folio subtus albicante. Magnolia, with a green laurel leaf whitish
below- Fagus foliis ovatis obsolete serratis; fructu triangulo. Beech, with
almost egg shaped slightly serrated leaves and a triangular fruit. Myrica (seu)
myrtus (brabantica similis) floridana, baccisera, baccis sessilis; fructu
cerifero. Florida berry-bearing myrtle, the berries squat; and yielding wax.
Canna foliis enervibus. Reed, with very week leaves Gleditsia spinosa, spinis
triplicibus axillaribus, capsula ovali, unicum semen claudente. Locust, with
triple axillary spines, an oval seed pod enclosing a single seed. Salix folio
angustissimo serrato glabro, petiolis dentatis glandu losis. Willow, with very
narrow smooth serrated leaves, the stalks dentated and full of glandules.
The back or inland swamps answer in situation to what are called the meadows
or savannahs (among the pine lands) their soil being rich, occasions them to
bear trees. The true back swamps, that are in wet seasons full of standing
water, bear scarcely any other tree, than a variety of that species of Nyssa
distinguished by Botanists by the name of Nyssa foliis latis acuminatis non
dentatis fructu aeleagni minore, pedunculis multiflore, vulgarly called bottle
arsed tupelo; the continuance of water on this kind of ground, is the reason
why scarce any undergrowth is found here. There are swamps also called back
swamps, but they are either at the head of some stream, or have more or less
water running through them; these are generally easy to drain. I would have
confined my description of back swamps to the first or standing ones, and
ranked the last (which i think might properly be done) among the river swamps,
but i was apprehensive, that it might have displeased some person, who
entertains the more established opinion; these last described often are found
mere cypress swamps, in that case, they are almost impassable, by reason of the
cypress spurs, even when dry, and for horses, they are extremely dangerous, as
they often get staked on those spurs. This vegetable monster i shall hereafter
describe; i do not remember to have ever seen it mentioned any where; when this
kind of swamp is not over grown with cypress alone, its product is the same as
that of the river swamps above mentioned, and in that case the soil is
certainly good; these last when properly drained, are the best land for the
cultivation of hemp.

The marshes are next to be considered, they are of four kinds, two in the
salt, and two in the fresh water; they are either soft or hard, the soft
marshes consisting of a very wet clay or mud, are as yet of no use, without a
very great expense to drain them; the hard ones are made up of a kind of marly
clay, which in dry seasons is almost burned up, true it is they afford a
pasture sufficient to keep any gramenivorous animals in good order; but the
milk and flesh of them in seasons, when the cattle near the sea side cannot
find any other food, and consequently feed on this alone, are of so horrible a
taste, that no stranger to the country can make use of them. Hard marshes in
general are such, whose soil has too much solidity, for the water to disunite
its particles by penetrating them; the soft marshes are those, whose spungy
nature allows the water easily to penetrate them; i have seen of both kinds on
Turtle River, about twenty miles up, in which, at about eight or ten feet below
the surface, there are numbers of cypress and other stumps remaining, but
chiefly cypress, and many of the fallen trees crossing each other; this is only
to be seen at low water, and to the height Arena aquatica sylvestris
above named; these trees are covered with a rich nitrous muddy soil; but i beg
leave to expect, that better Naturalists may explain this extraordinary
appearance; i believe them ruins of ancient forests on which the sea has
encroached. The whole appearance of this river seems to indicate such an
ancient and unrecorded hurricane on this part of the coast.


The marshes on fresh water are in every respect similar to those on the salt,
except, that they are not impregnated with the saline particles, of which the
first are very replete; therefore the hard ones, with little trouble, are
adapted to cultivation; the soft ones cost a considerable deal more of expense,
to render them fit to answer this purpose, but when so drained as to answer
this end, they certainly are by no means inferior to any land in this country;
in the lower part of these marshes grows a kind of hitherto undescribed grain,
of which the western Indians make a great use for bread, i never could see it
in blossom, therefore, cannot describe it, but joined to this is a figure of
it, nearly equal in size to one eighth of the common growth of the plant when
in perfection, it is known by the name of wild oats.

This kind of land produces rice very willingly, but if sufficiently made dry,
always proves the best for corn, indigo and hemp; i have seen at Mr.
Brewington's plantation, about three miles below savannah in Georgia, very good
corn and rice together, with the two kinds of melons, and cucumbers in great
perfection on this species of soil.

I shall next describe the bay and cypress galls; these intersect the pine
lands, and are seldom of any breadth; the bay galls are properly water courses,
covered with a spungy earth mixed with a kind of matted vegetable fibers; they
are so very unstable, as to shake for a great extent round a person, who,
standing on some part thereof, moves himself slightly up and down; they often
prove fatal to cattle, and sometimes i have been detained for above an hour at
the narrowest passes of them, they being so dangerous to cross, that frequently
a horse plunges in, so as to leave only his head in sight; their natural
produce is a stately tree called loblolly bay, Hyperium, seu G^rdonia
Lasianthus.
and many different vines, briars, thorny withs, and on their edges a species
of red or summer cane, which together combine to make this ground impenetrable,
as if nature had thus intended to prevent the destruction of cattle in these
dismal bogs, which would be particularly fatal to many of them in spring, when
the early produce of grass and green leaves in these galls, might entice them
into this danger, was not such a natural obstacle in their way; as these have
generally vent, they are sometimes drained, and rice planted therein, which for
one or two years thrives there tolerably, but this ground is so replete with
vitriolic principles, that the water standing in them is impregnated with acid,
insomuch, that i have tasted it sour enough to have persuaded a person,
unacquainted with this circumstance, that it was an equal portion of vinegar
and water mixed together, therefore it requires to lay open at least one year
before it will bear any thing, and they generally, by laying open four or five
years without any other draining, become quite dry, and might be advantageously
used for pasture ground.

The cypress galls differ from these, in being a firm sandy soil, in having no
vitriolic taste in the water, and very seldom vent; i never knew these made use
of for the purpose of planting, and the cypress they produce, is a dwarf kind,
not fit for use, being very much twisted and often hollow, there is no
undergrowth here, but in dry seasons some tolerable grass. Through all the
above species of land we find a distribution of very fine clay, fit for
manufacturing; the finest i ever saw is at the village on Mobile Bay, where i
have seen the inhabitants, in imitation of the Savages, have several rough made
vessels thereof; there is also a great variety of nitrous and bituminous
earths, fossills, marles, boles, magnetic and other iron ore, lead, coal,
chalk, slate, free stone, chrystals, and white topazes, these last in the beds
of rivers; ambergris is sometimes found; one Stirrup a few years ago found a
piece of a very enormous size on one of the keys; there is also much of a
natural pitch or asphalthus, vulgarly called mungiac, thrown up by the sea: The
uplands also afford a metallic substance appearing like musket bullets, which
on being thrown into the fire go off in smoke with a very sulphurous stench.

The water in this country is very various as to taste, quality and use, there
are salt, brackish, nitrous, sulphurous, and good fresh springs in most parts
of this country, as well as salt and fresh lakes, lagoons and rivers, the
rivers also vary in many respects, and so does the sea as well in the color,
and clearness of the water as in its degree of saltness; the water of St.
Mary's and Nassau, and all the brooks that run into them is very good,
wholesome, and well tasted, the color in the rivers is dark, as in all the
American rivers of the southern district; St. John's is a curiosity among
rivers indeed, this rises at a small distance from the lagoon called Indian
river, somewhere in or near the latitude of 27, perhaps out of the lake
Mayacco, which i have reason to believe really exists, and is the head of the
river St. Lucia, as i am told by a credible Spanish hunter, who had been
carried there by way of this last river; from its origin it runs through wide
extended plains and marshes, till near the latitude 28, where it approaches the
lagoon much, it then continues its course with a considerable current
northward, and glides through five great lakes, of which the last, called Lake
George, is by much the most considerable; in this last lake is about eight feet
water, it is twenty miles long and about eleven or twelve wide; all these lakes
and the river in general is very pleasant; endless orange groves are found
here, and indeed on every part of the river; below these the river grows wider,
loses it current, and has in some places none, in others a retrograde one, when
yet lower down it is again in its true direction; the banks of this river are
very poor land. and exhibit in a number of places sad monuments of the folly
and extravagant ideas of the first European adventurers and schemers, and the
villainy of their managers; the tide does not effect this river very far up. In
many places high up this river are found some extraordinary springs, which at a
small distance from the river on both sides, rush or boil out of the earth, at
once becoming navigable for boats, and from twenty five to forty yards wide,
their course is seldom half a mile before they meet the river; their water is
(contrary to that of the river) clear, so as to admit of the seeing a small
piece of money at the depth of ten feet or more; they smell strong of sulphur,
and whatever is thrown in them becomes soon incrusted with a white fungous
matter; their taste is bituminous, very disagreeable, and they in my opinion
cause the green cloudings we see on the surface of the water of this river, and
make it putrid, and so unwholesome as experience has taught us it is. I have no
sufficient ground to decide upon another circumstance, which i am told, viz:
That when rice is overflown with this river water, it kills it; above these
springs the water of the river is good: This river is from one and a half to
three miles wide, except at the house of Mr. Roll, who has here made an odd
attempt toward settling and making an estate in as complete a sandy desert as
can be found; just above this, it is full of islands, exhibiting every where a
very romantic appearance; there is a fine piece of water, called Dun's Lake,
this is about nine miles from the river, eastward from this place, this empties
itself by a stream into the river; another called the Doctor's Lake, is on the
west side, about sixty miles from the mouth, we see a variety of aquatic plants
floating thereon. In my journey by land from the Bay of Tampe across the
Peninsula to St. Augustine, i crossed twenty three miles from east to west of
miserable barren sand hills, the grain of the sand is very small and
ferrugineous; these hills rise a considerable height; on them is some growth of
very small pines, and a very humble kind of oak grows so thick, that with the
addition of some wythes and other plants, to me utterly unknown, they render it
absolutely impenetrable. in this Ridge, which, as far as i can learn, extends
from North to South, between the rivers St. John and Ocklaw-wawhaw, for about
an hundred and fifty miles* having no where any water in its whole extent, and
i am told, that where we crossed it, is its narrowest place; my Indian guide
had the precaution to carry water for ourselves and horses, which proved very
serviceable as it was a verv hot day, no growth of trees to shade us, and such
a burning sand for the sun to reflect on; i leave the reader to judge what we
suffered, though it was but a short distance over, both ourselves and beasts
often experienced the necessity of carrying water; what must traveling over
this place be in a hot day, where it is forty or more miles wide?

Before i leave St. John's River, i must not forget the river running from
south to north, called Pablo: This originates at a small distance from St.
Marks or North River, and empties into St. John's at a small distance from the
mouth. The water of this river is good, so is the land on it; and it is thought
that a communication with St. Mark's or the North River might be effected
without much difficulty: this would open an inland navigation by canoes or
boats, all the way from Carolina to near the Musketo.

The river St. Mary although it is said to originate in the Aehanphanaekin
swamp has a current of fine clear and wholesome water supplied from the pine
lands through which it flows, with many fine springs, runs, and rivulets of
very clear water, Nassau has also the same blessings, but does not spring far
distant from the sea. On Amelia Island near the sea, is a very good spring,
which makes a fine stream for some miles, dividing the island almost into two;
but below the spring its water is not commendable. On the beach between St.
John's and St. Augustine, at or near a place called the Horseguards, there are
three good springs running into the sea, and in every part where the beach is
clear sand, water is obtained by digging. About four miles north of St.
Augustine rises St. Sebastian's Creek, being a good fresh spring, it soon joins
a creek in salt marshes, and at a small distance from town it becomes very
large and deep; it empties into St. Anastasia's Sound two miles south of St.
Augustine, making a Peninsula of this territory nearly in form of a crescent;
three miles farther south is the mouth of the river St. Nicholas not very
considerable; St. Cecilia in the same sound, the North west, south of the
Matanca and Penon; the Tomoke and Spruce Creek in the Musketo Lagoon, and in
short every river and creek in the country except those above named, are
excellent wholesome water; thus much i suppose will suffice as to the nature
and quality of the water. All the rivers and springs in West Florida are good.

The aborigines of the country come most naturally under our next
consideration, no one is ignorant, that the epithet of indians is given to
those people, though no doubt, the French name of savage is a much more proper
one, as the manners of the red men are in every respect such as betray that
disposition, and show the savage through the best wrought veil of civilization;
we might call them Americans, as the inhabitants of the old world are each
distinguished by a name expressive of, or relative to the quarters, from which
they respectively originate, but this would be confounding them with the other
natives, as well white as black, which i think by no means reasonable.

Oldmixon with all his failings is undoubtedly the only writer, who speaks with
truth and pertinence on this subject; all other English, French, and Spanish
authors, which have fallen in my way (and they are not a few) have made of this
story a confused heap of nonsense and falsehood; i shall relate what i know and
have found from real experience among four or five nations, and as i can vouch
for the similarity, that will be found among them, i believe my reader will be
of my opinion, that from one end of America to the other, the red people are
the same nation and draw their origin from a different source, than either
Europeans, Chinese, Negroes, Moors, Indians, or any other different species of
the human genus, of which i think there are many species, as well as among most
other animals, and that they are not a variety occasioned by a commixture of
any of the above species must also appear.

The above account will perhaps raise a conjecture that i believe the red men
are not come from the westward out of the east of Asia; i do not believe it, i
am firmly of opinion, that God created an original man and woman in this part
of the globe, of different species from any in the other parts, and if per
chance in the Russian dominions, there are a people of similar make and
manners, is it not more natural to think they were colonies from the numerous
nations on the continent of America, than to imagine, that from the small
comparative number of those Russian subjects, such a vast country should have
been so numerously peopled, and by what we know from the geographical
discoveries that have been made within this century, it was undoubtedly easier
for these people to have crossed out of America into Asia, than it was for the
white people we find in Labrador to come from Lapland, yet who will deny that a
Laplander and Eskimaux are of the same original stock; add to this, that i have
both sacred and profane history, besides daily experience on my side to prove,
that population, as well as all other things we find in nature, have always
moved from the eastward, and still continue so to do, why then should we insist
on one part of this system to move in a retrograde way, when for a further
proof we find, by what we learn from the savages that have been far to the
northwest, that some white people answering to the Japonese, sometimes come on
that coast, but do not stay, nor have ever attempted colonization.

But alas! what a people do we find them, a people not only rude and
uncultivated, but incapable of civilization: a people that would think
themselves degraded in the lowest degree, were they to imitate us in any
respect whatever, and that look down on us and all our manners with the highest
contempt: and of whom experience has taught us, that on the least opportunity
they will return like the dog to his vomit. See there the boasted, the admired
state of nature, in which these brutes enjoy and pass their time here! How
justly did the above named author exclaim: -- Let the learned say all the fine
things that wit, eloquence, and art can inspire them with, of the simplicity of
pure nature, and its beauty and innocence, the savage wretches of America are
an instance, that this innocence is a downright stupidity, and this pretended
beauty a deformity, which puts man, the Lord of the creation, on an equal foot
(yea below) the brute beasts of the fields and forests.

In describing a people an historian is obliged to speak as they generally are;
Dr. Blackwell, drawing consequences from what he imagined a state of nature to
be (and what i believe it may have been) among most of the nations on the old
continent, says:

In the infancy of states, men generally resemble the public constitution,
they have only that turn, which the rough culture of accidents, perhaps dismal
enough, through which they have passed, could give them, they are ignorant and
undesigning, governed by fear, and superstition its companion; there is a vast
void in their minds, they know not what will happen, nor according to what
tenor things will take their course, every new object finds them unprepared,
and they gaze and stare like infants taking in their first ideas of light.

How opposite is the savage, he is cunning and designing, knows no fear, nor
has he any idea of religion to make him superstitious, on the contrary, the
pretended conjurer who lives with him, runs a perpetual risque of his life, he
has no void in his mind, but is very deliberate and careful in his mischief and
cruelty; the study of what may occur in the next war or hunting season always
employs him, he can ever so plan his schemes, as to be certain of his future
safety, and success; without this last he neither undertakes nor risks any
thing; new objects are but a momentary surprise to him, and his gazing and
staring always end in sovereign contempt.

But to demonstrate more clearly the contrast between a savage and the people
of the old continent, i beg leave to observe a few things, which have fallen
under my inspection and consideration, which i apprehend will be thought
pertinent to this purpose: A savage comes into this world with all the
possibility of opposition to us; his mother on her approaching labor, retires
from all company, aid, or assistance, into some lonesome wood, and there
without perceptible pain or inconvenience, disburthens herself, goes into cold
water to cleanse herself and her offspring, and returns to her daily vocation.

A savage has the most determined resolution against laboring or tilling the
ground, the slave his wife must do that, and a boy of seven or eight years old
is ashamed to be seen in his mother's company. No greater distance can be
thrown on a man than calling him by the odious epithet of Woman; what other
nation do we find so absolutely neglecting agriculture? What people are ashamed
to be seen eating or drinking in company with the fairer sex?

Our women carry their children with their faces toward their own, a she
savage puts the back of hers toward her own back. When we make fire, we pile
the fuel parrallel to each other; the savage puts his wood in a circular form,
lights the central ends, and by the help of one of the sticks, which he shoves
always to the center, he keeps it in.

We make war in an open brave way, a savage by hiding himself surprises; our
prisoners are sure of life, the prisoner of a savage is sure to die by cruel
tortures. When we take a sweat, we keep ourselves warm with the utmost care; a
savage with his open pores, plunges head long into the almost frozen river, or
into a hole in the ice if quite frozen.

A savage man discharges his urine in a sitting posture, and a savage woman
standing, i need not tell how opposite this is to our common practice.

A savage never eats salted meats, nor boils any thing in salted water, though
he has salt in abundance, but when he has been a long while from salt and then
gets it, he will frequently eat a pound of it without any thing else. A savage
either buries none of his dead, or if he does he puts the body in a sitting or
standing posture; in a word, if they had always studied to be in contrast with
us, they could not be more so, than nature has made them.

O Deus! homines et homines creavisti. All savages, with whom i have been
acquainted, are, generally speaking, well made, of a good stature, and neatly
limbed; crooked, lame, or otherwise deformed persons are seldom or never seen
among these people; and if per chance we find a savage laboring under these
misfortunes, we always find them accidental, never natural. Their color
resembles that of cinnamon, with a copperish cast; they are born white, but
retain that hue a very short time; their hair is lank, strong, black, and long;
they prevent the growth of what little beard nature has given them, by plucking
it out by the roots; they never suffer any hair to grow on any part of the body
except the head, their eyes are black, lively and piercing, and they are
blessed with an amazing faculty of discovering objects at a vast distance;
their teeth are very good, and to the last they retain them, being never
subject to the tooth ach; they are strong and active, patient in hunger and the
fatigue of hunting and journeying, but impatient and incapable of bearing
labor, they are incredibly swift of foot; their discourse is generally of war,
hunting, or indecency; their women are handsome, well made, only wanting the
color and cleanliness of our ladies, to make them appear lovely in every eye;
their strength is great, and they labor hard, carrying very heavy burdens a
great distance; they are lascivious, and have no idea of chastity in a girl,
but in married women, incontinence is severely punished; a savage never
forgives that crime. They are capable of an attachment, rather than a
friendship; addicted to lying in a high degree; their seeming candor and
simplicity is an effect of dissimulation; they know how to save appearances,
and will always find ways to cover their knavish, thieving tricks; their
notions of faith and honor are such as make them violate their word of
promise, even when they are in treaty, unless compelled to be true by fear or
force. They are brutal and have not the most distant idea of decorum; without
taste they are terrible drunkards, in which last state, there is no villainy new
crime, they will not commit, and when they recover their senses, throw the
blame on the liquor, holding themselves entirely excused; no religion of any
kind can we trace among them. Possessed of indifference and want of sentiment,
they drag themselves through a kind of life, which would make us pass our days
very irksomely, and tire us in a short time with the disagreeable similitude of
our hours; in a word, they have nothing in their way of life to tempt a man of
the least reflection, to envy them their miserable state of nature.

But with all these bad qualities, they have one virtue, which is hospitality,
and this they carry to excess; a savage will share his last ounce of meat with
a visitant stranger. What travelers have related of their giving their
daughters to transient persons, is not true, and it is not till after some
acquaintance, that they will give a white man, what they call a wife, unless he
chooses an abandoned prostitute, which are here to be found as well as
elsewhere. Among the nations, which i have frequented, a young stranger (led
away by the notion of this traveller's story) that would attempt, on his first
acquaintance, to ask a man for his daughter, might pay dear for it. The
Chactaws, who have a greater idea of a meum and tuum than any of their
neighbors, are not so hospitable as they; but although they will on this
principle require pay for even the least morsel, they set before one, yet the
same idea of property has taken off much of their savage dispositions in many
other cases.

I cannot think it foreign to my subject to mention, before i proceed to the
particular description of each nation, something farther about the origin of
the native Americans: Great pains have been taken to prove these people
descended from the Phaenicians; among others i find an anonimous Gentleman, who
gravely tells us, that Phaenicians or Erythreans in Greek, carry the same sense
as Esau or Edom in Hebrew, both meaning red, hence that nation was red, so are
the savages, ergo, they are the same people; as ridiculous as this argument is,
the pains taken to show that the extensive navigation of the Phaenicians
amounts to a proof of their having crossed the Atlantic to America, is no less
void of sense, although far fetched annotations are made use of to prove their
naval power, by Cambyses being obliged to renounce his design on Carthage, by
reason of the Phaenicians refusing to put to sea, yet neither that, nor the
proof of their having built Leptis, Utica, Hippo, Adrumetum, on the African
continent, nor Calis, and Tartessus in Europe, or their colonizations in
Iberia, and Lybia, nor all the power ascribed to them by Curtius, seems in the
least to indicate any transit to this western world.

Equally absurd are the reveries of Comtaeus, of those who construe the island
discovered by the Phaenicians (which Diodorus Siculus mentions L. 6 C. 7, and
the passages of Pliny L. 5 C. 1 and Pomponius Mela L. 1 C. 4) likewise the
common wealth of the alegorical dialogue between Midas and Silenus by
Theopompus, and the quotation of Pausanias concerning the discovery of the
Satyrides by Euphemius of Caria) into America; also Bossu father Laffiteau, du
Pratz, and others, as the refutation of these would be uninteresting and
therefore tedious, i shall content myself with having only mentioned them, and
proceed to take some notice of the more general hypothesis; that the savages
are the dispersions of the ten lost tribes of Israel.

We are told, that the Americans agree in many of their customs with the Jews;
but in which? We see not the smallest similarity in any of their ways, unless
the separation of women among the Chicasaws, at the time of their Catamenia;
but not to urge how naturally this fashion might point itself out, and its
being confined to one small tribe only, let us argue a little on the jewish
grand and characteristic ceremony of circumcision, of which the boldest
genealogist in this way, cannot find any the least mark, nor traces among those
people. How have the jews neglected to introduce this sign of the covenant
here, when they have made it obtain among so many of the Easterns where they
lived even as slaves and exiles; and they always thought their salvation
dependent thereon? How many tribes in Africa still retain that custom, though
without any other of the Isralitish rites, which they have forgot? but where
can we discover even the most distant appearance of this ceremony in America?

Just so is it with that pretended migration to Assareth, as mentioned in the
fourth book of Esdras, in the thirteenth chapter; but without insisting on the
apocryphal quality of this evidence, i would only ask, why this Assareth should
be more America, than any other far distant country? And how they found their
way by the Euphrates to this continent? Further it is evident, that St. Jerome
(who flourished under Theodosius in the latter end of the fourth century, lived
in Asia, and held a close correspondence with the Jews, for the sake of
learning their language) plainly tells us in his Ezech: L. 5, and Jerem: L. 6,
that those very ten tribes, were then groaning under the severe yoke of
slavery, in the cities of Media and Persia; this i judge to be proof enough to
invalidate this journey to Assareth, and rank it along with the fables of the
loss of the whole law, the confinement of souls in subterraneous apartments,
and with the childish tales of Behemoth and Leviathan in the same fourth book
of Esdras.

Yet, as a farther proof of the falsehood of this American expedition, by the
ten tribes of Israel, i would beg leave to ask my readers, whether they can
imagine, that so prodigious a migration could possibly happen at a time of the
most desperate wars, and desolations in the very countries through which they
must necessarily pass, for it is evident, that since St. Jerome's time,
although the Persians had again regained their empire, yet for several
centuries together, they were constantly warring with the Romans, Indians, and
other Eastern nations, and lastly with the Saracens. 'Till the famous Tartarian
expedition under Zengis Chan, this whole country swam in the blood of its
natives, and before this period, the Grecian wars, the conquests of Alexander,
with the divisions of his captains at his death, furnished as little
opportunity for this journey, which also must have been strangely overlooked,
by such a number of historians of credit, as flourished during the above space
of time. I could with as much force of argument invalidate Emanuel de Moras (a
Spaniard;) who, to prove that America is peopled from Carthage, and by the
Jews, makes numerous far fetched comparisons, of the manners of these nations
and the Brazilians; nor can i think, that after this, any of the favorers of
this Jewish ancestry will insist, that the natives of America are descended
from the other two tribes, since they were not only not allowed to see the land
of their fathers, even in quality of travelers, but on pain of death, were
they forbid to assemble in large companies, which it was however necessary they
should do for such a migration; but i am afraid my reader, as well as myself,
is by this time tired of so much argumentation against so silly an Hypothesis.

No less idle is the argument used by Grotius concerning the Mexicans telling
the Spaniards, that they came out of the North, where he thinks to find the
Norwegian descent in the city Norumbega, but who can find in North America,
traces of any ancient city at all? That the Americans divide their time by
nights (or sleeps, as they style them) is true, also their dipping new born
infants in cold water, their going naked, and their eating separate from the
women, with many other customs of the savages, similar to the ancient manners
of the Germans, but this only proves to me, that in the times of Tacitus and
the other Roman historians, the Teutonick nations were in as savage a state of
nature, as we now see the Americans; a sameness in color, and stature, as well
as, or rather than similarity of Languages is to me a requisite proof, and for
that reason i believe, that the Eskimaux came from Lapland, but by what
accident, we are ignorant of, and so we might guess at some eventual passage of
the red savages, were we able to trace any similarity between them and any
nation of the old world, but we see none; yet all the islands of America, even
New Zealand, are peopled by the same race as this vast continent; therefore i
will rather suppose, that the savages, have sent out colonies, than that they
are a colony from any other part of the earth. The same Gentleman endeavors to
fetch the Peruvians from China, but with as little foundation in truth. Mr.
Powell's story of Maddock the Welshman's voyage, cannot be thought fit, to
ascribe a Welsh origin to the savages, because they could by no means either
grow to such numbers, nor degenerate so much in color, as they must have done,
in two centuries; yet even this has been made use of by a certain Dutch writer,
whose name i do not now recollect; and how unluckily does Bossu here bring
forth the black headed Pinguin, to prove that the Welsh word Pen-gwin, was
given to this bird for a name, by Maddock's followers, because Pen is head, and
gwyn is white, and Mr. Foster in his note on that passage, is as unlucky in
saying Penguin is Spanish for a fat bird.

I find a more powerful argument used by those who bring the savages from
Tartary; because i do not at all doubt, from my judgment of geography, that
America joins Asia; but the expedition of Hoccota, the son of Canguista, first
King of the Tartars, as mentioned by Michalon Lituanus, in his Ennead 9, L. 6,
which has likewise been construed to have reached America, is also too late to
allow them time to become so numerous a people; because this man lived about
the year 1240; but although i believe a possibility of the passage by land, yet
i cannot find, that there is any similarity in the persons of the North Eastern
Tarters* and the American savages, and much less in their manners; and if there
is between those of Kamschatka and America, i still think, that the first are
more naturally to be supposed a small colony from the latter, than that the
latter prodigious numerous people are sprung from so small a tribe as the
Kamschatkans; every one of the red men over the whole continent, and those who
still remain in a few of the islands, is exactly similar in person to his
neighbor, and their numbers are to this day vastly great, notwithstanding the
cruel depredations of the several European nations,

The contemptible light, in which Bossu endeavors to place the number of the
savages, is well confuted by Mr. Hutchin's account of the nations near our
settlements, who having mutually destroyed each other, and been destroyed by
the sword, and liquid fire of the Europeans, at a shocking rate, yet amount by
that Gentleman's moderate calculation, even at this day, to near three hundred
thousand souls; therefore it is not their small number, but the vast extent of
this continent, that causes their nomadic life.

But to treat more particularly against this notion, of the American descent
from the Tartars, who can suppose that their darling animal, as well for food,
labor, and war, as other uses, i mean the horse, should not have been brought
along with the colony? Who knows not, that the Tartars use most, and can least
spare this noble creature? Does not all their martial power consist in
horsemen? Does not their very maintenance depend on horses? Have we not
sufficient proof, that many Tartarian Lords keep hundreds of horses, and even
stable them? None are so poor as not to have two or three; when they shift
their abode, do not horses carry their tents and provisions? When all other
food fails them, garlic and mare's milk is their resource; the very blood out
of the veins of these animals supplies the place of an agreeable drink; what
stream so rapid which they do not cross on their horses backs, or by holding
their manes, and guiding them with a twig, while they swim at their side?
making a small raft of their baggage, they tie it to the tail, and thus cross
every river in their way; a horse's skin makes a boat to cross a very wide
river, lake, or even an arm of the sea; the supposed narrow division between
Asia and America, near Cape Tchukshi, could then by no means, be an obstacle to
the transportation of these animals the division of the several places, named
by Bossu, through earthquakes, is absurdly introduced, to prove that this
migration happened before such a convulsion of nature, which prevented the
return of any of these emigrants. A Tartarian army appears larger than it is,
on account of each man having two or three horses; and notwithstanding their
horses die by the sword, or are killed for food, yet many thousands are yearly
delivered to Russia, by the European Tartars only; this much premised, how had
the savages no horses on the arrival of the Spaniards? Had the Tartars
inhabited a country near America, the very horses would have increased so as to
come over to this continent; how many instances do we find even among the
settled provinces of America, of horses going wild! but the greatest proof,
that this must have infallibly happened, is to be found in South America, where
now many millions are found wild, in the great plains south of Brazil,
especially near Rio de la Plata; yet these take their origin from the Northern
America, and have crossed vast mountains; how came it then, that a dozen or two
of horsemen routed myriads of Americans? only one objection remains to be
confuted; there may be an arm of the sea between Asia and America, and this
colony came by water; but can it even then be supposed, that these people would
have forgot their favorite horses? or will any say that if the horses could
come by land, yet every climate does not maintain them; one summer would
suffice for the journey: A horse when traveling alone, is experienced to go
very fast forward on his journey, and we learn also from the same great teacher
(experience) that thousands of horses in North America, even breeding mares,
live in the woods in deep snows, through hard winters, without human
assistance; but no, these Tartars could not bring horses, nor other useful
animals, and yet a colony of Panthers, Lynxes, Wolves, Foxes, Otters, and other
destructive animals must be supposed to have found their way as well as these
emigrants. Here language is tortured into a proof; a certain Abraham a Mylis
has found out, that in the empire of Cathay, which lays nearest America, they
speak the Teutonic dialect, and this same empire being divided, into seven
provinces, the Eastermost is called Tendhuk, very like to het eynde des hoeks,
or the end of the point, and Anyan is very like, Aangang, or passage (a passage
to be sure out of Tartary, to America;) again beyond Anyan, is the vast country
of Bergo, this certainly is very much like Bergen, or sheltering, because the
Scythians leaving their native country, sheltered themselves here; fine
Etymology! noble Geography! (risum teneatis amici!)

The passage from Asia to America, is by no means proved by the pretended
Elephants bones found in the swamp near Ohio, since by later observations, and
examinations of the bones, by men of more knowledge than the mere vulgar, they
appear never to have belonged to elephants, but more probably are the remains
of some Hippopotami, especially as near that river, the Indians, often at this
day, discover large foot steps, and hear great bellowings, both proceeding from
animals they never see themselves.

I think if Mr. Bossu had obliged us with the knowledge of the particular
nation that calls the Ginseng, Panax Quinquefolium
Gareloguen, he would have thrown more light on his far fetched notion of the
parallel between the Tartars and Savages; and since he has himself invalidated
the pretended etymology, i would beg leave to deal with his similar
significations in the same manner, for why should not the same idea strike
Bossus's nation and the Mantcheoux Tartars upon sight of the Ginseng, and make
both compare it to men's thighs? But as but one nation among so many has
accepted this idea, it cannot be allowed, even as the most distant proof; the
fable of the Escaaniba by Bossu also, is too ridiculous and absurd to merit
confutation.

Nothing now remains, but a few words about the migration of the Chinese into
Peru, from whence some suppose America is peopled, but how different the color
and figure of the people! and where do we find any Chinese finesse among the
savages? besides, what Geographer does not know that the Chinese might more
easily, have come over to the eastern shore of America, across the Atlantic,
than over the wilder, wider, and more stormy South Sea, to land on Perus's or
Chilis's unhospitable shore, where our large European vessels can scarcely
live, much less a Chinese junk; nor did the Peruvians know any thing of large
Vessels till the arrival of the Spaniards; strange indeed, that their naval
knowledge, and mother country, should be thus forgotten! the more so, as it is
much easier, to go from America to China, than the contrary, by reason of the
constant easterly winds reigning here, which also make it more improbable that
the Chinese vessels came here by chance, or stress of weather; nor could they
in that case, but by chance, be provided with the provisions necessary for so
long a voyage.

Methinks i hear some critical person say, whence then came the savages? That
indeed, is a difficult question to answer; it is easier to confute the
different opinions, than to say any thing with certainty on this head, more
especially as these people want all manner of record; yet a tolerable guess may
be made to extricate us out of this difficult labyrinth.

Without doubt Moses's account of the Creation is true, but why should this
Historian's books, in this one thing, be taken so universally, when he
evidently has confined himself to a kind of chronicle concerning one small part
of the earth, and in this to one nation only; this account therefore must be
understood with the same limitation as many others in holy writ are generally
allowed to be; i think therefore that (as mentioned before) we do not at all
derogate from God's greatness, nor in any ways dishonor the sacred evidence
given us by his servants, when we think, that there were as many Adams and Eves
(every body knows these names to have an allegorical sense) as we find
different species of the human genus; is this not a more natural way, agreeing
more with the proceedings of a God of order, than the silly suppositions that
the variety is an effect of chance, much less a consequence of curses? the more
so, as neither has any foundation in God's holy word; why must we think that
the curses of a head of a family, should effect each race with a peculiar set
of features, and shape of body? Or one tribe with a red, a second with a
sallow, a third with a yellow, and a fourth with a black color, etc? Besides
we read of but one curse of this kind; they are different species then. Anatomy
has taught us, that the bone of a Negroe's skull, is always black, that besides
the Tunies of which our skins are composed, they have an additional one,
consisting of numerous vesicles, filled wish a black ink-like humor; see here
then two characteristicks, besides the blackness of the skin, whereby this
sable race is distinguished; may not experience teach us, that when the other
species are more carefully examined, they will all be found to have some such
peculiar character of distinction? Why then shall we involve ourselves into
numberless, needless difficulties about the origin of these so singular people,
so very different from all other tribes on the globe, yet so very similar to
each other: Throughout their own continent their wild manners are universally
alike; their languages only differ; why then can we not take the more easy way
in saying, God has created an original pair here as well as elsewhere: Is not
this opinion supported by our finding numberless other kinds of the animal
kingdom on this continent peculiar to itself; where (besides in America) do we
find the Bos Americanus? Where the Paca, and Vecunha (both American sheep?)
where the Ursus Luscus or racoon, the Armadillo, the Agouti, the Lacerta
Americana, called Leguana? the Ignavo (an animal called the American Sloth?)
where the same kind of Simiae, and the Vespertilio Cynocephalus? where the
Warri or the Pecaire (two species of the Sus?) The many kinds of Myrmecophaga,
the Mus Marsupialis, Mus Scalopes, Mus Palustris hispidus, of the same kind, as
those in America? Where again the Struthio Americanus, or the immense variety
of the Psittacus, peculiar to America? Where the Toucan, the Phaenicopteros and
Arquato, with the red Platea? Where the beautiful wood duck, and the kinds of
Phasianus called Quama and Curasoa? Where the little Mellisuga, or the
beautiful, and remarkable aquatic Muscophagus, called a sun bird? and many more
of the quadruped and winged tribes, large and small, too tedious to enumerate?
Where again the rattle Snake, and others of the reptile kind? Even among
Fishes, the same observation holds; has Pliny among all his fabulous animals,
described any like these really existing ones?

Again, whence was America stocked with men in our likeness? Where were the
oxen, the horses, the swine, dogs, cats, or even rats? or where were our
poultry to be found on this continent? Yet we see how immensely they have
multiplied since their first importation, so that the air and food are
certainly well adapted to them; a wise effect of providence, which knew this
quarter must one day become inhabited by animals not originally created in it.

What can now be said against this my argument for a separate origin of the
savages? Nothing that will amount to an absolute proof of the contrary. But a
difficulty arises as to the effect of the deluge; to remove which i must
observe, that America, even in its mountains, retains very few if any of the so
often quoted marks of this inundation; on the contrary, it is a smooth
regularly rising country; and i think, that to believe the flood so far
partial, as to have reached the only lands of Egypt, Palestine, Armenia, and
Greece, is by no means an absurd opinion, nor inconsistent with the destruction
of the race of men of which Moses treats, nor with the water being fifteen
cubits above the highest hill then known, supposed to be Arrarat; and had it
been absolutely universal, yet the Andes, Cordileras, Aceytas, and Santa
Martha, are many hundred cubits higher and consequently, might remain a vast
way dry; but grant the deluge universal, who will dispute with me, that the
omnipotent Lord of the universe could create a red man after his own image,
suffer him to fall as well as a white man, destroy his posterity except a few,
and find a way to save a remnant of man and beast, and then for reasons, into
which we have no right to enter, any more than the clay has to contend with the
potter, leave this race without extending his tender mercies to them, as he did
to us, not even sending his apostles into this quarter of the world; and when
the christians, so called, arrived here first, to suffer the pretended
Missionaries to preach a false, absurd doctrine to those wretches, nay, even to
this day to harden their hearts against the light drawn from under a bushel,
and placed conspicuously on a candlestick.

However among none of the savages do we find any tradition of such a flood,
except among some southern nations, who tell of six persons creeping out of a
hole, whereby the earth was peopled; these have been construed into Noah's sons
and their wives.

The Chactaws have told me of a hole between their nation and the Chicasaws,
out of which their whole very numerous nation walked forth at once, without so
much as warning any neighbors; i cannot find any relation between this and a
deluge: On the Isthmus of Darien i have indeed been warned by the savages of an
approaching flood on a certain day, and when i had stayed till then and saw the
event to be nothing, i ridiculed them about it; and they told me that a great
while ago they had such an inundation, and that their Sukies or conjurors, had
foretold a similar one now, but had proved themselves liars; this is the only
hint i could ever trace of any notion of a great flood; and i leave my reader
to judge of the weakness or force of this evidence, and of the justness of the
opinion advanced, which i offer only because i think that truth should be the
object of man's enquiries, and that God has given us the only advantage we
Characteristick Chicasaw head
have over brutes, in order to spur us on to enquiries into the mysteries of
nature.

I shall now treat of the four most noted nations connected with Florida in
particular, beginning with the Chicasaws, they being (although a small tribe)
accounted the mother nation on this part of the continent, and their language,
universally adopted by most, if not all the western nations. This is the most
fierce, cruel, insolent, and haughty people, among the southern nations; they
are very intrepid in the wars with their Meridional neighbors, and the French
under Messrs. Artaguette and Bienville, in 1736 experienced their valor (when
aided by a few Englishmen of tried courage) and in 1752, and 1753, Messrs.
Benoist and Reggio likewise found them successful to their cost; but with the
northern nations it stands otherways; the Kikapoos, Piancashas and others are
their terror; notwithstanding their boast of scalps from the northward, it has
appeared that, except some private murders among nations, who think the insult
to come from some other quarter, and some slaves and scalps obtained from the
dastardly Chigtagiks, they have really not been able so much as to find the
Kikapoos, Piancasha, Wyogtani, Shogteys, Musquakey, Otogami towns; this
appeared clearly while i was in the Chicasaw nation in the winter of 1771 and
1772, when one Mr. James (who had been a prisoner with the Kikapoos, for the
space of three years, and had found means to escape from them) arrived there,
and told, that in all that time never one of the Chicasaws appeared, or did
mischief among these nations, nor could he learn they ever did; yet it is
evident that these come to the very Chicasaw towns to commit depredations, as
well as in their hunting grounds, where the Chicasaws always take care to
fortify themselves.

It is also observable, that to the north of their towns they never venture any
plantations, and to the southward they have many; nay they scarcely venture to
get fire wood north of their habitation; in short they have never shown their
bravery but against the Chactaws and Creeks, with the French their allies; the
Northerns have always been their masters, and the Arkansas and Catawbas their
match; the Cherokees have generally had the worst of the wars between them;
they have always been staunch allies to the English, but i think there is no
very great dependence to be had on them now, for i can (not without reason)
affirm, that that alliance was all owing to the French being their
irreconcilable, and mortal enemies; now these are out of the way, little
reliance is to be had on them; and in the winter of 1771 and 1772, the traders
were under daily apprehensions of a quarrel. It is true that those monsters in
human form, the very scum and out cast of the earth, are always more prone to
savage barbarity than the savages themselves; but it is no less true, that the
traders were of as dissolute a life, and of as profligate manners, with as
great an inclination for deceit and over reaching during the French time, as
they are now; but then the policy of these savages curbed their thoughts of
revenge; whereas now they frequently dare to vent threats of a disagreeable
nature, which are the more dangerous because those savage politicians are
always very much upon their guard when they are treating with our men in
office, how they behave themselves in this respect, well knowing that the
ancient fame of their faithful alliance is sufficiently rooted in the hearts of
the open minded English, to enable them to impose on their credulity.

As an instance of Chicasaw honor or faith, which is indeed equal to that of
any nation of American savages whatever; i would mention the trial that has
been made for concluding an union between the Arkansas, Quappas, or Kappas, and
the Chicasaws; the first attempted at least an alliance with the latter so long
ago as 1764, but no kind of solemn embassy, or deputation was employed for the
effecting this before the summer 1771, and then at this meeting the insolence
of the Chicasaws run so high, as to insult one of the Quapa deputies by calling
him a woman, and spitting rum in his face, which was put up with; but the
Arkansas never have made an attempt to finish the treaty since, and i dare
venture to foretell, that such an union would by no means be for our good, let
it happen when it may.

The morals of this nation are more corrupt than those of any of their
neighbors; the Chactaws are said to be thieves, but i can assure the reader
that the Chicasaws are a thousand times more so; i have had ample proof of it
by losing incomparably more in one day at the Chicasaw town than i did in two
months going through seventy four Chactaw towns, notwithstanding i had been
warned, and was on my guard against the Chicasaws; my razors and a case of
instruments, and other trifles of no real use to them, besides every horse i
had with me, vanished in one day among these deceitful people. Their discourse
is really intolerable, nothing but filth is heard from them; the vanity of
being accounted great hunters and warriors has the better of every
consideration, and rather than condescend to cultivate the earth (which they
think beneath them) they will sit and toy with their women; or if they send
them to labor, they play on an awkward kind of flute made of a cane, lolling
thus their time away with great indifference, which obliges them yearly to
apply for corn and pulse to the Chactaws.

They live nearly in the center of a very large and somewhat uneven savannah,
of a diameter of above three miles; this savannah at all times has but a barren
look, the earth is very Nitrous, and the savages get their water out of holes
or wells dug near the town; in any drought the ground will gape infissures of
about six or seven inches wide, and again, two or three days rain will cause an
inundation; the water is always nitrous, and this field abounds, with flint,
marl, and those kinds of anomilous fossils mistaken for oyster shells, which
cannot be burnt into lime; yet this produces a grass of which cattle are so
fond as to leave the richest cane brakes for it; and notwithstanding the soil
appears barren and burnt up, they thrive to admiration; it also affords a vast,
or even immense store of the salubrious Fragaria, vulgarly known by the name of
wood strawberry.

They have in this field what might be called one town, or rather an assemblage
of hutts, of the length of about one mile and a half, and very narrow and
irregular; this however they divide into seven, by the names of Melattaw (i.
e.) hat and feather, Chatelaw (i. e.) copper town, Chukafalaya (i. e.) long
town, Hikihaw (i. e.) stand still, Chucalissa (i. e.) great town, Tuckahaw (i.
e.) a certain weed, and Ashuck hooma (i. e.) red grass; this was formerly
enclosed in palisadoes, and thus well fortified against the attacks of small
arms, but now it lays open; a second Artaguette, a little more prudent than the
first, would now find them an easy prey.

The nearest running water, is about one mile and a half off, to the south of
the town, in the edge of the field, but it is of no note; the next is four
miles off; and at high times, canoes might come up here out of the river
Tombechbe; this place is a ford, which often proves difficult, and on this
account is called Nahoola Inalchubba (i. e.) the white men's hard labor.

Horses and cattle thrive well in this nation, their breed of the former was
once famous, being descended from some Arabian horses brought from Spain to
Mexico, but of late they have so mixed them with meaner kinds, as to cause them
to degenerate much.

The traders who for fear of causing jealousy by their discourse have formed
nick names for all the savage nations, have called these by the whimsical name
of the breed; as cunningly suspicious as the savages are, yet i never found
that any of them ever took notice of this distinction.

One remarkable thing i cannot omit of this nation: There were in 1771, only
two real original Chicasaws left; one of them, who goes by the name of North
West, scruples not to tell them all very often, that they are of a slave race.

Their grand Chief is called Opaya Mataha, and it is said he has killed his man
upwards of forty times, for which great feats he has been raised to this
nominal dignity, which by all savages is as much regarded, as among us a
titular nobleman would be if he should be obliged to be a journeyman tailor for
his maintenance.

These savages are the only ones i ever heard of who make their females observe
a separation at the time of their Menses (some ancient almost extirpated tribes
to the northward only excepted, and these used to avoid their own dwelling
houses) the women then retire into a small hut set apart for that purpose, of
which there are from two to six round each habitation, and by them called moon
houses.

The whole tribe are remarkably strong made fellows, but few of their women
have regular features, or deserve to be called handsome; these labor vastly
hard, either in the field for cultivation of corn, or fetching nuts, fire wood
and water, which they chiefly carry on their backs; the two first articles
generally two or three miles, and the last often a mile, their burdens would
amaze a stranger, being rather fit for asses than women to carry.

This nation is the most imperious in their carriage toward their women, of
any i have met with; they are very jealous of their wives, and adultery in them
is punished by the loss of the tip of the nose, which they sometimes cut, but
more generally bite off, but this does not deter them, for they are a very
salacious race, and the mark is pretty general. They are all good swimmers,
notwithstanding they live so far from waters, but they learn their children to
swim in clay holes, that are filled in wet seasons by rain.

They are the most expert of any perhaps in America in tracking what they are
in pursuit of, and they will follow their flying enemy, on a long gallop, over
any kind of ground without mistaking.

Since i am on this subject, i cannot forbear taking notice of one thing
related by many writers on America; which is the knowledge the savages have by
the track of what kind of people they pursue; this is very true, and this
sagacious particular deserved admiration, but the wonder must cease when i tell
my reader, that i have found in it much of a juggle, for instead of knowing it
by the foot steps (which they pretend to measure very ceremoniously with their
hands) they know it by the strokes of the hatchets in the trees and branches as
they go along, which no two savage nations agree in, be it in the height from
the ground, or in the slope of the cut; they can also distinguish the different
ways of making camps and fires; for instance; a Chactaw war camp is circular,
with a fire in the center, and each man has a crutched branch at his head to
hang his powder and shot upon, and to set his gun against, and the feet of all
to the fire; a Cherokee war camp is a long line of fire, against which they
also lay their feet; a Chactaw makes his camp in traveling in form of a sugar
loaf; a Chicasaw makes it in form of our arbours; a Creek like to our sheds, or
piazzas, to a timber house; in this manner every nation has some distinguishing
way.

The Chicasaws are esteemed good hunters, they have extensive hunting grounds
and make excellent use of them; they extend them to the branch of the Ohio,
called Tanasse, Hogoheechee or Cherokee river, and claim to the mouth of the
Ohio, but this ground they frequent with great caution, only in the depth of
winter when their northern enemies are close at home; they are often surprised
on the rivers Margot and Yasoo, but below the Yasoo as far east as the eastern
branches of Tombechbe, and as low as Oka Tibehaw, they hunt safely; this last
they regard as their boundary with the Chactaws, but these two nations are by
no means jealous of each other in this respect, and hunt in each others grounds
without let or hindrance from either side; although their country abounds in
beaver, they kill none, leaving that to the white men; they think this kind of
hunting beneath them, saying any body can kill beaver, but men only deer; this
is exactly the reverse of a northern Indian; they hunt like all their
neighbors with the skin and frontal bone of a deer's head, dried and stretched
on elastic chips; the horns they scoup out very curiously, employing so much
patience on this, that such a head and antlers often do not exceed ten or
twelve ounces; they fix this on the left hand, and imitating the motions of the
deer in sight, they decoy them within sure shot. I cannot forbear to mention a
merry accident on this occasion; a Chactaw Indian, who was hunting with one of
these decoys on his fist, saw a deer, and thinking to bring it to him, imitated
the deer's motions of feeding and looking round in a very natural way, another
savage within shot, mistaking the head for a real one, shot the ball through
it, scarcely missing the fingers of the first; the affair ended in fifty cuffs,
but was no farther resented.

Their habitations at home consist of three buildings, a summer house, a corn
house, and a winter house, called a hot house; the two first are oblong
squares, the latter is circular, they have no chimnies but let the smoke find
its way out through a hole at the top in their dwelling houses, but in the hot
houses, where it can; in these they make large wood fires, on the middle of the
floor, which being by evening all coals, they enter in, and sleep on benches
made round the inside of the building; this would stifle any one not used to
it, and be it never so sharp a morning, they come out sweating and naked as
soon as it is day; i believe this proceeding kills numbers of them, as in
lattitude 35 00, where they live, it is often very cold; they also use for an
universal cure of all diseases, excessive sweating in these hot houses, and
then with their pores open jump into a hole of cold water, this treatment of
those that had the small pox killed numbers; these hot houses of a morning
emitting smoke through every crevice, seem to a stranger to be all on fire on
the inside.

Their common food is the zea or the Indian corn, of which they make meal, and
boil it; they also parch it, and then pound it; thus taking it on their
journey, they mix it with cold water, and will travel a great way without any
other food; they begin to have the knowledge of keeping cattle; but at present
they enjoy little or no fresh meats while at home, but in the hunting season in
the woods, it is almost the only food they make use of; they have also a way of
drying and pounding their corn, before it comes to maturity; this they call
Boota Copassa (i. e.) cold flour; this, in small quantities, thrown into cold
water, boils and swells as much as common meal boiled over a fire; it is hearty
food, and being sweet, they are fond of it; but as the process for making it is
troublesome, their laziness seldom allows them to have it; they likewise use
hickory nuts in plenty, and make a milkey liquor of them, which they call milk
of nuts; the process is at bottom the same as what we use to make milk of
almonds; this milk they are very fond of, and eat it with sweet potatoes in it;
they also make a great use of Bears fat as oil; the flesh the traders have
learned them to make into bacon, exactly resembling that of a hog; but all
these dishes suit but ill the palate of an European, and when they have any
deer or buffalo flesh at home, it is so dried as to have no taste in it.

The knowledge they have of cattle keeping is borrowed from the traders among
them, who, notwithstanding the ordinance against settling on Indian grounds,
have many of them plantations, and raise cattle and hogs; one Caldwell has the
greatest stock; and Opaya Mingo Luxi went in 1771 to complain of it, but
Caldwell, knowing that no savage can withstand the words of a white man, took
advantage thereof, and so intimidated the savage, by his mere presence at
Pensacola, when in the superintendant's hall, in order to lodge his
information, and make his complaint that Opaya Mingo Luxi himself said he had
nothing against him; but as the very Commissary has a plantation and cattle,
and keeps negroes etc. for the cultivation thereof (though he keeps his cattle
under the name of Opaya Mataha) i think very little will be done to hinder it;
and upon the whole, i think the affair of advantage to the savages, who must
soon generally give into this way of life for their own preservation, or else
remove further from us.

This office of Commissary seems to me the most needless expense the crown is
at, as it only serves for a subject of ridicule both to the traders and
savages, which last scruple not often to give the officer in this nation the
(among them) scandalous epithet of old woman; and he can do but little toward
preventing disorders among them, or in regulating the standard of the trade;
besides, i am sure that whatever Commissiary dared to pretend to be any thing
more than a cipher, would run an imminent risque of his life.

Their numbers have been very large, and they themselves have a tradition that
they were a colony from another nation in the West, and that they first set
themselves down near the Ohio, but soon removed to their present Site; the
greatest number that their gunmen can now be reckoned at, does not exceed too
hundred and fifty; it is really amazing, to think, that such a handful keeps
about ten thousand of the men of the other tribes from destroying them; but
their ferocity and the way of making war among the savages which gives no
advantage to numbers, because the war parties of a small nation are as numerous
as those of a larger one) has long saved them from destruction.

Strong liquors make a sad havoc among these as among all other nations of the
savages in the North.

They are strong, and swift of foot, and their exercise at home is chiefly
their ball play, a very laborious diversion.

They are horridly given to sodomy, committing that crime even on the dead
bodies of their enemies, thereby (as they say) degrading them into women.

In their war parties, they have generally one who has done most mischief to
the enemy for their leader; but he is so far from having a command, that an
attempt, to do more than proposing whether such or such an undertaking would
not be most advisable, or at most persuading them to it, would at least be
followed by a total desertion.

They are very ceremonious in their preparations for war, and their fondness
for witchcraft makes them look for omens of futurity.

They and all other savages have the greatest share of patience imaginable;
when a scalp or prisoner is in question, they will travel hundreds of miles in
the deserts, with amazing precaution, enduring hunger, and often thirst, at a
great rate; nay if their provisions fail before they strike the blow, they have
been known to return to hunt for more in some safe place, and without going
home, to make a second or third attempt.

They make war by stratagem, surprise or ambush, despising us as fools for
exposing ourselves to be shot at like marks. A man's valor with them consists
in their cunning, and he is deemed the greatest hero who employs most art in
surprising his enemy; they never strike a blow unless they think themselves
sure of a retreat, and the loss of many men is an infamous crime laid to the
charge of the party,

They bury their dead almost the moment the breath is out of the body, in the
very spot under the couch on which the deceased died, and the nearest relations
mourn over it with woeful lamentations; the women are very vociferous in it,
but the men do it in silence, taking great care not to be seen any more than
heard at this business; the mourning continues about a year, which they know by
counting the moons, they are every morning and evening, and at first throughout
the day at different times, employed in the exercise of this last duty.

A people who by many peculiar customs, are very different from the other red
men on the continent, will next amuse us: They are the Chactaws, more commonly
known by the name of the Flatheads. These people are the only nation from whom
i could learn any idea of a traditional account of a first origin; and that is
their coming out of a hole in the ground, which they show between their nation
and the Chicasaws; they tell us also that their neighbors were surprised at
seeing a people rise at once out of the earth; dark as this account of a first
existence of these people is to us, we discover in it a higher idea of an
origin than among their neighbors, who never pretend to tell from whence they
came, and have only loose ideas of a migration from the north west; which
prevail among the Chicasaws and all other southern nations.

The Chactaws may more properly be called a nation of farmers than any savages
i have met with; they are the most considerable people in Florida, and their
situation may be known by the annexed plan of their country: Their hunting
grounds are in proportion less considerable than any of their neighbors; but
as they are very little jealous of their territories, nay with ease part with
them, the Chicasaws and they never interrupt each other in their hunting; as i
mentioned before.

They are in their warlike temper far from being such cowards as people in
general will pretend, but it is true they are not so fond of wandering abroad
to do mischief as the other savages are; few of such expeditions are undertaken
by them, and they g^ve for a reason, that in going abroad they may chance to be
obliged to content themselves with a woman's or child's scalp, but in staying
at home and waiting the attack of the enemy, they by pursuing them, are sure to
take men, which is a greater mark of valor: be this as it will, it is certain
they are carefully, cunningly, and bravely watchful at home, and on several
occasions they have, after many insults, boldly offered to meet their enemies
in equal numbers on a plain, which has always been by the other savages treated
with scorn, as cowardice; however when it has happened by chance that they meet
so, we have seen them brave and victorious. Even in the very town of Mobile, an
action of this kind happened deserving a record, when they drove their enemies
(the Creeks) through the river, and but for their inability to swim, they would
have totally destroyed them; the Captain Hooma or red Captain fighting with
forty Men against three hundred Creeks, and with his own hand destroying
thirteen of their Chiefs, even when fighting on his knees, and when he fell,
bravely telling who he was, and his being flead alive for his heroism, is so
fresh in every one's memory (being not above six Years ago) that many living
evidences can testify it; I thought the action worthy of this attempt, to save
it from oblivion. They have deserted many of their eastern frontier towns since
their present war with the Creeks, but during my stay in their nation, i saw
four or five instances of their not suffering their enemy to escape unpunished,
when he dared to commit depredations, and they valued themselves on the event
of the present war, when in 1771, news coming among the Traders, that the
Creeks computed their loss at near three hundred persons, and they having
guessed the number of their's, lost much the same; they said, we have lost many
women and children and even of them some Scalps have been retaken, but we like
men, have killed men only, and got all the marks thereof; this war began in
August 1765; the readers may judge at the greatness of their exploits, when i
assure them, that that number was the total loss during all that time.

These savages were the staunch and firm friends of the French while they
continued on the continent, until some English traders found means to draw the
east party, and the district of Coosa (which together are called
Oypat-oocooloo, or the small nation) into a civil war with the western
divisions called Oocooloo-Falaya, Oocooloo-Hanale, and Chickasawhays, which
after many conflicts and the destruction of east Congeeto, ended with the peace
in 1763. I believe they are a nation whose word may be depended on when they
give into the interest of any person, and that their faith is to be better
relied on than that of the Chicasaws or Creeks, which two last are really
versed in all the gallic tricks of deceit.

At the congress of 1771, there were two thousand three hundred of this nation
nearly all men, at Mobile on the superintendants books; in the nation i found
at above seventy of their villages, about two thousand men, and in the woods
and hunting grounds, i was at and heard of as many camps as could make no less
than six hundred men more. The French used to keep them very poor, but the
yearly small gifts they were accustomed to, were more proper to leave an idea
of gratitude on the mind of a savage, than our septennial great ones.

Monsieur de Kerlerec and others made a fine juggle and kind of monopoly of
this trade, which was very ill brooked by the French; but although i make no
doubt of the Gentlemen's having gone beyond the orders of their court, and
notwithstanding i am a bitter enemy to unreasonable regraters, yet i am certain
that a monopoly of this trade under proper restrictions would prove an
advantage and security to the colonies, since now the villainous over
reachings, chicanery, and mutual calumniations of the abandoned wretches, who
reside among the savages, joined to their worse than brutish or savage way of
life, tend to the rendering the nation to which they belong infamous,
despicable, and scandalous among the savages, as well as to turn the hopes of
advantage into a real disadvantage; and i dare venture to say, that unless such
restrictions take place, the different savages will always find reason to
complain against the colonies, and join in cabals against the poor settlers in
the remote counties, and at last oblige the colonies to take the disagreable
step of realizing our mock authority, by extirpating all savages that dare to
remain on the East of the Mississippi.

But to return to the warlike inclinations of the Chactaws, and not to involve
myself in politics; i take them to be a brave people, who can upon occasion
defend themselves very coolly, for during my stay in the nation, a woman of
that tribe made a bargain with me to give her ammunition for some provisions i
bought of her; and when i expressed my surprise thereat, she informed me that
she kept a gun to defend herself as well as her husband did; and i have several
times seen armed women in motion with the parties going in pursuit of the
invading enemy, who having completed their intended murder, were flying off.

They never exercised so much cruelty upon their captive enemies as the other
savages; they almost always brought them home to show them, and then dispatched
them with a bullet or hatchet; after which, the body being cut into many parts,
and all the hairy pieces of skin converted into scalps, the remainder is buried
and the above trophies carried home, where the women dance with them till
tired; then they are exposed on the tops of the hot houses till they are
annihiliated. The same treatment is exercised on those who are killed near the
nation, but he that falls in battle at a distance is barely scalped.

Their addictedness to pretended witchcraft leads them into a very
superstitious behavour when on an expedition which is remarkable, they carry
with them a certain thing which they look on as the genius of the party; it is
most commonly the stuffed skin of an owl of a large kind; they are very careful
of him, keep a guard over him, and offer him a part of their meat; should he
fall, or any other ways be disordered in position, the expedition is
frustrated; they always set him with his head toward the place of destination,
and if he should prove to be turned directly contrary, they consider this as
portending some very bad omen, and an absolute order to return; should
therefore any one's heart fail him, he needs only watch his opportunity to do
this to save his character of a brave or true man. There is also a species of
Motacilla (which i often endeavored to catch, in vain) whose chirping near the
camp, will occasion their immediate return.

Their war camps are already mentioned.

They are given to pilfering, but not so much as the Chicasaws.

They are the swiftest of foot of any savages in America, and very expert in
tracking a flying enemy, who very seldom escapes.

Their leader can not pretend to command on an expedition, the most he can do,
is to endeavor to persuade, or at the extent, he can only pretend to a greater
experience in order to enforce his counsel; should he pretend to order,
desertion would at least be his punishment, if not death.

Their exercises agree pretty much with what i have seen among other nations:
from their infancy they learn the use of bows and arrows; they are never beaten
or otherways rudely chastised, and very seldom chid; this education renders
them very willful and wayward, yet i think it preferable to the cruel and
barbarous treatment indiscriminately used by some European parents, who might
with slight punishments by the excellency of wholesome christian Admonitions,
work in a very different manner on the tender inclinations of pliable infancy.

The young savages also use a very strait cane eight or nine feet long, cleared
of its inward divisions of the joints; in this they put a small arrow, whose
one end is covered one third of the whole length with cotton or something
similar to it: this they hold nearest their mouth and blow it so expertly as
seldom to miss a mark fifteen or twenty yards off and that so violently as to
kill squirrils and birds therewith; with this instrument they often plague dogs
and other animals according to the innate disposition to cruelty of all
savages, being encouraged to take a delight in torturing any poor animal that
has the misfortune to fall into their hands; thinking best of him, who can
longest keep the victim in pain, and invent the greatest variety of torture.
When growing up, they use wrestling, running, heaving and lifting great
weights, the playing with the ball two different ways, and their favorite game
of chunke, all very violent exercises.

The excess in spirituous liquors to which they use themselves, is really
incredible.

Their meetings about serious matters are at night. Their belief in charms and
exorcisms is firm and out of reason, and he that should dare openly to boast of
this gift is sure to lose his life on the first misfortune in the town where he
resides; but if it is only pretended to extend to the cure of wounds and
diseases it is overlooked; when they prepare for war, and when they return they
use exorcisms, they call them all physic though only bare words or actions; and
if they prove unsuccessful, they say the physic was not strong enough; it is no
small diversion to see a Chactaw during this preparation act all his strange
gestures, and the day before his departure painted scarlet and black almost
naked and with swan wings to his arms run like a bacchant up and down through
the place of his abode; not drunk neither, as rum is by them avoided like
poison during this preparation.

While i was in this nation, i had the misfortune to be afflicted with a
violent fever which ended in a flux; my own skill being baffled, i applied to
my guide, who had the reputation of being a knowing Physician well acquainted
with the simples used among them. I submitted to his prescription; he got some
herbs and roots, and made a decoction of them; i drank it; while the effect was
expected, he alternately burnt some of the simples and sat down by me blowing
upon me to drive away the disorder; i found no benefit by it; and on my
refusing an other trial he said i was a fool, the next time the physic would be
stronger, but he was not affronted.

The French have made great attempts to render this nation Christians; at
Chicasawhay there resided a missionary and a chapel was built, but they were
absolutely unsuccessful; the savages always derided the Jesuit, called him a
woman, and would frequently desire him to take away his physic, thereby meaning
he would undo his ceremony of baptism; and when the English arrived there they
would go up to the altar and imitate all the jesuitical farce, telling them
that they were not such fools as to hear him; the chapel was destroyed before i
came there in 1771, but the cross (being of lightwood The heart of yellow pine.
) stood yet.

Their play at ball is either with a small ball of deer skin or a large one of
woollen rags; the first is thrown with battledores, the second with the hand
only; this is a trial of skill between village and village; after having
appointed the day and field for meeting, they assemble at the time and place,
fix two poles across each other at about an hundred and fifty feet apart, they
then attempt to throw the ball through the lower part of them, and the opposite
party trying to prevent it, throw it back among themselves, which the first
again try to prevent; thus they attempt to beat it about from one to the other
with amazing violence, and not seldom broken limbs or dislocated joints are the
consequence; their being almost naked, painted and ornamented with feathers,
has a good effect on the eye of the by stander during this violent diversion; a
number is agreed on for the score, and the party who first gets this number
wins.

The women play among themselves (after the men have done) disputing with as
much eagerness as the men; the stakes or betts are generally high. There is no
difference in the other game with the large ball, only the men and women play
promiscuously, and they use no battledores.

Their favorite game of chunke is a plain proof of the evil consequences of a
violent passion for gaming upon all kinds, classes and orders of men; at this
they play from morning till night, with an unwearied application, and they bet
high; here you may see a savage come and bring all his skins, stake them and
lose them; next his pipe, his beads, trinkets and ornaments; at last his
blanket, and other garment, and even all their arms, and after all it is not
uncommon for them to go home, borrow a gun and shoot themselves; an instance of
this happened in 1771 at East Yasoo a short time before my arrival. Suicide has
also been practiced here on other occasions, and they regard the act as a
crime, and bury the body as unworthy of their ordinary funeral rites.

The mannner of playing this game is thus: They make an alley of about two
hundred feet in length, where a very smooth caly ground is laid, which when dry
is very hard; they play two together having each a straight pole of about
fifteen feet long; one holds a stone, which is in shape of a truck, which he
throws before him over this alley, and the instant of its departure, they set
off and run; in running they cast their poles after the stone, he that did not
throw it endeavors to hit it, the other strives to strike the pole of his
antagonist in its flight so as to prevent its hitting the stone; if the first
should strike the stone he counts one for it, and if the other by the dexterity
of his cast should prevent the pole of his opponent hitting the stone, he
counts one, but should both miss their aim the throw is renewed; and in case a
score is won the winner casts the stone and eleven is up; they hurl this stone
and pole with wonderful dexterity and violence, and fatigue themselves much at
it.

The women also have a game where they take a small stick, or something else
off the ground after having thrown up a small ball which they are to catch
again, having picked up the other; they are fond of it, but ashamed to be seen
at it. I believe it is this propensity to gaming which has given these savages
an idea of a meum and tuum above all other nations of America.

They are extravagant in their debauches; when met for a drinking match some
women attend them, when these find the men beginning to be heated with liquor
they will take away all the weapons found near them and return with a callebash
under their wrappers, then mixing with them, the men offer them their bottles,
they take a draught and when not observed they empty it into the callebash,
which when full they empty into bottles brought for that purpose, and thus they
will accumulate two or three bottles full, and with the help of a little water,
still make them more; after a while rum fails among the men, and the women
acquaint them, that they have got some; they are told to fetch it; they refuse,
saying it cost them much and they cannot give it for nothing; a bargain ensues,
they receive the consideration first, and then bring it; in this way of trade
they will often get all the effects the men can command for such a delicate
nectar.

I have a great opinion of a Chactaw's faithfully performing his promises, i
have seen several little instances thereof; they detest a liar, and show
gratitude to a man that keeps his word; my guide whose name was Pooskoos Mingo
gave me an instance of this; when i left him he said i had satisfied him for
every thing like a true man, but if i would give him a speaking paper to the
great white man at Mobile (meaning John Stuart Esquire) then he would still better
know it; i gave him a note recommending him to that gentleman, and because he
had been of extraordinary service on the journey, begged he would allow him
something more than common; it had the desired effect, he got a good many
things extraordinary; when i was afterward missing, and it was thought the
Creeks had destroyed us in coming from the Chicasaw nation, this savage armed
to avenge my death, and was actually taking the war physic as they term it,
when news was brought to the nation of my arrival at Mobile.

They are well made both men and women; the women have agreeable features and
countenances, but their nasty way of life in general disfigures them; those
that are cleanly are really attractive; the women disfigure the heads of their
male children by means of bags of sand, flattening them into different shapes,
thinking it adds to their beauty; both men and women wear long hair, except
some young fellows who begin to imitate the Chicasaw fashion, and both sexes
mark their faces and bodies, particularly the women with indelible blue figures
of fancy, among which is a great deal of voluted work of vast variety.

Before the English traders came among them, there were scarcely any half
breed, but now they abound among the younger sort.

Both sexes are wanton to the highest degree, and a certain fashionable
disorder is very common among them. Sodom is also practiced but Characteristick
Chactaw Busts
B. Romans Fecit
not to the same excess as among the Creeks and Chicasaws, and the Cinaedi
among the Chactaws are obliged to dress themselves in woman's attire, and are
highly despised especially by the women.

Their buildings are exactly similar to those of the Chicasaws.

Their way of life in general may be called industrious, they will do what no
uncompelled savage will do, that is work in the field to raise grain; and one
may among them hire not only a guide, or a man to build a house, or make a
fence, but even to hoe his grounds; nay they will for payment be your menial
servants to the meanest offices; no other unsubdued savage will do any more of
all these than be your guide; they are very ingenious in making tools, utensils
and furniture; i have seen a narrow tooth comb made by one of these savages
with a knife only out of a root of the Diospyros that was as well finished as i
ever saw one with all the necessary tools; this shows their patience.

The Chactaws are very hospitable at their hunting camps, and there only they
will entertain a stranger at free cost.

Here i must relate a particular custom of these people: When a deer or bear is
killed by them, they divide the liver into as many pieces as there are fires,
and send a boy to each with a piece, that the men belonging to each fire may
burn it, but the women's fires are excluded from this ceremony, and if each
party kills one or more animals, the livers of them are all treated in the same
manner.

Horses of a good kind are in such plenty as to be sold for a kegg of four
gallons half water half rum; they would be excellent were it not that they back
them before the animals attain two years of age.

They cultivate for bread all the species and varieties of the Zea, likewise
two varieties of that species of Panicum vulgarly called guinea corn; a greater
number of different Phaseolus and Dolichos than any i have seen elsewhere; the
esculent Convolvulus (vulgo) sweet potatoes, and the Helianthus Giganteus; with
the seed of the last made into flour and mixed with flour of the Zea they make
a very palatable bread; they have carried the spirit of husbandry so far as to
cultivate leeks, garlic, cabbage and some other garden plants, of which they
make no use, in order to make profit of them to the traders; they also used to
carry poultry to market at Mobile, although it lays at the distance of an
hundred and twenty miles from the nearest town; dunghill fowls, and a very few
ducks, with some hogs, are the only esculent animals raised in the nation.

They make many kinds of bread of the above grains with the help of water,
Eggs, or hickory milk; they boil the esculent convolvulus and eat it with the
hickory milk; they boil green ears of corn, they boil corn and beans together,
and make many other preparations of their vegetables, but fresh meat they have
only at the hunting season, and then they never fail to eat while it lasts; of
their fowls and hogs they seldom eat any as they keep them for profit.

In failure of their crops, they make bread of the different kinds of Fagus, of
the Diospyros, of a species of Convolvulus with a tuberous root found in the
low cane grounds, of the root of a species of Smilax, of live oak acorns, and
of the young shoots of the Canna; in summer many wild plants chiefly of the
Drupi and Bacciferous kind supply them.

They raise some tobacco, and even sell some to the traders, but when they use
it for smoking they mix it with the leaves of two species of the Cariaria or
of the Liquidambar Styracifiua dried and rubbed to pieces.

They prepare a kind of cloth out of the bark of a species of Morus, and with
its root dye it yellow; i have all the reason in the world to believe, that
this cloth might be manufactured into paper.

Buffaloe's wool also furnishes them a material for a useful manufacture.

They likewise make blankets and other coverings out of the feathers of the
breasts of wild turkies by a process similar to that of our wig makers, when
they knit hair together for the purpose of making wigs.

They have a root by means of which they dye most substances of a bright lading
scarlet, but hitherto i have not been able to discover what it was.

Many among them are well acquainted with plants of every kind, and apply them
judicially both externally and internally; to others again they attribute
supernatural virtues, for instance, there is one which they make use of to
procure rain; for this purpose they have a number of people in their nation
called rainmakers; these assemble in a deserted field, and they boil this plant
in a large pot, dancing and singing round it with numberless awkward gestures;
then if it should happen to rain soon after the jugglers boast the virtue of
the plant; but should no rain follow, they say the physic was not strong
enough; they take care however not to employ this rain compelling herb unless a
cloudy day forebodes rain. The plant is very singular, and i believe a
nondescript; i saw two species of it, but could not ascertain the genius; the
savages call it Esta Hoola or the most beloved.

The most remarkable thing of these savages is their inability to swim,
occasioned by their being remote from large waters; this art the people of
Chicasahay and Yoani who live on the banks of the Pasca Oocooloo enjoy alone,
and incredible as it may appear, even most of their horses partake of this
inability, as many people and among others the Commissary for the nation have
informed me from their own experience.

They help their wives in the labor of the fields and many other works; near
one half of the men have never killed a deer or turkey during their lives. Game
is so scarce, that during my circuit through the nation we never saw any, and
we had but two or three opportunities of eating venison in as many months; they
take wives without much ceremony, and live together during pleasure, and after
separation which is not very frequent, they often leave the second to retake
the first wife.

Fornication is among them thought to be a natural accident, therefore a girl
is not the worse looked on for ten or a dozen slips; but although they are not
over jealous of their wives, they punish adultery in the woman, unless she
happens to belong to a stronger or more noted and numerous family than the
husband; in which case he scarce ventures even to put her away; but if she is
doomed to suffer, her punishment is to be at a public place (for that purpose
set apart at every town) carnally known by all who choose to be present, young
and old; thus the poor wretch after defending herself and struggling hard with
the first three or four, at last suffers motionless the brutality of perhaps an
hundred or an hundred and fifty of these barbarians; the same treatment is
undergone by a girl or woman who belonging to another town or quarter of the
nation, comes to a place where she is a stranger and cannot give a very good
account of herself and business, or the reason of her coming there; this they
call running through the meadow, and if a white man happens to be in the town,
they send him an offer or invitation to take the first heat; they plead in
excuse for so barbarous a custom, that the only way to disgust lewd women is to
give them at once what they so constantly and eagerly pursue.

The education of their children i have already mentioned.

The women suffer no more by child birth than any other savage women; they
retire into a place of solitude at the time, and after delivery return to their
daily labor; however while i staid at Oka Altakkala in this nation one died in
labor within about eighty yards of the house i resided in.

There are no laws or regulations observable among these people, except the Lex
Talionis, and although they have a strict notion of distinction in property,
and even divide their lands, we never hear them quarrel about boundaries; the
above law is so strictly followed, that i am furnished with the following
anecdote: It happened that a young Chactaw having done something deserving
reproof, he was therefore chid by his mother, this he took so ill as in the
fury of his shame to resolve his own death, which he effected with a gun; his
sister as his nearest relation thought herself bound to avenge his death, and
knowing the circumstance told her mother she had caused her brother's death and
must pay for his life; the old woman resigned herself to her fate, and died by
the hands of her daughter, who shot her with a gun which she had provided for
the catastrophe.

In sickness the juggling Quacks are consulted, and as they are naturally good
connoisseurs in simples, and judge pretty well of the nature of diseases, they
often succeed; but if a disorder is obstinate or incurable, the relations of
the patient assemble in his house, bewail his misfortune, cry bitterly, take
their leave of him, and he tells them how tired he is of life, that his
misfortunes are unsufferable, and that it is good he should die; upon this an
universal howl is raised, the nearest male relation jumps on him, and violently
in a moment breaks the neck of the patient, and then they rejoice that his
misery is over, but lamentations for his departure soon succeed.

The following treatment of the dead is very strange, yet we find Apollonius
Rhodius mention a similar custom of the inhabitants of Col^his near Pontus; we
find Ives in his voyage relating the like of the remainder of the ancient
Persians, and we find again in Hawkesworth's voyage the people B. R. (...)
of Otaheite, performing their obsequies in a manner little or nothing
different from the Chactaws; but it would be an hard matter to assign a reason
for it among the latter; that it is not with any solicitude about the
disposition of the body in regard to a future state is plain; all the reason i
could hear of them was, that they would not so soon forget their deceased
friends, and might be the oftener stimulated to weep over their remains. As
soon as the deceased is departed, a stage is erected (as in the annexed plate
is represented) and the corpse is laid on it and covered with a bear skin; if
he be a man of note, it is decorated, and the poles painted red with vermillion
and bears oil; if a child, it is put upon stakes set across; at this stage the
relations come and weep, asking many questions of the corpse, such as, why he
left them? did not his wife serve him well? was he not contented with his
children? had he not corn enough? did not his land produce sufficient of every
thing? was he afraid of his enemies? etc. and this accompanied by loud
howlings; the women will be there constantly, and sometimes with the corrupted
air and heat of the sun faint so as to oblige the by standers to carry them
home; the men will also come and mourn in the same manner, but in the night or
at other unseasonable times, when they are least likely to be discovered.

The stage is fenced round with poles, it remains thus a certain time but not a
fixed space, this is sometimes extended to three or four months, but seldom
more than half that time. A certain set of venerable old Gentlemen who wea^
very long nails as a distinguishing badge on the thumb, fore and middle finger
of each hand, constantly travel through the nation (when i was there, i was
told there were but five of this respectable order) that one of them may
acquaint those concerned, of the expiration of this period, which is according
to their own fancy; the day being come, the friends and relations assemble near
the stage, a fire is made, and the respectable operator, after the body is
taken down, with his nails tears the remaining flesh off the bones, and throws
it with the intrails into the fire, where it is consumed; then he scrapes the
bones and burns the scrapings likewise; the head being painted red with
vermillion is with the rest of the bones put into a neatly made chest (which
for a Chief is also made red) and deposited in the loft of a hut built for that
purpose, and called bone house; each town has one of these; after remaining
here one year or thereabouts, if he be a man of any note, they take the chest
down, and in an assembly of relations and friends they weep once more over him,
refresh the color of the head, paint the box red, and then deposit him to
lasting oblivion.

An enemy and one who commits suicide is buried under the earth as one to be
directly forgotten and unworthy the above ceremonial obsequies and mourning.

A mixture of the remains of the Cawittas, Talepoosas, Coosas, Apalachias,
Conshacs or Coosades, Oakmulgis, Oconis, Okchoys, Alibamons, Natchez,
Weetumkus, Pakanas, Taensas, Chacsihoomas, Abekas and some other tribes whose
names i do not recollect, will be the next subject of our attention; they call
themselves Muscokees and are at present known to us by the general name of
Creeks, and divided into upper and lower Creeks; also those they call allies
and are a colony from the others living far south in East Florida.

They inhabit a noble and fruitful country, where a civilized people in future
will enjoy all the earthly sweets they can wish for, and where the inhabitants
will always be placed commodiously for navigation, so as with little trouble to
bring all the valuable produce of a rich soil situate in a temperate air of the
middle latitudes to a market; in a word, i foresee this will become the seat of
trade and its attendant riches in North America.

They are the next most numerous nation after the Chactaws; but because i have
not been so universally through this nation as through the the others, i cannot
so nearly calculate their numbers, but to all appearance, three thousand five
hundred gun men is all the extent; this confederacy of remnants is a race of
very cunning fellows, and with regard to us, the most to be dreaded of any
nation on the continent, as well for their indefatigable thirst for blood
(which makes them travel incredibly for a scalp or prisoner) as for their being
truly politicians bred, and so very jealous of their lands, that they will not
only not part with any, but endeavor constantly to enlarge their territories
by conquest and claiming large tracts from the Cherokees and Chactaws.

As an instance of their politics, i beg leave to relate the following fact:
When in 1764 and 1765, Messrs. Rea and Galphus of Georgia, had the contract of
providing Pensacola with beef, they were of necessity obliged to have the
cattle drove through this nation, who never suffered any but oxen to pass, the
tendency of this prohibition must be obvious to every reader.

They are all remarkably well shaped, they live in a level country full of
rivers, are expert swimmers, and in general a very hardy race; what deserves
notice here is that their Thorax is very shallow, so that a savage of this race
may appear almost a giant by the breadth of his shoulders and yet not measure
so much in circumference as an ordinary European; but whether this is the
effect of art or nature, i cannot pretend to decide; their women are handsome
and many of them very cleanly, they are very hospitable and never fail of
making a stranger heartily welcome, offering him the pipe as soon as he
arrives, while the good women are employed to prepare a dish of venison and
homany, Maize coarsly pounded, sifted and boiled in water.
with some bread made of maize and flour, and being wraped in maize leaves,
baked under the ashes; when it is served up they accompany it with bears fat
purified to a perfect chrystalline oil, and a bottle of honey with which last
article the country abounds, and it is of so good a quality, as in my opinion
to exceed that of Calabria and Minorca.

In the lower nation and the allied tribes, there are many who keep rice by
them and have plenty of beef; of all which articles they are profusely liberal,
and i believe had they only a single potatoe, they would share it with a
stranger. In the fruit season they never fail to accompany these regales with
melons, peaches, plumbs, grapes, or some other wild fruit.

Characteristick head of a Creek War Chief.
B. Romans fecit


After the traveller is made welcome by his host, the latter introduces him
into the assembly, which is kept every evening at a place called the square, of
which we find one in each town. At this place he is entertained with tobacco
and cassine drink; this is also the common resort of their old men and warriors
to deliberate on matters of peace and war, to judge what steps are to be taken
for the welfare of the nation, and to decide the fate of their neighbors; so
that this square does not ill answer to the description we have of the Roman
Forum or Athenian Areopage; the evening ends in a dance, which is the common
practice every night.

To relate any thing concerning the wars of this nation, would be no more than
repeating what has been said of the Chicasaws.

Their way of life is in general very abundant; they have much more of venison,
Bear, turkies; and small game in their country than their neighbors have, and
they raise abundance of small cattle, hogs, turkeys, ducks and dunghill fowls
(all which are very good in their kind) and of these they spare not; the labor
of the field is all done by the women; no savages are more proud of being
counted hunters, fishermen, and warriors: were they to cultivate their
plentiful country, they might raise amazing quantities of grain and pulse, as
it is they have enough for their home consumption, they buy a good deal of
rice, and they are the only savages that ever i saw that could bear to have
some rum in store; yet they drink to excess as well as others; there are few
towns in this nation where there is not some savage residing, who either trades
of his own stock, or is employed as a factor. They have more variety in their
diet than other savages: They make pancakes; they dry the tongues of their
venison; they make a caustic salt out of a kind of moss found at the bottom of
creeks and rivers, which although a vegetable salt, does not deliquiate on
exposing to the air; this they dissolve in water and pound their dried venison
till it looks like oakum and then eat it dipped in the above sauce; they eat
much roasted and boiled venison, a great deal of milk and eggs; they dry
peaches and persimmons, chestnuts and the fruit of the chamaerops, they also
prepare a cake of the pulp of the species of the passi flora, vulgarly called
may apple; some kinds of acorns they also prepare into good bread; the common
esculent convolvulus and the sort found in the low woods, both called potatoes,
are eat in abundance among them; they have plenty of the various species of Zea
or maize, or the Phascolis and Dolichos, and of different kinds of Panicum;
bears oil, honey and hickory milk are the boast of the country; they have also
many kinds of salt and fresh water turtle, and their eggs, and plenty of fish;
we likewise find among them salted meats, corned venison in particular, which
is very fine; they cultivate abundance of melons; in a word, they have
naturally the greatest plenty imaginable; were they to cultivate the earth they
would have too much; vast numbers of horses are bred here, but of an
indifferent kind; and these savages are the greatest horse stealers yet known:
it is impossible to be sure of a horse wherever ^ese fellows come.

The Cassine is by them used as a drink, they barbacue or toast the leaves and
make a strong decoction of them; the men only are permitted to drink this
liquor to which they attribute many virtues, and it is made so strong as to be
black and raise a froth; when they drink it at their assemblies in the square,
they call it black drink.

Every afternoon a young savage warns the village to dance; as soon as it is
dusky they make a a fire of dry pitch pine, and round this they dance in a
circle with many strange gestures, postures, and cries; the women sing
regularly and some very prettily to the music of a kind of drum. I have heard
them sing, and seen them dance to no more than the words Yahoodela, Yahoyahena
for above two hours.

On this occasion i must not forget to mention an instance of female fondness
for dress, which i saw at one of these dancing assemblies: I observed the women
dressed their legs in a kind of leather stockings, hung full of the hoofs of
the roe deer in form of bells, in so much as to make a sound exactly like that
of the Castagnettes; i was very desirous of examining these stockings and had
an opportunity of satisfying my curiosity on those of my landlady at her return
home. I counted in one of her stockings four hundred and ninety three of these
claws; there were nine of the women at the dance with this kind of ornament, so
that allowing each of them to have had the same number of hoofs, and eight
hoofs to a deer, there must have been killed eleven hundred and ten deer to
furnish this small assembly of ladies with their ornaments, besides which,
earrings, bracelets, etc. are by no means forgot; an instance of luxury in
dress scarcely to be paralleled by our European ladies.

The men are also very fond of dress; my guide across the Peninsula, employed
above two hours at his toilet, at Mr. Moultrie's house, four miles from St.
Augustine, before he would venture to show himself in town.

Their principal exercises at home are ball playing in the manner before
related, and the just mentioned dances; the women are employed, besides the
cultivation of the earth, in dressing the victuals, preparing, scraping,
braining, rubbing and smoking the Roe skins, making macksens of them, spinning
buffaloe wool, making salt, preparing cassine drink, drying the chamaerops and
possiflora, making cold flour for traveling, gathering nuts and making their
milk; likewise in making baskets, brooms, pots, bowls and other earthen and
wooden vessels.

They live nearly in the same kind of habitations as the two other nations
already mentioned, except that their hot houses are not circular but oblong
squares; they learn their boys from their youth to endure all manner of
hardships particularly swimming in the coldest weather; they make them
frequently undergo scratching from head to foot through the skin with broken
glass or gar fish teeth, so as to make them all in a gore of blood, and then
wash them with cold water; this is with them the Arcanum against all diseases,
but when they design it as a punishment to the boys, they dry scratch them (i.
e) they apply no water after the operation, which renders it very painful; they
endeavor as much as possible to teach them all manner of cruelty, by making
them exercise it on the poor brute creation, in order to be the better versed
in it when they want to exercise it on their own species, and others of the
human genus, when they unhappily become their enemies.

As hospitable as this nation is to friends, as irreconcileably inhuman are
they to their enemies; there is hardly an instance of one miserable prisoner's
ever having escaped their barbarity; the torments they put the wretched victims
to, are too horrid to relate, and the account thereof can only serve to make
human nature shudder.

No nation has so contemptible an opinion of us as these. They practice
unnatural commerce with their own sex to as high a degree as the Chicasaws;
they, like all other savages, are very fond of dogs, in so much as never to
kill one out of a litter, and it is not uncommon in the nation to see a dog
very lean, and so sensible of his misfortune as to seek a wall or post for his
support before he ventures to bark.

With regard to the women, their girls are the most arrant prudes and coquets
in the world, though they will never scruple to sell the use of their bodies
when they can do it in private; a person who wishes to be accommodated here can
generally be supplied for payment, and the savages think a young woman nothing
the worse for making use of her body, as they term it; but it is a great
falsehood which has been related of these savages, that they exhort their young
women to cohabitation with white men.

Polygamy is here allowed, though not generally made use of; they marry without
much ceremony, seldom any more than to make some presents to the parents, and
to have a feast or hearty regale at the hut of the wife's Father; when once
married the women are bound to the strictest observation of obedience and
conjugal fidelity, saying that she that has once sold herself, can not any more
dispose of any thing whatever; and of their wives they are the most
unreasonably jealous of any nation under the sun. Adultery is punished by
severe flagellations and loss of hair, nose, and ears, in both parties, if they
are taken; sometimes they spare the nose of the man, and i have known some
instances of white men having this misfortune and being obliged to apply to the
Commissary, or the nearest Governor for a certificate to secure them from the
imputation of the pillory.

Physic, or the knowledge of it, is another thing in which they pride
themselves not a little, but they apply that name to all kinds of exorcisms,
juggling and legerdemain tricks, as well as to the knowledge of diseases and
the simples proper to cure them.

Once a year, about July, these people put out all the fires throughout the
nation; they fast the two next days; then the fire is lighted again according
to their old fashion (i. e.) by drilling with a hard piece of wood on a soft
one till it catches which soon happens, thus all the fires are again lighted
and universal feasting ensues.

The women are just as easily delivered as those of the other savages, and
immediately after birth the infant is plunged into cold water.

They revere old age to excess; in extreme sickness they will out of compassion
break the neck of the decrepid or lingering patient.

The dead are buried in a sitting posture, and they are furnished with a
musket, powder and ball, a hatchet, pipe, some tobacco, a club, a bow and
arrows, a looking glass, some vermillion and other trinkets, in order to come
well provided in the world of spirits.

The Arkanzas, Kanzas, Kappas, or Kwappas are the only nation of any note after
the three above named, with whom West Florida has any connection,
notwithstanding they live on the west side of the river; they are supposed to
be about four hundred gun men.

This nation is famous for the death of Ferdinand Soto in the year 1543, after
his immense journey from the Bay of Tampe through Apalachia, Pensacola, Mobile,
and the Chicasaw nation, etc. to the Mississippi, by his historian called Rio
Grande; also the arrival of Mr. de la Salle, who in 1682, coming down this
river and having taken formal possession of this country, went further down to
its mouth, observed it in Latitude 29, went up again as far as Illinois, thence
to Canada and France, from whence he returned with a small squadron in 1684 to
find the mouth of the river once more, but through obstinacy passed it so far
as to get into the Bay of St. Bernard and river Bravo, where losing his vessels
he attempted to find the Arkanzas a second time, but after a long and tedious
journey of almost three years he shared if possible a worse fate than Soto,
being murdered by his own people near the nation of the Caeni on the 29th of
May 1687; this we gather from the writings of Mr. Joutel who was present at all
the scenes i have related, concerning this affair, and who pursued the journey
to the Arkanzas and Canada; this nation were till lately the declared enemies
of the Chicasaws; their country is said to be exceeding fine, but as i have not
seen it i can not judge of it, i never saw above six of this race, therefore i
only treat of them on account of their connection with the country i am
describing.

In general their manners are very like those of all other savages, but among
them i find a custom not known by the other southern nations which is that of a
feast of dogs flesh at the declaration of war, which is a common practice among
all the northern tribes; we are also told that an Arkanza is counted a warrior
in his nation for having killed his enemies dog.

As many various accounts have been given of the manner of a declaration of war
by different savages, i will here acquaint my reader of my having more or less
personal knowledge or acquaintance with every tribe between the river St.
Lawrence and the bottom of the gulf of Darien, and i think i can give the
following as an account that will stand the universal test in all that extent.

When war has been resolved on by the leading men of the nation, a feast is
prepared and all the chief warriors are invited; after a great deal of
swilling, the cause of the assembly is eloquently made knows by some Orator,
and the intended expedition submitted to the consideration of the assembly; as
soon as it is approved of, they paint themselves red or black, assume a very
ghastly appearance and behavior, adorning themselves many uncouth ways; they
dance their war dances under a continual roar of the death whoop, every one
relates the great actions of his ancestors, and sings the praises of his own,
as well past as future;

the insults of the enemy are painted in their blackest colors, and a great
deal of bloody advice to their young men with an universal cry of revenge!
revenge! ends the farce, and then every one plans expeditions as he sees proper
and convenient to execute.

The practice of scalping their slain enemy i believe is universal, but those
in the neighborhood of the Dutch colonies have laid it by for another, that of
cutting off the hands, which was in consequence of a reward the company gave
them for the hands of such runaway blacks as joined the rebel Negroes, because
there were instances of persons scalped who have recovered, but after the loss
of hands they cannot any more use arms.

Juggling and pretense to witchcraft, as also consulting of omens, is common to
the Arkanzas as well as others, and passes by the name of physic.

They have so far a veneration for the alligator as not to destroy him, nor
have i seen a savage who would willingly kill a snake.

The pipe is used here as with others, Tobacco in some shape or other seems to
be the American symbol of peace, friendship and social conversation, to which
last the Europeans seem also to have applied it in imitation of the savages.

I am informed that they bury their dead like the Creeks with the addition of
tying the head down to the knees.

To be particular about the remains of the Tonicas, Chitimachas, Yascos,
Hoomas, Mobilians, Pasca-Oocoolos, Hattakappas, Taensas, Biloxis, Ybitoopas,
Aquelon-Pissas, or Colla-Pissas, Tiaoux, Oaktashippas, and many others, who
have been destroyed by the French, would be needless, as there are not above
from five to eighteen or twenty families of each of them left, who inhabit the
banks of the Mississippi, dispersed among the plantations, where they serve as
hunters, and for some other laborious uses; something similar to the subdued
tribes of New England; and so unnatural is a humanized life to these people,
that being as it were out of their element, this remnant melts daily like snow
before the Sun.

To give an idea of Indian hieroglyphick painting, i have subjoined the two
following cuts; the first is Chactaw, and means that an expedition by seventy
men, led by seven principal warriors, and eight of inferior rank, had in an
action killed nine of their enemies, of which they brought the scalps, and that
the place where it was marked was the first public place in their territories
where they arrived with the scalps.

The second is a painting in the Creek taste, it means, that ten of that nation
of the Stag family came in three canoes into their enemies country, that six of
the party near this place, which was at Oopah Ullah, a brook so called on the
road to the Chactaws, had met two men, and two women with a dog, that they lay
in ambush for them, killed them, and that they all went home with the four
scalps; the scalp in the stag's foot implies the honor of the action to the
whole family.

Such my reader may be assured were the boasted hieroglyphick paintings of
Muteczuma's people when Cortes landed in Mexico, and similar to my description
were the people, the palaces and temples of Mexico so gloriously painted in
Spanish Rhodomontades, for what end i know not, but i can assure every one that
these Iberian histories of the conquest of Mexico are no other than truth very
thickly veiled with absurdities; for except the silver and gold which these
savages might then have, believe me they differed nothing from others; and as
an evident proof of this we see the free unconquered nations of Darien in
possession of gold and silver of their own finding, but very confined in their
ideas of working it.

The primum Mobile of the welfare of these countries and of the wealth of their
inhabitants are the African slaves; the primary fine spun constitution of
Georgia, is a recent and striking proof of this; that country would not this
day have been worth the notice of any, had not the importation and use of
Negroes been allowed on the arrival of Governor Reynolds; when this Gentleman
came to the Government it had languished under the administration of General
Oglethorpe and the other trustees for about twenty years and then the land was
worth less than at the first beginning, but no sooner had Mr. Reynolds arrived,
and, among other useful regulations, the free use of slaves taken place, the
country flourished; it is now about seventeen years ago that this happened:
Hutchinson's island before Savannah was then sold for twenty pounds sterling,
as yet there is a great deal of it unimproved and it cannot now be bought for
ten thousand pound sterling, the improvements likewise are far more perfect;
amazing as this increase of value is, yet i believe that there are many
instances of a still greater, and i know some lands without any improvements on
them of any kind, increase in six years time from five to forty shillings per
acre, and many inhabitants of savannah can now testify, that before the
surrender of the trustees, almost every house there might have been bought for
the consideration of doing the militia duty in the room of the first owner
only. Last year the exports of the province amounted to above 121,000 l.
sterling, as may be seen by a state of the custom house books then published,
an amazing increase in seventeen years from nothing!

The late foolish, not to call them cruel attempts of settling East Florida by
whites from Europe (i mean as well from England as from the Levant) are
likewise a very absolute conviction of the necessity of having Negroe slaves;
but as some people who are able to purchase, slaves, run away with the notion
of the unlawfulness of holding a property in Negroes, and who are perhaps not a
little misled by the silly pamphlet published in some of the colonies, called
an address to the inhabitants of the British settlements in America upon slave
keeping, etc. have attempted to settle without Negroes at all; i cannot in
conscience forbear to give my advice to all adventurers in Florida, who desire
to improve a plantation for their benefit, not to forget these useful though
inferior members of society; not but poor families may live in plenty, and by
honest labor acquire a comfortable and easy situation in life as may be wished
for, but until their industry helps them to the means of buying one slave and
so on till they get

An AGGREGATE and VALUATION of EXPORTS of PRODUCE from the PROVINCE of GEORGIA,
With the NUMBER of VESSELS and TONNAGE employed therein, annually
distinguished, from the Year 1754, to 1773. Compiled by WILLIAM BROWN,
Comptroller and Searcher of his Majesty's Customs in the Port of Savannah.
Square rigged Vessels. Sloops and Schooners. Vessels. Tonnage. Barrels of
Rice. Indico. Dear Skins, raw and dressed. ^ver Skins. Raw Silk. Tanned
Leather. Tobacco. Timber of all kinds. Staves of all Kinds. Shingles. Oars and
Handspikes. (...) Turpentine. Pitch. Tar. Por^ (...) H^ and Shoa^. Corn. Flour.
Rough Rice. Pease. Sago Powder. Orange Juice. Tallow. Bees and Myrtle Wax.
Horses. Mules. Stee^s and Cows. Value of (...) Articles not enumerated in the
Table. Total Value in Sterling at current Prices. No. No. Tot. No. No. Lbs.
Lbs. Lbs. Lbs. Lbs. Lbs. Feet. No. No. No. Lbs. Bar. Bar. Bar. Bar. Bar. No.
Bush. Lbs. Bush Bush Lbs. Gal. Lbs. Lbs. No. No. No. L. L. From 5th Jan. 1755,
to 5th Jan. 1756. 9 43 52 1899 2299 4508 49995 120 438 3250 387849 203225 24090
45 20 40 76 600 237 400 960 48 16 24 15744 Jan. 1756, to Jan. 1757, 7 35 42
1799 2997 933^ 39220 380 268 6035 289843 196259 26300 884 300 12^ 610 200 40
200 500 150 23 46 32 16776 Jan. 1757, to Jan. 1758, 11 33 44 1559 2998 1815
26357 358 9837 270396 182268 17800 2200 12^ 717 793 1 6 15649 Jan. 1758, to
Jan. 1759, 4 17 21 665 2371 9600 5791 358 10350 50215 63330 6885 158 35 2^ 100
1 8613 Jan. 1759, to Jan. 1760, 13 35 48 1981 3603 555 7380 622 734 12030
278066 102959 80880 1287 83 35 700 290 95 100 12694 Jan. 1760, to Jan. 1761, 7
30 37 1457 3283 11746 65765 2298 55^ 34725 283961 80500 58^00 1112 425 8 ^ 208
3910 20852 Jan. 1761, to Jan. 1762, 9 36 45 1604 4666 1552 13140 60 332 11775
307690 50969 60^5^ 1244 160 235 274 ^ 37 271 4584 1050 24 2 5 15870 Jan. 1762,
to Jan. 1763, 22 35 57 2784 6509 9133 42855 5260 380 17100 417449 325477 68^6^
1833 246 392 38 70 1280 776 430 384 5120 1800 46 65 27021 Jan. 1763, to Jan.
1764, 34 58 92 4761 7702 8764 184737 240 953 16605 917384 594356 147^20 565 8
23 175 161 ^ 310 405 480 632 1780 65 15 51 47551 Jan. 1764, to Jan. 1765, 36 79
115 5586 9690 14151 172425 540 898 58005 1043535 423251 206^51 19 359 154 7^
740 6756 2533 460 316 512 840 179 32 149 55025 Jan. 1765, to Jan. 1766, 54 94
148 7685 12224 16019 200695 1800 711 34575 1879454 661416 372^50 528 486 394
14^ 1360 7805 3113 300 100 2170 209 69 318 73426 Jan. 1766, to Jan. 1767, 68 86
154 9^47 14257 14366 273460 1121 1084 33120 2101466 737898 203^47 607 82 506
723 754 76 965 4527 2892 143 608 536 1280 2051 139 152 184 81228 Jan. 1767, to
Jan. 1768, 62 92 154 8465 11281 12918 205340 5412 671 46670 1767199 748166
25^25 320 88 627 387 948 1^ 777 403 6486 40 100 142 512 3300 132 20 77 66 67092
Jan. 1768, to Jan. 1769, 77 109 186 10406 17773 20041 306510 207 541 39234
1787258 806609 36^77 50 202 49^ 167 512 3^ 1238 10897 1543 440 2912 660 512
3137 270 11 37 92284 Jan. 1769, to Jan. 1770, 87 94 181 9276 16740 13908 288870
2405 332 33963 3030 1634331 747903 34^588 130 68 492 138 673 190 608 21896 1122
273 12289 434 4985 4808 266 20 24 49 86480 Jan. 1770, to Jan. 1771, 73 113 186
10514 22129 22336 284840 1469 290 44539 13447 1805992 406276 28^991 96 1860 103
80 105 521 639 605 1359^ 7064 601 18405 605 1079 4058 345 30 25 126 99383 Jan.
1771, to Jan. 1772, 64 121 185 955^ 25232 19900 270860 528 438 48209 34875
2159072 403253 22^698 305 5470 45 193 102 409 4^ 216 11952 7200 1364 96 120^0
1770 498 2666 65 21 30 125 106387 Jan. 1772, to Jan. 1773, 84 133 217 11246
23540 11882 213475 632 485 52126 176732 2163582 988791 35^930 259 40 364 298
628 535 574 11444 1000 2627 140 14435 284 1954 257 10 136 300 121677

Of the above Aggregate the Part of SUNBURY exported last Year L. 20,876.

N. B. The sudden Increase and Decrease of several Articles in certain ^ea^.
are (...) Produce from such seemingly so. The RICE from 1772 to 1773 amounted
to 96,266 l. 9 s. DEER SKINS, (...) and dressed, to 18,740 l. 8 s. 11 d. and
LUMBER of a^ Kinds to 12,634 l. (...) of every Year 30 l. upon an Average for a
Gain in the Islands of at least 200 per Cent. on Scantling, and 75 per Cent^
Plank.

BEFORE me ANTHONY STOKES, Barrister at Law, Chief Justice of the said Province
of Georgia, personally appeared WILLIAM BROWN, Esquire, Comptroller and
Searcher of the Port of Savannah, in the said Province, and made Oath, That the
above Aggregate is true, according to the best of his Knowledge and Belief;
which Oath was taken before me, the first Day of March, 1773.

ANTHONY STOKES.


It is to be observed that the first ninth Year of the above Aggregate amounts
to 47,551 l. and the second being 121, 677 is nearly equal to two and a half
Times the first; so that in the third ninth Year (anno 1782) by an Increase in
the same Proportion, the Exports must amount to 300,000 l. though (...) if we
^on geometrically; especially we consider the great Bodies of ^ed Swamp Lands
still ^maining in the Province, and near four Mil^ of (...) Acres of Indian
Hunting-Grounds, ceded anno 1773, of as rich upland Soil as any in America, and
exactly adapted for rai^ Grain of all Kinds, Tobacco, Hamp and Indigo. In
short, ^rgia may be justly deemed one of the most flou^hing Colonies in
America. In the Year 1772 a Gentleman upon the Island of Skid-away, ten Miles
below Savannah, cleared 50 l. sterl^by each Negroe employed in planting Indigo;
and there is almost an equal Profit to be made by cutting Lumber, which, from
its being so strongly impregnated with Turpentine, resists the Worm and Weather
better than the Pine of the more northern Colonies; i^sequence of this it is in
great Demand in the West Indies. -- As to Indian Corn, its common Produce in
the lowlands is from forty to fifty Bushels per Acre; and up the Country, from
sixty to seventy Bushels; but though there is also great Benefit to ^ped by
cultivating Rice, etc. only the wealthier Sort of People can attend to it, on
account of the Number of Slaves, and the great Apparatus necessary for that
Business. The Floridas may be regarded in the same Light with Georgia, allowing
their State of Infancy.

more it will be vanity for them to hope for an accumulation of wealth.

Do we not see Solomon's words fully verified in Negroes? A servant will not
answer though he understand. The very perverse nature of this black race seems
to require the harsh treatment they generally receive, but like all other
things, this is carried into the extreme; far be it from me to approve or
recommend the vile usage to which this useful part of the creation is subjected
by some of our western nabobs, but against the Phyllis of Boston (who is the
Phaenix of her race) i could bring at least twenty well known instances of the
contrary effect of education on this sable generation.

Treachery, theft, stubbornness, and idleness, the first in the more northern
Negroes, and the three last in the Ebo, Angola, and Benin slaves are such
consequences of their manner of life at home as to put it out of all doubt that
these qualities are natural to them and not originated by their state of
slavery.

Had Montesquieu been well acquainted with the American colonies, he would not
have made use of any argument so much below so great a man as the one quoted in
the above named enthusiastical production, which seems calculated to procure a
greater number of vagabonds than we are already pestered with. I think no man
ought to be allowed the manumission of his slave except he be bound for his
good behavior and industry, and idle free blacks ought to be sold for the good
of the community.

The anecdotes of the sublimity of Negroes sentiments in their own country are
very similar to my anecdote of a savage shooting himself because his mother
reprimanded him, or another doing the same because he lost his all at play.

Mr. Le Poivre has mentioned the making sugar in Cochin China, by free men, but
it has not been observed, that those free men make small quantities, and sell
it at the low rate they do, only because others who employ slaves in the same
or in the adjacent countries, sell them at that price, which may be easily
proved, and consequently oblige the others to do the same; nor that these free
men live on the same diet as our slaves, and who will say that Cochin Chinese
sugar after exportation sells at a more reasonable rate than Javan, Martinique,
Jamaica, or any eastern or western sugar does.

Have not all the endeavors of the several Legislatures in the West Indies to
introduce more white or free people proved abortive, by reason of their general
inability for labor in those climates?

Is it not therefore better to employ those, who labor at a similar work in
their own sultry country, and in a state of slavery too, than to make victims
of men who can by no means be qualified for the fatigue of a southern
plantation.

We have known not long ago sugars etc. as cheap in the West Indies as in the
East; it is the increase of consumption in Europe and North America that
renders it dear: I affirm that in America, neither sugar, rice nor indigo can
be made by whites at three times the price it is made now by the blacks, and i
also affirm that the West India lands are distributed among all nations with
less reservation, than they are on the continent of British North America.

Can any one say that the favorites of mankind (i mean liberty and property)
are any where enjoyed in Africa?

The rhapsodical opinion that the earth produces more when worked by free men
than by slaves may do in theory but not in practice; the contrary is easily
made to appear; and i am certain from the nature of the climates, that the same
colonies when cultivated by free men would not produce one tenth part of what
they do now; as for an equal distribution of property it is like Harrington's
Oceana or Sir Thomas More's Utopia.

An European will outlive a Creole by means of his more regular life, not
otherwise, and who knows not that Negroes attain with all their labor a much
higher age than the generality of idle Whites.

The foolish argument of the shortness of the Jewish history, as well as
lugging in the practice of Polygamy by the head and shoulders (although the
text quoted is not to the purpose) is too mean to be refuted.

Let not therefore the narrow system of morality adopted by some of our
contemporary enthusiastical Philosophers restrain us from properly using this
naturally subjected species of mankind; the impossibility of an European's
bearing the requisite labor in those climes is now so well ascertained as not
to require any elucidation, nor can any one pretend to say, that the posterity
of Europeans born in the torrid Zone ought to bear its inclemency; what labor
can we expect from men brought up in ease and affluence? It is pretended that
our employing slaves is contrary to the precepts of the founder of our most
holy religion, when he says: "Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself;" i need
not make use of the confined ideas of the ancient Jews, who thought that the
title of neighbor did not extend to any thing beyond their own nation.

I will then affirm, that there is a fivefold state of slavery, not only known
or permitted; but commanded in God's holy word.

1st. Those who are condemned to slavery for their crimes, which we but too
often experience to be the case with the slaves imported to us from Africa.

2ly. Those that are taken in war, which is the most general way among the
Negroes to furnish us with slaves, and who would be murdered; did we not induce
their conquerors by our manufactures and money to show them mercy.

3ly. Those who are sold by their Parents, which custom obtains among many
people even the refined and civilized Chinese, not to mention some christians,
but most among the Negroes.

4ly Those who sell themselves or are sold for debts, or other wants, which not
only the Negroes, but our own laws justify.

5ly Those who are born in slavery.

I need not seek assistance from the laws actually in force among us to prove
the first; Noah in Genesis, chap. 9, v. 25, 27, condemns Ham to slavery for the
crime he had committed, and in Exodus, chap. 22, v. 3, God commands us that, If
the Sun be risen upon a thief, it shall unto him be a crime of blood, for he
should make full restitution, if he have nothing, let him be sold for his
theft. Here let me remind my reader, how much easier the slavery of our Negroes
is, than the cruel captivity of those, who for their misdemeanors are condemned
to the chain, the wheelbarrow or the galleys.

For the second read Joshua, chap. 9, v. 23.

Does not Exodus, chap. 21, v. 7, show, that a man might sell his child as a
servant, only giving the maid servant a privilege above men servants?

In the fourth case i think that (without leaving the point in view) i may ask,
does not the soldier sell his liberty to his sovereign or other Prince for his
pay be it for a time or for life?

Proverbs, chap. 11, v. 29, tell us, That the fool shall be servant to the wise
of heart. Chap. 22, v. 7, The rich rules over the poor and the borrower shall
be servant to the lender. Does not Jesus himself, Math. chap. 18. v. 25 make
use of a parable fully to my purpose? when he says: But for as much as he had
not to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife and children and
all that he had, and payment to be made.

Exodus chap. 21, v. 4, tells us that; if the master have given his servant a
wife, and she have born him sons or daughters, the wife and her children shall
be her masters.

For the perpetuity of slavery read Leviticus chap. 25, v. 39, to 47, how
absurdly is Montesquieu again quoted, when in his L. 10, C. 3, he speaks of a
conquered nation, who through necessity are made slaves in their own country:
every one knows that such conquered people, who are suffered to remain at home
at first under oppression, ought by degrees to be made free subjects, their
good behavior being their ransom; but who, even among those refined moralists,
would emancipate his slave without some reward either private or public?

How Tacitus comes to be so pat to the purpose of this acute Philosopher i have
not been able to learn; nor is the quotation from the universal history, or Mr.
Robertson of any more force: Since we are able then to get slaves in a lawful
manner, why should we now be restrained from buying them to cultivate our
grounds, when all nations at all times have enjoyed that privilege?

Had not the well known Christian Doctor of the Colossian Church a slave called
Onefimus? did not this slave run away (after having, as usual with slaves,
robbed his master) come to Rome and go to see St. Paul? Paul treated him
kindly, instructed, converted, and baptized him and sent him back to his master
with a letter full of godly eloquence to persuade Philemon to forgive his slave
and re-establish him in his favor, but by no means an exhortation, much less
an order to set him free.

It is not religion then nor christian charity that forbids us to have slaves,
but it commands us the duties we are to fulfill toward them, instructing them
to obey us, and us to use them as a part of the reasonable creation.

Who knows not, that the Spaniards are so much slaves that they can not well be
more so, were they bought by their King: And who, that is acquainted in the
Spanish dominions, knows not, that a modern Iberian does himself more honor by
saying (Soi Blanco) i. e. I am a white man, than if he exclaimed, i am Noble!

Shall after what i have said, this Rhapsodist with his confined ideas, send us
to some modern system of religion, or say, that i have offered any thing
contrary to the sublime doctrine of the author of christianity? Had this
anonymous writer instead of playing with the word slavery, told us, that the
Northern colonies had no occasion for Negroes, he would have said more, than
all he has advanced in his futile publication.

A Negroe at the Mississippi is reckoned to bring in his master an hundred
dollars per annum, besides his share toward all the provision consumed in the
family; Negroes in general are used with more lenity there than in Carolina.

I have in my dissertation on the origin of the savages, which has swelled
beyond my intention, made mention of a peculiar characteristic of the Negroe
species, here let me be allowed to mention that they, like all others of the
different species, and varieties of the human genus are born white, which
color soon changes, but on the moment of birth in both sexes the exterior
parts of generation will show, whether the person will be black, yellow, brown,
red or any other color known among mankind.

There is among the Negroes a kind of anomalous beings with white skins, feeble
eyes, etc. which have been so often described by other authors that i shall not
trouble my reader with a particular account of them; yet one observation i
cannot forbear to make, which i believe will be found no less curious than new:

Through all the Northern America the red men are universally so, but as soon
as we come on the Isthmus we find some of those unhappy anomalous individuals
among the savages; i have myself seen several of either sex of this forlorn
kind among the Sant Blass nation, who call themselves Ayomalas; they inhabit
the South Eastern part of the Isthmus, and i understand from others conversant
farther South, that in South America it is common; these people are of such an
exceeding tender texture of skin, that it is disagreeably fair and very liable
to become scurfy and freckled; their eyes are nearly as red as those of a white
rabbit and very weak, seeing objects plainly only after Sun set, before Sun
rise, or in a cloudy day: Their hair is straight, long, lank, and red, not
participating of the harsh strong texture of the hair of common savages; their
in ability for labor, for want of sight, causes the others of the nation to
support them; the offspring of these poor creatures however is again red and in
the general course of nature.

The manners and way of life of the white people in Florida, differ very
greatly from those in other provinces of America, particularly in respect of
clothing; they are very plain, their dress consists of a slight waistcoast of
striped cotton, and a pair of trowsers of the same, and often no coat; if any,
it is a short one of some light stuff; in winter a kind of surtout, made of a
blanket, and a pair of Indian boots is all the addition; the women also dress
light and are not very expensive; happy frugality! May the inhabitants of this
blessed climate long continue to cherish thee as their greatest temporary
blessing! Manufactures of cotton for their own use also prevail greatly among
the industrious Acadians; may the new comer under the free government of the
English not be ashamed to follow this excellent example! sorry i am though,
that i find myself obliged to say that when in anno 1772 i was in Orleans i
could not forbear to feel the weight and justice of an exclamation made by a
French gentleman to me upon seeing some English gentlemen walk upon the Levis "
Tell me Sir, which of us are the Petits Maitres of Lo^isiana the English or we.
Dites moy Monsieur (says he) lesquels sont les petits maitres de la Louifiane
Messrs. les Anglois ou nous autres, with grief i was obliged tacitly to own the
English were.

The amazing plenty of the country in its western regions makes them keep
princely tables at a small expense, thus i can not call this luxury a fault; to
form an idea at what a good table may be furnished, i beg my reader to peruse
the following account, as this really stood in the year 1772 in the months of
November and December, and in January and February 1773: Beef at 13 s6. per
hundred; fresh pork of the best corn fed 18 s. per hundred; country flour from
12 s. to 13 s6. the North American flour 15 s6. to 16 s6. per hundred; a bushel
of good clean full grained Indian corn about 13 d.; a barrel of the best clean
merchantable rice being about two gross hundred weight of neat grain, from 9 s.
to 11 s3; sweet potatoes about 8 d. per bushel; a sheep of about 12 pound per
quarter, if purchased above New Orleans, will cost 6 s9, if below, 9 s; a tame
goose of the best kind from 10 d. to 1 s; a turkey about 20 d. to 2 s; if a
very fine wild one, some times 2 s6; a common dunghill fowl about 6 d; a tame
duck from 6 d. to 8 d; venison variable according to the caprice or nation of
the hunter, but always very cheap, this has a noble peculiar fine flavor here;
butter is little used, yet the best the Acadians make which is very good sells
at about 6 d.; bears oil carefully clarified supplies its place; this is bought
at about 3 s6 a gallon; and in my opinion, as well as in the opinion of all who
once try it, richly deserves the pre-eminence of butter; besides these the
lakes Pont-Chartrain, Maurepas, Borgne, and O^achas supply the country with a
vast variety of excellent fish at an exceeding low price, and in winter large
quantities of fine oysters and a great choice of water game in high perfection,
so low as seldom to be asked more than 6 d. for a goose, about 4 d. for a duck,
mallard, widgeon, or other of that size, and about 2 d. for a teal; All these
prices are as near as possible reduced out of the country currency into
sterling.
all these have here a peculiar flavor and are much admired; the river abounds
likewise in fish, but being very deep and little pains taken to catch them, the
different kinds are scarcely known; the planters all keep their hunters for
providing their tables, and their yards abound in poultry; small game, such as
quails, pheasants, hares, squirrels, snipes, godwits, curlews, meadow larks,
fieldfares, rice birds, etc. etc. are very frequently had.

It is true that Pensacola and Mobile especially the first are not so abundant;
but in regard of meat, venison and fish, i pronounce it to be owing to the
indolence of the inhabitants, who content themselves to pay any price fixed
thereon by one or two butchers, and three or four industrious Spanish hunters
and fishermen.

Mobile has plenty of bread kind already, and notwithstanding the barren
miserable appearance of the sea coast here and at Pensacola, their fine rivers
will e're long oblige propitious plenty to rear her at present hidden head.

In respect of vegetables, from Mobile westward there is an amazing supply of
every kind the year round in their highest perfection and of the finest
flavor; but the barren sand of Pensacola will not admit of gardening in June,
July, and August, the proportion of moisture being then too small for that of
heat.

In the gardens we find various kinds of cabbage and sallading, carrots,
turnips, radishes, skirrets, leaks, scallions and other roots, asparagus,
artichoakes, cucumbers, green pease (in some the year round) vast variety of
beans, and choice of best flavoured pot herbs, in short every fine esculent
plant Europe can boast of, they have beyond description perfect, neither has
the bounteous hand of nature here been sparing in the most delicious fruits for
the table, nor forgot to stock the fields and woods with fine mushrooms,
truffles and morels for the most exquisite sauces.

Hic ver assiduum atque alienis mensibus aestas bis gravidae pecudes; bis pomis
utilis arbos

VIRG. Happy climate where through all seasons of the year the inestimable
gifts of Flora and Pomona are common, where snow or ice are very seldom seen,
and where the cruel necessity of roasting one's self before a fire is utterly
unknown!

With respect to drink, among the English inhabitants it is generally water
tempered with a moderate quantity of the best West India rum, and among the
better sort the Portuguese and Spanish wines; the French drink their favorite
claret of the two kinds called vin cabor and vin de ville; the Spaniards add
the St. Lucar wine to it, New England rum (that bane of health and happiness)
has found its way here also, among the lower classes; a low kind of rum from
the French Isles is likewise used by some, and its cheapness makes it preferred
for the trade with the savages.

A transition to the agriculture of these colonies comes most naturally in
course; this science (undoubtedly the most noble and most useful of all
employments) has not only had the protection and countenance of Monarchs and
other great men, but they have even practiced it, our present gracious
Sovereign has shown instances of his care of the art, and many individuals of
rank in England, Holland and France now practice it and study its improvement,
and the annals of all nations tell us, that the flourishing state of that art
was the happy period of their grandeur; and it undoubtedly is and always will
be an honorable, innocent, pleasant, and useful pursuit.

The amazing multiplication of mankind in America, which since eighteen years
that i have been acquainted with the continent has proceeded nearly, if not
wholly, in a triplicate proportion, is entirely owing to this great art, and to
the room this wide waste of new world affords for its improvement; this art is
the source of our grandeur, and the cause of our happy strides to greatness;
the welfare of the people depends thereon, all the consequence of a nation is
owing to it, and the national independency of the greatest comunities is in a
great measure inseparable from it.

In this noble country then (which will afford not only all the necessaries but
even the superfluities of life) it ought therefore to be the principal object
of our most arduous pursuits; all the products of the torrid Zone as well as of
the temperate are capable of being produced in this perfect climate, let us see
which of them most deserves our attention.

Before i descend to particulars a thought claims my notice; West Florida is
beyond measure happy in having its fertile soil more equally divided than the
barren sands which were chosen by the No doubt this was a scheme of the enemies
of American population who see themselves every way bafiled.
monopolizers of East Florida; these even overlooked the most useful places
there, and planted their baronies in the pine barrens. There let the lords be
lumber cutters! The fertile part of West Florida is more equally divided, and
there population through agriculture does and must continue to flourish, happy
circumstance! for which Dr. Stork and the self taught Pennsylvanian Philosopher
deserve our perpetual thanks.

I. Wheat will always be produced in West Florida especially in the higher
latitudes on the river, so that all attempts to starve that country by blockade
would be vain and frustrated; barley, and oats grow well in all the lighter
soils, and rye may be produced in the most barren sands of the province.

The cultivation of these are so universally known, that to describe them would
be spending paper in vain, but a remark in regard to wheat (which has fallen
under my observation) must not be omitted; in the lower latitudes wheat will
grow exceeding well till it comes almost to maturity; but then of a sudden a
disease called the blast will often take it, and this in one night reduces the
hopes of a fine crop into a certainty that the best thing to be done next
morning is to burn the straw to clear the ground for some thing else; to
prevent this an observant farmer of my acquaintance in Georgia Mr. Isaac Young,
having found that rye was never subject to this disease, mixed some rye among
his wheat, and the field escaped the blast; he repeated the trial till he was
convinced of its efficacy, and then sowed a field of about five acres with
wheat, surrounding it with a list of about twenty feet of rye; he succeeded in
this experiment also, and his repeated trials have now shown that it may be
depended upon as efficacious, and thus wheat may be truly made an universal
grain.

II. The Zea, Maize or Indian corn is a grain by no means to be neglected; the
rich grounds in the N. W. parts of East Florida about Alachua etc. and the
lands in the N. E. of West Florida are peculiarly adapted thereto and will
yield fifty or sixty bushels per acre, the intervale on the Tembechbe and the
land on the Mississippi is capable of producing eighty bushels per acre; even
the sandy land, or that which is little better than sand, will yield according
to seasons from fifteen to twenty five bushels an acre.

The vast consumption of this grain in food for mankind is very well known, but
its superior goodness for the feeding of swine, poultry, and indeed all
animals, joined to its easy culture and prodigious increase, makes it deserve a
rank before all other grain after wheat: Its culture requires the ground to be
thoroughly hoed The savages anciently performed this with the shoulder blade of
animals fixed on staves.
or plowed, so as to make it entirely mellow, and break every clod, then holes
are made at equal distances in regular rows, and four or five grains dropped in
each and covered; in this part of the husbandry the greatest mistake is often
made through over greediness of land, the holes ought to be at the regular
distance of five feet, which will leave room for the horse or hand hoeing it
much better, than if it was placed at four feet; some people are so near minded
as to plant them only three feet a part, but this prevents the free circulation
of air through the rows, of which this grain stands very much in need; this is
so evident, that on planting in the same field some corn at three, at four, or
at five feet distance, (suppose the soil equally good) there will be a
difference of six feet in the height of the plants, for the best land can not
raise the crowded corn to above ten or twelve feet, whereas that through which
the air has free access, is frequently raised to sixteen, eighteen, and even
twenty feet; I write for Florida.
nor is this the only difference, the crowded corn will not produce grain in
any thing like the proportion of that which stands at proper distances; a stem
of crowded corn will hardly ever furnish above three ears, and th^se not above
eight inches long, nor have they their extremities ever filled, neither are the
rows so compact nor close together as that of corn that has enjoyed more
freedom; a stem of which will produce generally from three to five well grown
ears from nine to twelve inches long, compact, and to the end full grown and of
a wholesome look; when the young plants are grown about five or six inches out
of the ground, a man ought to go through the field, and pull up those plants
that look least promising leaving only three plants in each hill and the ground
must be kept weeded; when at the height of a foot or thereabouts, it must have
the first hoeing, the earth is then to be drawn round upon the root in form of
a cucumber hill; and now it may stand till it attains the height of three feet,
when it must have a second hoeing, and be cleared of suckers, which will appear
in numbers; when the grain is got to the growth of about six or seven feet, or
when the tassel or female flower begins to appear, it must again be relieved
from suckers, and have a third hoeing, throwing the ground well up round its
foot; in a large field these hoeings are most commodiously performed by the
hoe-plow drawn by one horse, but in new fields the hand hoe must assist, if not
do all the work; all the trouble with which this culture seems burdened is
amply repaid by this grateful grain, the time of ripening depends on the
climate; the northern climes bring it tardily but the southern ones hastily.

After this third hoeing the spike or male flower will appear in perfection;
you may now strip some superfluous leaves from the lower part of the plant
which will prove excellent hay for a horse and some cows that are necessary to
keep near the house; the corn having attained nearly its growth and the spikes
not showing any more pollen, which is the impregnating yellow dust, that is
seen on it during its flowering state, we find the female flower or silken
tassel change color; the ears fill and some lower leaves begin to fade, it
will not be bad husbandry to cut off all the tops above the uppermost ear; this
is left two or three days to dry on the summit of the plant, then tied in
sheaves, it is as fine a hay as any known for feeding such animals as are
intended to be kept about the farm yard, or in the stable, and every prudent
planter will find it his interest to keep some milch cows (at least) at home;
this lopping of the tops is also said to contribute to the filling of the ears
and the sooner ripening of them: the corn ripens in four or five months from
the planting, in Florida; the gathering is done by pulling the ear from the
stem, and carrying it in baskets to a place where it is stripped of all its husk
except the inner coat, and then it is kept in some airy loft or granary: and
when wanted for use, it is laid in heaps and threshed with flails, and
afterward winnowed like other grain.

A report has been spread that on the Mississippi it was only necessary to burn
the canes, make a hole in the ground and put the grain in, and it will grow
without culture; it is true, but less wise men than Solomon will know such a
field at sight to be that of the sluggard, and know the owner by his shabby
appearance.

To enumerate the vast variety of ways in employing this noble grain for food
such as hommany, mush, groats, parched flour, cold flour, puddings, Anagreeta
Anagreeta is the corn gathered before maturity, and dried in an oven or the hot
sun by which means it retains its sweetness and is easily dressed, making a
fine mixture in puddings especially with pease, but this is only practiced in
the provinces of New York and New Jersey.
and a multitude of other dishes, that vary in the difference of ripeness,
grinding or other ways of dressing it, would be too tedious and unfit for this
work; however the mixing its flour in equal parts with wheat flour after
macerating the first in water till the liquor becomes slightly acidulated makes
so fine a bread that i could by no means think it just to forget the mention of
this process, the meal coarsly ground and cleared of bran, then boiled with a
little salt in water, and thus mixed with wheat flour, makes also a palatable
bread of great use to the poor; i hope my reader will excuse this prolixity, so
great a staff of life deserves some notice.

III. Pease, as they are here called but improperly, because species of the
Phaseolus and Dolichos are meant, follow the maize in utility: It is well known
that most people use them like European pease either green or dry, and some
kinds, such as the small white sort, the bonavist, cuckolds increase, the white
black eyed pea, the white crowder, and many others, are undoubtedly at least as
good; add to this that while young, hull and all, they make a fine esculent
dish for the table, and when hulled they are as good as green pease, and as
much admired; the hulls after threshing are eagerly sought after by cattle, and
increase milk, the hogs fattened with this pulse are the next best pork to
those fed with maize; thus they infinitely increase the quantity of food; their
culture is easy, they are generally now planted between the corn at the second
time of hoeing; they want little or no attendance in that case, as the corn
serves them for support to climb up by, and the further attendance on the corn
also serves the crop of pease; i can not but think this husbandry a very good
one as by the time that the Cirrhi take hold of the corn it is sufficiently
filled to be out of all danger of hurt from this parasitical nature of the
pease. I also believe that the haulm left behind supplies the land with
sufficient manure to re-establish its vegetative vigor, which maize is but too
apt to exhaust.

The proper pea is not so fit for the field in this part of America, therefore
only cultivated in gardens for the purpose of eating them green.

IV. The esculent convolvulus, vulgo, sweet potatoe, claims the next place in
this list; this root is by agriculture meliorated so much that some of the
varieties are by no means inferior to any food we use on the southern tables,
although some palates, for instance my own, can hardly accommodate themselves
to them; the following list will point out the varieties, in an ascending scale
for goodness.

1st. Spanish, or the original root. 2d. Carolina, little superior to the
first. 3d. Brimstone, from its internal color, with a red skin. 4th. Purple
potatoe, having that color throughout except a very little of the heart. 5th.
Bermudas, or round white potatoe.
The 1st. 4th. and a few of the 5th. are cultivated in the Floridas.

The 1st. is scarce fit for the table being very fibrous, therefore most proper
to feed cattle; however pork from hogs fed with them is indifferent, and
requires to be hardened a considerable time with corn; it is remarkable that in
pork fed with them the fat always separates wholly from the lean, which is
likewise the case with that fed on the common peruvian potatoe, vulgarly called
the Irish.

The 4th and 5th are excellent food and deserve a place on every table, the 4th
cut into longitudinal slices and fried is a very good dish; plainly boiled they
are a good succedaneum for bread.

The 5th being less sweet and more dry than the others are best for stewing
with meat, such as fat pork or beef, or a fat goose or duck, to make what is
called an Haricot; their very mealy texture renders them the most proper in
room of bread, or to mix with flour and make bread of.

They are a profitable crop, and require a light sandy soil which must be made
very clean and mellow; they are planted in beds or hills, being propagated from
pieces that have what is called an eye in them; they require two or three
hoeings, and with this management will produce from three hundred to five
hundred bushels per acre; even the last, if we reckon ten hills necessary to
make a bushel.

About July, in rainy weather, slips are taken from them, and planted in beds
to procure a crop of small ones for next years seed.

The very same treatment is here necessary for the peruvian potatoe, but it
wants oftener covering because the heat of the summer sun would strengthen the
poisonous juices (with which this genus of night shade abounds) in those that
might be exposed to the air; therefore they are unfit for the field in this
climate, nor will they bear to be kept any time but in the garden; they will
yield six or eight crops yearly, of a very good kind for the table.

V. Buckwheat justly deserves the next rank, it being the most fattening grain
to all animals, but especially hogs and poultry; which last are always
surprisingly multiplied where this grain is raised; to man it is also an
excellent food; it is well known that in Philadelphia buckwheat cakes are one
of the articles of that city at their breakfasts; it is also a noble crop near
an apiary, and will multiply honey greatly; it requires a light loamy soil well
broke, and to be sowed very thin, it improves land where ever it is planted.

VI. The panicum or Guinea corn is next in this scale of the produce of the
earth; it differs from maize in being more difficult to be reduced into food,
and being of too hot a nature for brutes, especially poultry, who will become
blind by eating it often; it impoverishes land, but when sown at broad cast
will yield a fine and profitable crop of hay for such as are inclined to keep
horses or milch cows near home, nor has it in this case so bad an effect on the
soil.

VII. Rice though so lucrative a commodity did not deserve an earlier place in
this enumeration, because it is not properly a necessary article in the human
Economy in this country but a staple branch of trade, not likely to increase
the number of profitable members of society; however notwithstanding it is (for
our use) only fit for puddings, and to put in soops, or to make the wafer-like
bread called journey cakes in Carolina, yet it must be mentioned here on
account of its usefulness in feeding Negroes, cattle and poultry.

Its culture is in wet grounds, where in the dry season it is sowed in drills
eighteen inches apart and kept very clean, first by hoeing, and afterward by
letting water on just sufficient to destroy the weeds, and not to drown the
rice by covering its top; for rice will grow in any soil though it loves watery
ones best; but the reason of letting water on is more to suppress other plants
than to forward the growth of rice; for the crop grass and ^ther weeds are kept
under by being covered; ^over the rice and you will also destroy it; and i have
seen good crops in high lands, when the season was but moderately wet; it is
therefore to save labor that the planter chooses wet ground, but should he not
have the water at his command, the noxious growth in dry weather, or a
profusion of water in wet weather, would equally destroy the crop; it is
therefore necessary that great banks and deep ditches should be made to secure
the crop, and that is no work for new planters to begin.

The grain in the rough is very noble food for all quadrupeds and poultry; to
manufacture it there is a great deal of labor necessary; when manufactured a
quart per diem will very plentifully feed a working Negroe, and the dust,
beaten husk etc. that comes off will cause all animals on the plantation to be
very fat, especially turkeys, which no place on earth furnishes equal to those
on a rice plantation; it will require eighteen or twenty bushels of rough grain
to make a manufactured barrel of 500 pounds weight: The time of planting is
from the end of the frost to the 10th of June, and the season for reaping is
generally in October; a second crop will rise fit for fodder. In the twelve
mile swamp in East Florida i have seen a second crop come to perfection, and no
doubt in the grand marsh in latitude 25, 30, in that province it would always
yield twice.

An acre will produce from sixteen to eighteen hundred pound weight,
manufactured grain, and one Negroe will attend three acres in a very complete
manner.

This grain causes a great consumption of cypress and pine wood to be made into
casks; consequently a great deal of coopers labor is necessary, in which the
planter ought to be obliged to employ white men, it not being harder labor
than is consistent with our temperament and constitution.

The process of manufacturing rice in a great measure resembles that of peeling
barley; the planter who has water at command manufactures by a water mill,
consequently cheaper than he who is obliged to do it by horses or by the manual
labor of his slaves.

This grain has one great article in its favor, that is the number of hands it
employs in transporting and exporting it, who may be truly said to live by it.

The machines for manufacturing it have been so often described and figured,
that they hardly ought to be introduced into a work that bears the name of
concise.

VIII. There is no doubt but beans would be found of use, were they cultivated
on the strong clay grounds which are at some distance from the Mississippi, and
such as the lands on the ridges of the Yasoo, and in the Chicasaw nation; but
as long as the canes, reeds, and the numberless natural grasses are in such
abundance, this article is not yet worth attending to, any more than crops of
turnips, carrots, or cabbage, which however would undoubtedly answer here for
culture in the field as well as in any other part of the earth.

IX. The artificial grasses found here are 1st: That kind of grass known in the
islands by the name of dog grass, and in Carolina and Georgia by that of crop
grass, and by the French of Florida chiendent; this so greatly resembles the
annual meadow grass, that i would rank it as one of that class; its leaves are
broader; this rises naturally after the ground is broke up and will continue in
the ground for two or three years, when the ground being again plowed up, a
fresh crop ensues, and this is all the culture it wants; in Carolina and
Georgia, this is apt to plague the planter much by reason of its continual
renovation, and the strong matting of its roots whereby it renders the surface
of the earth in a great measure impenetrable to the hoe, wherefore they wish to
destroy it; but in places where pasture is scarce and eagerly desired, they
would do well to consider its excellent quality in fattening cattle, and the
fondness all cattle show for it; and if instead of trying clover and other
foreign grasses, which have so often baffled their utmost efforts, they would
encourage this easily cultivated grass by plowing their poorest grounds once in
two years, they would soon find themselves amply repaid by their long wished
for desideratum, pasture; this grass will grow kindly in the poorest soils of
Florida.

2dly, A second species of the same kind with narrow leaves called by the
French Herb au cheval, from the fondness of horses for it; in Carolina it is
called nutt grass from a nutt found at its root; this, when once it takes in
the ground, is as easily entertained as the first and makes a very good pasture
on poor ground, but it must be well fenced against hogs, which being very fond
of the nutts would root all up in a short time.

It may be said that i describe these grasses as natural yet call them
artificial, but when we reflect, that they require some kind of culture, the
name of artificial can not be thought improper.

3dly, A grass not ill resembling silver hair grass, which is called from the
color of its seed, black seed grass, makes an excellent pasture on the meanest
sand we find in the country; the seed is easily procured in Carolina, Georgia
and East Florida.

4thly, Scud grass vulgarly called Scots grass is a noble grass on poor land,
it grows to the height of thirty inches and upwards; In wet lands in Jamaica it
will grow four or five feet high though the soil be sandy. It is propagated by
cutting it in pieces, leaving a joint to each piece, this stuck into wet swampy
ground soon grows and propagates others, so that it becomes a very close matted
sod; i have seen it called gramen panicum.
an experiment made by Mr. Wegg at Pensacola convinces me that this grass will
grow in the sandy land of the provinces; the seed or plant may be procured at
Jamaica where i knew a gentleman of the name of Jones make 1500 l. per annum of
a penn by means of this grass alone: Cattle prefer it to every other.

5thly, The Panicum and maize are of use as grasses i have already shown how.

6thly, A species of Dolichos lately introduced into Georgia from China
although not properly a grass, yet as it thrives to admiration there and yields
four or five crops per annum, i think it not improper to recommend, as
deserving cultivation for feeding cattle, the more so as all kinds are fond of
it.

7thly, Experience has taught us that sain-foin, lucerne, clover and timothy
grass thrive not in the eastern part of these provinces, the sun being too hot
for them in summer, at which season clover in particular can not resist it out
of the shade; on the western part of West Florida i believe they might answer,
but we need not yet look out for pasture there, while that noble grass Indian
reed (canna) is so abundant.

X. Sago might be here produced as well as in Georgia, for the tree from which
the basis of this drug is taken abounds particularly in East Florida; every
body knows of what a vast use it is.

XI. Sesamen or oily grain, This was introduced by some of the Negroes from the
coast of Africa, into Carolina, and is the best thing yet known for extracting
a fine esculent oil; it will grow in any sandy ground, even luxuriantly, and
yields more oil than any thing we have as yet any knowledge of: Capt. P. M'Kay
of Sunbury in Georgia, told me that a quantity of this seed sent to
Philadelphia, yielded him twelve quarts per bushel; incredible as this may
appear, i have the greatest reason to believe him; the first run of this oil is
always transparent, the second expression, which is procured by the addition of
hot water, is muddy, but on standing it will deposit a whi^ sediment, and
become as limpid as the first; this oil is at first of a slightly pungent
taste, but soon loses that and will never grow rancid even if left exposed to
the air; the Negroes use it as food either raw, toasted, or boiled in their
soups and are very fond of it, they call it Benni.

All the culture it requires is to be sown in drills about eighteen inches
apart and by frequent hoeings to be kept clean.

XII. The ground nut also introduced by the Blacks from Guinea, is next after
this for its easy cultivation, a good kind of oil that does not soon grow
rancid, and the great quantity it yields; but the earth does not produce the
seed in such plenty as the last, and it takes up more room.

XIII. The pumpkins as cultivated in the fields here, being of an easy culture
in the poorest soils, and yielding a great and beneficial increase of food,
should not be forgot, although on account of their being chiefly used as a
sauce i have given them this late place; their culture is so easy as to require
little or no attendance after the seed is in the ground; they overgrow every
kind of grass or weed, and are generally planted by dropping some seeds in the
potatoe or corn fields, and their increase is immense; was the shield shaped
squash from the north added to this, it would prove a beneficial addition; all
these kinds are eagerly eaten by horses and cattle of every sort, and they
increase milk.

XIV. Liquor is as necessary as victuals; i would therefore recommend the
culture of vines, which will here succeed with certainty; ask the French
inhabitants and the^ will tell you, that they once were in a very fair way to
make their own wines at least, until an order for the suppression of the
vineyards came from France; the remains of these vineyards in many places yet
show the practicability of this scheme; the Spaniards continue the
proscription, but why should not we make this profitable use of a country,
whose soil and climate are evidently inviting us to this attempt, and which
experience has taught us are adapted to it?

XV. Apples and pears are here of very good quality, but are never likely to
become an object of attention by growing in quantities sufficient to make cider
and perry; but peaches grow here of the finest flavor, and in the highest
perfection, on standard trees, and therefore are fit to be planted in orchards.
It is well known that hogs fattened by them make an excellent pork; the
superfluous quantity would not be ill employed in that way, but as in Virginia
they have set us the example, why can we not in Florida also distill their
juices, and by means of that spirit which becomes excellent by age, at least
partially banish the money draining useless article rum? This tree should be
grafted not so much on account of the choice of fruit (Florida produces no
indifferent ones) as because the tree in this climate, especially in sandy
soils, is not so lasting when raised from the nut as when grafted on its own or
any other proper stock.

XVI. Sugar is a matter at present of mere speculation, yet it is made already
near Orleans, although acknowledged not to yield the profit of a rice or indigo
plantation. At or near New Smyrna some is also produced, and rum has been made
there. Some of the lands between the latitude 25 and 27, would undoubtedly
yield it to advantage particularly at the river Rattones and the grand marsh.

We gather from Horace and Virgil that severe frosts were common in their time
at Rome; now ice is scarce known naturally there; so while i have been
acquainted with New York government, which is about seventeen years, it seems
to have altered its climate four or five degrees more southward; The later
appearance of frost and the earlier arrival of spring, but above all, the
visits paid of late years by some species of southern fishes to New York
harbor, such as the mullet, p^rgy and some others are evident proofs of this.
of this we have many striking proofs; this being owing to the opening of the
country it is not unlikely but in time, by clearing the woods of Florida, that
country may be brought to produce sugar to advantage, till then its culture
merits no place here.

XVII. Oranges of various kinds are worth notice as they are on many accounts
useful in drink and sauces, and their leaves a good fodder for some esculent
animals, such as sheep, rabbits and goats; they thrive extremely well
throughout all Florida.

XVIII. Olives are as yet a matter of speculation, but as the wild olive is
found here, and the cultivated one has already shown its propensity to a
naturalization in this country, i make no doubt but they will become a grand
article here; their utility is so well known that it requires no comment; their
culture can not yet claim room in this work.

XIX. In some of the Swedish provinces, a strong kind of cloth is said to be
prepared from hop stalks; and in the transactions of the swedish acadamy for
the year 1750 there is an account of an experiment made in consequence of that
report. Of the stalks, gathered in autumn, about as much was taken as equalled
in bulk a quantity of flax, that would have produced a pound after preparation.
The stalks were put into water and kept covered therewith during the winter: in
March they were taken out, dried in a stove, and dressed as flax. The prepared
filaments weighed very nearly a pound, and proved fine, soft and white; they
were spun and woven into six else of fine strong cloth. The author Mr.
Schissler observes, that hop stalks take much longer time to rot than flax; and
that if not fully rotted, the woody part will not separate, and the cloth will
neither prove white nor fine.

Dr. Lewis's notes on Neuman's chemistry 4to, London 1759, page 429.


Hops grow spontaneously through all this country.

XX. Having now gone through most of the different esculent productions of the
earth, i will examine the merits of those which are serviceable in commerce, be
they for manufactures or otherways; and among these indigo justly calls for the
first rank.

The description of this plant will more properly appear in the botanical part
of the work.

For its culture it requires a middling rich loose soil, and the field ought to
be as nearly as possible a perfect level; it will grow in any soil from the
heaviest to the lightest, but rich hammock, or oak land, of a moist nature, is
the best adapted to this purpose; the ground should be thoroughly cleaned, and
reduced to a perfect garden mould; this is the most laborious part of the
culture, and so absolutely necessary that no crops can be expected without it.

Seed of the best kind abounds on the Mississippi, about four bushels of seed
are requisite for an acre, it must be sown in drills about two feet apart; the
time of approaching rain is always best; the season for sowing sets in the
beginning of March and may be continued down till May; if the season is any
thing favorable it will afford five cuttings between March and November; seven
weeks being a long allowance between each two cuttings; we must be very
cautious about cutting, for if that be done in dry weather it will infallibly
destroy the plant; but in rainy weather there is no manner of risque of this;
by this treatment and care, the plant is continued for years together in the
warmer climates; it ought to be cut as soon as there is any appearance of
blossom, ten weeks from planting will generally ripen the seed perfectly; when
cut, it is tied in bundles and carried to the vats.

The vats are three in number and ought to be, the first very large, the second
one third less, and the third yet less: At the head of the large vat stands a
pump to fill it with water; these vats particularly the first or steeping vat,
ought to be made of very hard timber; in this steeping vat the weed is thrown
together, and pressed down with pieces of live oak or other solid and ponderous
timber; it is then covered with water by means of the pump; here it remains to
ferment; the crisis whereby to know the exact time it is to remain in this vat
is when the liquor thickens, begins violently to effervesce and assumes a
purplish blue color; this will be effected in a greater or less space of time
from eight to twenty hours according to the temperature of the atmosphere.

The steeping vat projects with one edge about three feet over the second or
beating vat; in this edge the bottom of the first has a hole and plug in it,
this plug must be drawn as soon as the above signs of the perfection of
fermentation appear, to draw off the liquor from the weed, which last is
absolutely useless; except perhaps it might be employed to good purpose in a
saltpetre manufacture.

In this second or beating vat as soon as the liquor is in, it must be beat or
stirred by a process similar to churning; this is a laborious work and used to
be performed by Negroes, who draw up and down a lever that has either one or
two bottomless square buckets at each end; but of late horses have been
employed in large works; this churning is continued till the dying particles
are separated from the liquor, or as it were sufficiently congealed to form a
body or mass; here lies the secret of the art, for if the beating is ceased too
soon a part of the dying matter remains undissolved, and if beat too long some
part will again dissolve; only experience can teach this criterion, and there
is only one method to try it which is by taking up some of the liquor in a
phial or cup and observing whether the dying matter is inclined to depose
itself or not; all farther theoretical lessons are in vain, the young planter
must have recourse to practice.

Lime water is in the English colonies used to hasten the separation, this i am
inclined to believe spoils the indigo, neither the French, Dutch, nor Spaniards
use any in their plantations.

The indigo being arrived at this crisis the churning ceases, and it is left to
subside at the bottom of the vat; when the liquor begins to look of a faint
green transparent color the water must be drawn off, first by a cock fixed at
a certain height in the side of this second vat, till you come near to the
superficies of the Residuum which is the indigo; then another cock
corresponding with the third vat must be opened to let the Residuum run into
this last vat, where it remains to settle a little longer in order that it may
totally discharge itself of all the tinging matter, This will be completely
deposited in about 8 or 10 hours time, the Residuum must be strained through a
horse hair sieve, previous to its being put into bags in order to have it
entirely pure and free from extraneous matter.
it is then put into bags of the form of Hippocrates's sleave to drain it from
all superfluous humidity; these bags must hang in the shade.

When all the water is drained from it, the remainder, which has all the
appearance of mud is put into very shallow boxes, where it is left to dry; when
it begins to have the consistence of clay fit to make brick with, it must be
cut with a very thin bladed knife into square pieces, and then further left to
become quite dry, which is the state in which indigo comes to us.

This last process must be all done under a shed where the air has free access
but the sun none; should the sun touch indigo in this state, it would exhale
all the tinging matter and leave the mass in a colorless state, similar to
slate in appearance; beware also of moisture for that will keep it dissolved
and incline it to putrefacton.

Some planters press their bags in a box of about six feet long three feet wide
and two deep, having holes in the bottom to let the water off, and a strong
thick board fitting exactly in it; in this box the indigo bags are laid and the
board with a number of weights on it, but whether this method is better than
hanging them in a shed to dry i know not.

I should have observed, that in the drying she the pieces must be carefully
turned three or four times a day, and that two young Negroes with a bush, wing,
or bunch of feathers, ought to be employed in fanning the flies out of the
drying shed, as they are hurtful to indigo; be cautious also in packing it in
barrels not to put it in till it is thoroughly dried.

The dimensions of a set of vats in Carolina is about sixteen feet square, and
three feet deep, in the clear, for the steeper; and the battery twelve feet
square and four and a half feet deep for every seven acres of indigo; they make
them of two and a half inch plank of cypress, and the joints or studs of live
oak; to these the planks are well secured by seven inch spikes; such a set will
last seven or eight years.

The best indigo is called flotant or flora; this is light, pure and
approaching to hard; it floats on water, is easily inflammable, and is almost
totally consumed by fire; the color is a fine dark blue inclining to violet,
and by rubbing it with the nail it assumes the color of old copper.

The next best is more ponderous, and is called violet or gorge de pigeon, its
color being alluded to; these two are best for dying or staining linen and
cotton.

The third kind is of a copper color deriving its name from the coppery
appearance it exhibits on being broke; this is the weightiest of all the
merchantable indigo, and therefore the desideratum of the planters; and is most
used for the woollen manufacture.

The inferior sorts are not worth describing as they are unsaleable and unfit
for use; they discover themselves by flintiness, or a muddy soft crumbling
appearance accompanied by a dull blue color, often appearing even like slate.

An indigo work should always be remote from the dwelling house on account of
the disagreeable effluvia of the rotten weed and the quantity of flies it
draws; by which means it is also scarce possible to keep any animal on an
indigo plantation in any tolerable case, the fly being so troublesome, that
even poultry thrive but little where indigo is made; nor is there scarce a
possibility to live in a house nearer than a quarter of a mile to the vats; the
stench at the work is likewise horrid: This is certainly a great inconvenience,
but it is the only one this profitable business is subject to.

XXI. Cotton being so very useful a commodity that scarce any other exceeds it,
and an article of which we can never raise too much (for like all other things,
the more it is multiplied the more its consumption increases) it therefore
behooves me to mention it as second in rank: We, by following the example of the
industrious Acadians, will do well to manufacture all our necessary clothing in
Florida of this staple, and although it has not yet been raised in a sufficient
extent to export a considerable quantity thereof, yet when we consider the
number of manufactures in Lancashire, Derbyshire, and Cheshire that consume
this benificial commodity either alone or in mixture with silk, wool, flax,
etc. and that England imports all the rough materials from abroad (chiefly from
the Levant) to so great an amount as near 400,000 l. sterling value, we may
perhaps find it worthy of a more universal propagation; i shall, in hopes that
this may take place, give the method of culture and of cleaning this produce of
our earth.

The natural history of the plant and its characters, species and varieties
will be found in the botanical account.

Cotton will grow in any soil, even the most meagre and barren sand we can find.

The sort we must cultivate here is the Gossypium Anniversarium or Xylon
Herbaceum; also known by the name of green seeded cotton, which grows about
four or five feet in height. Give this plant a dry soil and further it will
cost you little trouble or attention; it must be planted in rows at regular
distances about six feet apart; plant the seed in rainy weather and in about
five months time the fibers will be completely formed and the pods fit to
gather, which will be known by their being completely expanded; it must now be
carried to the mill of which take the following description.

It is a strong frame of four studs, each about four feet high and joined above
and below by strong transverse pieces; across this are placed two round well
polished iron spindles, having a small groove through their whole length, and
by means of treddles are by the workman's foot put in directly opposite motions
to each other; the workman sits before the frame having a thin board, of seven
or eight inches wide and the length of the frame, before him; this board is so
fixed to the frame that it may be moved, over again, and near the spindle; he
has the cotton in a basket near him, and with his left hand spreads it on this
board along the spindles which by their turning draw the cotton through them
being wide enough to admit the cotton, but too near to permit the seed to go
through, which being thus forced to leave the cotton in which it was contained,
and by its rough coat entangled; falls on the ground between the workmans legs
while the cotton drawn through falls on the other side into an open bag
suspended for that purpose under the spindles.

The French in Florida have much improved this machine by a large wheel, which
turns two of these mills at once, and with so much velocity as by means of a
boy, who turns it, to employ two negroes at hard labor to shovel the seed from
under the mill: One of these machines i saw at Mr. Krebs at Pasca Oocooloo, but
as it was partly taken down, he claiming the invention was very cautious in
answering my questions, i cannot pretend to describe it accurately; i am
informed that one of those improving mills will deliver seventy or eighty
pounds of clean cotton per diem.

The packing is done in large canvas bags, which must be wetted as the cotton
is put in, that it may not hang to the cloth and may slide better down; the bag
is suspended between two trees, posts or beams and a negro with his feet stamps
it down; these bags are made to contain from three hundred and fifty to four
hundred weight; with about twenty slaves moderately working a very large piece
of poor ground might be finely improved so as to yield to its owner a fine
annual income by means of a staple which is much in demand in England, and here
is raised by no means inferior in whiteness and fineness as well as length of
fibers to that of the Levant.

XXII. The Mulberry, deserves our next notice for a two fold clothing it
provides us with.

Among my botanical articles the reader will find the description of one of
this class, which i have all the reason in the world to believe to be the Morus
papyrifera and which i have on page 20 of this volume distinguished by the name
of Morus foliis palmatis, cortice filamentosa, fructu nigro, radice tinctoria.

This tree is found in abundance in the North Western parts of Florida: The
chactaws put its inner bark in hot water along with a quantity of ashes and
obtain filaments, with which they weave a kind of cloth not unlike a coarse
hempen cloth; i would propose to boil the bark in a strong alkaline Lixivium,
by which means i make no doubt but a very fine and durable thread of the nature
of cotton, flax or hemp might be obtained; the root of this same tree likewise
yields an excellent yellow dye: But i shall here treat of the article, which is
most commonly known to be produced by means of the mulberry tree, this is silk:
A very short time about six weeks in the year will suffice for all the labor
requisite to acquire this valuable article, and that labor is so light as only
need children to attend it

The gathering of the leaves being the most laborious part of the work i would
advise the sowing the seed as it were at broad cast, so that it may spring up
in form of wide hedges of about ten feet breadth leaving a lane of two feet
between each pair, by this treatment the leaves may be gathered by means of a
pair of sheers or if the hedges are narrower the hand may do it, without the
disagreable necessity of climbing trees, which is always more or less attended
with some danger, and as this is a female business, with indecency.

I am convinced mulberry bushes will grow thus and yield abundance of leaves
and therefore this method is eligible before groves or orchards, which take up
much room and have a dirty effect during the fruit season.

All the species of mulberry trees grow kindly in Florida and some people
pretend the white kind to be best, but on my strictest enquiries i could not
find in what manner this affects the worms, but i would have the silk planter
be very cautious if he has one kind in his nursery, strictly to banish the
other, because this change of leaves is certainly the reason of some of the
diseases attending the worms: The remainder of the silk culture is no more than
to keep the worms well fed, and the apartment where they are kept thoroughly
clean; when they begin to acquire a certain transparency, the period of their
spinning or resolving themselves into a Chrysalis is at hand; then it is
necessary to put up bundles of some slight thin twigs between the shelves. The
wild or dogs fennel affords a ready and proper material for it; here the worms
will naturally enough mount upon and pitch on a place where to metamorphose
themselves into a cocoon; in Georgia we have a filature, likewise at Purysburg;
but as there are none in Florida i will subjoin the following account of its
preparation for the manufactury.

1st. The cocoons are to be put into an oven just hot enough to deprive the
Chrysalis it involves of life, without hurting, the fibers of the cocoon:

A heat something below Fahrenheits scale for boiling water will effect this:
without this precaution the insect eats its way out and destroys the thread of
silk.

2dly. It must then be put into a copper with water just on the boil and kept
so, this will discharge the glutinous matter from the cocoon and discover the
end of the clew; then taking several of these ends together they are gently
reeled off, and afterward spun and prepared for the loom.

This process is hurtful to the elasticity and strength of the silk, though it
does not deprive it of its gloss: Therefore if we could attain the knowledge
how the raw silk is managed in the Levant, it would be the most eligible way;
all we know about this is, that it is performed without hot water: this is
called raw silk and comes in bales to England and other manufacturing countries.

The refuse cocoons either damaged by the insect or other ways, are carded in
Europe, and are then improperly styled raw silk; this should not be confounded
with the above named from the Levant, being by no means equal to it. After the
silk is reeled off, we find some irregular coarser kind on the inner division
of the cocoon; damaged cocoons are mixed with this, as also the inner division
next over the Chrysalis, after being steeped in warm water to dissipate its
gelatinous parts; this mixture is carded and called floretting.

All these carded silks loose their luster by that process.

Of this commodity there is at present imported into Baitain Thoughts on the
times, and the silk manufactory 8vo. page 7, anno 1765.
From Spain and Italy to the value of L. 1, 500, 000 Political essays
concerning the present state of the British empire, 4to. page 191, London 1772.
From Turkey, the East Indies, and China, 400, 000 L. Sterling 1, 900, 000

This account shows sufficiently how beneficial this business would be to
America, would we by our industry in a very light labor try to oblige England
to let this money circulate here instead of among Spaniards, Italians, Chinese,
and Turks; which is by no means impossible, since the bounteous hand of nature
has furnished us with the requisite plant among the number of those that are
indigenous in Florida.

XXIII. The Carthamus Tinctorius or safflower is likewise found among the
indigenous plants in the western part of Florida; this useful dying weed
requires but little cultivation, and well deserves our attention in that
country.

XXIV. Hemp and flax (according to a very ingenious performance Museum
Rusticum, vol. 1, page 457.
) Britain imports from the Baltic annually to the value of 500,000 l. sterling;
another great encouragement for Florida; neither Carolina nor Georgia have any
lands comparable to our fine lands on the Mississippi, and yet they have
already exported considerable quantities of hemp, and thus set Florida an
example well worthy of imitation; the lands are so rich on the Mississippi,
that neither of these two impoverishing plants will exhaust them, therefore let
us apply ourselves to this cultivation, which is so universally known as not to
need description; thoroughly pulverizing the earth, and not sowing it too thick
are almost the only things to be attended to in its cultivation, and the proper
criterion of rotting the ligneous parts of the plant, so that they may be
easily separated in the brake, is the only one of moment in preparing it for
embarkation.

Add to this, that ere long we shall have extensive settlements producing
immense quantities of materials for exportation on and near the banks of that
almost unbounded interior ocean the Mississippi, for three thousand miles up
it; not to mention the products of the river Ohio, the Shawanese, Ouabache,
Hogoheegee, Yasoo, Missouri, St. Peter. St. Francis, and the red and black
rivers with many others of inferior note, all emptying themselves in it, where
there is so much room for the increase of people; which always proceeds in
proportion as there is more space for them to sit down in, this is beyond reply
verified by so amazing a rapidity of increase as America has experienced within
these twenty years, being no less than in triplicate proportion. Now it is
evident, that to carry off the produce of this vast tract, it will be necessary
to build ships in every part of it which together with their bulky commodities
must be sold abroad, as very few small craft will be sufficient to bring up the
trifling returns the inhabitants of this happy country may stand in need of;
this being the case let us consider that timber, iron, lead, etc. are found up
this river, but without rigging and sails they cannot constitute a ship;
likewise we must recollect, that rigging and sails are bulky articles and would
cost much for carrying up so immense a distance. Think not reader, that these
are chimerical ideas, by no means; every part above named has already in some
degree experienced more or less the effects of the industrious ax and hoe in
the hands of the Herculea^ sons of America.

There is a very strong kind of fiber called Indian hemp in Florida; i would
recommend an inquiry into what it is; the savages use it and i am persuaded we
should find it worth improving.

The use of flax is too wellknown and its necessity so evident, that a
description or recommendation of its culture and preparation would be
superfluous.

The North American Annona, the Lime, and Mahoe tree; all indigenous in
Florida, yield each a serviceable bark of great use if properly manufactured.

XXV. Tobacco is a source of great riches in this country; the French have
proved that this plant may be produced in great quantities and of the best
quality; this may be made an article of great emolument especially as that
trade is excessively on the decline in Virginia and Maryland, but if we cannot
keep it clear from the multiplicity of encumbrances it is saddled with in those
colonies, such as a trade by factors and many etcaetera^ which makes its value
to the planter very inconsiderable, i would rather cultivate none; it is a rank
luxuriant, impoverishing vegetable, requiring a deep rich soil such as the
Mississippi alone affords here; therefore it will undoubtedly thrive; its
culture is almost identically the same as that of the Zea, but i would advise
the planting it further apart, such as six feet at least; the only material
thing this culture differs in, is because the seed being exceedingly diminutive
in size it must be sown in beds of rich new ground, which has been well
manured, with the ashes of the brush cut off from it; from hence it is
transplanted in regular rows at the above named distances: In about three weeks
time it will be advanced to the growth of a foot: Now the first hoeing takes
place, and suckers and worms begin to appear; from both these the plants must
be carefully cleared.

The plants are at this period out of danger of being scratched out of the
ground by a large flock of turkies which may now be turned into the field, who
will not touch the plants but carefully look for the worms that infect them, of
which those birds are very fond; and thus they will save a great deal of
labor, but the suckers must be attended to by human labor, which is also
required to keep the ground clear from weeds; when the plant attains the
height of eighteen inches it must be deprived of its head and stripped of its
lowermost leaves, reserving a few with their heads on for seed: In about eleven
weeks after they are transplanted the plants cease growing and the leaves
assume a variegated color of different green shades; this is an indication of
their maturity; they are then cut and laid in heaps to sweat for about sixteen
hours; next day they are carried to a shed, so constructed as to admit a free
circulation of air through every part thereof, but well covered against rain;
this is the practice in Virginia; in some countries they keep all the light out
except where the rays cannot immediately reflect on the tobacco; in this shed
they are hung with their tops downwards for about six weeks; then taking
advantage of a day when the atmosphere is pretty much laden with moisture,
they are laid on a kind of floor of poles, and left to sweat for about ten or
twelve days; now the leaves are stripped off and the tops kept separate from
the middle and the lower leaves; the uppermost leaves being the best tobacco
and the lower the worst; they are then made up into very close packed bundles
called in Florida Carrots, which are held together by a string of bark; there
are at present but two sorts produced viz Nanquitoche and Point coupee, the
first infinitely superior to the second.

XXVI. Pitch, tar and turpentine being the produce of vegetables will not
improperly come in here; the process of making the common tar is by splitting
the heart of the pitch pine, fallen down (with which the ground is covered in
the eastern and southern parts of Florida) into small sticks of the length of
about three feet, and arrange them into a kiln of a circular form; but as this
is a process hardly to be learned by theory, i will recommend it to the
inquisitive reader to inform himself at a tar kiln great or small, which are a
very common occurrence thoughout this continent,

Sometimes this kind of tar is made of pine knots without splitting.

The green tar has not yet been made in Florida and until i gave some account
of the process to some of the planters there, it was entirely unknown in the
country.

This is made from trees that have been tapped for turpentine, and continued
running for about three years, by chopping the bark off by degrees to twelve or
fifteen feet high; they are then cut down and split into small sticks; and the
tar is made by the same operation as the common sort.

Notwithstanding the great quantities of pitch pine in Florida, turpentine has
not yet been made there; even in February 1773 when i was at Orleans, there
being a necessity for some turpentine on board of the vessel (in which i came
from thence) the Captain was obliged to pay sixteen dollars for a half cask of
it, and i have been informed, that even then it was sold in that town for
medicinal uses at a great price by the pint and quart.

The process is very simple; a hole is cut in the tree on the side ^st exposed
to the solar rays (in large trees two of these may take place) these holes are
cut slanting downwards leaving the bottom concave and large enough to introduce
a calebash to dip out the gum, which deposits its self in the bottom of the
hole; this hole is called a box, and the turpentine is dipped out of it and put
in casks: Florida, especially the Eastern and Southern parts, has the advantage
for this business of the more Northern provinces by not being tied down to any
particular season, the climate admitting of this work the year round.

Pitch is in this country generally made by burning the tar in the clay hole
into which it runs from the kiln but i would recommend the use of a still for
this purpose, which is agreeable to the practice in Sweden and Germany; by this
means a very valuable essential oil is saved which arises in the boiling; this
oil is called Oleum pini or Oleum taedae.

It is of great use with painters, varnishers etc. on account of its drying
quality, it soon becomes thick of a consistence like balsam: Along with this
oil comes over a watery liquor, which the workmen injudiciously throw away; it
is a good acid spirit, capable of being applied to sundry useful purposes:
Neuman says he knew a person in France, who had saved by it several thousand
dollars. Neuman's chemistry 4to. page ^88, London 1750.


Resin commonly called Rosin is best made by distillation also, a considerable
quantity of oil would be obtained, and the expense of a still would be amply
repaid by these savings.

As pitch and tar are often used to pay roofs of houses etc. and the addition
of red lead etc. made use of, which has proved ineffectual, and as the same
observation takes place with regard to ships bottoms, were water (as does air
in the former case) corrodes the pitch, i think it not improper to insert the
following note of the ingenious Dr. Lewis on Neuman's chemistry: An anonymous
correspondent of the Swedish academy observes, that the tarred or pitched
boards or shingles, with which houses in many places are covered are soon
damaged by the heat and moisture, the sun's heat melting off the tar so that
the wood remains bare. Some have endeavored to prevent this, by laying on the
tar late in the year, that the winter's cold might fix it; an expedient of some
use, but very far from being effectual, for however the tar may be hardened by
the winter, the return of summer soon makes it soft again. Others have mixed
smith's cinders with the tar, which instead of mending the matter makes it
worse, all ponderous substances do the same. He says, he has never found any
addition comparable to coal dust (that of charcoal he seems to mean) which is
to be stirred into tar made hot in such a quantity as to make it thick: The
mixture is to be laid on with wooden trowels in a hot day: tar thus prepared,
he says, is fixed, never runs, binds and hardens surprisingly from heat and
moisture and shines better than oil varnish.

Pitch burnt in a close furnace, so that no smoke escapes causes a soot to
arise, which is the lamp black so much in use.

The last quoted gentleman in the same page Neuman's chemistry 4to. page 289,
London 1759.
favors us with the following annotations: As i think other words than his
own, cannot be ^o descriptive of any process whatever, i hope my reader will
excuse these quotations:

What is called lamp black (originally perhaps the soot collected from lamps)
is obtained in different parts of Germany, Sweden, etc. not from pure resin or
pitch, but from the dregs and pieces of bark of the trees separated in their
preparation, for making common resin, the impure juice collected from incisions
in pine and fir-trees is boiled down with a little water, and strained whilst
hot through a sack, on cooling the resin congeals upon the surface of the
water, and is then packed up in barrels; it is distinguished according to its
color, into white, yellow and brown. The dross left on straining is burnt for
lampblack in a low oven, from which the smoke is conveyed by a long passage
into a square chamber, having an aperture in the top, upon which a large sack
is fastened: the soot concretes partly in the sack, which is occasionally
removed, and partly in the chamber and canal, from which it is swept out.

XXVII. Gum elemi is a resin fit for many medicinal uses, and the product of a
species of Pistachia, very common in the southern and south-eastern parts of
Florida; the wood in itself is not valuable, but as the gum is one of those
articles, that are generally brought to England in a sophisticated state: this
tree is worthy our attention, and may prove a serviceable article to the
country; but this is not the only use of this tree, it is very useful for
cattle either in dry seasons in the southern part of the country, or for such
as are kept up at the farm yard, they are very fond of the leaves of this tree,
which are a wholesome food, increasing milk, and keeping cattle in a thriving
condition.

XXVIII. A species of tree greatly resembling the poplar is found in
West-Florida, which produces, if not the Tacamahaca, at least something of the
resinous kind so extremely like it, that it is not distinguishable from it; i
am told, that the resin is obtained by digesting the buds, which appear early
in the spring.

XXIX. The Liquidambar, or maple leaved Storax is also found in abundance in
both Floridas; from this the Storax is produced, by boiling the branches: this
valuable gum may be worth attention, as a great deal might be gathered in these
provinces.

XXX. Cortex Eleuthera, or Cortex Winteranus, is an article found in abundance
in the southern parts of the Peninsula; the people from Providence know it by
the name of Cascarilla, and carry a good deal of it to market; it is a medical
plant of good use, and worth our notice.

XXXI. Balaustians, or the double flowering Pome granate comes to a good
perfection here, and as they are a profitable article they deserve our
attention.

XXXII. China Root is found in both provinces, but the prickly plant, commonly
known by that name, does not yield the genuine kind; the true one, which is not
thorny, is also found in abundance; and as in India this is paid for at the
rate of from 6 to 16 shillings per hundred pounds, to send to Europe, it
undoubtedly is an article worth exporting from America.

XXXIII. Ipecacuanha is found in almost every spot of oak land in this country,
it may deserve to be manufactured from the spontaneous root, if not to be
cultivated.

XXXIV. Jalap, an article of consequence in trade, not only on account of its
use in physic, but likewise for its universal use in the fermentation of
liquors: Europe has hitherto been obliged to import this article from Mexico,
in which kingdom is a place called Xaleppo, or Haleppo, of which this drug
bears the name; the only place where it was supposed to grow: we have hitherto
been at a loss to know the genus it belongs to, and many roots of purgative
quality have been supposed to be it, and were substituted in its room: the late
Doctor Houston introduced it from Mexico into Jamaica; but while he was gone to
England the man whom he left in care of it, suffered hogs to destroy it;
however, this gentleman brought a pencil drawing of it to Europe, but as this
did not show the color, and the seed has been sown in the botanical garden, at
Chelsea, without success, what it was remained still a secret, until i
accidentally found it growing wild near Pensacola; being led to think, that a
certain tuberous root made use of by the savages as a purgative might be it; i
dried some slices of it, and found it so nearly agree with that drug in
appearance, that it caused me to examine all the convolvuli i could find in
this country, because i was informed that to that genus the plant belonged: I
succeeded, and samples, which i sent to diverse parts of Europe and America,
have proved to be it, and of a good quality; this plant is pretty plentiful in
some spots on the highest and driest lands, and i suppose its cultivation must
be somewhat analogous to that of carrots.

XXXV. The above researches among the convolvuli, have made me acquainted with
another of that genus, which seems to answer to the Scammony plant; i am not
yet able with certainty to determine whether it really is the Scammony or not,
but have great reason to believe it is.

XXXVI. Seeds of the true Rhubarb In Bossu's travels by Foster, vol. 1. page
353, London 1771, mention is made both of Jalap and Rhubarb, as indigenous in
West-Florida; my strictest inquiry on the subject near the banks of Mississippi
have been in vain to find Rhubarb, or even any thing the French call so, and as
for Jalap i have all the reason in the world to believe, that this superficial
writer never was in those parts of West-Florida where it is found, as he wrote
his book merely to blacken the officers of a different opinion from himself, in
regard to their conduct in admitting English vessels in time of need, into New
Orleans, and being an inveterate enemy of M. De Kerle^ in particular, cloaked
it under the specious title he has done, and therefore i believe, that he
received all he says, concerning natural history, from hear say only, and thus
has been led to mistake a kind of Belle de Nuit with a purgative root, which is
pretty common on Mississippi, for the true Jalap.

Mr. Foster in his note on this passage has copied the same mistake, when he
says it is the M^rabilis.


having been lately introduced into America, and the deep soil of the
Mississippi, being very proper for its cultivation, i would by all means
recommend trials to be made for raising that valuable root, which i think will
not fail to answer our expectation.

XXXVII. A shrub resembling in its fructification the Starry Anise is found in
West-Florida, but it totally wants the aromatic taste of the seed; perhaps
cultivation may bring it to the same state of perfection with the oriental.

XXXVIII. Silk Grass grows on the most barren sand hills of Florida (called
black Jack ridges) if it does not deserve a cultivation on account of its
fibers; yet the root having been found by experience to wash woollen the
cleanest and whitest of any thing yet known. Quere, would it not be useful for
the woollen manufactory?

XXXIX. Arnotto, a useful dye is introduced in the colony; i have seen some of
the plants vigorous and in good health, in Mr. Wegg's garden; should it
succeed, its cultivation is by no means to be neglected, however, if it fails
in West-Florida, the southern parts of East-Florida will certainly produce it.

XL. My knowledge of Mosses being hitherto very confined, i shall not speak
with certainty about the Argal (Lichen Ro^ella) but having seen some mosses on
the rocky islands, and part of the Peninsula greatly resembling the Argal,
gathered on the island of Orchilla, i verily believe this valuable article to
be there, if not it might easily be introduced from Orchilla; the face of this
part of the country exactly resembling that island, and its climate being
nearly the same.

XLI. Cochineal. This valuable insect is found in pretty large quantities in
the Floridas, especially in the eastern province, of the kind, which is called
Sylvester, on a species of Cactus, or ^puntia; could the true Cochineal Cactus
be introduced into East-Florida, i make no doubt of its succeeding, and the
vicinity of the Cochineal countries makes this not at all improbable; the
people from the Musketo Shore, or Bay of Honduras might be serviceable in
obtaining it.

XLII. Sumach greatly necessary in dying and tanning, which is much used for
preparing Turkey leather; several kinds grow in the southern parts of America,
and therefore it is worth our wh^ to enquire into the matter, to know which
kind is used for this purpose. This plant is also known in medicine. The large
kind is used to make vinegar with, and i am told by the French people, that a
piece of the wood put into a cask of weak or faded vinegar, or even water, will
produce an intensely sharp vinegar.

As a hint to travelers, in the southern parts of America, where the distance
between the settlements often obliges us to carry our provisions with us, i
will assure them, that the fruit of this kind, steeped a very short time in
water, communicates to it a very agreeable acid flavor, which will render it
very fit to make punch; which agreeable liquor proves a great refreshment in a
hot day, in the woods.

Another kind possesses a noxious quality; this grows in low grounds; beware
therefore of making spits of this to roast meat on, and take it for a general
rule not to employ any wood (unless you are well acquainted with it) growing in
low grounds for that purpose, as almost all the noxious plants, of this
country, are found in such situations; in high grounds you may indiscriminately
use any wood (which has no bad taste) for that purpose.

XLIII. If the acorns of the Quercus Suber could be introduced here, i make no
doubt, in this part of the world (where above twenty kinds of oak are
indigenous) the cork manufacture might be profitably carried on.

Since i am on the subject of oaks, i beg leave to mention, that in New England
there are works for making an extract of oak bark, which yields a considerable
advantage by sending it to Europe for the use of the tanners.

I have seen also a kind of dwarf oak producing galls; quere, could they not be
made use of?

XLIV. Madder, Rubia Tinctorum. This root is one of the most useful ingredients
in dying wool and stuffs red, as also cotton of an agreeable bloom color, and
consequently much used in England for the different manufactures; but
incomparably the greatest quantity used is imported from abroad, to the amount
of large sums.

It is likewise said, that Madder is an excellent food for cattle, that it
increases milk, and causes the butter to have a most agreeable color and
flavor; i know it to be sometimes cut for hay and we are told, that it makes an
excellent fodder.

This plant does undoubtedly deserve our attention in Florida, on the above
accounts, especially as the many trials to grow it to advantage in England,
seem for the most part unsuccessful. Many different kinds of madder have been
tried for this purpose, but none have yet proved of real use except the Rubia
Tinctorum Sativa of C. Bauhine, which is the sort cultivated in Zealand, and
some parts of Austrian Flanders.

If it be objected to the culture of Madder in Florida, that these are in a
very different climate from the southern part of British America, let it be
remembered that in the Levant it is cultivated with success, and that what
comes from thence is a more valuable dye.

The ground in which Madder thrives best seems to be a deep black mould, in
something of a low situation, which should not have a clay foundation, but sand
or gravel; the land in Zeeland is, and that on the river Amite, seems to be in
general of this kind.

It is cultivated in Zeeland by offsets, or shoots, which they take from an old
plantation, and replant immediately in rows, about eighteen inches apart; the
young plants have each a distance of four inches allowed them, and the ground
is divided into beds of twelve feet wide, leaving a ditch of about twenty
inches between them; this is done in the beginning of May, and great care is
taken that no offset is planted, without it be furnished with fibers; as it is
thought that for want of fibers they would miscarry, which they often do even
in the most favorable seasons. The greatest labor, i think, i have seen the
people at in Holland, in regard to this culture, is the covering the stalks,
when they attain the height of about sixteen inches, leaving only the tops
bare, in order to promote the multiplication of roots, which is the part o^ the
plant manufactured and sold; when this covering is performed, there remains
only the attention of weeding, which ought to be done often; the root is
generally taken up the second year, but i think i have heard it said, as well
as read it, that three summers are necessary for this crop to come to full
maturity; the roots, which are said to yield the most and best dye, have been
taken up, when they had obtained about three tenths of an inch diameter in
size; it is thought that when they grow too large, they yield a dye more
inclining to yellow than red.

The lateral fibrous ver^icular roots, are said to yield a superior dye, but
not to pay for the expense necessary for gathering them.

From this general sketch of the Madder culture, such as it is in Holland and
Zeeland, my ^rs may see, that it is not so expensive an af^ as it is generally
deemed to be, but like all over things the cultivation of this plant may be ^d
on at too costly a rate, and it likewise may be attempted in too penurious a
way: I have endeavored to make my writing intelligible to every capacity, and
therefore hope, that every one of my readers may be led into the true idea of
this culture, to make it answer the purpose in Florida.

This cultivation by sets or shoots being practiced in countries where the seed
does not at all, or very difficultly come to maturity, i think the seed ought
to be introduced into Florida, or endeavors made to obtain it, from plants to
be carried or transplanted there, which, if productive of seed, it ought to be
sown in drills, like rice; which i would think the most elegible in the
moderate climates of those provinces. I believe this plant to be a great
impoverisher of the soil, for in Zeeland they always allow some years between
every two crops in the same spot.

As it has lately been said, that there was no necessity for drying Madder, and
that in using it green, there is even in the evaporation of dying matter a
saving of one half, besides the greater saving of the expenses of a kiln, a
mill, a drying house, etc. I must inform my reader, that he will find all this
true, but then it will be necessary for him to transport the dying houses from
Europe to our Madder fields, and not the Madder to the dyers, in order to enjoy
the profits of all this great and oeconomical frugality; for perhaps there is
not a plant on earth so soon inclining to fermentation and putrefaction, which
is occasioned by its succulency; yet for the planters present family-use it is
certainly fit to use green; as soon as the roots have become spotted, or black,
or lost a strong scent (similar to that of liquorice) they are utterly unfit
for any use; i shall therefore make a few remarks, necessary to be known for
the drying process in Florida. A hot, sun-shiny day may be used to advantage,
to dry the roots partially; but if the weather be not favorable, when the
roots are taken up, they must be spread within doors on a floor, taking care to
spread them thinly, and stir them often; but this will never absolutely
preserve them from changing, much less make them fit for transportation to any
distance; if the crop be small, a baker's oven may suffice, but beware of
raising the heat above 180 degrees of Farenheit's thermometer in the place
where the roots are put, which should be over the oven; but for larger crops
kilns, similar to malt-kilns are necessary; take care to make them roomy, keep
an equal and moderate heat, and by all means prevent any the least access of
smoke to the roots; for which reason I would advise large ovens, such as the
biscuit bakers in Holland use, as preferrable to every other method; a building
may be so contrived as to contain 13 ovens, viz. four on each side, three at
one end, and two at the end where the door is, with one general brick floor
over all; one or two windows may be so contrived as to give access to a
sufficient light; let us suppose the oven ten feet long, by eight wide, and
allow two feet for each partition, this will make an oblong apartment of
forty-two feet by thirty-two in the clear below, and on the upper floor
fifty-two, by forty-two, room enough for any crop; provide good brick funnels
to your chimnies, and there can be no danger of fire, the rest of the building
may be of timber; in this process Madder will loose five sixths of its weight.

When the roots are sufficiently dried, they must be pounded in wooden mortars;
for this purpose a mill constructed exactly like the old fashioned rice mills
is very proper, only varying in the shape of the lower end of the pistil, or
beetle; for in the rice mills their lower end is in form of an inverted cone;
but here the lower end ought not only to terminate in a square, but the but-end
ought to be cut into small squares, so as to render the pestle toothed; for
this reason also the mortar ought to be of a different form from the rice
mortar, which last is likewse an inverted cone, or shaped like the side of the
top of a funnel, whereas this ought to be in form of a hollow globe, which has
a neck like a decanter or bottle, in which neck the pestle ought nearly to fit.
To empty the mortars and supply them with fresh roots, is a necessary
occupation during the pounding. The roots ought to be cleared of their outer
bark.

It will then be fit for packing into casks and exporting.

I remember to have heard it said in Holland, that poor people, in order not to
be obliged to sell their small crops to the manufacturer, at his own price,
preserve the roots from fermentation, by burying them between layers of earth
in the ground, and that by this means it may be preserved for any term of time,
without perceptible alteration.

XLV. Coffee being an article to all appearance fit to be raised in the
southern parts of the peninsula, and some of the islands, i shall give it a
place here. This is an object worth our notice, as its consumption is great
already, and still increasing; there is little or none produced in the English
West India islands, in comparison of that which the Dutch and French colonies
produce.

Its culture throughout all the settlements where it is raised, is now by the
young shoots obtained from the larger trees; but originally it was introduced
by seed, which being soaked for about twenty-four hours, is then planted in
tubs, pots, or beds, at about three inches distance, covered lightly with
earth, and carefully watered when no rain happens. Usually in about 14 days
time the plant appears; when the young plants have attained the height of eight
or ten inches, a rainy day is watched to transplant them into a walk, as it is
there called, which answers to our orchards; the ground is here carefully
cleared of all manner of roots and plants, and turned up at least a spit deep.
About twelve feet is the distance which ought to be left between every two
plants.

The growth of coffee is quick, provided the ground be kept clean, but perhaps
no plant is sooner hurt than this by too luxuriant a growth of weeds or plants,
round or near it. The second year Eddos Eddo or Tanier is a species of esculent
Arum, well known in East Florida, and is good food for negroes.
, or Taniers, or even patatoes, may be planted among them, which will be a
means of raising provisions by the same labor, that is necessary to keep the
ground clean.

This plant bears fruit sufficient to defray the yearly expenses at the end of
the third year; its produce will then increase until the seventh year, and
after this it will continue to bear in a degree nearly equal, until about the
fortieth year of its age, when it begins to decay.

If any of the young plants should fail, they ought immediately to be replaced
by others.

In the Dutch colonies, when a coffee walk decays, they root the trees out, and
let the ground lay fallow for ten years, or upwards, during which time it
affords pasture for cattle, and afterward it is turned into a cocoa walk, or
cotton plantation.

The ordinary height of this tree is from twelve to sixteen feet; in the Dutch
colonies they are lopped, to reduce them to a kind of Espaliers, for the easier
gathering of the fruit.

When the coffee has attained to ripeness, it is carried to drying sheds, which
are constructed in the Dutch colonies on the following plan:

The Area of the ground generally applied to this use is seventy feet by
thirty; a brick foundation of four, five or six feet high, is first laid to
raise the building from the ground; on this the building is placed of timber,
being of two stories; the upper floor is about twelve feet above the lower; in
each side of the building are from twelve to sixteen large windows likewise two
at each end, on each side of large doors, all this is necessary to give a free
access to the air, to prevent the coffee from heating or shooting. In the lower
part of the building a kind of drawers, of about six feet square are so
contrived as to be drawn without side the building, where they rest on wooden
rollers or blocks, these drawers receive the coffee after the drying floor, and
in fine weather are drawn out, but pushed back the moment it begins to rain; by
this contrivance a large quantity is, as it were, instantly sheltered from
ruin; no other invention can be so expeditious.

The building must be furnished with two pieces of square timber, of the length
of twenty-five or thirty feet, and about eighteen, or twenty-four inches thick,
made of hard wood; in these a row of mortars is sunk, to beat the coffee in,
pestles or beatles for the same, fanning mills to clean the coffee, shovels for
turning it often while it lies on the upper floor; a competent number of
baskets, of different sizes, and a pair of scales with weights. Before this
building there are generally one or two platforms, from forty to fifty feet
square, called drying floors, intended to take all benefit of the fine drying
weather during the coffee harvest. Adjoining to the building is generally a
smaller one, containing a cooper's shop and a mill, called a breaking mill,
through which the new gathered coffee passes, to deprive the grain of its pulp,
or red outer skin; after coming from this mill it is soaked during one night in
water, and next day spread upon the drying floors, where it remains till the air
and wind have sufficiently dried it; if rain should happen it is quickly
gathered into heaps, and covered with sear cloth.

The coffee, being thus dried, is put into the drawers, where it is left till
thoroughly dry; from hence it is carried into the loft (being now only
surrounded with a thin, semi-transparent husk over each pair of seeds) where it
is left till the whole crop is gathered; the harvest lasting often two months;
while it remains in the loft it must be daily turned, to prevent its heating,
and in good weather all the air possible must be admitted; after harvest it is
again returned into the drawers, and left there for three or four days, in
order to become totally dry, it is then pounded or beat in the above mortars by
hand, to deprive it of the thin, inner husk, which involves every pair of
seeds; after this it is fanned, and when fanned the broken grains are separated
from the whole, which last are put in bales, or casks, for the market, with all
this seeming trouble a coffee walk is easier attended than a sugar plantation,
and is said to be full as profitable.

XLVI. Cacao is a plant which i make no doubt would succeed in some of the
lands found in the southern division of East-Florida, but as it is tender, and
requires a deal of attention i shall only hint at it, as an object worth
trying, and we ought to do this out of regard for our lives and constitutions;
chocalate being become so common an aliment, and the vilainous adulterations of
it in the northern colonies, make it an enemy to the stomach, whereas if good
and genuine it proves a very agreeable, nourishing and balsamic food.

XLVII. Tea, a despicable weed, and of late attempted to be made a dirty
conduit, to lead a stream of oppressions into these happy regions, one of the
greatest causes of the poverty, which seems for some years past to have preyed
on the vitals of Britain, would not have deserved my attention, had it not so
universally become a necessary of life; and were not most people so infatuated
as more and more to establish this vile article of luxury in America; our gold
and silver for this dirty return is sent to Europe, from whence, being joined
by more from the mother country, it finds its way to the Chinese, who, no
doubt, find sport in this instance of superior wisdom of the Europeans. These
considerations, joined to the additional evil of its being a monopoly of the
worst kind, and the frauds of mixing it with leaves of other plants, ought to
rouse us here, to introduce the plant (which is of late become pretty common in
Europe) into these provinces, where the same climate reigns as in China, and
where (no doubt) the same soil is to be found; by this means we may trample
under foot this yoke of oppression, which has so long pressed the mother
country, and begins to gall us very sore; and will the Europeans (according to
an unaccountable custom of despising all our western produce, when compared to
oriental ones) avoid drinking American tea? Be not ye so infatuated, ye sons of
America, as not to drink of your own growth! Learn to save your money at home!
I cannot think this advice contrary to the interest of Britain, for whatever is
beneficial to the colonies, will in the end be at least equally so to the
mother country.

In hopes of some well minded planter taking this into consideration, i have
thus hinted at it, and will write what i can, from hearsay, of its culture.
First then let me caution the attempter against imposition; be sure that you
get the seeds in good order, and in their capsules, for the friend you employ
may be deceived more in the plants than the seeds, there being a plant called
by Linnaeus, Camellia, and by Kaempfer, Tsubakki, so exactly like to Tea in its
leaves, as not to be distinguished therefrom; this has frequently been sold to
the Europeans for Tea, and is thus introduced into Europe. If the seed cannot
be procured in Europe, nor the real plant from a trusty friend, apply to some
well-meaning Captain of an East Indiaman, no matter of what nation, he can get
the seed in China, and it may be brought to America, without any danger of
decay, in a manner which I shall hereafter mention for the preservation of
seeds in general. After the tea seed is procured some may be sown on the
passage from England here. Will any reader say this is building castles in the
air? let him remember, that seventy years ago rice was an utter stranger in
America, till some such good captain, who had been in the east made a present
of some seeds to a person in Carolina, who planted it; both these men are
seemingly forgot, but how much more did they deserve statues, than many others,
who have been in an unnatural manner, often for crimes, idolized, and as it
were eternized, by pompous effigies, and lying monuments!

Even in their native country the seeds are very ^iable to miscarriage,
therefore they plant ten or twelve in each hole, in rows throughout the field;
Kempfer, who had the best opportunity of information, tells us, that the plants
are left to grow till seven or eight years before the leaves are gathered; but
he should have told us, whether this was necessary to the perfection of the
leaves, or only done on account of the quantity obtainable, perhaps to strip
them younger would destroy the plants: I think he also says, that after ten
years the plant is cut down, and young shoots spring up, or the plantation is
entirely removed.

In the gathering, it is said, much time is taken up, each person culling not
above two or three pounds per day, it being done leaf by leaf; during the time
a sheet is spread over the bush, in form of a canopy, to prevent the leaves
drying hastily, in the sunshine, which would exhale the flavor; it is said
also, that they have three crops, viz. in the end of February, this is the
best; then in the end of March, and beginning of April, and the last and worst
is in the end of April and beginning of May; what remains on the bush till the
end of May is said to be unfit for curing, and consequently for exporting; the
observation on tobacco is also said to hold good in regard to tea, i mean, that
the upper, middle, and lower leaves are different in goodness, and consequently
three different kinds.

The curing is done on iron plates, over a moderate artificial fire, and the
leaves are constantly rolled by the hand. Neuman thinks the dark color, and
the rose flavor of Bohea tea, to be artificial; he seems to say that Kaempfer
and Dr. Cunningham (when they wrote that Bohea tea was the first gathering)
meant it to be a crop of leaves collected before the plant comes to maturity,
which is perhaps the case in the provinces of China that are too far north, to
bring it to perfection: He also mentions the process related by one Meister, to
wit, that the leaves are put into a hot kettle, just emptied of boiling water,
and that in this they are kept close, till they are cold, afterward committed
to the hot plates this produces Bohea tea; he adds, that this at least is
certain, that by a similar process good Bohea tea may be made among ourselves;
a specimen of which he himself exhibited to a numerous audience. He further
says, some dealers in tea, in England are not ignorant that certain European
leaves, particularly those of the Dog Rose, and Cherry tree may be so colored
as to pass for good Bohea. The leaves of the red whortle, or cranberry, and
rose bush seem now to be most in esteem among these sophisticating gentlemen.

The above author relates, that the Chinese are extremely curious in every
branch of this manufacture, they gather the leaves with thin gloves, and the
workmen employed in cutting it are restrained for a fortnight before from
flatulent food, or whatever else may communicate an ill flavor.

There is a later writer on this subject, i think Dr. I. C. Letsom, who is
perhaps better informed, but i have not been able to consult him: be all this
as it may, let us introduce the plant, and we will discover its culture and
curation.

XLVIII. Such numbers of Lauri being found indigenous in America, it may not be
amiss to hint at the Pimento, or Jamaica pepper, as very proper to be
introduced into the southern parts of East-Florida, where, i make no doubt, it
will prove a profitable article.

XLIX. Mangroves and Salsola: Pot, Pearl and Barilla ashes, can nowhere be made
to more profit than in East-Florida; the several genera of trees known by the
name of Mangroves, are in so great an abundance, and so replete with salts,
that they will undoubtedly yield a much greater proportion than any wood yet
used for that purpose; i have made several very good samples on the coast;
these trees have never yet been properly classed, i intend to do it in the
course of this work: the Kali for Barilla is perhaps nowhere so abundant as in
that province.

L. Bees are in great numbers in the eastern province, but found their way as
far westward as Pensacola only about the year 1772, they not being original
natives of America, but all of this class which are found wild, have sprung
from swarms deserted from Apiaries in the settled provinces; there are none
wild about the Mississippi yet, but a few years will certainly bring them
thither; it is evident from this relapse of the bees in a wild state, and their
prodigious thriving, that honey and wax may be made very considerable articles.

LI. Ginger will certainly be found profitable if introduced into the southern
parts of East-Florida.

No doubt many of my readers begin to think, i have swelled this account beyond
all bounds; i beg pardon for intruding on their patience, if i have done it,
but the inquiring philosopher will, i suppose, find that considering the
variety of climates and soils, i might have gone on, and reasonably enumerated
a number of others; my earnest hopes are that these loose hints may prove
beneficial to a continent, which has so great a share in my warmest wishes.

I have every where avoided describing exp^ve ways of culture, such are too
much obtruded on gentlemen who begin the noble science of agriculture; men are
discouraged by following such precepts; in those hints which are new I speak
from a degree of experimental observation, in others i have chosen such methods
as are in use and least expensive, i have shunned a mere theoretical narrative,
because i utterly hate it: unpractised methods often appear plausible, even
when they will produce effects diametrically opposite to what were intended.

It is true, that the pine barrens (so called) will in all appearance not be
soon wanted, especially in West-Florida; but i think that for those, who are
not possessed of hammock land, a hint for the improvement of these pine lands
may not be amiss; we so a surprising vegetation effected on some of them:
complaints of barrenness may sometimes be removed by merely adapting the soil
to its proper use; a man who has a good piece of river land, bordering
immediately on these barrens, without any intermidiate oak or hammock soil in
Georgia, Carolina and East-Florida, thinks himself almost always deprived of
means to raise Maize, and will think his staple land of less value on that
account: let such a person well examine his pine land, perhaps the clay or marl
lays at the same depth below the surface, in that case, by mixing the soils,
you may improve them so as to be fit for any purpose. None of these lands are
so absolutely barren but they will produce sweet potatoes, or pumpkins; i have
seen yams come to good perfection in Georgia and East-Florida in such lands; in
West-Florida i saw them pretty forward in the navy garden of Pensacola, which
is comparatively a mere beach. Peach orchards will do here as well as in the
richest soils; the worst kind of this land will produce rye to advantage, even
twice in one year; the sesamen, or oily grain, a profitable article if well
attended to, will grow kindly in them, and they produce crop grass (a good
pasture) in abundance, by merely turning them up often: for these reasons then
a man ought never to be too precipitate in pronouncing a piece of ground
absolutely barren; we have in these provinces no undrainable boggs, no
mountains, and very few stones to deal with.

The manner in which cattle are now kept in the southern colonies is
unprofitable; twelve or sixteen cattle might be with a little attention made to
yield more profit in a dairy, than stocks of three or 400 do now, with all the
labor and time at present bestowed on them; the practice of letting calves
suck so long as they now do, is contrary to the practice of all ages and
countries, except among the Spaniards; who keep large stocks for the sake of
their hides and tallow only; and as in the southern colonies the people seem
more and more to neglect keeping a few cows at home for the dairy, and hides
and tallow cannot be made large articles in trade, by means of small stocks of
five hundred or six hundred only, i can hardly see the intent of keeping such
stocks of cattle, except for exportation alive, as the stocks of horses are
kept; for in the article of beef, cattle can hardly yield profit where the
Carolinian or Georgian method of killing at two, three, and four years old
obtains, which is the cause of the badness of their beef.

Hogs are so profitable an article, and so easily made spontaneous, that it is
a matter of the greatest surprise to me that no more are raised in Florida;
especially as man is very various, and in great abundance.

The bounteous hand of nature has here given us an animal, which, by
experience, we know may easily be domesticated, whose fine wool might yield
good profit, and whose flesh is equal at least to our beef, and yields as much
tallow; i mean the buffaloe: if instead of wantonly destroying this excellent
beast, (for the sake of perhaps his tongue only) we were to endeavor its
domiciliation, either by a pure breed, or by raising a spurious one with him
and our common cattle, i think we would find our account in it.

The Moose, or American Elk, found in the higher latitudes on the river,
naturally leads a life so nearly approaching to a state of domestication, that
i am often surprised he has never yet been attempted to be incorporated among
the class of useful tame animals on this continent. These and the like hints i
think deserve attention, and i hope they may be of use. In a country where
horses and cattle are in such abundance, and consequently cheap, and where
human labor is so dear, more improvements in machinery ought to be introduced:
it has amazed me often to see people so blindly mad as to ruin themselves, by
obstinately persisting in building saw-mills in improper places, which has been
here too often the case. The Mississippi indeed affords the means for mills at
a small expense, but they are only of temporary use. In such a timber country
as the Floridas, introduce the Dutch windmills, it is easily done; i have
frequently heard, that they are unfit for this climate, but in my strictest
inquiry not one reason appears against them, but that people by infatuation
will run on a sand, where so many before them have suffered ruin by making dams
in improper places.

As much as possible difuse the hand hoe, particularly at turning up, and
otherwise preparing the ground for seed; introduce the plough; the newest lands
may be plouged, and the hand hoe is only necessary to assist a little round the
edges of stumps, etc. introduce likewise the horse hoe with the Dutch and
Suffolk foot ploughs, to do the laborious work of the hoe in hilling corn up;
in well improved grounds for rice use the drill plough, especially in countries
where an ox of four years old may be had for forty shillings, and a serviceable
horse for four pounds; all these would save great sums, and render it less
necessary for the planter to depend on the labor of negroes.

In lieu of the awkward tool made use of to cut grain, i mean the sicle, i
would advise the introduction of the short scythe and hook, called in New York
government segt and mat hook; and in case of thin crops the scythe and cradle:
by means of these; expedition and neatness will become common, whereas now the
crop stands sometimes on the field till it is damaged, unless a great number of
slaves can be employed.

Threshing is performed in the most awkward manner imaginable, in the Southern
colonies; to many the common flail is entirely unknown, and long poles, or a
crooked cudgel made use of, and where the flail is used it is ill managed; for
the large crops of rice, etc, i would recommend a machine which i remember to
have seen used in Holland, as long as my memory can serve, and yet strange to
tell, even in England the people were breaking their heads for the invention of
a threshing machine no longer than four years ago; when the same machine had
been known, and commonly used in New York and Pennsylvania, near fifty years:
it consists of a wooden cone, whose base is about two feet, or two and and a
half foot diameter, and whose length is from nine to twelve feet, it should be
made of very hard wood, its surface is regularly fluted, toothed, ribbed or
indented; the ribs are about fifteen in number, with as many grooves
alternately between them, of about three inches thickness and depth; the small
end of this kind of roller is furnished with a strong ragged eye-bolt and ring,
and iron hoops to prevent its cracking, or the bolts drawing, this ring should
be about six inches diameter in the clear, and be fixed on a post in the middle
of the floor, which for twelve or fourteen inches up ought to be cased with
iron, to prevent the ring from cutting it off by the continual friction: the
sheaves being laid circularly round this post, the roller is by one or two
horses or oxen drawn round in a constant circular process, one man attending to
turn up the straw continually; this is more expeditious and cleanly than the
trampling of it out with horses and cattle, because the thing is so contrived
as to let the cattle walk without all, and it makes incomparably more dispatch
than the flail can even with many hands.

In the common way of shelling maize there is also great loss of time. A man
can hardly shell six bushels per day, whereas with the flail he will shell
twenty in an hour, and the fanning mill will soon clean it; many more
improvements will in time be wanting, but the above are now absolutely
necessary.

Thus far i have given a detail of the agriculture practiced, or practicable in
those climates; during the course of my collecting materials for this
narrative, i have sometimes been beyond all measure vexed, and at others i have
been obliged to laugh at the silly notions, whereby England is deceived in her
ideas of America, occasioned by some foolish writers, who have raised some
absurd hypothesis in their own brain, from whence they deduce as crooked
theories as ever entered the thoughts of mankind; thus writing without
experience, they lead a parcel of blind copiers, as it were, in a string, as if
intended on purpose to deceive mankind; and what is more strange, some people
so implicitly believe these ingenious writers, that i have seen them after
coming here obstinately follow the precepts of these guides, though in direct
opposition to what they see to be the practice of their neighbors, who have
been taught by experience. How sillily has one vented an opinion, that by
clearing the woods of North America, we would ruin our temperate colonies, and
turn them into cold uninhabitable deserts, thereby bestowing the climates of
New England, on Carolina; Present State of Great Britain and America. 8vo 1767.
with more such fancied evils, notwithstanding that even when he wrote, Canada
(by the French only deemed fit for a furfactory) began by English industry to
become a grain country; so that he might have known better, and now that same
country even exports wheat; pray what is the reason of this but that the
clearing the land causes the snow to remove sooner than it formerly did? Under
the head of sugar in this work see more of this.

Just such nonsense he vends, when he attributes the want of wood in the plains
of the north western parts of America to barrenness, when experience has taught
every one that they are fertile; how well does it confirm this genius's opinion
when we see without deception, that the nearer we approach those plains to the
west, the more temperate is the climate! At Ilionois, in latitude 40, snow
seldom lays three days, and cattle are out all winter; in the Nadouessin's
country, latitude 45 and 46, above two thousand miles from the Atlantic, snow
rarely exceeds three inches in depth, and the wild rice is found spontaneous in
amazing tracts. Nor is his argument of the cold being more felt in a field than
in a wood of any force; let him remember that snow lies a month, or even six
weeks longer in a wood than in a field. This man dares to tell us we talk from
experience. So it seems, when he says the badness of pasturage in the southern
colonies renders it impracticable to maintain stocks of cattle: was it my
business i might enumerate more such shining authors; There is one so very
cunning as to have discovered the labor of our slaves here to be dearer than
that of hired people. Amazing wisdom! See the Appendix to the In^ (...)
Great Britain. 8vo. 1760.
but as it could serve no good purpose i omit it, and only beg leave to hint
that such blind guides ought not to be too implicitly followed.

In the above account i have inserted some articles which might possibly have
come more properly under the head of manufacturing, such as indigo, pitch, tar,
turpentine, etc. and even rice, but their near connection with tillage has made
me insert them there, rather than in the following part of this work, where i
have dedicated some pages to hints concerning manufactures.

Reducing the rough timber into boards is now the most common branch of
business in the southern colonies, that comes under the name of manufactures: a
pair of negro sawyers are taxed to cut an hundred feet per diem, this the
industrious ones often perform by two o'clock, or sooner, they are then
suffered to cut lumber for their own use the rest of the day, or do any other
business, for which their masters pay them; these hundred feet per diem, are
six hundred per week, or thirty-one thousand two hundred per annum, which,
allowing them to be only inch boards, and to sell at six shillings sterling per
hundred, is L. 93, 12 s. per annum, a noble benefit! which in thicker board,
scantling, and ranging timber is much greater; the owner of such a pair of
slaves lets them out at L. 60 per annum; from hence we may gather how necessary
the introduction of saw mills is to lower the price of this article.

Hogshead staves of white oak are made by what are called gangs of people; a
stave making gang consists of five persons, a feller of the timber, who cuts
down the trees, two to cross-cut them in proper lengths, a river or splitter,
who rives them with the fro, and the fifth is employed in shaving them; this
gang makes five hundred staves each day, which are supposed to be worth 30 s.
is 6 s. per diem for each man.

Shingles of cypress and white cedar, which are made nearly in the manner of
staves, are sold at about 10 s. per thousand, and one gang may very well make
three or four thousand per day.

But the grand manufacture to be made of timber here, is SHIPPING, for this
purpose no country affords more or better wood; live oak, cedar, cypress,
yellow pine, are adapted by nature to this. O! how just is every Englishman's
reason for cursing the late peacemakers, when he reflects upon the fatal
mistake of leaving the isle of New-Orleans in the hands of the French and
consequently of the Spaniards! and when he sees them building such fine
frigates as they did last year on that island; to add to the misfortune they
leave their own timber and cut it off of the English land, about the lakes, for
present use; might not England herself infinitely rather build ships of war,
and sell them to her enemies, and so make profits of them, than to be obliged
to behold this with supineness? When we recollect the amazing distance into the
heart of the country to which the Mississippi and its branches gives us access,
and where we may build ships of two hundred tons at least; when we see the iron
mines dispersed up and down the country; when we recollect the possibility of
producing the most immense quantities of hemp and flax; when we behold the more
than rapid increase of mankind there; and finally when we survey the harbors,
Charlotte, Tampe, St. Joseph, Pensacola, all proper for the admission of ships
of rank, besides others we know not yet; what a field is open here! what a
prospect of power and grandeur seems to be already welcoming us! no country had
ever such inexhaustible resources; no empire had ever half so many advantages
combining in its behalf: methinks i see already the American fleets inhabiting
the ocean, like cities in vicinity!

The manufactory of iron will undoubtedly be very great here; every part of the
western province at least abounds with it; no doubt other minerals are hidden
in the bowels of the earth, but except lead and antimony they are not yet found.

The article of Potashes of various kinds have been mentioned under the head of
Mangroves and Salsola; i shall only repeat here that no country can make these
commodities equal to East Florida; that province can undersell and supply all
others of the earth, when we consider that England takes L. 50,000 sterling
worth out of North America alone, where people can not make it either so good
or so cheap, it is spur enough to encourage some person to begin this
manufactory in that country, but be aware of doing it in a manner clear of
S^vens's and other expensive schemes.

Deerskins though none are manufactured here, yet, being a great staple
commodity already, they deserve a place here, was it but to remind my reader
that the Floridas are watered by all the rivers by which peltry is like to come
in future, and that by a little attention and pains taken with that trade,
these two provinces, particularly the western one, may lead it down their own
channel to that degree, that every individual skin (got to the westward of the
heads of the Ouabache, and so up to the western branches of the Mississippi,
and to the southward of Ohio) must, as they certainly ere long will, center in
the gulf of Mexico.

When we consider the vast increase of stocks here, and the ease of maintaining
a stock of a thousand or fifteen hundred cattle, and four or five hundred
horses, and the very great difficulty attending the northern colonists in
keeping up a stock even of no more than twenty or thirty head of black cattle,
it must be evident, that tanning of leather will be a great business here; even
allowing the number of American inhabitants to be no more than three millions
(which number the late systematic writers seem determined to confine us to) and
allowing two and an half millions of these to wear about six pair of shoes per
annum, and that in America about ten millions of these are annually made of
American leather, which is more than likely to be the ca^e; the town of Lynn
alone exporting above three hundred thousand per annum, there will then remain
about five millions to be supplied from England, even this leaves a large field
open, and if we are industrious not only that gap will be stopped, but we may
export tanned leather; if England does not want it, or will not take it, other
countries will; consider ye Floridans what an extensive manufacture of Chamcis
leather your lazy neighbors of Campeachy carry on already.

When we consider that the northern inhabitants clothe at least seven eights of
themselves with cloth, that costs them hardly any thing, but their industry,
when we ponder well the indefatigable pains taken by the Acadians, settled on
the Mississippi, to array themselves in every respect with the produce of their
own fields, and the work of their own hands, when we see the immense quantity
and variety of raw materials afforded by this country, such as wool, cotton,
silk, etc. heretofore enumerated, must we not be inspired by the genius of
frugality, to make use of these blessings of the bounteous hand of nature, and
to imitate these industrious people, whom Providence already suffered to be
driven out of the land of their forefathers by the iron rod of arbitrary Mars,
and caused to settle in our neighborhood? If we learn by times to know, that
we enjoy all these blessings, we shall have but little use for importing any
thing but money.

Pork and beef will shortly be worth attending to on the Mississippi, as is
evident from the quantities of salted wild beef, already exported by the
Spaniards to the Havannah.

An article little known, perhaps not thought of, next claims our attention, i
mean the extensive fisheries in the power of these colonies, with which they
now supinely, not to say stupidly, allow the Spaniards to run away. The whole
of the west coast of East Florida, is covered with fishermens huts and flakes;
these are built by the Spanish fishermen from the Havannah, who come annually
to make one or two fishing voyages on this coast, to the number of about thirty
sail, and one or two visit Rio d' Ais, and other places on the east coast of
the penninsula, they arrive about the latter end of August, and continue coming
and going till the end of March; their first care is to prepare their nets, and
to build a hut, or refit the old one; then they new furnish their flakes or
stages with new strings of silk grass to the wooden hooks by which the fish is
to be hung up to dry; their nets and other apparatus of lines, etc. are all
made of silk grass likewise; and as they fish upon shares, each man furnishes
his piece of net, number of lines, share of salt, and quota of provisions for
the voyage, or if not able to purchase all these (which is seldom the case) the
proportion of such person is furnished by the owner or captain, who deducts
their value from his share, when he receives the dividend of the neat proceeds
of the cargo; the distribution of this dividend is generally as follows: the
vessel draws one third, the patroon or master, two shares of the remaining two
thirds, which is divided into as many shares as there are adventurers;
reckoning two boys for a man: their charges are little more than the wear and
tear of the vessel, the purchase of salt from the King, and the duties of entry
for the fish, which last i think is two and an half per cent, with these people
a profitable trade might be established; they have often told me, that in case
they could find Englishmen on the coast, who would furnish them with salt, they
would not purchase any more than what was absolutely necessary to cover their
license, for these very men are obliged to go to Key Sal, to gather the salt
there, and bring it to the Havanna, where they are obliged to deliver it into
the King's ware houses at three rials for a fanego, a measure containing scarce
two bushels, and when they prepare for the fi^hing voyages, they are not
suffered to take any salt elsewhere but out of these warehouses, where they
are now constrained, by their most gracious Sovereign, to pay one dollar and an
half, or twelve rials for the identical salt he took from them for three;
provisions and dry goods might also be sold to them to advantage, but it would
be necessary, that they were made certain first of finding such vessels on the
coast, for without such a certainty, they would not venture to come without
salt, nor would they bring any money; the same vessel that carried salt and dry
goods might here drive an advantageous trade with the parties of lower Creeks,
who come to hunt in the same season, in this part of the peninsula, and always
get great quantities of skin* she might likewise get a load of fish, which
would answer well in the West Indies, as the fish from hence always fetch a
considerably greater price in the islands, than the fish from Newfoundland. The
principal fish here, and of which the Spaniards make up the bulk of their
cargoes, is the red drum, called in East Florida a bass, and in West Florida
carp; the French call them poisson rouge; this is in those provinces a fine
fish, although in the northern colonies they are generally poor. They also salt
a quantity of fish which they call Pampanos, for which they get a price three
times as high as for other fish. A few soles, some sea trout, and the roes of
mullets and black drum make up the remainder of the cargo; some oil from the
liver of nurses and sharks is also carried; of the sound of the sea trout a
glue is made by only drying them, which is a perfect and fine ichthyocolla. The
roes of mullets and black drums are put into a pickle for about a quarter of an
hour, then taken out and partially dried in the sun, then pressed between two
boards; afterward exposed upon a hurdle in a small hut to the smoke of the
inner part of the ears of corn, which is properly the receptacle of the seed,
and called the cobs. These roes the Spaniards are very fond of, and use them
instead of cavear. From this account my reader may judge of the worth of this
fishery. These fishermen make likewise no inconsiderable quantity of shark oil,
and it is well known what number of turtle the Providence people catch on the
east coast.

The Myrica, or candle berry myrtle grows in great abundance on the seashore
of both these provinces; the wax produced by it is too well known to need
description; it is manufactured by throwing the berries into a hot bath, to
discharge them of their wax, which is skimmed from of the top after the water
grows cold.

Traveling through the uninhabited part of the woods, falling to the share of
every person, who arrives at present in Florida, it cannot be amiss to say a
few words about it: whether you go by water or by land it is most necessary to
carry with you powder, shot, and a fowling piece; provide yourself with rice,
or such bread as you like best to use; a hunter is necessary and utensils for
dressing provisions; always before night allow yourself at least one hour's
time to prepare fire wood, for this must be used in summer as well as winter to
rarity the air round the camp; always lay with your feet toward the fire, and
you are out of danger of catching cold; if you are in a country where warring
savages resort, keep up a large fire all night, and be sure to put some hats on
po^es near the fire, this will protect you from their attempts, unless they are
at war with ourselves. A bear skin on the ground to protect you from its
dampness is very necessary; always choose an elevated spot, and if you have
horses choose a situation near a cane branch, or where the woods have been
lately burnt, this will effectually prevent your beasts from straying. As the
diet is generally roasted meat remember my former caution against spits got out
of a low ground; small reeds are excellently adapted to this purpose: a small
hut covered with tna^ch of palmittos, or bark of trees, is always preferable to
the lumber of a tent; such an one, sufficiently large for two men at least, is
easily set up in a quarter of an hour; if you are in a river be sure of
fastening your boat in a still water or eddy, and be cautious not to fasten it
with a with, which is too common a practice with many; this precaution will
prevent your boats going adrift by means of a beaver's appetite. If you are
where the grass is long, burn a space of ground before you make your fire, this
will save your baggage, which many have lost by neglecting this; if in a part
of the country where musketoes are plenty, have a close covering, called in
this country a Bear, and made in form of a musk to net, to put up over your
bed, suspending it by two stakes; and lastly encamp not near any old trees, but
as much as possible shelter your camp against the wind; by carefully observing
these hints, you will not find traveling through the American deserts so
uncomfortable a business as it may generally appear to be; as for the dreadful
stories told of wild beasts, believe me they are vain, no animal is yet found
in the North American wilderness ferocious enough to come within sight of a
man, if the wind wafts the air of a human body toward the brute; if it does
not, he will not venture nearer than in sight; but should you wound a bear, or
the American panther, so as to disable him from flight, he will prove
dangerous, but remember, if you tread even on a worm, he will turn up his tail
at you, as it were in his own defense.

I shall now say something about the most advisable method to be taken by
emigrants, who intend to transplant themselves into this part of America, from
the more northern regions; first i would observe that if destined for East
Florida, it is absolutely necessary to carry at least one year's provisions in
flour, maize, pork and beef; if to the eastern part of West Florida, the same
step is to be taken; but if to the Mississippi, provisions barely for the
voyage will be sufficient, they being always to be had there in plenty, at or
nearly at the prices beforementioned; if the person be able i would advise him
to purchase negroes in the northern provinces, and to carry a few more than he
intends for his own use, the profits on the sale of four or five will nearly
defray his expenses; carry no white servants, unless you have a mind to
colonize a large tract of land, and this has never yet turned to account; i
will suppose two instances of what in my opinion is the most elegible method of
settling people of different situations in life.

Let one man be possessed of two thousand five hundred Dollars in money, and we
will suppose him living in R^ode Island, or in any other part of New England,
or New York, New Jersey, or Pennsylvania; and allow him to have a wife and four
children, with two house slaves, in either of these colonies; he may purchase
eight good working slaves for twelve hundred dollars, out of his two thousand
five hundred; about four hundred dollars more will buy four young girls or
boys, for which he will, in Florida, find ready sale, with 80 per cent advance,
but they ought not to be under twelve or thirteen years old; his next care is
now to get a vessel, we will suppose her of sixty tons burden, such a one as
may generally be h^d manned and victualed, at two dollars and a half a ton, per
month, from any of these provinces, the planters provisions and implements for
himself and family will cost about three hundred dollars, allowing him well
provided with every necessary for eight weeks; thus we may suppose him arrived
in the Mississippi, with six hundred dollars left him in money: here we will
leave him a while, to pay a visit to a poorer family, we will al^ow the head of
this to have as many cattle, horses, hogs and superfluous implements as may
raise him four hundred dollars, for a poorer man should not attempt to go as a
planter, he may as an artificer, of tradesman, we will also allow him to have
an equal share of matrimonial blessings with his richer neighbor this man must
lay out about sixty dollars in provisions, and about twenty-five for plantation
tools, his passage money will amount to fifty dollars more, we may suppose him
possessed of one good able negro, besides his money which may be worth an
hundred and sixty dollars; thus he may arrive at the Mississipi and have ninety
dollars clear money after obtaining his land and stock; hereby the way let all
who intend going to this country endeavor to arrive about the latter end of
November, in order to clear some land and bu^d some place for shelter. White
servants will never turn to account, there being so many idlers already
imported on wrong plans, that you can carry none with you who would not in
three months time think it very hard to be obliged to call you master, in a
country where the most dirty vagabond you can hire at six Dollars per month,
would think his honor touched by hearing any body call him to you with less
civility than, Sir, your employer would be glad to speak to you.

I will now throw this matter into a clearer light, by placing it in tables, in
which the reader may see it at one view.

The first men being possessed of Dol. 2500 We will suppose him to prepare
himself for the journey in New York, where he purchases 8 working slaves, at L.
60 per head, L. 480 4 young do. for sale, at L. 40 160 Allowing his 14 slaves,
including his 2 house-slaves 2 lb. of rice, and half a pound of pork per diem,
for 60 days passage; this will amount to about three tierces, containing 1700
pound of rice, which at 24 s. per Ct. amounts to 20 8 660 8 2500 brought over,
L. 660 8 0 2 barrels containing 420 lb. of pork, L. 4 10 per barrel, 9 For his
white family's use we will say, 2 tierces of 360 lb. of bread, at 17 s. per Ct.
3 1 2 1 barrel of 180 lb. of flour, at 22 s. per Ct. 1 19 6 1 barrel of choice
beef, L. 3 3 barrel of choice pork, 50 s. 2 10 50 lb. of hams, 1 s. per lb. 2
10 a firkin, 60 lb. of butter, 1 s. per pound, 3 2 large shoats, 10 s. a piece,
1 2 sheep, 15 s. do. 1 10 1 dozen of geese and turkies 1 4 4 dozen of small
poultry, 2 8 coffee, tea, and spices, 3 3 loaves, 30 lb. of sugar, 1 10 25 lb.
of muscovado ditto, 16 15 bushels of corn, to feed his stock, at 3 s. per
bushel, 2 5 small expenses, for greens, etc. 18 4 Total in N. Y. cur. amounts
to 700 0 0 1750 remains, 750 we will suppose him to carry one half puncheon of
Jamaica spirits, and one half ditto of common rum, Dollars 50 and to lay out
for half a pipe of good Madeira, to serve him for his first year's stock, 100
150 There now remains as above Dollars 600 in his possession, at his arrival:
of this he must pay for the charter of the vessel, 300 Remain Ds. 300 Suppose
his 4 young negroes sell at an average for 150 Dollars each (which is not a
high price) this amounts to 600 Dollars 900

In the above account no mention is made of furniture, because a man possessed
of such a sum of money may naturally be supposed to be superfluously provided
with that article, and by selling a part of this, he may supply himself with
others, that have a peculiar reference to these climates, and are indeed not to
be dispensed with: axes, saws, spades, hoes and other implements of husbandry
perhaps necessary to the amount of sixty Dollars, may be likewise supposed to
be purchased out of the sale of his superfluous furniture.

Since the writing of this part of the manuscript, the new mode of parcelling
lands out in small lots, and selling them at auction, was introduced into the
colonies. This scheme, it is said, was first projected by Sir James Wright,
Baronet, Governor of Georgia.

On what terms lands are to be had now since the shutting up the land-office is
yet impossible to tell; but the undermentioned was the state of this business
before that event happened, with the fees as they stood regulated in South
Carolina, Georgia, and East-Florida. In the western office I was never
conversant enough to know the real state of this matter; but I have seen some
of Mr. Durnford's bills for surveys calculated at 50 per cent. higher; for what
reason I know not, for surveying in West Florida is attended with less
difficulty, than in either of the others.

Petition, warrant, and precept, 11 7 To the surveyor general, and his deputy,
each 2 s3 per 100 acres; the number of acres for the abovenamed family would
amount honestly to 850 acres, which makes at 4 s6 per hundred 1 18 3 Suppose
that 1000 acres were granted besides on purchase, this would cost 10 s. per
hundred, 5 The abovementioned expenses of petition, warrant and precept on the
last 1000 acres is, 11 7 Survey of 1000 acres, at 4 s6 per 100 2 5 Suppose the
land 150 miles distant from the surveyor's residence, he being allowed 6 s9 for
every 20 miles out and in, except for the first 20 miles, this being 130 miles,
at 6 s9 per 20 miles out, 2 3 10 The same 130 miles at 6 s9 per 20 miles home,
2 3 10 Allow the surveyor 14 days to go and come back, he has four men with him
to row in his boat, or carry his provisions and instruments, if by land these
same two men serve as chain-bearers, and two as blazers, they are generally
paid for at 2 s6 per diem each, 7 Provisions for 5 men for 14 days are Carried
forward L 21 14 2 brought over, L21 14 2 to be had plentifully, and good, at
one shilling per diem, rum included, 3 10 Return of two precepts, plats and
certificates by the deputy surveyor, 6 s9 each, 13 6 Return of the two
warrants, platts and certificates by the surveyor general, to the
attorney general, 6 s9 each, 13 6 Two fiats by the attorney general, 6 s9 each,
13 6 Governors and Secretray's fees, about 8 Total Sterling L 35 4 8 Which L.
35 4 8 Str. (in consideration whereof the planter is now in possession of 1850
acres of land,) are at the exchange of 4 s6 per Dollar Dol. 155 Building a
comfortable neat timber house, outhouses and negro hutts on this land, will
cost about 250 Maintenance of the planter and his family for 4 months, during
which time all the above business may be done and the house at least rendered
habitable, the expense of traveling to Pensacola and back to Mississippi
included 150 Deduct these 555 from 900 and we will leave him now in possession
of his land, house, two negroes, and cash to the amount of 345

Suppose the month of April now set in, and his negroes in these 4 months to
have cleared him 20 acres of land, of which he plants 10 with Maize, pease,
etc. 3 with rice, and 7 with indigo, from this he may reasonably expect at the
most moderate calculation on the Mississippi lands, about 400 bushels of Maize,
and 300 of pease, with perhaps about 500 pumkins, about 150 bushels of rough
rice It is necessary to observe here what i forgot before, this is that about
three pecks of rice are sown on an acre.
and 400 lb- of indigo by the beginning of November; we will suppose that in
this same interval he has purchased Six milch cows at 12 Dollars each 72 Six
hogs - 4 24 A stock of poultry 10 A horse 30 Having lived at home between April
and November, we may reasonably suppose these 7 months to have been less
expense to him, and to have cost for maintenance no more than the first
mentioned 4 months or 150 Expenses of building his indigo vats 40 A boat for
plantation use, 15 341 Dol. We must suppose him to have converted one of his
house negroes into a field slave, which will make his working hands 9 in all;
by no means too small a number to clear and cultivate 20 acres for the first
year We have now indeed seen him expend nearly all his money, but the year is
come round and he has now 400 bushels of corn, 200 of which together with the
pumpkins he must reserve to feed his negroes and stock with during the next
year: thus remains 200 bushels of maize for sale at 2 ryalls per bushel as
before said is 50 Dol. Of 300 bushels of pease (150 reserved for his use)
remain 150 for sale at 2 ryalls also 32 150 bushels of rough will make 3500lb.
of cleaned rice, which his negroes manufacture during the first winter by hand;
this is about 17 barrels of the Mississippi measure, of which 2 being kept for
his own use, there will remain 15 barrels for sale which at 2 Dol. per barrel
is 37 400lb. of indigo at the price it bore in November and December 1772, is
400 Thus we may suppose for this first year his live stock in a thriving
condition, his stores full of provisions, and his cash amount to 520 Dol.

He may at present reasonably be thought to increase his working negroes to 10,
and to add 10 more acres to his cleared ground, besides improving last years
clearing. I will now leave this man and give some advice to his poorer
neighbor -- I appeal to every man who will be candid and is really acquainted
with the country i speak of, whether my calculations are just or not, and
whether my balance of the first years work is not exceedingly moderate: in
regard to a buck or jockey, who expecting to find this new country on his
arrival full of Vaux halls, Ranelaghs, and New Markets; who just comes to
scamper over it, and when he finds his expectations failing takes a look at the
woods, and at the moderate life of the new planter, then turns up his nose
takes a pet and goes off, puffing of a "d -- n the the country," he can at best
pretend that he was there in a dream; he is no judge, he has no business with
serious books on the present subject, at least I write not for him.

The poorer planter we have before allowed to possess 400 D. The provisions
necessary for his voyage for his negro and all included to be bought at New
York as before, 2 tierces of bread L. 3 3 1 2 1 barrel of beef 2 5 0 1 barrel
of pork, 4 10 0 25 lb. of ham, 1 5 0 1 firkin of butter, 3 0 0 4 small shoats,
2 0 0 2 dozen small poultry, 2 8 0 25lb. muscovado sugar, 0 15 0 10 bushels of
maize, 1 10 0 coffee, tea, and other small expenses, rum included, 3 6 0 24 0 2
equal to 60 D. remains 340 his passage money, 50 remains 290 D. brought over,
290 D. I will suppose the plantation tools he wants may amount to 25 remains
265 D. The expenses attending a survey of 400 acres of land (150 miles from the
surveyors house,) the quantity this family was formerly entitled to, are as
follows, viz. Petition warrant and precept as before L. 11 7 Str. Surveying 400
acres at 4 s6 18 Milage 2 3 10 Allow the surveyor 12 days with four men, but at
the same time the planter may be supposed to have a son, being an able lad, who
together with the negro make out three, thus remains only one to pay 2 s6 per
diem, 1 10 0 Provisions for 5 men 12 days rum included, 1 s per diem, 3 0 0
Return of precept warrant, plat certificate and fiat 1 3 0 Governors and
secretarys fees, 3 0 0 L 12 3 8 Str. Equal to 52 Dollars. Himself, his son, and
negro eployed between November and April, in building a comfortable house of
square cypress timber, dove tailed, consisting of two rooms and a loft,
together with a corn-house, and in clearing 8 Carried forward 52 -- 265D.
brought over 52 -- 265 D. acres of land, during which interval the maintenance
of his family may be supposed to cost 80 D. Allow that he buys in the same
interval a cow, 12 D. 2 sows, 4 D. 8 D. a stock of poultry, 6 D. 158 D. A horse
15 D. A canoe we may suppose built by himself, iron work excepted, 2 D. Thus we
see him in possession of 400 175 D. acres of land, a small plantation stock,
and 90 D. in cash. Suppose his clear land planted in the following proportion,
viz. 5 acres with maize, pease and pumpkins, 1 acre of potatoes, 2 acres of
indigo, It may reasonable be supposed to yield 200 bushels of corn, 150 do. of
pease, 300 pumpkins, 100 lb of indigo. During summer, his son and negro
attending the land, he may be usefully employed in squaring timber, or in some
handicraft he understands, this together with the increase of his little stock,
and about 60 dollars well laid out, we may reasonably think will Carried
forward 90 D. brought over 90 D. maintain his family from April till November
60 D. Thus the remainder of his cash now amounts to 30 D. We must allow himself
to have made his small indigo vats, He has now for sale 100lb of indigo 100 D.
120 bushels of corn 2 s. 30 D. 100 do pease, 2 s. 25 D. 155 D. Thus he may very
justly at a moderate computation be said to remain at the first years end in
possession of 400 acres of land a comfortable house, improving stock, and
fruitful farm, besides in cash, 185 D.

Let it always be remembered, that the same calculation I have made for the
Mississippi, will nearly answer for the Tombechbe or Mobile river too; but if
you intend for the eastern province, or for Pensacola, be cautious and bring
provisions along with you to last you at least the first year. It may not be
amiss to recapitulate in a general view the present exports of these provinces,
together with the possible additions, which to all appearance may be made to
them as mentioned in the foregoing pages.

1st. Articles already exported from these provinces.

Indigo, Maize, Rice, Tobacco, Indigo seed, Salted wild beef, Carravances, Live
cattle from West Florida, Mules from Spanish Louisiana, Pitch, Tar, Squared
timber, Cedar posts and plank, Cypress and pine boards, Plank of various woods,
Scantling, Staves and heading, Shingles, Sassafras, Hoops, This article and
Cavear with some Ichthyocolla are alalready exported by the Spanish fishermen,
the two first in very considerable quantities.
Dried salt fish, Canes, Oranges, Deer-skins, Peltry, Myrtle-wax, Pacan-nuts,
Raw hides, Buffaloe tallow, Bears oil.
2d. Articles, some of which are already naturally found, and others, which to
all appearance will soon be introduced, and must become staple commodities in
these provinces, Wheat and wheat flour, Rye, Hemp, Flax, Beeswax and honey,
Silk, Wine, Madder, Rhubarb, Jalap, Pot-ash, Barilla, Safflower, Oil of Benni,
-- of ground nuts, Oil of olives, Cotton, Tanned leather, Salt beef, Salt pork,
Ichthyocolla, Cavear, Turpentine, Oil of do. Rosin, Gum elemi, Storax, Figgs,
Raisins, Drugs of many kinds.


3d. Articles which we have the greatest reason to believe will in process of
time become staple exports from these provinces; these are, Sugar, Rum, Ginger,
Coffee, Pimento, Cacao.


4th. Articles of which it were to be wished that the introduction would be
attempted soon, under some encouragement, Tea, Arnotto, Orchil, Cochineal, Cork
Tree, Spurious breed of the buffaloe.


I have used my utmost endeavors to collect materials for ascertaining the
enumerated exports of Carolina and Georgia for the last two years, but to no
purpose, except a paper of the best authority wherein the state of the exports
of the last province are recapitulated, and their value ascertained; this paper
was printed by James Johnston, in Savannah, and is republished in this work,
with a view to convince my reader by the most undoubted matter of fact, that
the province of Georgia has advanced the value of her exports in about
seventeen years time from L 15000 to L 121000 sterling per annum, before the
1st of January 1773, as shown in page 104 of this volume, this together with a
consideration that in the year 1768, when Georgia was still poor, that province
and Carolina were thought to increase the wealth of the British nation, near a
million sterling Political essays 4 to London 1772. p. 359.
will make us reasonably judge that these two provinces under consideration,
(one of which is at least equal to Georgia, and the western one

infinitely superior to both Carolina and Georgia in point of the quantity of
fertile acres) may in 10 years time do as much, provided that the course of
nature be not forced into another channel, when either by fraud or violence
means will be found to deprive the inhabitants of the Floridas of the benefits
which have accrued to Carolina and Georgia, from that law of nature and of God,
the lex agraria. Commerce is so effectually necessary to all people on earth,
that none can be said to subsist without it; it is in this part of the world
chiefly necessary on one account; this is to acquire the means of power to
defend the country by riches, which in all probability we must expect to do
chiefly ourselves, if we may judge from the policy of destroying the forts
Toulouse and Tombechhe among the chain of forts that defended the colonies from
the inroads of the savages; it may also be of use to maintain the poor, for of
these there are already no inconsiderable number who not being brought up or
used to tillage are obliged to become fishermen and hunters, contributing to
support the naval power of Britain may likewise be called a third important
motive to urge us on to a promotion of trade, but this last cause of incitement
is yet in embryo. Let us endeavor to build vessels ourselves, let not our
trade in this country (where ships may be so easily procured) be confined to
selling our products at home to people from abroad, who will come to fetch them
at pleasure; if we do, what must become of the hopes of ever extending our
present limited settlements! consider that on this point depends the increase
of mankind, and the welfare of every country.

Never let us suffer monopolies from abroad; observe with what a fatality they
are attended; see what a large cultivable tract of America lies waste through
the influence of a mean dirty company, who do not annually trade to above one
fourth the value of what some private merchants do both in England and Holland,
and who have ever with might and main in private opposed the pursuit of a
business Discovery of a north west passage.
the very effecting and encouraging of which was the fundamental intention and
condition of the charter which intitles them to be at present such a set of
illegal regraters.

When we consider again the effects of the establishment of European factors on
the trade of Virginia, we shall likewise see the effects of monopolies to be
pernicious; for this very scheme, however strange my assertion my appear, is a
monopoly in disguise; keep such mangonizers from among us; it is true, some few
merchants will be at first possessed of the chief of all the trade, and thereby
(if they are not more virtuous than the generality of mankind at present are)
have it in their power to do much mischief to commerce, but let it be
remembered, that as long as they are not factors from Europe there is room for
others to come in, whereas if once European factors take place, who have the
sale of the European manufactures consigned to them, with orders to keep the
price of our valuable products within their own stated limits, it is also done
with us; commerce will be so cramped that the innumerable quantities of
profitable and fertile acres of this wide extended waste of new world might as
well be converted into a sea, and think not these cautions premature; there is
no want of designing men to set such a scheme on foot to the prejudice of these
new countries, and too many ungrateful sons of America itself, would be found
to turn their acquaintance with its commercial interests to advantage in
gratifying a desire to have a bite at her vitals. I would not be thought,
notwithstanding this, to contradict the advice i gave in page 74 of this
volume; that scandalous licentiousness which so greatly prevails among the
present traders, is so great an evil, that it is become highly necessary a less
one should be introduced to effect the destruction of the greater, by
monopolies of the trade of each particular savage nation being granted to
different men, who would go to reside in each of these different nations; nor
should they have this stretch of favor bestowed on them by the community,
unless they are laid under proper legal restraints, and until such time, as an
amendment in the present distracted state of this great and profitable branch
of trade might be effected.

It would scarcely have been necessary to say so much on this subject, were it
not that new countries are so open to an introduction of novel schemes, which
will be found of pernicious consequences when it is too late; i say it
therefore once more, oppose all schemes that may have a tendency to introduce a
monopoly of your products, for a conclusion, hear from me the opinion of the
greatest statesman Europe ever produced; Jan De Wit, counselor pensionary of
Holland.
he says that it was the opinion of the greatest statesmen (undoubtedly after
him) that had the rulers of that respectable union in 1609 dealt in the same
manner with every branch of trade as they did with that of the East and
West Indies, not one tenth part of the inhabitants of that opulent country
would have been able to live and earn their bread; and Holland would have been
ruined. Another writer poetically exclaims, "this (meaning monopolies) is the
spring from whence misery overwhelms the people." Hac font derivata cladis in
patriam populumque fluxit Thoughts of the present state of trade in India.
In short, to me it seems nothing can be more evident than that the
establishing a rational commerce, in an equitable manner, should be a principal
aim at the same time with the establishment of agriculture, and introduction of
profitable staples in a country so peculiarly full of advantages for the
promoting of these grand objects, as the western province especially is. I am
here tempted, although not the least appearance of such a monopoly exists yet,
to lay before my readers the manner of government at Surinam, a colony of
people who are beyond contradiction possessed of real liberty in all its
extent, and whose political history (notwithstanding their vicinity to
Great Britain) remains absolutely a dark labyrinth to almost every individual
of all ranks and classes, high or low, in the British dominion, notwithstanding
the knowledge of a pamphlet, called Observation upon the Netherlands, whose
author Sir William Temple.
(I ask pardon of his respectable memory) has only made some crude and short
remarks, in which he has in the most evident manner, published his thorough
ignorance of the state of the government he pretended to explain. This mode of
administration would never have been erected by my countrymen over their
plantations, was it not that a monopoly was at the head of it, what I offer
here is a faithful translation of some papers authenticated in the utmost
extent of the word.

"The governor, who at the same time is colonel of the military, (not the
militia only) has the supreme command over the colony, as well in civil as
military affairs: he is appointed by the society; but his appointment must be
approved of by the universal ^tes. In affairs of consequence, he is obliged to
assemble the council of police, where he always presides, as well as in the
council of justice, the vacating offices are pro tempore in the gift of the
governor till further orders from the directors; the governor has the care of
the safety of the colony, and issues the necessary orders for that end; but
when is to be protected against inimical invasions, he must assemble the grand
court martial, consisting of the commander, all the captains, and as many
members of the council of police, as there are military officers in the
court martial; the governor presides in this assembly, and proposes what he
thinks necessary for the security of the colony. Lastly, the governor (by his
instructions) is obliged to protect and promote the reformed religion in
Surinam. The governor has a secretary, who is paid by the directors. The
maintenance of all the officers is paid out of taxes imposed on all the
inhabitants, the directors pay only the governor's salary with a part of the
pay of the soldiers, and the maintenance of the garrison.

The council of police and criminal justice consists of ten counselors,
(including the commander of the forts and troops, who bears the title of prime
counselor,) with the attorney general and a secretary: it has already been
observed that the governor constantly presides in this council.

The council of justice consists of the governor, and fix other persons, to
whom a secretary is added; civil affairs are managed by this council. But an
appeal lies to the universal states; the governor has here only one vote,
except where a casting vote is wanted, in these cases his opinion is decisive;
the counselors of police and justice draw no salaries; the members are elected
by the votes of all and every of the inhabitants for a double number, out of
which the governor appoints according to his pleasure: they must declare by a
solemn oath that they will observe and maintain (in every part) the charter
granted by the universal states to the society and that in every other business
they will conform themselves to the orders which from time to time they may
receive from the directors.

At Paramaribo there is also a chamber of small affairs, and a chamber for the
management of the affairs of orphans and unpossessed legacies. The fir^
consists of seven commissaries and one secretary; the last of four overseers of
orphans, who have a clerk and book-keeper in their service.

The military, maintained at Surinam, consists of four companies of foot; the
governor is their colonel, and captain of the first company; the commandant of
the forts commands the second company; this last named gentleman together with
the captains, lieutenants, and ensigns compose the inferior court martial. The
seven provinces have promised to pay the expense of one man in each company, on
the return of the war-office, for the protection of the colony of Surinam. The
whole colony is divided into eight parts; according to which division, we find
a similar number of companies of militia; each commanded by a captain, the two
first companies are composed of the inhabitants of Paramaribo, the third of the
ward of Thorarica; the fourth and fifth from upper and lower Commawina; the
sixth of Cottika and Perika, the seventh from Paulus-Creek; and the eighth of
the Jewish nation.

The churches, the clergy, and lecturers are maintained at the expense of the
inhabitants; the clergy meet yearly in the month of February to consider the
state and necessities of the church. In this assembly (known by the name of
Conventus Deputatorum) a counselor of the court of police presides, with the
title of political commissary.

As an addendum, every man without exception, whether a native of the mother
country or not. is obliged on his arrival to take the oath of fealty to this
noble society.

I do not present my readers with the above account because I think a general
monopoly is ever likely to take place, but to let them have an opportunity of
comparing their own happy circumstances with those of a people where
monopolists preside, considering at the same time that even these monopolizers
through poverty are obliged to allow extraordinary privileges; I wish to put
every person on his guard even against particular monopolies or monopolies in
disguise.

All Dutch ships pay three guilders per last, both at entertering and clearing
out of the colony, which is about 2 s. 9 d. ster. per ton, of every ship,
port-charges, and the inhabitants pay a general poll-tax, black or white; each
50lb. of sugar, and 2 per cent, on all imported goods, and no vessels from the
other Dutch colonies are allowed to enter here.


The particular branches of commerce so naturally point themselves out, that it
is unnecessary to say much on that head, I will however slightly touch on a
very few of the principal prospects now apparently already open to us.

Our timber trade is certainly capable of being made incomparably greater than
that of other countries together, as well in quantity as in variety: but care
should be taken that this trade should be put under such regulations as would
prevent a waste of timber, (such as has been too fatally practiced in the north
of America,) For a small instance, dog-wood is used as firewood in New York;
it is a hard fine grained timber, fit for many use, to much better purposes.
and at the same time make our timber by a proper mode of manufacturing, answer
the European markets, equally with those of the West India islands, where the
superior quality of West-Florida timber stands acknowledged without a rival.
Nothing is wanting to effect this, but the erecting a number of sawing-mills on
the Dutch model, and the procuring a regularity of demand for the manufactured
boards, etc. As a proof that large quantities of timber may be brought down to
our seaside settlements, I beg leave to relate the following instance; Mons.
de la Gauterais, formerly an officer in the service of his most Christian
Majesty, but now residing as a planter on Pearl-river, some years ago had the
command of the garrison of Tombechbe, during this tedious sequestration from
christian inhabitants he thought of a scheme to turn this solitude to
advantage; to effect this he employed several savages of the Chactaw nation in
the cutting of cedar trees, and made those of his little garrison who were able
and willing for a reward to do it, square the timber, and form some of it into
a very strong frame of a house of about sixty foot by twenty-five, which frame
was next spring erected on an island or gravel bank, about two miles below the
fort, and during the summer season, and recess of the waters, this frame was
filled with the squared timber, which as effectually secured against removing.
When he had this raft completed, he got leave of absence, and watched the time
of the rising waters, which at length took the raft away and him with four
people upon it; this raft drew about 12 feet of water, and came down the river
without let or hindrance, carrying before it every obstacle (even bending large
trees under it) all the way down to Mobile, and by some neglect even as far
down the bay as the present fort Croftown; when thus we see that an enormous
raft containing upwards of five hundred tuns of solid timber may be with
facility brought down the Tombechbe, above three hundred miles, what have we
not a right to expect in the Mississipi.

Naval stores are likewise an article of immense speculation in both provinces;
West-Florida already supplies Spain with considerable quantities; no province
can so profitably furnish Madeira with corn and pipe-staves than West-Florida,
and in return supply itself and other provinces with wines: the above named
fisheries likewise may yield a very profitable commercial benefit. The trade
for furs is a fifth article of importance, and is already very great; to
mention rice, indigo, tobacco, etc. would be superfluous. But i have one
material point to mention, i have often wondered at the stupidity of people let
loose in a certain part of the field of commerce: i mean the trade with the
Spaniards, the deceitful appearance of which has led many into ruin, and yet
intoxicates every one who is so unfortunate as to stray within its bounds to a
degree of madness. The generality of traders this way, consider only the price
of things as they formerly stood, and not that these articles are much fallen
in their price on the Spanish coasts; the danger attending this trade they
despise, though it too often proves fatal; the delays on the coast are not so
much as thought of, and the perfidy of the Spanish traders forgot; the
underselling by Dutch and French traders, although very real, is thought
chimerical, and so on; in short, the prospect is here so gilded over, that
nothing but profits appear, where nothing but certain and inevitable loss can
be expected, the fatal mistake of over-stocking every part of America with
European manufactures, is a kind of obligation, or rather compulsion on us to
strike out into such pernicious branches of trade to the ruin of those who are
interested, as well here as in Europe. Be then advised, and let no vain hopes
intoxicate you, have patience, and if you import goods from Europe with views
of profit, import them in moderate quantities, unless long credit or abundance
of money enable you to wait patiently for the arrival of the Spaniards on our
own coast; and let none of our vessels frequent their coasts except it be for
the purpose of cutting fine timber and dye-wood, (and even these not often) or
when you are very well secured by value left in your hands for the vessel to
fetch a previously engaged, (but by no means by you) yet paid for cargo.
Believe me, an American Spaniard will give you more for your goods at your own
house than he will on his coast, and by coming to us he seems to loose all his
cunning, which in fact is only owing to our eagerness of completing a voyage
when we arrive on their coasts. More branches of trade are not at present to be
mentioned, because none have as yet appeared in this country to be worth
pursuing, but an immense variety must and will in the course of nature make
their apperance.

Having now explained my meaning in respect of the commercial interest of the
country, i will say a few words on the benefits arising from the population of
these and other similar provinces It is an undoubted fact, which has been long
ago taken notice of, By Sir Josiah Child, in his discourse on trade, p. 149.
that one man transplanted into the colonies creates work for four or five in
the mother country; a late writer Dr. Campbell's considerations on the sugar
trade.
agrees with this in saying, that numbers of people who would have migrated to
foreign countries, or done worse, are, by coming here preserved, and when
become rich, return home. I must, however, differ in opinion from a third,
Political essays, p. 359.
who has quoted both these, and expresses his opinion, by saying, that
emigrants ought to be made settle where they may be beneficial to
Great Britain; his saying would be just if a migration to the northern colonies
was pernicious, but this is so far from being the case, that people there love
room as much as any where; the continual and of late excessive importation of
settlers into these colonies is an evident proof of this, for by means of
these, even the natives are obliged to look out for habitations where they are
more at liberty to increase, not only the necessaries of life to which they are
at present confined, but also profitable staples for the mother country. A very
striking proof of this appears at present in every one of the northern
colonies, though in none so much as in Connecticut, whose very hill-tops are
inhabited full; those migrations ought therefore to be encouraged, because they
will naturally find their way to the more favorable climates and soil of the
southern colonies. It is also the interest of the southern colonies to
encourage the migrations from the northward, for fear these last might by being
confined within their prolific regions be in time induced to think of forming
bodies of modern Goths and Vandals to overrun and invade the territories of
their more happily situated southern neighbors. I am therefore induced to
think, that (however strange it may appear that a people in one hundred and
fifty years time should increase so rapidly as these have done) there is a
necessity even now to enlarge their territories; in this i agree with the last
quoted writer, and if Britain wants to secure the dependency of these colonies,
it is absolutely incumbent on her to allow this, contrary to some late ill
judged schemes as this may appear. Can she suppose that those countries will
remain unsettled? No, the prospect is too fine, numbers of families have
through the natural course of the increase of mankind settled themselves on the
lands intended lately for a new province on the Ohio: if i am rightly informed,
no less than fifteen hundred families already, and many others on places not
yet so much as thought of in Britain. These are the people who are most likely
to form independencies, and not the known provinces; what ideas have these
people of the paltry fear of a war with a few savages, (for in the northern
America they are but few) not that i would be thought to imagine that these
last mentioned provinces would not strike in with them in case of favorable
opportunities; what if some enterprizing genius among those dispersed
inhabitants should form an idea of becoming a great man, and by insinuating
himself among the most: western tribes of savages (who never having had
intercourse with us, nor any other white people, such for instance are the
Nadouessins, who are said to be a people remarkably tractable) would
incorporate a body of whites with them, and form combinations with other
neighboring nations, and thus form themselves into a regular state. Such a
state would undoubtedly soon become formidable, and be daily increased by such
men as for want of room would leave the crowded provinces. These, supposing
them at first vagabonds, or little better, when they should find themselves in
a place where they might possess the sweets of life at ease, would find it
their interest to become united with the common weal; therefore, i say again,
that since for want of room, people to the number of at least five hundred
thousand men, brought up to farming, are now without employ through lack of
land, and therefore they are obliged to migrate,) and settle without the limits
of the established governments, and thus it is highly incumbent on Britain to
enlarge those limits, or form new provinces; a few paltry tribes of savages who
retain the ancient grudge against us are no obstacle; the emigrants will soon
bear down those melting remains of a people, who having lost their country,
cannot fail to hate us, on that account, and in a kind of despair will rather
choose to be destroyed than to incorporate with us. Such bodies as above
described being once formed, can any man in his senses suppose, that possessed
with the spirit and ideas of freedom, for which the Americans are so
remarkable, they would after a course of thirty or forty years enjoyment of
such an independency be brought to submit themselves to any imposed government?
By no means; for not to mention their inaccessibility, men, who thus by a
regular train of accidents become masters of a country by honest means, and
improve it by robust industry, are not so easily dislodged as we may imagine;
history furnishes abundance of instances of such combinations of men, in a
short time, becoming formidable; and even in General Oglethorpe's time a German
with conceptions similar to those above named was found among the Creek
savages, who, had he not engaged in his scheme entirely alone, and therefore by
the Creeks, (although reluctantly) through the General's importunity and
intrigues betrayed into his enemies hands, it would have been no wonder if such
a man, with such ideas, joined to the amazing presence of mind and intrepidity
he is said to have been possessed of. would have so nestled himself in the
southern part of America, that we might have had no occasion to think of
forming the two provinces of Florida in 1763; and we may venture to affirm,
that had not the settlement of Georgia, just at that crisis become the object
of Britain's attention, he would have gone on unnoticed till he had formed all
the neighboring nations into a regular governed body, too strong to be crushed
by any power from abroad. But laying aside this reasoning, which i still insist
upon is not only apparently probable, but may be looked upon as certainly to
happen, unless the present bounds of the several provinces are enlarged; there
are other cogent reasons to induce Britain to change her conduct in respect to
this branch of her politics, she ought to let the Americans spread themselves
under regular governments over the continent, that they may be planters of
staples, and thereby find the means of employing more hands in the mother
country, by obtaining from her such of the necessaries of life as they find
themselves obliged to have from Europe, at an easier rate than they could
procure them among themselves. By suffering the upper latitude of the
Mississippi, and the banks of the Ohio to be cultivated under the influence of
a regular and civil government, we shall increase such plenty of necessaries in
the mother country, that all connection with foreigners who have the balance of
trade against Britain will become needless, any further than in selling them
British manufactures for money, instead of what is now the case of sending
bullion, besides the stated quota of manufactures, in exchange for hemp, iron,
flax, and other such necessary and bulky articles. When we consider, that
during the period of time in which these higher countries enjoyed and were
protected by a state of regular government under the French, one winter (so
long ago as twenty-eight years) furnished new Orleans with eight hundred
thousand weight of good flour from Ilinois D^ Prat^.
, we must be sensible at what a reasonable rate this and other necessaries of
life could be procured at New-Orleans and Pensacola, and from thence to
East-Florida and the West Indies, where the Pennsylvanians and New-Yorkers at
present insist on their own price, in so much that flour now is commonly at
from 20 s. to 22 s. per cent their currency at home; whereas I remember that
even in 1760, during the war, 16 s. and 18 s. was thought a high price. This
alone demonstrates the necessity of such a measure; would not such a fresh
supply spread its influence even across the Atlantic to the poor in Britain? no
doubt it would, the navigation down these rivers is nothing in difficulty or
expense compared with that of the European rivers, from whence the materials
come for the supply of Britain. The inhabitants of the upper counties of
Virginia and Pennsylvania would be obliged to drop the bulky commodities they
now raise, if they saw the inhabitants of upper Mississippi, the Ohio, etc.
raise the same with redoubled ardor, and in a perhaps fourfold quantity, at
the same time bringing them to market at much less than half the expense
themselves can do it at, and instead of the said coarse, heavy, and bulky
articles, they would necessarily be induced to think seriously of a vigorous
culture of wine, silk, oil, and similar necessary, light, and valuable
products, able to bear the heavy tax of land carriage to which those countries
are by nature subjected. In case of a rupture with any power who should think
proper to attack the southern provinces, especially West-Florida, would they
not most naturally be supplied with provisions, ammunition, and soldiers by way
of the river from those settlements in the higher latitudes? nor is it on
account of hemp and flax, etc. alone, which may be said to be still objects of
speculation, we see the tobacco culture which is a branch of vast importance to
the revenue as it were daily mouldering away into its primitive nonexistence,
and therefore new lands for this culture ought to be found and improved; the
want of this supply of the revenue will soon be felt in the treasury, and
Britain will find too late that she would have done well to have gone not only
to the expense of the establishment of these new provinces, but even to the
expense of that tremendous bugbear, a war, with the remains of the ancient
inimical tribes of savages; unless indeed, she intended the proclamation of
October 7, 1763, as a mere matter of form, and wished the back settlements
quietly to spread themselves without any expense to the mother country; but
should this be the case, the mistakes of such policy I think are fully refuted
in the foregoing pages: the spreading of people over the continent will make
them produce great quantities of staples, and Britain hereby would secure a
period for the dependence of the colonies upon her, while she would have
nothing to do but provide markets for the produce of the labor of her sons.
All Europe is sensible of this; every writer i meet with is either of my
opinion, or absurdly and continually contradicts and confutes his own
maintenance of the contrary in his own writings: i beg leave, to quote a very
sensible Frenchman (whose name I know not) on this subject, "it is true," says
he, "that the free and happy situation of North America, may much disorder our
European systems, The French word is Comb^n^isones European's, which may mean
European alliances, combinations, or junctions, but I cannot find English sense
in using either, therefore I suppose he means systems, or he may have meant
European plots which the word also bears.
particularly, if the English colonies attain to the not paying imposed duties.
Vast, fertile, and new tracts, where neither customs, taxes, nor military
troops, will take place, because they need fear no invasion, will deserve the
most serious attention from all our governments; and policy will be obliged
more than ever to turn all her views on the side of beneficence. Those states
which will be latest in using this reflection, will find themselves utterly
incapable of mending the evil; for the greatness of punishments or weight of
slavery only serve to increase ill-blood." This is not the way to mend the
matter, and i think certainly that no remedy will possibly be found out against
such a number of evils, as must necessarily attend the keeping the colonies
confined to their present bounds, whereas, by only allowing people to spread
over the country, they will all be effectually prevented.

To give my reader an idea of what room there is yet left for people to plant
themselves, i must tell him, that between the latitudes of 31 to 46, which i
judge to be the most habitable country from the Atlantic to the Pacific ocean,
and which cannot fail by the course of nature to become the country of those
Americans who were originally planted from England, Holland, and France, and
emigrated from Germany, on, and to the shores which bound the Atlantic
westward, and who now generally speak English; within these limits I say are
contained no less than two thousand one hundred and thirty-five millions, and
forty thousand square acres, exclusive of the known waters; at least twice as
much as the vast empire of China is said to contain, and allowing each family
to possess fifty acres of land, there is room for forty two millions, seven
hundred and eight families to live here. To conclude this discourse on the
settling of new provinces, i will just observe that the daily emigrations of
the people beyond the frontiers, even at the risque of the dreadful situation
of being exposed to savage incursions, is the most evident proof of the
necessity of this measure to the at present crowded Americans, if not to
Britain. Likewise it is a proof how little the present Americans who inhabit
the frontier countries value so insignificant a foe as the remains of the
ancient inimical tribes of savages, or even the prosecutions in law of
super-intendants, their delegates, and other formerly useful officers.

To say a word or two about the political history of these provinces, may be
thought incumbent on me, but little can be said of moment on that subject as
yet; except that Major Ogilvie in taking possession of the eastern province, by
his impolitick behavior caused all the Spaniards to remove to Havanna, which
was a deadly wound to the province, never to be cured again, notwithstanding
the inviting means used by Governor Grant, who succeeded him, to retain the
remainder, and to make them all return; -- that Governor Grant used all
possible means to encourage indigo and rice planting; -- that the crown would
not allow the transfer of Spanish landed interest to be good, although
mentioned in the articles of peace; -- that the said governor reigned supreme
without control, and in peace, notwithstanding the frequent murmurs of the
people, and the presentiments of the grand juries, occasioned by his not calling
an assembly, which they thought was a duty incumbent on him; -- there was also
a complaint of the contingent money of five thousand pounds per annum, for
seven years, not being so very visibly expended on highways, bridges, ferries,
and such other necessary things as the people could have wished; finally,
Governor Grant departed the province for Britain in 1772, on account of his bad
state of health, having a pompous address presented to him by his council,
which was re-echoed by a few of the inhabitants; -- that he was succeeded by
Major Moultrie as lieutenant governor, who was again succeeded by Patrick
Tonyn, Esquire as governor in chief, who enjoys the command there now; -- that in
the northern extremity of the province at the mouth of St. Mary's river, a
place is now founded, which, to all appearance, by its situation and superior
entrance into its harbor compared with St. Augustine, will draw the feat of
government away from the latter; -- that the cultivation of many articles,
especially indigo, begins to wear a pleasing and promising aspect.

Concerning West-Florida, i can only say, that discord has early made her
appearance in the counsels of this province; -- that disaffection to Governor
Johnson has been the occasion of its being so late as it was in rearing its
head; -- that Montfort Brown, Esquire succeeded him as commander in chief in
quality of lieutenant governor, who was succeeded by -- Elliot, Esquire who
unhappily ended his days; when the lieutenant governor again succeeded him, and
was a second time replaced by Governor-Chester, who is universally esteemed,
and under whose auspices the province is in a thriving condition.

About March 1772, the freeholders being met for the purpose of electing their
representatives, but finding that the writs mentioned a continuance of the
assembly for three years, (whereas they had heretofore held annual elections)
they now added this condition to their votes, that the new elected members were
to continue only one year; the mode of return on the writ the governor took
ill, and refused to accept it, insisting that the members should be returned
for three years, but all in vain, the freeholders remained inflexible, and
rather than not have annual elections, they chose to remain without
representatives, which has been the case ever since. The settlement of this
province goes on very rapidly, and its different valuable products increase
a-pace.

I shall now treat of a subject in which I confess myself not to have so much
skill as I could wish; i speak of it from such experience as my temper,
inquisitive into the mysteries of nature, has furnished me with during my stay
in this country; i mean the diseases most frequent in those provinces. But by
way of prologue, i shall enquire a little into the universally dreaded, though
chimerical unhealthiness of this climate. Dr. Lind 2d edition p. 1. chapter 4.
sect. 2, p. 137, et seq. London 1^71.
enumerates some proofs or signs of an unhealthy country, which are as follows,
viz. 1st. Sudden and great alterations in the air, from intolerable heat, and
chilling cold; this is perceived as soon as the sun is set, and for the most
part is accompanied with a very heavy dew, and shows an unhealthy swampy soil;
this is perfectly the case on St. John's river, and about Nassau-river, in
East-Florida, likewise at Mobille, and Campbellton, in West-Florida. At
Pensacola, and from thence East: there is little or none of this perceivable;
at Orleans, and on the Mississippi i was not sensible of any sudden alterations
of this kind: and on enquiry found it not to be generally complained of.
Neither of those provinces are so subject to this unhealthy variability as
Georgia and Carolina, especially the last; however, i do not find that any
person need be much under uneasiness about this any where, not even a newly
arrived European; the chief care necessary to such at seasons when these sudden
alterations take place, is to avoid being exposed to the night air, and after
sun set, to add some more clothes to those worn in the day time; and if on a
journey in the woods, never forget keeping a very large fire at night in order
to rarify this dangerous air. His second sign is, thick noisome fogs, arising
chiefly after sunset, from the valleys, and more particularly from the mud,
slime, and other impurities; this i never perceived to a great degree in any
part of these provinces; St. John's alone is very subject to thick nasty fogs
of all kinds, the seaside where soft salt marshes are frequent, is often
troubled with these, and these marshes a little before rain emit a most horrid,
and to me a suffocating stench; the northern part of East-Florida is very full
of these kind or marshes, in Georgia and Carolina they cover a prodigious
surface; the marshes in the south east of East-Florida are of a different
nature, and in West-Florida i remember very few of this kind; i have, however,
never heard any thing said contrary to a prevailing opinion of great salubrity
in dwelling near, the sea side, even among the thickest of these marshes; nor
have i ever heard any notice taken of the above stench by the inhabitants,
except as being a certain indication of rain; where this kind of marshes are
situate in brackish water, the situation is beyond doubt very unhealthy, the
wan complexion and miserable mien of the generality of the inhabitants of such
districts too plainly evinces it- We know by experience, that all such fenny
countries on every part of the earth labor under the same unhealthy calamity,
but the comfort is, their areas are every where very small when compared with
the more salutary situations which abound almost universally in every province,
and in every climate.

The third is, uncommon swarms of flies, gnats, and other insects, which attend
putrid air, and unhealthy places covered with wood; the first of these is not
common here, except at indigo works; and if these, according to my former
caution Page 139.
be a little remote from the dwelling, I never saw nor heard of any bad
consequences with regard to health attending them. I have already mentioned the
bad effects of these voracious vermin on cattle of all kind at an indigo work;
gnats, here called musquitos, are vastly numerous in some spots, but after we
have passed some distance the brackish waters in every river, they diminish,
and at last we find none; the Mississippi however is an exception, but on this
river they are not in such plenty at the freshes as below, at the rigolets, on
pearl river, and at the Riviere aux Boeuss, and on Dolphin-island, likewise in
Santa-Rosa bay, and in the bays of St. Andrews, St. Joseph's, and at St.
George's sound and islands, they are intolerable, and all the sea coast of
both provinces is exceedingly pestered with them. I traveled across the
peninsula in 1769, in the months of June, July, August, and September, but
found none at all in the interior part; i never heard these being attended by
any fatal disease except their troublesome bites, which sometimes cause
inflammations, especially in the legs; but the inhabitants of the western
province so effectualy fortify themselves against those vermin with musqueto
nets, tents, and Baires, Baires are a kind of tent made of light coarse cloth,
like canvas gauze, called by the French villemontiers.
that whether at home or traveling, they are not in the least danger from the
attacks of this terrible and bold, though dimunitive enemy, whose destruction
gradually takes place as the woods daily diminish; in very dry hot summers,
scarce any of these vermin are seen; a very dry hot air causing the deaths of
numberless animaculae of every kind, their effluvia, even of those that are
imperceptible to the naked eye, arising or exhaling from ponds, marshes,
swamps, etc. must spread a great quantity of noxious vapors through the
atmosphere, See page 15 of this volume.
and consequently corrupt the air, and spread disease throughout their
vicinity; this misfortune will likewise cease on opening the country, till then
let me advise every new comer, particularly a person of a gross habit of body,
to be careful of his constitution, a wine-bibber or rum guzzler, with such a
plethoric habit, can hardly avoid falling a prey to this bad air.

His fourth, is the quick corruption of butcher's meat etc. this, if the case
at all in any of these provinces, is not common, i remember indeed to have
heard a complaint of this happening at Pensacola in 1765, which was a sickly
season, but in all my journies through these provinces I never experienced it,
on the contrary I could always by some means or other preserve my venison, or
beef, when there was a necessity for doing it.

The fifth reason, says the Doctor, is a sort of sandy soil, among others he
says, such as that at Pensacola; i beg leave to inform the Doctor, that the
sand about Pensacola, and throughout these provinces, is a coarse, gritty and
gravelly sand of various colors, though chiefly red and white, that on this
sandy soil many excellent salubrious herbs grow, which serve as food to
innumerable herds of cattle, and when cleared they are improvable by culture;
this is not the case with the hot sandy deserts of South-America, Africa, and
Asia, over which the samiel wind passes, nor do i believe that the oldest
person in Florida remembers any sudden, hot and suffocating gusts, or blasts,
from which he has ever been obliged to turn his face in order to draw breath;
there are no open plains of sand in North America, they are all covered with
trees rooted in the lower strata of these sandy tracts; the only plain of sand
i know without trees, is at, or near the head of St. Lucia, in East-Florida,
which however is not extensive, and to it numerous herds of roe-deer resort
during night from the adjacent woods; i think, therefore, that neither of the
Floridas have any ill consequences to dread from their land winds; moreover, if
we consider, that the land-winds come from the west and north-west; geography
will tell us, that they range over innumerable acres of oak land, consequently
clay ground, Excepting the few hommocks near the sea, which are oak land, but
most of them sand.
and that only the sea coasts, and from twenty to about an hundred miles off,
are any ways sandy; which being so constantly fanned by the wholesome
sea-breezes, (so remarkable in these provinces) could not have any fatal
effects, even if the ground was of the nature of the Lybian deserts; thus we
see again how men reasoning from mere theory, are liable to commit mistakes.

To treat of the diseases to which the human frame is most liable here, in the
same regular manner, as i believe i have done of every preceding article, i
will divide them into two classes, viz. acute and chronic, and the first again
into two orders, viz. those of the summer, and those of the winter.

Fevers are the first of the summer diseases; the ancients have ages ago made
an observation, that the season of the reign of this terrible disorder was
always preceeded by an atmosphere laden with great heats, and much rain, for
some time; the modern writers seem to me to be generally of the same opinion;
this is exactly the case in all the southern provinces; for fevers begin to
take place in some districts more, in some less, about the latter end of July,
and in August, and continue throughout September, and part of October, just the
season immediately succeeding our greatest rains; and most violent heats; here
i will notice a Inquiry concerning the cause of the pestilence, and the
diseases in fleets and armies. London 1759.
remark which i have read long ago, and i find it confirmed in all climates,
"That the middle of the third month was observed to be the period of the
greatest rage of epidemical disorders." Those districts which lay near to low
rice fields, particularly in back swamps) and to such indigo works, where the
planter is obliged to make reservoirs of water, are most liable to these
disorders, after, and during the latter part of an excessive drought; because
in those neighbourhoods the air is at such times most prodigiously laden with
corrupt moist effluvia; for this same reason, cool rainy summers will make
those places more healthy than dryer spots, because during such a season all
the above mentioned noxious exhalations do not take place in so great a degree,
and the air is kept cool by the frequency of the showers; however such
situations will never be so common in the Floridas as in Carolina or Georgia,
the quantity of good wholesome fresh running water being infinitely greater,
and consequently little necessity of making stagnating ponds or dams.

It must be allowed, that all fevers however dissimilar in appearance, proceed
from the same origin; nature only works with more or less violence to rid
herself of what is detrimental to her.

The Ephemera, or day fever, occasioned by a mere increase of the velocity of
the blood, by means of a fit of drunkenness, or debauch, or originating from
violent exercise during the heat of the day is too frequently seen here; but as
it is seldom of a longer continuance than eighteen or twenty hours, it has not
often dangerous consequences, and may be avoided by every person; i shall
content myself with barely observing, that some cooling acidulated liquid
aliments will soon abate its violence, bleeding may likewise be of use to
restrain its force.

The continual fever, or inflammatory fever, is sometimes, though rarely
experienced in this climate, but seldom attended by those dreadful symptoms and
fatality, which accompany the same kind of fever, though of a more violent
class in the countries immediately between the tropics: this, in its common
form lasts about ten or twelve days, beginning to abate its violence in general
after the seventh; the fourth or fifth is often fatal. I am persuaded, that
whenever the yellow fever has made its appearance in the Floridas, it was
imported from Jamaica or Havannah, as was the case in 1765, which (by the way)
was almost universally an unhealthy Era, as well in Europe as elsewhere. This
continual fever begins with an excessive heat of the whole body, continued,
though not violent head ach, great drought of the tongue and palate, and
consequently a continual desire to drink; those people who die of this
disorder, generally depart on the fourth day, and i am of opinion, that few are
carried off by it, except such as are kept too close confined from the fresh
air: i would recommend the keeping the sun out of the room, but to admit as
much air as will gently ventilate it; a cooling diet, such as rice gruel,
barley water, infusions of baum, or sage, and lemonade, which is lime juice,
water, and very little sugar; lime juice, syrup of lemons, and current jelly
should moderately enter into every part or the patient's diet; avoid all salt,
spices, spirituous liquors or generous wines; a gentle purge of glauber salt,
with a few grains of kermes mineral, and some drops of oil of mint is generally
given on the first appearance of the disease; the effects of this are forwarded
by frequent draughts of warm chicken broth. During the operation of this, avoid
all acids: bleeding (especially if the disease makes a violent attack, and the
patient is of a plethoric habit) is indispensably necessary, the patient ought
by all means to avoid motion, and notwithstanding the above caution of admiting
air in the room, keep himself covered, and be careful not to throw his bed
cloths a-side. If the symptoms abate after the above mixture, emetics are
commonly subscribed; if it still continues, particularly if attended with
delirium, lethargic symptoms, or their reverse, blisters are applied; and in
great watchfulness some laudanum is used; if worms are suspected, an infusion
of Lonicoera.
Indian pink root, (a very common plant here) leaves, wood, and all, is made use
of as tea; but this plant possessing a pretty strong narcotic quality, ought to
be used with caution: in excessive heats some grains of sal nitri are added to
the liquors administered to the patient, and as soon as the fever begins to
abate, some orange, lime or lemon juice, saturated with salt of wormwood, is
given by a small tea-cup full every two hours.

The yellow fever being sometimes imported here, it may be necessary to
describe this Proteus among diseases, which I have frequently seen, and which i
myself have suffered in Jamaica under one of its various forms. I choose to
follow the description of Dr. Rouppe, in his de morb. navigant. as quoted by
Dr. Lind, because I find no other author who has done it so exactly, and if i
had not seen his account i should not perhaps have recollected half the symtoms
he mentions, although i now perfectly remember to have seen that dire distemper
in every shape he paints it in. He seems to speak of it as an illness to which
seamen only are subject in that climate (Curacoa;) he may have been induced to
think so by the disorder not raging on shore; the florid complexion of most of
the people in the island sufficiently showing it to be a very healthy spot; but
i find by his description, that it was the real yellow fever contracted at St.
Eustatius; he calls it the putrid colliquative or spotted fever; it raged in
the Dutch ship of war Princess Carolina, on board of which this physician
arrived at St. Eustatius on the 1st of August, 1760, on the 11th they sailed
from thence for Curacoa, which harbor they entered on the 19th, and then
(whether he means on the passage, or the very day he arrived, seems doubtful)
twenty people were sick, some of these had headaches without fevers, and some
were afflicted with a true bilious cholic; but they were by an easy cure again
restored to the enjoyment of their former health: the sense of his account of
the disorder, i take to be as follows, viz.

In the beginning of our stay in the isle of Curacoa, as before mentioned, the
diseases which occurred most frequently were headaches and bilious cholics,
which were soon cured; this changed into true choleric complaints, gradually
increasing with pain much more dangerous than the former, wonderfully
tormenting the patients: the disorder begun with a very great burning heat
about the praecordia, (sides of the upper part of the belly) griping stools,
great anxiety and uneasiness, these were followed by bilious stools and
vomitings, with great loss of strength, many of them being bedewed with
abundance of cold sweat; if this continued, especially if a fever came on,
(which was the manner in which it seized some with a high pulse, which
continued in most about ten hours,) then the lips began to swell, and a ghastly
paleness seized the face; afterward, the fever abating, they vomited abundance
of dark colored blood; at this period they generally died, or within a few
hours after the appearance of these symptoms. Those who voided the above named
and some blacker matter by stool, emitted a terrible offensive smell; but some
of these were with difficulty cured; in the same manner it happened to those,
who suffering of the fever, had, however no evacuation; others were only seized
with a common bilious fever, and as much as i could judge, the major part of
those were young men, or middle aged, robust, and before sickness the briskest
and most cheerful; they had a heat about the praecordium, they vomited bile, or
were making attempts to vomit and had an unquenchable thirst; some of these
frequently found themselves cold, and by turns heats would seize them; then
succeeded a hot itching of the whole body, with a high, full, and quick pulse;
the tongue was yellowish or whitish- often encompassed with a green border on
the edges, and always wet or moist.

The disease continued in some to the second, in others to the third day; then
the heat would abate of itself, and the natural pulse returned suddenly or
unawares, which by little and little would sink, and at length become small and
tremulous, in some there appeared petechioe about the breast, arms, and inside
of the thighs; in others, large livid spots appeared; the strength of some was
by all this so exceedingly exhausted, that on the least motion, the patient
would swoon; besides an abundant sweat would arise on the whole body; the
patient moreover would be anxious, fretful, uneasy, slightly delirious, very
inattentive, valuing nothing, complaining of nothing, eluding questions, and
yet at the same time almost always answering pertinently to them; in some, upon
the declining of the pulse, a fiery heat would arise about the stomach, the
lips swelling a little, the face becoming ghastly, shortly after they vomited
discolored matter, and at length died; others would be consumed by heat and
griping stools, and discharged corrupt, stinking, and almost black blood by
stool; some in the third, and others in the fourth day, would begin to acquire
a yellow tinge in the white of the eye, and on the skin, which was an evil
sign; moreover, the tongue would from day to day become whiter, and at length
tremulous; they would always lay on their backs, thus as the disease increased,
sometimes on the second, third, or at latest on the fourth day, an easy, calm
death would follow.

Blood drawn from the veins, in the heat of the fever; was bright red: it
concreted and separated a yellow serum, just as in Europe. Those, who by mere
dint of strength resisted the disease, and reached the fifth or seventh day,
would have the whole body almost covered with small boils, or little painful
red pimples, very difficult to be brought to a suppuration, resembling small
pox of the confluent kind.

At length, most of the diseased, particularly those who had reached beyond
thirty years of age, and were of a bad habit of body, when they were seized
with the disorder were overwhelmed with pain and heat about the stomach, with a
continual retching, but yet bringing up little or nothing; in some the pulse
increased for some hours, and again appeared in a short time to be in its
natural state; it became low, the skin possessed its natural heat, the tongue
was moist and white; on the first day of the disease a copious sweat would
break out over the whole body, but no spots appeared, those whose sweat was
little or none, had copious black and very foetid discharges, were troubled
with gripings, and would often faint away suddenly; when the evacuations were
trifling, ceased, or otherways remarkably lessened, and but little sweat
pervaded; then the patients suffered greatly and were very restless; on the
contrary, if it broke forth plentifully, they found themselves much better.

Lastly, in all its stages from beginning to end they were afflicted with
constant watchings.

A worthy lad about eighteen years old, who found himself well in the morning
early, was, about 10 o'clock of the same morning taken with a head ach, and
other feverish symptoms, he had a high full and quick pulse, he obstinately
refused being blooded: the second day at evening he voided abundance of dark
discolored blood by vomit, and the third he died. Another of about sixteen was
well in the evening, but we found him next morning ill, and utterly deprived of
all sense, i examined his body, which was swelled and overspread with livid
spots, his pulse almost entirely gone; some black blood of a sweetish taste
flowed from his left ear and out of his nostrils, which continued to ooze out
some hours after his disease, the corpse in a short time became wholly
discolored and livid, emitting a very disagreeable smell.

The French call this disorder mal de Siam, supposing it originally imported
from thence into the islands; the Spaniards vomito preto, or black vomit; the
Dutch geele koorts, which last conveys the same idea as the English yellow
fever.

In general, when fevers are violent, the practice which prevails at present,
is to have recourse to antimonial medicines, and as soon as a remission is
brought about: the bark is administered in large doses.

Intermittents are endemial in all low situations, thus we see in all the
provinces to the southward, particular places remarkable for a continuance of
this disorder in them, such as more especially Jacksonburg, in South Carolina,
Savannah, in Georgia, Rolles-Town, and most of the settlements on St. John's,
in East-Florida, at Campbell-town, near the mouth of the Escambe and at Mobile
in West-Florida; this disease attacks people much in the same form as the
continued fever, the first fit frequently lasting three days without
intermission; physicians treat it nearly in the same manner as the last, but i
have observed, that they are very averse to taking blood from a patient
afflicted with this disorder, saying, that bleeding is a sure way to prolong
the disease, although sometimes a small matter of blood is taken from people of
a very gross habit of body, when the returning fits seemed to continue longer
in point of time than at the first, the same diet is observed as in the
continued fever, except when the patient is very weak, when strong broths well
separated from the fat are frequently given; if delirious, or comatose symptoms
with pains in the back, etc, make their appearance, cooling medicines are used,
during the paroxysms, Doctor James's powder or other antimonials, and on
intermission the bark in copious doses is administered with success, and in
obstinate headaches recourse is had to blisters.

This is a very tedious disease, and whoever is afflicted with it should not
too soon judge himself cured, but continue taking a bitter infusion, composed
of the bark of the root of the magnolia major (which the French on the
Mississippi substitute in lieu of Jesuit's bark) with Virginia heart,
snake-root, rue, sal absynth: and pink root, in good Madeira or Lisbon wine.

People in general, suppose them even obliged to remain on the sickly spot
during the fatal season, which is autumn, may by care, in a great measure shun
this tedious illness, such as living on a more generous diet, especially animal
food high seasoned, and a moderate glass of wine; avoiding a too great exposure
to the then frequent sudden changes of air. They ought to use the cold bath
often, wear garlic and camphire in the pockets, not expose themselves to rain,
and above all keep warm and dry feet, and if got wet by rain not to change
their clothes too suddenly; never go out of a morning fasting, but before you
go to work, business, etc. eat a piece of bread, and drink a glass of the
bitter infusion; avoid the night air, and keep some fire in the house,
particularly in the mornings and evenings to rarify the damp air in the rooms,
especially in the bed rooms which ought never to be on a lower floor, and
should be in the eastern parts of the building exposed to the morning sun: by
observing these rules the constitution of the human body will be less disposed
to receive the impressions of a bad air.

An excellent thing to be given the negroes on a plantation before they go to
work, is a wine glass full of the above bitter ingredients, and garlic infused
in rum; and they should be encouraged to chew and smoke tobacco.

When a person is seized with a fit of the ague, he ought by no means to delay
going to bed, and drink a draught of lime juice, and powder of chalk, while it
is fermenting in the glass; this will bring on a sweat, and shorten the fit, or
in the hot fit use some opiate if the patient is not delirious, this ought to
be done as often as the paroxysms return.

The nervous fever, likewise called the slow fever, is known by a small, quick
and low pulse, and by not affecting the patient with such violent heats as the
others fevers, but with greater oppression about the praecordium; it does not
make them so thirsty; the tongue is at first unusually moist, and looks white,
though at last it becomes dry, and looks brown or inflamed; continual heats are
felt in the palms of the hands, heats and chills return alternately very quick,
a copious clammy weakening sweat, excessive lowness of spirits, restlessness,
being drowsy without power of sleeping, pain and giddiness of the head, ringing
in the ears, and if it lasts long, the tendons are often affected with a sort
of cramp; deafness, deliriums, continual lethargic fits; insensibility and
stupor are the constant attendants of this disorder when in its last stages.

This is a most treacherous disorder, and by affecting the sufferer with only
slight symptoms of weariness and weakness, attended with frequent yawnings and
stretchings, a slight giddiness and loss of appetite, and a great heat in the
forehead, makes people neglect an early application to the physican, and thus
they endanger themselves much, though in people of a robust constitution who
are much exposed to the sun, it will often appear for the first day or two with
violent symptoms; this fever will last sometimes for twenty days or more
without any apparent abatement; it generally attacks people who have been
exposed to unusual fatigue, or such as are naturally of a weak constitution.
Vomits are the remedy to which recourse is most usually had in this disorder.

Physicians steadily, and almost totally avoid bleeding and purging, till after
a free use of the Ipecacuana, and even then their cathartic prescriptions are
rarely any other than manna and salts, and after the gentle purges obtained by
this method, they order a free use of rich chicken broth, and the above
described juice of lemons saturated with sal absynth: this they generally
continue until the disease changes into an intermittent fever, and then treat
it in the manner last mentioned; frequently also applying blisters.

This fever more particularly than any other disorder, bears hardest on the
patient toward sunset. The diet commonly prescribed is sago, chicken broth and
panado, with some small matter of wine and loaf sugar in the first and last;
infusions of sage and baum, together with wine whey, are the drink mostly
thought proper during the continuance of this disorder.

The use of bark is generally blamed as productive of dropsy; jaundice, the
ague cake, A hardness in the region of the spleen, one of the consequences of
long continued fevers, and by the Dutch Creoles distinguished by this name,
they call it in their own language ^o^k in de buyck, or simply de koek.
and other inveterate chronical disorders, but it is certain that the bark is
blameless; it is the fault of the physicians, who too late and with too much
caution use this blessed remedy, which seems as purposely designed by
Providence to relieve us in those tedious disorders; or it is that of the
patient himself, who, prejudiced against this excellent remedy, refuses to take
it till it is too late, and thereby brings upon himself the above diseases,
which are consequences of the fevers, not of this great specific.

The above mentioned fevers and unusual hardships in traveling, etc. as well
as excesses at plentiful tables full of variety, often bring on a severe bloody
flux especially in autumn, and if this makes its appearance with hard dry and
bloody stools, the disease is dangerous; brisk purges and clysters of Castile
soap, and some of the hot seeds are used to expel these; when the desired end
is obtained, gentle emetics are called in; i have known people find great
relief from a decoction of logwood and pomgranate skins, others again it would
not help in the least; a new honey comb enclosed in an apple scooped out, and
then roasted before the fire, has often proved a speedy and very effectual
remedy; calcined hartshorn, a nauseous medicine, is nonsense; bark of sumach
is a good medicine, but there being a dangerous kind, it ought to be gathered
by a skilful hand; the bark of the liquidambar styraciflua; aceris folio
mentioned in page 20, together with the gum exuding from the same tree, is
generally found efficacious; a wine glass full of the juice of lemons mixed
with some common salt has often proved a most excellent, safe, and general
specific; the frequent chewing of cinnamon and camomile flowers, especially
when a weak stomach vexes the patient, has a noble effect; avoid all vegetable
food except rice, eat roasted rather than boiled flesh; salted beef need not to
be avoided; use often veal, jellies and salop; use a great deal of mustard; i
know by the experience of many as well as my own, that Dr. Barry's observation
of vegetables not being so easily assimilated as animal food, is in the
strictest sense universally true, and in an obstinate continuance of this
disorder, vegetables even our common wheaten bread are not at all digested, but
most generally pass through the body unaltered. When this disease changes into
a chronic habitual flux, it will be necessary to use pills of equal parts of
rhubarb and ipecacuana, mixed with some liquid opiate, and use weak lime water
for common drink: if this does not prove a specific, let the patient be removed
to some other clime, for no remedy will affect that disorder in the same
climate, where it was originally contracted, claret or port ought to be their
constant drink in this disease, and spirituous liquors ought by all means to be
avoided; rum, a cursed bane of health and of society; is too often and
indiscriminately applied to every disease as an universal arcaum.

The cholera morbus is likewise a consequence of intemperate meals, and when it
is not occasioned by any food peculiarly repugnant to the stomach it often
proves fatal.

Debauch of every kind, particularly unseasonable sitting up, is most
frequently productive of some of the most dreadful disorders, and excessive
passions of the mind sometimes produce the same effects.

Excess in venery is generally productive of the most violent and obstinate
disorders, principally inflammatory fevers, and obstinate fluxes.

There is a disease which the French call La Tytanose, which affects people in
the western parts of Florida, and will attack them with prodigious violence
upon being wounded even in the slightest manner: if during the hot months a
splinter be run into the flesh, the patients are attacked with violent
contorsive spasms, and generally die in about eighteen or twenty hours.

I never saw any person afflicted with this dreadful disorder, but from the
similarity of the name with the latin Tetanus, and from my being told, that
opium and camphire are much used to procure relief, I take it to be the locked
jaw, with which I saw a young man die at Mobile, Mr. Lind Hot Climates, second
edition, page 285 -- 286.
recommends copious external applications of opium, and the cold bath; and
gives some imperfect account of mercurial ointment having lately proved an
efficacious remedy; the hint was perhaps necessary to be inserted here.

Angina Suffocativa, or the putrid sore-throat, sometimes appears here, this is
a contagious distemper, and rages in America mostly among the youth; it
generally begins with a slow fever attended with great lassitude and a low
pulse; this is succeeded by a sore throat with white spots near the uvula, and
if it be not immediately taken notice of, the patient soon becomes past hopes,
and generally dies within 24 hours after the first severe attack of the fever;
the physicians in Carolina and Georgia prescribe first mercurial purges, and
order a gargle of borax, dragon's blood and Armenian bole in vinegar and honey;
and the throat is anointed frequently by help of a feather, with a mixture of
balsam of sulphur, tincture of myrh, honey, loaf sugar, and yolk of eggs; the
principal part of the cure is to attend the disease early, the least neglect
being dangerous.

The dry belly-ach is a very painful and tormenting disorder, though rarely
fatal; it is occasioned by cold damp lodgings, and being exposed to the night
air; but most frequently in all climates by an excessive use of the vegetable
acid juices, which are all extremely astringent in their nature: and when this
disorder proceeds from too liberal an use of punch, rheumatic pains and
paralytic affections of the nerves are its constant consequences and
attendants, with loss of the proper use of limbs: (often for life) the most
usual symptoms are the vomiting of bile, with the most obstinate costive habit
imaginable; and when stools are procured, the excrements are excessive hard,
and in round balls like horse dung: all this is attended with the most
excruciating pain in the bowels, and a clammy sweat^ the method of cure is by
administering emetics of the antimonial kind, which often also procure a stool;
this is the only thing that can relieve the poor sufferers; the warm steam of
hot herb baths, clysters of the tinct. Thebaic. in luke warm milk, and
emollient plasters in which opium enters, applied to the stomach and belly;
bitter purging salts and manna, and infusions of sena leaves, after the middle
vein is stripped out of them; in the severe attacks of the pain, opiates are
used, and too often that cursed arcanam of the vulgar among the English; I mean
rum and other distilled spirits, which in this disorder too often prove fatal
poisons; the oil of Palmae Christi, by three or four spoonfuls has sometimes
proved effectual; oil of almonds and of olives, have been given with success;
after all medicines had failed, i once applied to a mulato woman, who was a
noted empyric in the island of Curacoa, where i was attacked by this distemper:
she ordered a clyster of sweet milk, tobacco and brown sugar, which gave some
slight relief, but after a while the painful symptoms of the disease seemed to
be as excruciating as ever; she then gathered some handfuls of the leaves of a
shrub which is there called Wild Carpat; Carpat, is the Dutch name of Palma
Christi; I have long in vain tried to find the shrub, from which these leaves
were taken; all i know of them is, they are Lanceolate, of a lucid green, and
boil very tender.
these she boiled like spinnage, and made them into seven or eight balls of the
size of walnuts, put them in a plate, and poured oil olive on them, and a
little pepper; this kind of salad she made me eat with a piece of bread, when i
observed to her, that she ought to have added vinegar to have made a perfect
sallad; she answered, that vinegar in my case was poison; in half an hour after
the use of this mess, a stool (the first in twenty-three days) was procured,
which was followed by five or six more that very afternoon; and she then gave
me for some days an intensely bitter mixture, in which i perceived the juice of
aloes predominant, but could not learn the composition. This kept me in a lax
habit of body, and in about fourteen days i was enabled to pursue my ordinary
avocations; camphire and opium enter into all the purgative prescriptions i
have seen ordered in this disease, by the physicians of the south.

There is an instantaneous fatal disorder which the French call un coup de
Soleil, i. e. literally, a stroke of the sun; of this i remember one instance
during my stay in West-Florida, when it killed a child of about twelve years
old on the spot between the hours of eleven and twelve in the forenoon, the
time, as i am informed, in which it always takes place; by instantly applying
cold water to the crown of the head, i am told, its fatality is prevented;
likewise by cupping the crown of the head: what its symptoms are, i have not
seen, but by the descriptions, i take it to be a fever, which so violently
attacks the patient, that it causes instant death. This disorder occurs very
seldom, and as it is so very easily guarded against, persons who are attacked
by it, are in a great measure blameable for their own misfortune, particularly
if they know the country; the French, one and all, put a single piece of clean
writing paper between their hat and head during the hot months, to ward off the
attacks of the coup de Soleil.

These are the diseases, which occur during the hot seasons; there is likewise
a fever, in which the patient is continually affected with defluxions of the
head: this appears in the late winter months, and during a wet spring; it is
called a Catarrhal Fever: this disease is not frequent, but when it appears, it
is generally treated like other fevers, except that bleeding is more freely
used.

The pleurisy also makes its appearance sometimes in winter. Moderate or
copious bleedings from the arm according to the degrees of violence of its
attacks are immediately used: if looseness and gripes attend the pain, blood is
taken away often, and in small quantities; the patient is kept moderately warm,
and on no account suffered to uncover; the first medecin is commonly a cooling
purge; gentle sudorifics are likewise administered; frequent hot baths for the
feet are also prescribed, but very cautiously applied for fear of his catching
cold. After the operation of purges and sudorifics, gentle antimonials are
used, and a light easy digested diet, with infusions of hyssop, sage, or baum,
follow in course; likewise swallowing of living wood-lice: and in case of
costive symptoms, clysters are used; on a continuance of the pain in the side,
a moderate blister or drawing plaster is put to the part; -- much coughing,
which causes a watchfulness, is removed by opiates: in feverish symptoms the
disease is treated as the other fevers; spirituous liquors are to be avoided by
all means.

During some winters, a Peripneumony also visits a few people here; the method
of cure is the same as for the pleurisy: it is said to be more dangerous than
the pleurisy, particularly if copious bleeding is not made use of as soon as
the patient is affected. In this disorder there is generally a freer access of
air allowed than in the last, and the patient kept almost in a sitting posture;
it is said that the steams of warm water drawn into the lungs in this disease,
is a powerful help.

A compound of the two last disorders, called the Pleuro-peripneumony, is
likewise sometimes heard of, and is treated as the last.

In Georgia i saw one or two instances of a disorder among blacks, to which the
people give the odd name of the pleurisy of the temple, of the forehead, of the
eye, and so on; i am told they have a pleurisy for every part of the head. It
is violently acute, and, as i am informed, proves sometimes fatal in ten or
twelve hours time; if immediately on its attack, a quantity of blood is not
drawn from the arm, for the rest this disease is treated like a pleurisy.

The chronic diseases are dropsies, consumptions, hemorrhoidal and habitual
fluxes, relaxed and bilious habits of body, ruptures, worm-fevers, and among
blacks the leprosy, elephantiasis and body yaws; which last in Carolina is
called the lame distemper; the first five of these are often best removed by a
change of air, as the most efficacious medicines often prove of no use against
the obstinacy of the disorders in the climate where they first originated.

The dropsy most frequently seizes a patient after an obstinate intermitting
fever, where the use of the bark has been too long delayed: in this disorder
the ordinary prescriptions in these countries is syrup of squills, and the
common diuretic salt; with these the patient is confined to dry food, and from
spirituous liqurs; such vegetables as turnips, radishes, etc. he is allowed to
indulge in: Dr. Lind says, that exciting a slight salivation, may be of help in
a tolerable sound constitution, perhaps none of the chronic diseases are more
relieved by change of climate than an obstinate dropsy. A consumptive habit of
body. particularly where the cough is very obstinate and frequent, and when
bilious stools, with a great hardness of the lower belly affect the patient, or
when a continual fever emaciates the poor sufferer, he is in a dangerous way,
and a remove to colder climates is hardly advisable; i have known such people
relieved by making frequent short voyages to sea in moderate climates; but
unless proper remedies are also made use of during these voyages, the fever
returns almost directly on relanding; frequently after one or two of these
voyages the patient feels himself better; if he then retires to a milk diet,
and freely indulges himself in fruits, utterly avoiding all manner of drugs or
medicines, he may find relief, and even a return of constitution; frequent
doses of flour of brimstone, and cooling the water he drinks with sal nitre,
are of use during this course: likewise the patient ought with the greatest
care to avoid exercise; the stiller he keeps himself the more hopes of recovery
there is. The fever which attends this disorder is of such a nature, that here
the use of the bark must be carefully shunned, as it has been during long
practice, and by frequent experiments of very able physicians, found to be a
sure poison in this disorder. The Spaniards wear the nest of the great
traveling spider sowed in a rag about their necks as a sure way to assuage a
hectic fever, and i think with great success: it is a matter of surprise to
see how perhaps a thousand animalculae which are in perfect life in one of
these nests, at the time of its being put round the patient's neck, will ^n the
course of about thirty hours be perfectly pulverized by mere dint of the heat
of the body, which these young Spiders seem in a peculiar manner to attract. In
hardness of the belly in this disorder most of the Creoles use hard and
frequent rubbing it with a warm hand dipped in oil or hogs-lard, Quere bears oil
being so very subtle and penetrating, would it not be preferable in rubbing?

The haemorrhoidal flux is very frequent here, and was it not so very
troublesome an attendant, it would be looked upon as a beneficial event.
Persons who are attacked by it are generally certain of not falling into the
more dangerous diseases occasioned by obstructions of the Viscera in hot
climates; the greatest danger attending it is that of the patient's falling
into an habitual flux, which is a most tedious and troublesome disease, and
that although the patient has no other complaint but the frequent necessity of
going to stool and is but seldom troubled with an involuntary expulsion of the
faeces; this disease is almost always a slow though sure harbinger of death by
its continuance for years, draining to the very last drop of moisture from the
sufferer, who being left a mere skeleton, is as it were carried off in the
manner of an expiring candle-snuff; yet those persons, who have been opened
after death have been found with all the inward parts perfectly sound, and thus
the faculty is left in the dark without any way to account for this disorder; i
have heard of people of a very robust constitution with whom it has continued
above twenty years; no disease is so frequent; it almost always attacks people
who have suffered much from frequent sickness or severe fatigue; and its
obstinacy is such, that it will yield to no remedy whatever in the climate
where it originated; i have myself been attacked by it first in the province of
Georgia, in consequence of the great fatigue i underwent in my frequent long
and wearisome journies by land; no astringent of any kind, not even the long
use of rhubarb and ipecacuanha was of any the least service to me; vain was
every medicine against this obstinate malady; opium was recommended to me as a
specific; this i took at length in incredible doses but the relief was only
momentary; after the short reprieve obtained hereby it returned with tenfold
violence and obstinacy: if then i was unhappy enough to use opium during this
attack it was of no use whatever, but obliged me for the next time to seek
respite from a double dose, the cold bath i found of some slight benefit and
when i was at the proper season in any part of Florida, where the coco-plumb
Chrys^ C^
grew in abundance, by freely eating this wholesome fruit i was relieved for
that season, and no sooner was i obliged to abandon this excellent remedy, but
the disease again prevailed. Thus was i harrassed for about eight years when i
changed climates by coming to New York; here likewise all medical prescriptions
failed, till at length i found that a decoction of the bark of Semi-Ruba and
Terra japonica in the proportion of half an ounce of each to six pounds of
water being boiled down to one sixth, was an effectual medicine after the
change of climate, which last alone must not be relied on: one quart of the
above decoction in the quantity of a wine-glass fu^ taken morning and evening
cured me; but relapsing again after about three months: got another quar^, with
the two first glasses of which i took a small pill of crude opium, and by two
more glasses full i found myself again restored to my natural habit of body.

An entire relaxation of the solids, and a bilious habit of body is another
common affliction of those, who have suffered much by the diseases of hot
climates; the constitution is in such people so decayed, that it seems as if
every moment would be that of dissolution: the stomach is weak, their
complexion is nearly that of a sufferer by the jaundice, and hardly any food
especially greens and salads are found digestible; if the dry belly-ach has
been their frequent attendant a paralytic contraction of the limbs is the final
consequence of that malady: others again will frequently vomit clear bile and
be very costive having the abdomen exceeding hard; for all these complaints
there is no better cure than a change of climate, and when the patient begins
to feel any benefit from the difference of air while at sea, i would recommend
a plentiful and constant use of chamoemile flowers, chewing them in the same
manner as people do tobacco; this, however disagreeable to most palates at
first, becomes in time as agreeable to the mouth as it is grateful to the
stomach. The use of Elixir Vitrioli in the quantity of fifteen or twenty drops
taken every morning fasting and again an hour before dinner; and the moderate
use of a glass of generous wine is not amiss to such sufferers: animal food,
especially mutton, is the most suitable diet, and in case of an obstinate
costiveness use the Elixir Aloes often at night or in the morning; the cold
bath, especially of salt water, is very beneficial to such sufferers.

Ruptures are pretty much complained of on the banks of Mississippi; i have
observed likewise that they are a good deal frequent in Georgia and in
Carolina: what can be the cause of a disorder of this kind being frequent i
know not, but i find in a pamphlet which gives a superficial description of
South Carolina the following way to account for it, the obstructed viscera
being swelled beyond their natural size, the intestines are too much confined,
and by nature of the aliment and bad digestion being frequently distended with
wind, it is not to be wondered at, that they often pass through the rings of
the abdominal muscles.

The Worm fever which is common through all America, especially from
Pennsylvania southwards, is not so common here as in Carolina, Georgia, etc.
the reason i take to be because the sweet potatoe is not so universally used
for food here as elsewhere; children suffer most with it; though it sometimes
affects people of all ages. When a fever obstinately withstands all medicines
it may almost be depended upon, that this obstinacy proceeds from worms; the
stinking weed which is known by the name of Jerusalem Oak, and in those
provinces is the most efficacious vermifuge, and the safest medicine especially
for children; a spoon full of the expressed juice of the whole plant taken on
an empty stomach is found to be a sovereign antidote; the Lonic^ra i have
already mentioned as to its qualities; if the worms are suspected to be lodged
in the rectum, clysters of a decoction of tansey, onions, garlic, rue,
wormwood, and such like in milk are of good effect; a plaster of pulverized
Aloes, oil of rue, or wormwood, with powder of the bitter gourd and ox-gall
applied to the navel is also of good effect: i would recommend the use of
animal food, particularly rich fish-soups highly seasoned with garlic or
onions, and it will be proper to avoid all kinds of farinaceous vegetables
except wheaten bread: above all the potatoe and pumpkin ought to be shunned as
poison.

A loathsome disease appears some times among the Negroes after severe acute
disorders, especially if the patient has been obliged to keep his bed long,
likewise after a violent exercise has brought on a surfeit: this is called the
Elephantiasis from the swelling of the feet and legs; it is most frequently
seen to affect one leg only; in the first stages of this disorder the patient
becomes wretched through excessive lassitudes which bring on an emaciation of
the body, then the corrupted juices subside into the leg or legs and feet,
these swell, the skin becoming distended, shines and shows the distended veins
every where below the knee; now the skin by degrees loses its gloss and becomes
unequal and something scaly; after this chaps make their appearance, the glands
are stretched and the scales are daily enlarged, appearing as hard and callous
as the hide of an Alligator, notwithstanding which the slightest prick of a
pointed instrument will cause the blood to exude; this disease affects neither
the appetite nor the digestive powers of the body, on the contrary the patient
in this and cheerfulness of spirits resembles the healthiest of men, and the
inconvenience of his heavy leg only prevents his ability for the more laborious
part of his duty.

No manner of our has yet been found for this cruel disorder, but the patients
often live to a very advanced age under the pressure of its yoke, even when it
has been contracted in early youth; it is said that the amputation of the
affected limbs is no cure, for the disease will immediately attack the sound
leg; this i find also asserted by Hughes in his Natural History of Barbados.

I have seen three or four instances of the disease called body yaws (in the
Islands) and in Carolina the lame distemper, this is said to proceed from
hereditary v^nereal taints; it appears in cancerous corroding sores in the
mouth and throat, and spreading ulcers together with fleshy protuberances
chiefly on the face, breast and thighs, with a swelling of the skin and
knee-bones, and commonly corrodes the Cartilages of the nose, its first
symptoms showing themselves about the throat and palate, have caused ignorant
people to mistake it for the Angina Suffocativa before described: Mercurial
medicines are used against it, afterward diet-drinks of China root, nut-grass,
etc. the sores in the mouth are often to be rubbed with a feather dipped in syrup
of roses to an ounce of which two drops of Sp. Vitr. have been added: unctuous,
salt, spiced meats and spirituous liquors are absolutely to be avoided;
frequent sweats are also prescribed and a great care against catching cold.

The Leprosy so called, whether the same as was the cause of proscription to
the unhappy patients under the Mosaic laws i shall not pretend to determine;
certain it is, that it is a nauseous, loathsome and infectious disease some
times seen among the blacks; this appears first with the loss of beard and hair
from the eyebrows, swelling of the lobes of the ears, the face begins to shine
and brown protuberances appear thereon, the lips and nose swell to a monstrous
size, the fingers and toes will in the end drop off, and the body becomes at
last so ulcerated as to make the poor incurable patient really a miserable
object of pity.

Having thus largely described the climate, soil, water, general productions of
the earth, the inhabitants with their customs, manners and the diseases
incident to the human race here, i shall next proceed to give a topographical
description of the country, the general face particularly, and with this
subject end my first volume.

The river St. Mary is the northernmost boundary of East Florida and by the
Spaniards called Rio Santa Cecilia, and by the savages Thlathla Tlakuphka, and
is described in page 36; the soil here is not very fertile, unless it be at its
very head, which reaches up to near the head of flint river, which last runs
into the river Apalachicola, and this being the western bounds of this
province, we may in the present undetermined state of these matters regard as
the most natural limits of the province on the land side; from St. Mary's
river's mouth there is a distance of fourteen miles along the beach of Amelia
island to the mouth of Nassau river; this island is in general sandy and hilly,
but has some fertile spots on it capable of fine improvements, it is about two
miles through in its broadest parts, which is the north end, and tapers away
till it is south end is scarce half a mile across; here near the south end was
formerly a convent of Nuns and a church dedicated to St. Mary, whose name the
island bore in the time of the Spaniards, but where were scarce any traces left
of the buildings in 1770; west of its north end lay the Tiger islands, between
which and Amelia there is a tolerable broad passage forming a convenient
harbor, these islands consist chiefly of marsh and pine hammocks; this passage
continues through Amelia narrows into Nassau river, and is frequented by such
crafts as exceed not four feet draught of water. The land on Nassau river is
almost all very fertile; the river originates not above thirty miles from the
sea, where it begins in many small rivulets, which all joining very soon, by
their confluence form a considerable large stream navigable for vessels of ten
feet draught up to its forks, this river formerly called Rio Sta. Maria, in my
opinion has along its banks the best body of land in East Florida near the sea,
and i believe that this will form in time a pretty opulent district; between
this river and St. John's river the land is miserably barren, as it is likewise
between Nassau and St. Mary, though not in so wretched a degree; we find
between the mouths of Nassau and St. John's river three islands, great and
little Talbot, and fort George, together in length about five or six miles; the
Talbot's islands lay next to the south of Amelia, and the greatest innermost:
this last is counted fertile, the other is inconsiderable; they are hilly a^
well as fort George; the last has received its name from an intrenchment thrown
up on it by general Oglethorp during his fruitless expedition against St.
Augustine.

We are now at the mouth of the river St. John, already in part described in
page 34 and 35; this river called by the indians Ylacco, and by the Spaniards
Rio St. Matheo o Picolato, runs from its mouth something above twenty-four
miles up nearly east and west; at this distance up the ferry is kept: (commonly
called the cow-ford from the multitude of cattle drove through here at the
beginning of the settlement by the English:) just above this ferry the river
takes a bend and the direction of its course becomes parallel to the ocean; the
general run of its water being from south to north rising at or near the
latitude 27: and this ferry laying nearly in 30:10; near the latitude 28: it
approaches the sea within a mile, in so much, that some marsh and broken
pine-land only separates them: thus it makes a peninsula from hence to the
above latitude 30:10. which peninsula is for the most part between twenty-five
and twenty miles in breadth. This part of the country is the chief seat of the
present improvements, and is for the most part too barren for planting; but
excellent for the keeping of cattle and horses, as the land chiefly consists of
pine-land and savannahs of the kind described in page 22; the swamps along the
river (although their appearance from the river deceived the first
adventurers,) are for the most part no more than an edging along its banks,
hardly any where extending a quarter of a mile deep; the journal of Mr Bartram
as published by Dr. Stork, may give (...) tolerable idea of the banks of this
river, and consequently of the west part of this peninsula; but this journal,
though a very loose performance, and principally defective where we might
expect it most complete, viz. in the botanical articles, yet such as it is, the
Doctor who wanted to extol this province even beyond reason, has not thought
fit to give it us in its native dress, but mutilated and unfairly modelled it
to answer his own purpose, which has given another author Present State of
Great Britain and North America.
a handle for depreciating this country still more below its value than the
Doctor has endeavored to raise it above; however all such prejudiced writers
being below contempt, let us leave them what they are, and after observing once
more that the fruitful spots are few when compared with the unfruitful in this
tract, proceed to give an account of the eastern edge of this peninsula viz.
the sea coast from the mouth of St. John to the mouth of the river Ais or
Aisahatcha: not far from the entrance of St. John's is St. Pablo or St. Paul's
creek or river; on it are some fruitful spots about twelve miles south of the
great river; Sablo river approaches the head of St. Mark's or the North river,
at whose head are the plains of Diego very proper for the breeding of cattle.
This river St. Mark falls into the harbor of Augustine about two miles to the
northward of the fort, and but a little way within the bar: to which bar from
the general's mount at the entrance of St. John's is a measured distance of 36
miles. Between the north river and the sea is a very narrow slip of sand-hills
and other almost useless ground; the bar of this harbor is a perpetual
obstruction to St. Augustine's becoming a place of any great trade, and alone
is security enough against enemies; so that i see but little occasion for so
much fortification as the Spaniards had here, especially as a little look out
called Mossa at a small distance north of the town, proved sufficient to repel
general Oglethorpe with the most formidable armament ever intended against
Augustine; however there was much more propriety in the Spaniards having a fort
in the modern taste of military architecture of a regular quadrangular form,
with four bastions, a wide ditch, a covered way, a glacis, a ravelin to defend
the gate, places of arms and bomb-proofs with a casemating all round etc. etc.
for a defense against the savages, than there was in raising such stupendous
piles of building as the new barracks by the English, which are large enough to
contain five regiments, when it is a matter of great doubt whether there will
ever be a necessity to keep one whole regiment here; to mend this matter the
great barrack was built with materials brought to Augustine from New York, far
inferior in value to those found on the spot; yet the freight alone amounted to
more than their value when landed; so that people can hardly help thinking that
the contrivers of all this having a sum of money to throw away, found a
necessity to fill some parasite pockets, and judged the best method for doing
this was to make contractors of the folks in view, as fifty men besides the
inhabitants would defend this fort against the united bands of all the savages
here; as a constant supply of provisions can come by water, and no formidable
foreign force can ever be reasonably expected to come here, it makes us almost
believe that all this show is in vain, or at most, that the English were so
much in dread of musketos, that they thought a large army requisite to drive
off these formidable foes. To be serious, this fort and barracks add not a
little to the beauty of the prospect, but most good men will think with me that
the money spent on this useless parade would have been better laid out on roads
and ferries through the province, or if it must be in forts, why not at
Pensacola? where there is a necessity to have a powerful force, and where the
bar will admit a sixty gun-ship: but i had almost forgot that the acts of
Assembly there would have defeated the sanguine expectations of Messrs.
contractors.

The town has by all writers till Dr. Stork's time been said to lay at the foot
of a hill; so far from truth is this, that it is almost surrounded by water,
and the remains of the line drawn from the harbor to St. Sebastian's creek, a
quarter of a mile to the north of the fort ^m which line stands a fortified
gate called the barrier gate, is the only rising ground near it; this line had
a ditch, and its fortification was pretty regular; about a mile and a half
beyond this are the remains of another fortified line, which had a kind of look
out or advanced guard of stoccadoes at its western extremity on St. Sebastian's
creek; and fort Mossa at its east end; besides these the town has been
fortified with a slight but regular line of circumvallation and a ditch. The
town is half a mile in length and its southern line had two bastions of stone,
one of which (if not both) are broken down, and the materials used for the
building of the foundation of the barracks; the ditch and parapet are planted
with a species of agave, which by its points is well fitted to keep cattle out,
and with that intention was used by the Spaniards for fences. Dr. Stork has
raised this fence into a fortification against the savages and magnified it
into Chevaux de frize. The town is very ill built, the streets being all except
one crooked and narrow. The date on one of the houses i remember to be 1571;
these are of stone, mostly flat roofed, heavy and look badly. Till the arrival
of the English neither glass windows nor chimneys were known here, the lower
windows had all a projecting frame of wooden rails before them. On the 3d of
January 1766, a frost destroyed all the tropical productions in the country
except the oranges; the Spaniards called this a judgment on the place, for
being become the property of Heretics, as they never had experienced the like.
The Governor's house is a heavy unsightly pile, but well contrived for the
climate; at its north west side it has a kind of tower to the height of which
Governor Grant has added several feet; this serves as a look out. There were
three suburbs in the time of the Spaniards, but all destroyed before my
acquaintance with the place, except the church of the indian town to the north
now converted into an hospital; (Dr. Stork says the steeple of this church is
of good workmanship though built by the indians, neither of which assertions is
true,) and the steeple of the German chapel to the west of the town likewise
remains. The parish church in the town is a wretched building and now almost a
heap of ruins; the parade before the Governor's house is nearly in the middle
of the town and has a very fine effect; there are two rows of orange trees
planted by order of Governor Grant, which make a fine walk on each side of it:
the sandy streets are hardened by lime and oyster-shells; Dr. Stork says there
were nine hundred houses at the time of the Spanish evacuation, and three
thousand two hundred inhabitants; in my time there were not three hundred
houses and at most a thousand inhabitants; these, a few excepted, i found to be
a kind of outcast and scum of the earth; to keep them such, their ill form of
government does not a little contribute. A letter from a friend, who lately
returned from England, directed to me, dated 2 th May 1774, says, this town is
now truly become a heap of ruins, a fit receptacle for the wretches of
inhabitants.

About eight miles north of the town is a tract of a considerable size, called
the twelve mile swamp; which i take to be equal in goodness to any in America;
this began to be cultivated in the year 1770. Three miles west from the town is
another small tract of tolerable land, called the three mile swamp; all besides
this within many miles is really a miserable sand, a dreary scrub ground, and
boggy salt marsh, a few acres at the head of St. Sebastian's only excepted.

The island St. Anastatio is situate opposite the town and forms the harbor,
its north end being opposite to the south end of the narrow peninsula made by
the north river: this is the only part of all the lands purchased by the worthy
Mr. Fish, for the debts due to him by the Spaniards, which he was allowed to
keep, notwithstanding the treaty allowed it him; for no sale was judged valid
if made by him, unless the government afterward gave a grant, but this was one
of the many ways to make offices worthy of holding; the above named gentleman
has a pretty retreat on this island, about four miles from town; but as the
land is barren it is more pleasant than profitable. The sound which divides
this island from the main, is called Matauca river, it is about twenty miles in
length; the island affords pasturage for numerous herds of horses and some
cattle, the first in particular breed kindly here; about half a mile from the
north end of the island is a heavy stone building serving for a look out; a
small detachment of troops is kept here, and by signals from hence, the
inhabitants are given to understand what kind of, and how many vessels are
approaching the harbor, either from the north or from the south; in the year
1770 fifty feet of timber frame work was added to its former height, as was
likewise a mast or flagstaff forty seven feet long, but this last proving too
weighty, endangered the building and was soon taken down. In this island are
quarries of a kind of concreted petrified shells, or a stone bearing their
resemblance, this will be described hereafter.

About two miles south of the town is the mouth of St. Sebastian's river
already mentioned, this is a small creek rising near six miles north of the
town, but its stream soon becomes salt by the meeting of the waters from below;
vessels go two miles and a half up it to clean. A bridge was built over it to
the west of the town, which shortened the road into the country near seven
miles, but the great depth of the water joined to the instability of the bottom
did not suffer it to remain long, and a ferry is now established in its room;
the keeper of the ferry has L 50 sterling. per annum allowed him, and the
inhabitants pay nothing for crossing except after dark.

We next meet the mouth of St. Nicholas creek, on the point to the north of
which the first town was built by the Spaniards, but they soon removed it for
conveniency's sake to its present site: on the south point is a plantation
belonging to Mr. Moultrie the present Lieutenant Governor; this place is
remarkable for a large oyster bank being entirely eat out by this gentleman's
negroes in a scarce season. This river is short originating about ten miles to
the west of the sound, and has no fertile land on or near it.

Six miles further south, or about ten miles from town is the mouth of Sta.
Cecilia, another small river of little note. Between nine and ten miles further
is the look out or fort of Matanca, on a marshy island, commanding the entrance
of Matanca, which lays opposite to it; this fort is to be seen at the distance
of about five leagues, it is of very little strength, nor need it be otherwise,
as there is scarce eight feet water at the best of times on this bar: the
Spaniards kept a Lieutenant's command here; the English a Serjeant's. Between
two or three miles from this inlet or bar is another of still less note, called
el Penon; opposite and southward is the mouth of a river called North West, i
suppose from the direction of the course we go up it; it is somewhat more
considerable than the two or three last mentioned; some settlements are near
its banks, but of small importance, the land being in general arid and poor.
Three miles further south is the upper end of the water which by former
Geographers has been styled a river; the Spaniards called it Rio Musketo, and
the English the Musketo river: Mr. de Brahm has changed the name of it into
Halifax river. This pretended river is one of those arms of the sea commonly
called a Lagoon; thus i believe the wonder of Dr. Stork's two rivers, lying
parrallel to each other and the ocean, and yet running directly opposite
courses is well accounted for, such Lagoons being not at all uncommon: the
upper part of this piece of water is a kind of lake or pond, and is removed at
so inconsiderable a distance from the sea, that boats which were obliged to go
outside at Penon, where the inland navigation ceases, are here drawn out of the
sea into this lagoon. I believe the first rocks to be seen on the beach of the
coast of America, from Long Island to this place are to be seen here; they are
of that kind which seems to be a concretion of shells; they are small and do
not extend far into the water, but are as it were buried in the sand at low
water mark.

About twenty miles south is the mouth of Tomoco creek, falling into this
lagoon from the westward; the head of this is at a small distance from St.
John's river; it is said that some good land lays along its banks.

Thirty two miles further south is the mouth of another river, called spruce
creek; it is very rich in fresh marsh, the ground being greatly broken at its
mouth; this is a more considerable stream than the last, and at a little
distance from this mouth are the first settlements of Musketo or New Smyrna,
particularly Mr. Penman's.

Between three and four miles further south is the entrance, or bar of New
Smyrna of still less navigable convenience than St. Augustine, and is the
outwatering of the above named lagoon as likewise of another coming from the
south styled North Hillsborough river; here we begin to see a few of the
tropical plants, such as carica, borassus, capsicum, mangles and blackwood. At
a few miles from the bar is the situation of the town or settlement made by Dr.
Turnbull for Sir William Duncan, himself, and perhaps more associates; this
town is called New Smyrna, from the place of the Doctor's lady's nativity. The
settlements round this famous town extend considerably along the banks of this
lagoon, and large quantities of very good indigo have been made here. If my
reader is inquisitive to know why i call this famous, i answer on account of
the cruel methods used in settling it, which made it the daily topic of
conversation for a long time in this and the neighboring provinces.

About 1500 people, men, women and children were deluded away from their native
country, where they lived at home in the plentiful cornfields and vineyards of
Greece and Italy, to this place, where instead of plenty they found want in its
last degree, instead of promised fields, a dreary wilderness; instead of a
grateful fertile soil, a barren arid sand; and in addition to their misery,
were obliged to indent themselves, their wives, and children for many years, to
a man who had the most sanguine expectations of transplanting Bashawship from
the Levant. The better to effect his purpose, he granted them a pitiful portion
of land for ten years, upon the plan of the fe^dal system: this being improved
and just rendered fit for cultivation, at the end of that term it again reverts
to the original grantor, and the grantee, may, if he chooses, begin a new state
of vas^alage for ten years more. Many were denied even such grants as these,
and were obliged to work in the manner of negroes, a task in the field; their
provisions were at the best of times only a quart of maize per day, and two
ounces of pork per week; this might have sufficed with the help of fish which a
bounds in this lagoon, but they were denied the liberty of fishing, and lest
they should not labor enough, inhuman taskmasters were set over them, and
instead of allowing each family to do with their homely fare as they pleased,
they were forced to ^in all together in one mess, and at the beat of a vile
drum, to come to one common copper, from whence their h^many was laded out to
them; even this coarse and scanty meal was through careless management rendered
still more coarse, and through the knavery of a proveditor, and the pilfering
of a hungry cook, still more scant. Masters of vessels were forewarned from
giving any of them a piece of bread or meat. Imagine to yourself an African (an
expert hunter) who had been long the favorite of his master, through the
importunities of this petty tyrant sold to him, -- imagine to yourself one of a
class of men, whose hearts are generally callous against the softer feelings,
melted with the wants of some of these wretches, giving them a piece of his
venison, of which he caught what he pleased, and for this charitable act
disgraced, whipped, and in course of time used so severely that the unusual
servitude soon released him to a happier state; again, behold a man obliged to
whip his own wife in public, for pilfering bread to relieve her helpless
family; then think of a time when the above small allowance was reduced to
half, and see some brave generous seamen charitably sharing their own allowance
with some of these wretches, the merciful tars suffering abuse for their
generosity, and the miserable objects of their ill-timed pity, undergoing
bodily punishment, for satisfying the cravings of a long disappointed appetite,
and you may form some judgment of the manner in which New Smyrna was settled.
Mr. Joseph Purcell, an excellent young man, who was draughtsman to our
department, a Minorquin, who with his family came over at the same time with
these people, but happily withdrew from the yoke, could never speak of this
without tears; he had been several times an eye witness to this distress, and
told me, that he knew many among the unhappy sufferers who were comfortably
established in Europe, but by great promises deluded away; and O Florida! were
this the only instance of similar barbarity which thou have seen, we might draw
a veil over these scenes of horror; but Rolls Town, Mount Royal, and three or
four others of less note have seen too many wretches fall victims to hunger and
ill usage, and that at a period of life when health and strength generally
maintain the human frame in its greatest vigor, and seem to insure longevity.
Rolles-Town in particular has been the sepulcher of above four hundred such
victims. Before i leave this subject, i will relate the insurrection to which
those unhappy people at New Smyrna were obliged to have recourse, and which the
great ones styled rebellion. In the year 1769, at a time when the unparalleled
severities of their taskmasters, particularly one Cutter (who had been made a
justice of the peace, with no other view than to enable him to execute his
barbarities in a large extent, and with the greater appearance of authority)
had drove these wretches to despair, they resolved to escape to the Havannah;
to execute this, they broke into the provision stores, and seized on some craft
lying in the harbor, but were prevented from taking others by the care of the
masters. Destitute of any man fit for the important post of a leader, their
proceedings were all confusion, and an Italian of very bad principles, who was
accused of a rape on a very young girl, but of so much note, that he had
formerly been admitted to the overseer's table, assumed a kind of command; they
thought themselves secure where they were, and this occasioned a delay, 'till a
detachment of the ninth regiment had time to arrive, to whom they submitted,
except one boat full, which escaped to the Florida Keys; but was taken up by a
Providence-man: many were the victims destined to punishment; as i was one of
the grand jury which at fifteen days on this business, i had an opportunity of
canvassing it well, but the accusations were of so small account that we found
only five bills; one of these was against a man for maiming the above said
Cutter, whom, it seems, they had pitched upon as the principal object of their
resentment, and curtailed his ear, and two of his fingers; -- another for
shooting a cow, which being a capital crime in England, the law making it such
was here extended to this Province; the others were against the leader, and
three more, for the burglary committed on the provision store; the distresses
of the sufferers touched us so, that we almost unanimously wished for some
happy circumstances that might justify our rejecting all the bills, except that
against the chief, who was a villain. One man was brought before us three or
four times, and at last was joined in one accusation with the person who maimed
Cutter; yet no evidence of weight appearing against him, I had an opportunity
to remark by the appearance of some faces in court, that he had been marked,
and that the grand jury disappointed the expectations of more than one great
man. Governor Grant pardoned two, and a third who was obliged to be the
executioner of the remaining two. On this occasion I saw one of the most moving
scenes I ever experienced; long and obstinate was the struggle of this man's
mind, who repeatedly called out, that he chose to die rather than be the
executioner of his friends in distress: this not a little perplexed Mr.
Woolridge, the sheriff, till at length the entreaties of the victims
themselves, put an end to the conflict in his breast, by encouraging him to the
act. Now we beheld a man thus compelled to mount the ladder, take leave of his
friends in the most moving manner, kissing them the moment before he committed
them to an ignominious death. I have dwelt the longer on this subject, because
the native prejudice of vulgar Englishmen, has represented the misfortunes of
these wretches in too black a light. It is said that Dr. Stork, who was near
the spot when the insurrection happened, died with the fright, and Cutter some
time after died a lingering death, having experienced, besides his wounds, the
terrors of a coward in power, overtaken by vengeance.

To return to our topographical account: -- along this southern lagoon, which
extends itself for about forty miles to Cape Cannaveral, in the latitude of 28
degrees and a half, we find several settlements of good note, among which that
of Captain Rogers is the most meridional habitation on the British continent.
At Cape Cannaveral is some good plantable land, and here is the southern head
of this lagoon; about two miles and an half to the westward thereof is the head
or northern end of another branch, likewise called a river; a road is cut to
draw boats out of the Musketo Lagoon into this, which is called
Southhillsborough, by De Braham, but commonly called Indian River; the savages
call it Aisa Hatcha, i.e. Deer River, although the same elegant Lexiphanes has
made it Hysweeslake; a word by him fabricated, as I suppose, from Ylacco, the
name given by the savages to St. John's River; the Spaniards call it Reo d'ais.
No rivers of any no^e fall into its northern branch, except St. Sebastians,
directly opposite to whose mouth happened the shipwreck of the Spanish Admiral,
who was the northermost wreck of fourteen galleons, and a hired Dutch ship, all
laden with specie and plate; which by stress of north east winds were drove
ashore and lost on this coast, between this place and the bleach-yard, in 1715.
A hired Frenchman, fortunately escaped, by having steered half a point more
east than the others. The people employed in the course of our survey, while
walking the strand, after strong eastern gales, have repeatedly found
pistareens and double pistareens, which kinds of money probably yet remaining
in the wrecks, are sometimes washed up by the surf in hard winds. This Lagoon
stretches parallel to the sea, until the latitude 27:20, where it has an
out-watering, or mouth: directly before this mouth, in three fathom water, lie
the remains of the Dutch wreck. The banks of this lagoon are not fruitful.

Having now exceeded the latitude 28, to the southward, i shall here break off
from the seacoast, and resume the description of the interior country from
that latitude; being, as before observed, the south-end of the peninsula, made
by St. John's River and the sea. This southern end a mere point of marsh, with
some broken pine land in it, not much above three quarters of a mile wide,
dividing the fresh water of St. John, from the salt of Aisa hatcha: imagine
then to yourself a country gradually rising into a ridge of highland, very
barren, sandy and gravelly, a few places excepted, intersected with abundance
of rivulets, and variegated with ponds and lakes, whose banks being in general
lined with oak Magnolia, and other trees, exhibit the most romantic scene
imaginable, and you will have a just idea of this place. We frequently meet
with spacious savannahs of the high kind; the country is covered with roe deer
and turkies, the lakes stocked with fish, and thus it continues in a due west
line across the Mexican gulf to the said latitude 28, which strikes said gulf
15 m. northward of the bay of Spiritu Santo. As we go northerly the fertile
spots become more frequent, till we come to that part of the province formerly
possessed by the Spaniards: here we find along the road from Augustine to
Apalachia, the remains, or ruins of the following forts and towns, viz. on each
side of St. John's; fort Picolata, Popa, and about seventy miles W. N. W. of
Popa, we meet with Alachua, Puebla nova Navala, Santa Fe, in a very fertile
region, Utoca, St. Pedro, and St. Matheo in a less favorable soil; then some
small remains of Ayovola; next the fort St. Mark's in pine barren, all which
are still marked (even in late maps) though not now inhabited; in this part of
the country, especially at Alachua, an hundred miles N. W. from Augustine; the
ground is fertile in a high degree, and so continues northward, to the extent
of the province. Near Santa Fe is a river of the same name, which, by the
English, is corruptly called St. Taffy's; this river, after a considerable
course, loses itself under ground, and the geography is not sufficiently known
to acquaint us whether it emerges again or not. This i reckon one of the chief
curiosities of this province. We next met with very great holes, fifty or sixty
feet deep, and thirty or forty feet in diameter at the surface, in the highest
part of the pine ridges, which afford some good water to the thirsty traveller,
there being no other water in those ridges. I came across the peninsula in a
dry season, and we were five days without water, because we traveled over the
ridge almost in its longitudinal direction, and saw but few of these holes; (in
the southern latitude of 28 and 29, in which i was then) even these we found
dry; but i did not know, at that time, their nature, which i afterward found.
My guide informed me, that in the road from Augustine to Apalachia, in a
similar season, he had been obliged to suffer a long thirst, and at last came
to one of these holes, in which he had always found water, though in others it
failed; but this time he found his expectations frustrated; pressed by drought,
and animated by his companions, they, with some labor, removed a flat stone,
which lay at the bottom, with an intent to dig for water; but how were they
surprised, when they saw a small hole, and about six inches below its surface
some very fine water; having satisfied the call of nature, their contemplation
led them to consider whence this water sprung; one of them imagined he saw it
gently running, their staves were put in to feel for bottom, but none was
found: inqusitive curiosity led them to sound deeper, and lo! a sapplin, of
near thirty feet, found no bottom, and they departed with unsettled conjectures.

On the 10th of June, 1771, i found myself in a disagreeable situation, on the
west course of East-Florida, through want of water; I saw frequently very
strong currents of discolored water, indicating fresh streams; supposing these
to proceed from rivers, i coasted along shore; but found nothing except
innumerable islands and vast shoals; frequently tasting the water, found it
always brackish: at length, on the 21st day of said month, i found an opening,
where I got anchorage for my vessel. I went personally on shore, to explore the
small island we were next to, taking with me a lad, and a thirty gallon cask.
Its aspect was miserable; oyster shells and rocks were every where its
superficies; at last, however, I found a small hole in the rock, and water in
it; which, to my inexpressible joy proved fresh, and of the clearest and finest
kind; hastening back on board, we were obliged to roll the cask in the water,
in order to get it into the boat, when, accidentally applying my hand to my
mouth, i found to my surprise the water to be fresh; having proceeded on board,
we tasted the water in which the vessel swam, which also proved fresh and good:
thus i found, myself, as it were, in a sea of fresh water; stimulated by
curiosity, i left the vessel next day, with an intention to penetrate to the
main land, which, with difficulty was effected; but in a whole day's search no
river was found; yet a constant strong current proceeded from the shore, and
along it. The singularity of the circumstance made me beat the ground, and
stamp on it, which occasioned a hollow sound. I have since been informed by
travelers, that between the town St. Mattheo, (now inhabited by savages, and
situate on the river St. Juan de Guacaro) and Apalachia, they frequently meet
with this hollow sound under their horses feet. Twenty miles east from
Apalachia, we cross a place over a creek, called by the savages, the natural
bridge: all these circumstances correspond with an idea which I have formed of
subterraneous rivers in this province. Another curiosity, though not a natural
one, are the marks of former improvement of this country; particularly the
vestiges of the regular maize hills (even in woods where, since the era of
culture, trees of twelve to eighteen inches diameter have grown up) and the
nails and spikes drove into some very large trees, apparently at ancient
Spanish Cowpens; add to these, the relics of old fences, huts, houses and
churches, particularly a church bell in the fields, at Santa Fe. Thus we have a
melancholy instance, even in this new world, of the depredations of time, and a
country once nobly and extensively settled, through the inroads of the savages
reduced again to a wilderness, yet all this must have happened some time later
than Anno Domini 1543, the year when Soto completed the first Christian
expedition to Florida, with his death.

Tanta est terrestrium vicissitudo! The remaining natural curiosities are the
mineral springs, described in page 34 and 35, and the ridge of sand hills
between Oclawwawhaw, and St. John's, likewise mentioned in page 35 and 36 of
this volume. I also regard as a curiosity of the artificial kind, the immense
orange groves, found in the woods between latitude 28, and 30, supposing them
originally sprung from the seeds of some oranges formerly dropped, by traveling
Spaniards, at their camps, but which are now gradually decaying, by reason of
the wantonness of our traders and hunters, who, when in want of the fruit, cut
down the tree; other vegetable curiosities will more probably appear under the
botanical heads. The many Tumuli, originally intended for the peaceful
repository of the dead, though some of their tops now bear summer houses for
recreation to the living, are another curiosity. Having mentioned hills, I
could wish to know whence comes the idea of Apalachian Mountains, nothing above
a moderate hill appearing in all this vast extent of country, till we meet (to
the north of latitude 35) with the mountains of the Upper Cherokees, on the
Tanassee river; and it is observable, that this ridge continuing back of
North Carolina, Virginia and Maryland, through Pennsylvania, and back of
New Jersey, into New York, and terminating near Katskill, about eight miles
from Hudson's River (where they bear the name of Blue Mountains) lie nearer to
the ocean than to the Mississippi; all the country west of them is nearly a
plain, there being no falls from Monongahela and Aligheny forks, down to the
mouth of Mississippi, that are of consequence enough to interrupt navigation;
even the Ohio falls, so called, are not violently rapid; nor are there any
falls from the place of embarkation on the Tanassee, down the Hogoheegee, to
the Ohio; the Shawanese river, has none that ever I could learn; Tombechbe none
in all its extent; -- whence then come the descriptions of Apalachian
Mountains? whence Augustine, at the foot of a hill, and many more such dreams
not worth repeating. Either the face of the country is more changed than any we
read of elsewhere, or former writers having been abused, have again imposed on
us; for the face of Greece and other regions of the East, is yet reconcilable
to Homer's geography. Holland still has nearly the same kind of superficial
appearance, as we are informed, it had eighteen hundred years ago; and we my
still trace Julius Caesar through these ancient habitations of the Catti, Kelti
and Cherusci; how then comes America so altered? Most of the describers of this
new world, even late ones must have imposed upon us, either originally, or by
copying such lying exaggerators and impostors, as the inventors of the conquest
of Mexico, and others of his stamp; who, not content with giving us plain
truth, and simple facts in their native dress, have almost hid them from us by
the thick clouds of fable.

In this northern part of the province we find the following settlements of
savages, about the middle of the land, nearly in latitude 28, in a village
called New Yufala, being a colony from Yufala, in the upper Creek nation,
planted in 1767, in a beautiful and fertile plain: about fifty miles N. E. from
thence, and about thirty W. S. W. from the upper part of Lake George, in St.
John's River, which is eighty miles nearly south of Augustine, is another town,
situate on a very beautiful lake, about seven miles in length, and from one to
one and an half in breadth; this town is accessible only on the N. W. side of
the above lake, over a very narrow and high ridge: when i came to it from the
southward, though in a very dry season, we had near a mile and a half, or two
miles, to wade breast high, and sometimes deeper, through a kind of marsh on
the west bank. The town lies near the N. W. end of the lake, and from its
situation is called Taloffa Ockhafe, i. e. the town of the lake; some islands
in this lake, as well as some land near the town, are cultivated by the
savages. Further north is Alacua, Santa Fe, and St. Mattheo, now inhabited by
the savages; the fort at Apalache is now a trading house, chiefly in their
possession, and the western extremity of the province is the great river
Apalachicola, on which the Lower Creek nation is settled, whose principal towns
are called the Cowettas, Chatahoochas, Euchas, Citasees, Hogoleeges, Oakmulgos,
Tuskeegies, Cussitos, and Cherokee Lousitsa, near the ruins of fort
Apalachicola, at the junction of Flint River, and the river in the south
western extreme of this division is the head of Manatee river, between which
and the Amaxura, I saw a vast number of deer, and the marks of many of the
hunting camps of the savages. We found the foot steps of six or eight buffaloes
hereabouts, so plain as to be convinced of the track being made by those
animals, but saw none of the animals themselves; the Amaxura or some of its
branches is not far from the Manatee, and where we crossed it, was an extensive
piece of excellent land.

To complete the Topography of this part, i shall maintain that Rio d'ais
abounds so much in fish of various kinds, that a person may sit on the bank,
and stick the fish with a knife, or sharp stick, as they swim by; and i have
frequently shot from four to twelve mullets at one shot, nay our boys used to
go along side of the vessel in the boat, and kill the cat-fish with a hatchet,
or stick. This might well be ranked among the curiosities; but the whole
country abounds so much in fish, that when St. Augustine flourished most, the
fishermen frequently used to allow people, who brought a Real, to take as much
as they pleased, out of their boats.

The reader will observe that the rules of geography, with regard to natural
limits, have caused me to vary a little in the present division of the
peninsula, from that adopted in page 1 and 2 in this work, which was founded in
the climates; but the variation being small, i hope it is excuseable. I shall
now proceed with the description or topography of the southern part of the
peninsula.

From the latitude 28, the lagoon of Aisa, or Indian River, has not any thing
very remarkable, until latitude 27: 20, where there is a mouth, or outwatering,
into the ocean, with several small inlets within it. This mouth can seldom be
entered by any vessel that draws above five feet water; and before it, in the
sea, are two bars, the inner one having about ten, the outer one seventeen feet
on it; and this outer one is near four miles from the land. The sand before
this entrance, is a fine white quicksand, of a particular nature. I have
anchored several times within the distance of three or four leagues from this
mouth, but not above once or twice without having the cable all eaten through,
in the ring of the anchor; sometimes i have purchased the anchor by a single
strand, sometimes by less, at other times by a little more; and i have lost
above six or seven anchors, and large grapnels at this place, yet there is
nowhere any foul ground, or, in other words, no rocky bottom. At a mile, or
more, from the shore, and within that distance, i think, i have found a few
shell stones, I imagine that this fine quicksand, being very sharp, by its
continual motion chafes and frets the cable quite through, and this, it
generally does, in less than four and twenty hours.

From this mouth of the lagoon an island stretches to about the latitude 26,
55, where there is another mouth, or inlet, caled Hobe by the Spaniards; this
island is thirty-nine measured statute miles long: at twenty-four miles from
its northend are several high cliffs of a blue stone; these are the first rocks
that lie high out of the water, along the American beach; they are placed at
about high water mark, and a small ridge, or reef, runs sloping off from the
northernmost one: and about nine miles further, toward Hobe is another parcel;
as there is likewise at the entrance of Hobe, of very solid, hard rock; all
which, particularly the northernmost ones, are excellent landmarks for the
seamen, going southwards. The remarkable things about this island are, that it
is a narrow slip of beach, and mangrove land; on the beach are always great
numbers of pieces of Spanish cedar; originally cut on the windward rivers of
Cuba, for the use of the Catholic King's ship-yards; but by land floods drove
into the Bahama channel, and Gulf stream, whence the frequent east-winds force
them upon foundings, and so on this beach; very few pieces are found either
north or south of this island. The island on its west side is indented, almost
regularly into points and bays. Fresh water may be obtained by digging in
almost every part of the beach. The chief growth here are mangroves, blackwood,
c^nocarpus, salsola and uniola; with a p^rasitical plant of the genus Bromelia,
called wild pine apple. A few spots of hammock, or upland, are found on this
island; these produce the zantoxylum, ficus citri folio, Coccoloba, Mastick,
Borassus, and a few trees of the live oak, and w^llow oak, the Chrysobolanus,
and the Cercus Triangularis, with that kind of Cactus, commonly called Opuntia.
During the season the loggerhead turtles land here in vast multitudes, to lay
their eggs, which the bears profit by; for, led by instinct, or otherwise,
these animals come in droves, and dig the eggs out: at this business they are
so expert, that they dig wells for their supply of water; during their stay,
they sometimes fetch down the wild Pine Tillandsia Lingulata.
, which, by its structure naturally contains a considerable quantity of
rainwater, preserved in a fresh, sweet taste. So industrious are the bears at
digging up the eggs, that the turtle seldom leaves her nest above a quarter of
an hour before they are eaten, insomuch, that a traveller, if he chooses any of
this provision, is obliged to watch the turtles coming. I have seen the bears
approach within five or six yards of our camp, at times when we had some of
these eggs, but this stretch of latronical boldness, generally cost them their
lives.

Opposite this island the shore is sandy and high, here are many rivulets, and
the Berassus here appears to be the master of the soil, scarce any other plant
showing itself; directly opposite the rocks before described is the mouth of
St. Lucia river, which has a wide kind of bay, for eight miles up, stretching
first N. E. 40 W. four miles, then W. four miles more, when it divides into two
branches, one coming from the south, the other from the N. W. by N. this last
appearing the principal, i went up it for twenty-four miles, reckoning direct
distance, and found no where less than seven feet water; here the river became
narrow, and partly on account of the obstructions by logs, partly on account of
the rapidity of the stream, I left the vessel; and going up by land, found the
river at last to run through a vast plain, the bank of the stream only being
fringed with a few trees.

Here we shot what number of deer, and turkies we pleased, and might have
continued so to do, i dare say, two months longer; the reason of this plenty
is, in my opinion, that this tract is scarcely ever invaded by the hostile
savages, or yet more destructive white hunter; this is the river, which, as i
was told by a Spanish pilot and fisherman of good credit, proceeds from the
lake Mayacco, a lake of seventy-five miles in circumference by his account. The
man told me that he had formerly been taken by the savages, and by them carried
a prisoner, in a canoe, by way of this river, to their settlements on the banks
of the lake; he says, that at the disemboguing of the river, out of the lake,
lies a small cedar island; he also told me that he saw the mouth of five or six
rivers, but whether falling out of, or into the lake, i could not learn of him;
probably some of the many rivers i crossed in my journey across this peninsula,
fall into it, and it is not improbable that St. John's river originates in it.
The large river in Charlotte harbor, by the direction of its course, meridian
situation, and great width, i judge, might, perhaps, spring from the same
fountain; however, the savages of Taloffo Ochase told me, that in going far
south, they go round a large water, emptying itself into the west sea, i. e.
gulf of Mexico.

Thus much have i been able to learn of this water, the exploring of which i
always intended; whether there is really this lake, or not, i will not be
positive, but the above circumstances, joined to a dark account, which the
savages give of going up St. John's, and coming down another river, to go into
some far southern region of East Florida (on which account the name of Ylacco,
and the name given to St. Lucia by the savages, both conveying indecent
meanings, are by them given to these rivers) seems to confirm it. That there is
some such great water, is further to be gathered from the profusion of fresh
water which this river, St. Lucia, pours down. Such is the immense quantity
that the whole sound between the abovenamed island and the main, though an arm
of the sea, situate in a very salt region, and in general two miles wide, is
very often rendered totally fresh thereby: in so much, that it has made the
very speculative Mr. De Brahm insist upon having seen mangrove stumps in fresh
water. This lake has given rise to the intersected, and mangled condition in
which we see the peninsula exhibited in old maps. But to return to the mouth of
the river St. Lucia, it lays one mile, seventy four chains, and seventy links,
S. W. by S. from the great rocks; the mouth is fifty-four chains, eighty-nine
links wide: six miles and a quarter N. N. W. from the mouth on the edge of the
sound, lies the hill by the Spaniards called Ropa Tendida, and by us the
Bleach-Yard, on account of its appearance; being a high hill full of white
spots, the first of any note from the Neversinks in the Jerseys, to this place,
and is a remarkable landmark. At the mouth of the river is a bay, into which
runs a rivulet from the south; Mr. De Brahm has honored this with the name of
Grenville River, on account of a tract of land here laid out for that
gentleman, on one of the most unaccountable pieces of white sand i ever saw;
which by reason of its being covered with a large growth of all sorts of trees,
indicating a fine soil, i have always looked upon in the light of a natural
curiosity.

From this mouth of the river southward the sound is cut into three branches,
by means of two peninsulas of mangroves, divided from the main island by these
lagoons; the branch which disembogues itself at Hobe is shallow, and full of
oyster banks, about fou^teen miles long; however, a small schooner, drawing
five feet water, was by our people brought through here, and out at Hobe. This
inlet was shut for many years before 1769, but i have since seen it open till
1773, our people have been encamped on the same spot where now the water allows
egress and regress to such a craft as the abovementioned schooner, just
sufficient to pass it: This, i suppose, has been owing to a less quantity of
water coming down St. Lucia river for some years, because the Spaniards
informed me of its having been open before. In short, this part of the country
is such a curiosity, that i have many times lamented the want of leisure, and
means to explore it thoroughly. My journal from the bay of Tampe, over land to
Augustine, threw indeed a great light on this; but to my irretrievable loss i
have missed it these four or five years: I can, however remark upon the
authority of that journal, that he fertile land is found in less proportion, in
the interior part of the peninsula, in this southern, than in the northern
division; -- that the ground becomes more stony as we approach the meridional
regions; that it is likewise interspersed with the same kind of romantic ponds,
or lakes, as described on page, -- that in the river Manatee is a considerable
fall of rocks fourteen miles from its mouth; -- that above these falls the
banks are very steep; -- that this steepness causes the water to rise about
fifty feet above its ordinary surface; a circumstance which this short river
has in common with all torrents; -- and that the bay of Tampe, into which this
river falls, is the most proper place in all America, south of Halifax, for the
rendezvous of a large fleet of heavy ships; the country all around being
plentifully timbered and watered; the soil is poor, some of the islands along
the west coast excepted, and both this and Charlotte harbor are excellent
situations for establishing fisheries.

From Hobe to the latitude 25:44, the coast is all double land, or narrow necks
between the sea; there are some rivers and lagoons; on the banks of such of
them as are fresh we meet with great bodies of marsh land, which may be
improveable. About fifty miles north, of the southern point of the main land
the coast changes its course from S. S. E. to directly south; and at the head
land, occasioned by this, is a large hard blue rock on the beach, out of which
a large stream of very fine fresh water issues, gushing directly into the
ocean; there are four little inlets between this rock and latitude 25:35; one
of these not always open; the last is in the north end of the first island,
whose south end De Brahm has thought proper to call Cape Florida, although it
is by no means a cape, or head land at all. West from this is the river
Rattones, being a fine stream, and pretty considerable, with a little good rich
soil on its banks, where many tropical plants grow; at its mouth are the
remains of a savage settlement. To the southward of this river is a large body
of marsh, through which several rivulets of fine water empty themselves into
the sound, back of the keys, which begin here, that a man may here stand with
one foot in fresh, and the other in salt water; nay when the tide is out fresh
water boils up through the sand. From this river and marsh the remainder of the
land is a heap of stones and rocks, very sharp, and little water to be found,
there being only a few ponds, and these dry in a dry season. The only growth
here is shrubby pine. At Sandy point, the southern extremity of the peninsula,
are large old fields, being the lands formerly planted by the Coloosa savages;
in latitude 25:20, is a salt lake, and a remarkable isthmus, joining what was
formerly called Cayo largo, or long key to the main: our researches for a
passage, west of the keys, have convinced us of its being fast to the main
land. In the bay of Juan Ponce De Leon, in the west side of the land, we meet
with innumerable small islands, and several fresh streams: the land in general
is drowned mangrove swamp. On the banks of these streams we meet with some
hills of rich soil, and on every one of those the evident marks of their having
been formerly cultivated by the savages. I went up into some high trees on
these hills, to see if i could not spy the pine land from their tops, with a
view, if i saw it any where near, to penetrate to it, through the swamps, but
the nearest i saw was, by computation, twelve miles off.

These hills, among this dreary mangrove land, have apparently been the last
retreats, and skulking places, of the Coloosa savages, when their more potent
neighbors, the Creeks, drove them off the continent. Punta largo, or cape
Roman, in latitude 25:43, on the west side, terminates with this great bay, and
the situation of the country will be best learned by consulting my charts. From
this place to latitude 20:30 are many inconsiderable inlets, all carefully laid
down in the chart; here is Carlos Bay, and the Co^oosa Hatcha, or Coloosa
river, with the island San Ybell, where we find the southern entrance of
Charlotte harbor abovenamed: Let it suffice to refer my readers in general to
my maps, after i shall have told him that all this point is sandy pine land,
and that deer, turkeys, oysters, clams, and fish abound here surprisingly. The
keys, or Martyrs, and the reef will likewise be best known by inspection of the
charts: these are a heap of rocks, very few small spots on them being
cultivated; Matacombe alone would be worth attention for a settlement, all
their productions are tropical, not an oak to be found o^ any one, and pine
trees on one only; but this reef and keys may be rendered serviceable in time
of war, to any people who are well acquainted with them, the reef begins in
latitude 25; 34, and the channel, between it and the islands, will admit a
vessel drawing sixteen feet water; for a good way in, and at key Biscay, is a
good place for careening craft of ten feet draught: there is good water on it,
and if it should fail, the rivulets in the grand marsh will supp]y any quantity
for a ship of considerable force, and her tender might here find the best
station, for a cruize, of any i know, for there being no more than fifteen
leagues from the reef to the Beminis, where there is likewise water, and on
both shores plenty of fish and turtle, she may lay on either side in safe^y.
The tender finds a hurbour on each side, of ten feet at least; on the Florida
side, the ship laying within the reef, i need not tell the seamen that she lay
safe; thus cruizing across here, or one being on the station on one side, and
the other on the other, it would be next to an impossibility for a ship to
escape them. Of what consequence this is, in a place through which the
Spaniards are obliged to send all their treasures, every one may judge. At Cayo
Tabona, a large ship, even of 60 guns, may ride just within the reef, and her
tender can always supply her with water, either from Matacombe, or the
abovenamed marsh, and key Biskay. Few vessels can come through the gulf
without coming in sight of this place, and it is generally the first land made
by every sail of shipping after they leave the Cuba shore, Sound-Point, or
Cape-Florida, being just N. of it. Matacombe is another good station for small
vessels, which may run in here, and the Bahama bank affords anchorage in case
one would choose to cruize across. Cayo Huiso, commonly called Key West, is
another good station for a small frigate, but not so advantageous as the
others, nor is there so much safety here.

Nothing further of note occurs at these islands, except that at Cayos Vacos,
and Cayo Huiso, we see the remains of some savage habitations, built, or rather
piled up of stones; these were the last refuges of the Caloosa nation; but even
here the water did not protect them against the inroads from the Creeks, and in
1763 the remnant of this people, consisting of about eighty families, left this
last possession of their native land, and went to the Havannah. They were a
tribe of excellent fishermen; this nation was strenuously engaged in the
Spanish interest, they were governed in a manner somewhat monarchical, and
while they lived on these keys, were the dread and terror of the seamen; who,
not being able to steer clear of the dangerous reefs which are here, escaped
one kind of cruel death, to run into the jaws of one still more terrible: the
inhumanity committed by the Coloosas, on shipwrecked mariners, is shocking even
to Barbarians. A little key lying before Matacombe is a dreadful monument of
this, it is called the Matanca, (i. e.) slaughter, from the murder of near four
hundred wretched Frenchmen, who, being cast away, fell into the hands of these
monsters; who, after keeping them in the adjacent islands for some time,
carried them all to this little key, which now serves them for one common
grave. The people from Providence, who came here for turtle or Mahogany wood,
came always armed, and had frequent brushes with them, so that the dislodging
of these fierce savages has been of service to navigation. The unhappy sufferer
by wreck, who escapes with life, may now be sure of safety on the shore of
these islands. Having mentioned the cutting of mahogany it may be proper to
observe that little or none now remains here.

I have now given as ample a description of East Florida, as the nature of this
work will allow, and after having made some remarks on two curious productions
of that profound and speculative philosopher, William Gerrard De Brahm, Esquire his
Majesty's surveyor general of the southern district of North America, I shall
say something of the western province.

The first of these consists of some observations made by this singular genius,
and transmitted to the Honorable Board of Trade; such as they are, Dr. Stork
has given them to the public, as to be depended upon.

First he says, in latitude 27 the plantable land is scarce, except the
mangrove swamps, for the cultivation of Barilla. What reader, seeing this,
would not imagine that these swamps were improveable, but they are a soil
drowned by the sea to the depth of three or four feet; often only sand banks,
and as the roots of trees grow in arches, above ground, they are for the most
part impenetrable, and some totally inaccessible to either man or beast.

2. The trees and shrubs -- are the arboreous grape vine, and spice bark trees,
the Hiccora, Plumb and Panao. I shall inform my botanical reader, that this
arboreous grape vine is the Coccolaba, or grape tree, well known in the
West Indies, which has no manner of affinity with the vitis or vine, the spice
bark trees are no other than two species of Lauri, one of them the Laurus
Borbonia, or Red Bay, having its aromatic juices more concentrated in this
climate than further north, and through the influence of the sun it is no more
than a mere shrub.

The Hiccora: Anno 1772 he has learned to call this by its right name,
Hickorey; but what shall we say, when it is not possible to find a single plant
of this kind in the southern part of the province; nor is there any thing that
looks like a plumb, except the Chrysobalanus, Icaco, or Coco-plumb, not at all
alike in kind to the pruni which one would judge to be meant by the plumb. The
Papao i guess is the Carica, vulgarly called Papaw, of which we find a good
number.

3. From latitude 26:40 to 27, there is a branch of Hillsborough river,
terminating in fresh water marsh, the principal river departing southward.

Compare this with my description of the sound into which St. Lucia river falls.

What a piece of accuracy do we discover in the numbers 4693, 9386, 24, 300,
950, 2800, and 37961 acres! this is of the same stamp with the matchless
exactness of latitudes 25 d. 48 m. 33 s. 26 d. 53 m. 35 s. 24 d. 57 m 6 s. etc
in his map prefixed to that curious publication, the Atlantic Pilot.

4. The west side -- may do in time for the cultivation of the Opuntia plant.
When we know, that this identical plant is a weed and mere nuisance in the very
spot here mentioned; pray what is meant by a hope of its becoming a cultivated
article in the soil where it grows spontaneously in great abundance?

5. The cape and seacoast -- whose luxurious plants are the pomegranate, etc.

Not a pomegranate in all the country, except what is cultivated in the
gardens, at and near St. Augustine.

6. The main on the west of Cape River appears to be all high land, and is
chiefly covered with cedar, oak, mulberry, and gum. No such river as Cape river
known to any but this extraordinary inventor himself, nor is there a sprig of
any of the above plants found within many miles of the cape.

7. In latitude 25:35, the main upon a due west line is a mile across, and
there appears a river four miles over, which comes either from Tampe Bay, St.
John's river, or is the mouth of Hillsborough river, which in latitude 26.50
takes a S. W. departure. Every letter of this is a forgery of the brain of this
lunatic writer, no river is found at or near this latitude, but Rio Rattones
above described; what a pity it is, that the conjectures or wishes of such
dreamers did not sometimes become real! Either of the communications there
mentioned would open a most beneficial addition to the ease and convenience of
our navigation.

8. No fish in the white waters round the cape, at least there were none on May
13 and 29, nor is any other animal species there except sea birds, and the
track of only one bear was observed. Every body that is acquainted with the
immense variety and quantity of fish found here, will naturally imagine, that
the fish were retired on May 13 and 29, to some general council or meeting of
the finny nations, and the gentlemen from providence, who come sometimes here
for the diversion of hunting a species of deer peculiar to these islands, and
very numerous on them, can witness for me how true this last assertion is; not
to mention the bald pate, and small American turtle dove, the red bird, the
stare and American fieldfare, nor the racoon, which seems here to be an
universal inhabitant in vast numbers, nor the amphibious crocodile and turtle.

9. No sign of winter effect is visible, nor any shrub or tree species of those
in the northern climate, etc. etc.

How well does this agree with the trees mentioned in the sixth article, and
the impudent safeshood of the pomegranate is here a second time introduced with
an of which i had a full proof by the pomegranate, of which the trees are full
of blossoms with half ripe and full ripe fruit.

10. At Shark's-tail, Middle-river, and the head of Cape-river, are a few live
oaks, and in the next article we find hickory, live oak, mulberry, smooth black
yellow pine. The very choice for timber!

11. This agrees pretty well with the assertion in No. 9. -- The conclusion of
these fine remarks, is a recommendation of laying the land out in large tracts,
the very thing which has proved the means of keeping the country uncultivated.

Can we any longer be surprised at the little, not to say perverse knowledge
the people of the mother country have of America, when we find principal
officers misrepresenting facts to the chief rulers of the land? I make no doubt
but many good folks, in other offices, have as much misrepresented facts of
another kind, as this man has done the description of the affairs in the
department he was entrusted with.

But if this narrative deserves contempt, and to be exposed, the latter
production of 1772, with its very improper title of Atlantic Pilot, evidently
bearing marks of insanity, demands our pity; here we see an account of an
unnatural change in the face of the country, which for many reasons never could
have happened but in the brain of this Bedlamite, from whence also seems to
originate the name of Tegesta; he turns one peninsula into broken islands,
another into sunken rocks; what a havoc of jumbling this Hercules makes! when
in this unmeaning chaos he joins and disjoins, turns water into land, and land
into water, calls the current from Baffin's frozen bay, to join with the
velocious stream of Torrid Mexico and Florida; and again makes them form a
vortex reverting back to their points of departure; magnifies a parcel of
pitiful flats into a gulf, with the sonorous name of Sandwich, or into a lake
with the pretorian title of grand affixed to it, and all this does not cost him
more trouble than a few strokes of his inimitable pen; nay more, he
metamorphoses the hunting seat of the Prince of Orange into a wolf, and turns a
woman just delivered from child bed travail, and her child, into a paradise Key
Loo, so called from the Loo frigate which was cast away on it, he has changed
into Loup, the French name for a wolf, and the two keys by the English called
Soldier Keys, from the multitude of those animals found on and near them, are
by the Spaniards titled La Parida y Su Iiguela, but this curious raver has
called them Los Paradizos.
.

Not to say much of his arrogant false claim of his having discovered the
navigation through the channel, inside of the reef, which numbers of people,
even Englishmen, knew better forty years ago, than it is likely he ever will
know it; I cannot forbear mentioning the alteration of well-known names in a
place of so much danger; can the arbitrary imposition of the names of
Dartmouth, Littleton, Pownal, Hawke, Egmont, Huntingdon, Holbourn, Keppel, Fox,
Townshend, Ellis, Oglethorp, Reynolds, Dyson, and about a legion more, of
inferior great and little men, make up for the mistakes they may occasion? Or
can these statesmen and heroes owe him thanks for the confusion occasioned by
the jumbling of their names, like dice in a box? The formation of a reef, "out
of sight of any land," west of the dry Tortugas, is likewise a child of his own
brain; and we are apt to think him finding fault with the goodness of the
Creator, in not making shoals enough, for there is no such bank any where west
of the dry Tortugas.

But his placing soundings in his draught deeper by three feet than they really
are; and his advising people who intend to go through the Gulf of Florida, to
take their departure at the Havannah, and steer due north, in order to make,
what he calls, Cape Florida, seems as if calculated on purpose to destroy ship,
goods and people; happy is it for me that our present navigators know the
navigation so well, and for the benefit of trade i hope his pamphlet will never
serve as a guide to any man that is a novice, and chances to come this way.

As a specimen of his marine knowledge, observe him telling us, that at times
of a westerly wind, the Atlantic coast is the most eligible lee for navigators
who do not choose to take the stream; as he has just before defined this
Atlantic coast to be the Florida shore, it must consequently at such seasons be
the weather shore; but cease to wonder at this, when i tell you, that the
method of his own, which he refers to, for taking the variation, is a
mechanical one, and very tedious, and that he did not know how to do it
astronomically, by an amplitude of the sun, till i taught him in 1769. I am
almost weary of removing all this dirt, and would leave the man and his
performance, but my love for truth in natural history obliges me to trace him,
even through his presumptuous rummaging of the kingdoms of nature, of which he
knows as little as of nautical affairs.

To support the ridiculous hypothesis, he has broached about the change of his
ancient Tegesta, he says, amongst other arguments, in page 9, myself and
people, employed by me in this service (of which number, i the present writer
was one) have these three years observed many places where fresh encroachments
appear to this effect: even the vast quantity of scattered large old trees,
washed out with their roots on all shores of the islands, and out in the
shallow sea, between the islands and the main, testify, that they lay on the
spot of the former continent and peninsulas, where their genus and species
formerly flourished. I came through this place four years before I knew this
man, and from that time down to last year i have seen many changes and
alterations in the positions of these trees, some of which come down the rivers
in Cuba, in land-floods, but more down the Mississipi; and by the currents are
here forced on the reefs and keys Let us for a moment calculate, how long the
worms will leave such a tree as a monument, and we shall find, that this change
of Tegesta, at least in part, must have happened of late years.
.

A few of those from Cuba being tropical, might serve to support the reasoning
of the Atlantic Pilot, but many kinds never grew in Florida; the coco-nuts
found on the shore likewise convince us, that Cuba sends much of her outcast
this way; but when we consider that nine out of ten of the trees thus found are
oak, cypress, red cedar, elms, and above all, beach of the greatest magnitude
(none of which ever grew in this climate) it is done with Tegesta, she is
fallen never to rise again!

He has however this time forgot the pomegranate; but how do we know what is
meant by Papaios, distinguished from Papaw; some new genus in botany, no doubt,
has the Spanish name of the Papaw bestowed on it by this excellent naturalist.
Observe him last of all turn systematist, when he tells us that a species of
prawn (shrimps) growing to the size of five pounds (he might have said fifteen)
are improperly called lobsters; o Philosophus eximius! The lobster which is the
first in rank among the families of Astaci, must here give way to the most
diminutive of the whole genus, which is placed first, and that forsooth because
in Mr. De Brahm's opinion there can be no lobsters without claws: -- but enough
of this, let us proceed to the topography of West Florida.

The river Apalachicola is the boundary of the two provinces; before its mouth
eastward, and a little westward, we meet with St. George's Islands, well known
for the sufferings of Pierre Viaud, etc. after shipwreck here. I must remark,
that the relation we have of this affair is a great exaggeration of facts;
people in that situation may suffer, but on a place like this, where plenty of
fish, crabs and oysters are to be had, as well as water, for the trouble of
digging, their sufferings cannot be great. Our pity is much lessened upon
finding a reasonable man so debilitated by fright and despair, that he cannot
make use of a plenty provided by providence. All along this coast fish are in
such abundance, that both myself and people, when not inclined to fish with a
hook and line, have struck many hundreds with a stick sharpened at one end, and
hardened in the fire, in lieu of a harpoon; i will not mention much about the
exaggeration of distress, which runs through the whole of this performance; but
the story of Madame La Couture bringing a turkey and her eggs, out of the
woods, at the time when relief had reached her fellow suffere^, appeared to me
too palpable a falsehood to be credited, because these birds were never found on
any island from Carolina to this place, except formerly on Amelia island;
(which is separated from the main only by a little creek, in some places scarce
ten feet across) but supposing one to have been accidentally here, i will
readily allow that the eggs may have been found, and taken by Madame La
Couture; yet as these birds are the most shy animal we meet with, (insomuch
that a deer, in places where he is frequently disturbed, is incomparably more
easy to come at than turkies) certainly she must have been a more expert
huntress than ever i heard of before, and i should be after all very much
inclined to think that the poor woman, and her companions, had mistaken the
Mexican vulture for a turkey; but that from the relation we naturally judge
there were many eggs in the nest, which oversets that kind of reconciliation:
wherefore, finding it was at the time of their relief, i went to Mr. Simpson,
(the interpreter for the savages, who was one of the people in the boat at the
time of affording help to those unhappy people, and is a man of veracity) and
asked him if it was true that the woman brought in a turkey, and her nest, of
which he and his companions shared; he told me that it was no other than a crab
of the kind called in the southern province a king crab, and to the northward a
horse-shoe, but he saw no eggs of any kind. As this fish bears a distant
resemblance to a turtle, perhaps Mr. Viaud took it for such, and wrote tortue,
which may have been translated turtle too, but by a mistake common enough in
printing-offices, the compositor may have made it a turkey I find mention made
also of a bustard, it is well known that there is not one of this kind of birds
in all America; however a bustard is in French called outarde, and this is the
name given by the French to the blackhead Canada goose, which abounds here in
the season, when Viaud was on this coast, this the translator seems not to have
been informed of. I perceived many symptoms of an imperfect knowledge of the
French language, by the translator, however, this is not a place to point them
out, only out of complaisance to the sex, i will inform her that casse tete
means a tomahawk.
, and the corrector, either through inadvertency, or not considering how
largely he launched into the mavelous, left it so.

But to proceed, a little west of these islands we find Cape Blaze in latitude
29:47, and the Bay of St. Joseph, to the N. W. of which is St. Andrew's Bay,
and W. by N. from here, Santa Rosa bay and islands; in the east end of this bay
is Matto Hatcha; which last running E. and W. makes the eastern shore of
Pensacola entrance. All these places are very arid, dry sand, near the coast;
farther in toward the Upper Creek country, which is in some measure described
in page 91, it is scarcely known, but what i have seen of it is much like
Georgia, and the north part of East Florida.

Pensacola has about an hundred and eighty houses in it, built in general in a
good taste, but of timber: the town is laid out in an oblong square, near the
foot of an hill, called Gage-hill; and by means of two rivulets of excellent
water, which almost surround it, is the best watered of any i know on the
continent. The harbor is spacious, and here are three considerable rivers,
viz. Escambe, Chester, and Middle rivers, besides several lagoons and rivulets
of no note. Chester-river is full of islands, great and small, abounding
principally with the Cupressus Thyoides. Middle-river communicates with several
lakes; the water of this river is so cold, that the savages call it Weewa
Casupka, which in the Creek language signifies cold water. The Escambe is
navigable a considerable way up, but rapid, and about twenty miles from
Pensacola we begin to meet with some spots of fertile land, variously timbered.
Twenty-eight miles from the town, and on the banks of this river, on an
eminence, are the remains of a Spanish out-guard, or ^ocado fort; about
seventy-eight miles from town, this river forks, a branch called Weewa Oka, or
Weeoka, by us little Scambe, coming from the N. W. runs into the main river;
this branch where it is crossed is about sixty feet wide, and the fo^d is a
bottom of small gravel, which is not common here; the road that crosses it
leads from Pensacola to the Upper Creek nation; the distance is two hundred and
ten miles; and the heads of these rivers are all within a few miles of the
savage towns. Fourteen miles farther west from Pensacola, is the Rio Perdido,
or lost river, of inconsiderable length and navigation; and about forty miles
west of this, we meet with Mobile, Tombechbe and Taensa bay and rivers; into
which last the Alibama, or Coosa river falls. All the country between this last
river and Chester-river, and probably all to Apalachicola is very favorable
for stocks of cattle; many noble cane branches, mixed in the pine land,
affording them excellent food, and they multiply very rapidly. Lovers of minute
geography, by examining my maps, will find that the lower part of the coast
between Mobile bay and Perdido, and so on to Pensacola, may easily be made
navigable for boats in land, there being already a rolling road out of the
river Ben secour, into a creek running into Perdido; but this being mere matter
of speculation we must leave the practical part to some future generation. The
country west from Mobile bay, to Nita Albany, or Bean-camp, at lake Maurepas,
is much of the same kind as that already described; only we find more fertile
planting ground in it. The timber here is nearly the same as in the north part
of East-Florida; but it is worthy of remark, that not one of the Borassus, or
Cabbage tree, is found along this whole extent from Apalachia westward; which
does not agree well with a report in a letter to a certain George Lookup, Esquire
in Robinson's history of Florida, where he says, that the cabbage trees along
this coast, rear their lofty heads above all others; but so curious a piece as
this pamphlet is ought not to be ransaked, i will therefore proceed to give
some extracts from my journals through the western parts of West Florida, as
being the best way to give my reader a true idea of this country.

In the following pages the distances. are accurately measured, by such methods
as circumstances permitted.

On Saturday the 20th September, 1771, at 4 P. M. i left Mobile, and encamped
that night in pine land, near a spring to the north of the path, and at the
foot of an hill, six miles from town, to the west a little by south.

21st. Opaya Mingo, a Chicasaw warrior, of our train, was this morning sick, on
which occasion i saw one of his companions cut his temples with a flint, and
applying a cane about four inches long, to the scarification, suck it till he
nearly filled it with blood, then threw it out, and repeated it several times;
this is something like cupping: we were obliged to leave these two behind and
proceeded this day chiefly to the N. W. through pine land, and encamped this
night at the head of a branch of Dog-river, fifteen miles and three quarters
from town.

22d. Crossed several creeks, and headed others, running all eastward; we
advanced twenty miles and a half through pine land, and encamped near a creek
called pine logg; in the afternoon we came to the first considerable ascent,
where the ground is gravelly, here the road goes of to Yoani.

23d. This morning we went over a very narnow ridge, leaving Dog-river on the
left, and Tombechbe on the right of us. Crossed several heads of cane branches,
running different ways; saw many grass ponds, and Indian camps, and crossed a
large cane branch, called by the Chactaws Coosak Hattak falaya; proceeded
eleven miles and encamped on the waters of Pasca Oocoloo river; here saw a good
deal of chestnut and other timber, besides pine trees.

24th. This morning we came past some good low grounds, and saw the first oaks
of the kind called black jacks: crossed several creeks, and went through some
swamps and oak land; encamped near a branch, and here saw the hieroglyphick No.
1, in page 108, advanced this day twenty-one miles.

25th. This morning we had a great deal of rain, which continued by showers all
day; the two savages left behind joined us. We advanced but five miles and a
half; encamped this night about two miles W. S. Westward from the path, near a
lake abounding in excellent fish, particularly pikes, perch, and red eyed
chubs, of a very superior size.

26th. Being rainy we lay by, and recruited our provision with abundance of
fish, two deer, and two turkies.

27th. Went over a good deal of gravelly ground, mostly pine land, and encamped
at Bogue Hooma, (i. e.) Red Creek, our boundary with the Chactaws; here we saw
the first rocks on the south side of the creek: we traveled only eleven miles
and a quarter; the creek being very high we were obliged to spend a great while
in ferrying our goods, and swimming our horses over; the stream runs westward;
-- shot three turkies.

28th. After six miles traveling, we came to oak-land, being short hills, and
all day we found the land pretty much mixed; -- crossed many springs and
rivulets; -- saw the head of a savage stuck on a pole, with many other marks of
our being on the theater of war; we left the road to Chicasawhay on the left;
-- all this afternoon we leave a considerable stream on our right, running N.
eastward: -- advanced this day fifteen miles and a quarter, the last three or
four miles the land was chiefly oak-land: at night we encamped at a war-camp,
near a branch running into the above stream, from which we were one and an half
mile to the west, using the ordinary precautions See page 189.
.

29th. Ascended and descended several considerably steep hills; found the land
mixed, chiefly oak; at three o'clock went through the savannah called Poos coos
Paahaw, about one mile and an half across, with here and there some points of
wood land on it; and again crossed some hilly oak land; and after thirteen
miles travel encamped near a branch of Pasca Oocoloo river; here a very plain
path goes eastward.

N. B. The water in the savannah has a taste of lime.

30th. Almost as soon as we left camp we crossed a branch of Bogue aithee
Tanne, vulgarly Bakkatane, having the low land of this river constantly in
sight, about half a mile to our left; traveled chiefly through pine land, and
some hurricane ground Tracts of wood formerly destroyed by hurricanes are so
called.
, and after journeying eleven miles and three quarters, we encamped at Hoopah
Ullah, (i. e.) the noisy owl, where we saw the hieroglyphick No. 2, page 102.

1st October, went through a vast variety of hilly, stony, boggy, swampy and
oak land; passed some very elevated hills, and crossed several rivulets:
encamped at Oku Ullah (i. e.) the noisy water, a creek; having gone twenty-two
miles and an half this day, we passed by three graves within the space of three
quarters of a mile from each other, the first of a soldier of a detachment that
went to fort Tombeehbe, the second of a savage, who went by the name of
rum-drinker, after whom the hill is called rum drinker's hill; and the third of
one Mr. Brown, a very considerable trader in the Chactaw and Chicasaw nations.

2d. At four miles distance from our last night's encapment we crossed Pancha
Waya, the last water running to the south-west, and two miles further we left
the path going to Coosa on our left. Our road all this day led through the same
kind of rugged, uneven, stony, gravelly and swampy ground as yesterday, as also
a hurricane ground and scrub hill; some of the stones we saw were very large,
and the hills considerably elevated: having traveled eighteen miles and three
quarters, we encamped a quarter of a mile west of a Chactaw village called
Paonte, near a delightful spot, but deserted on account of the war; here we got
some peaches, plumbs, and grapes; six miles W. S. W. from the camp is the Coosa
town, of Chactaw. A showery day.

3d. Very heavy rain from midnight till noon, at two miles and an half from our
camp left the road going to Haanka Ullah (i. e.) the bawling goose, a chactaw
town, to the left; traveled only four miles and an half through mixed but
pretty even land, and encamped near a branch of Sook han Hatcha river, the
streams being very high the ferriage delayed us much.

4th. This day we met some traders and savages, and traveled through several
deserted fields, and one deserted town, called Sapa-Pesah: the ground is
generally very uneven; -- here we crossed several paths, and were joined by
three Chactaw savages, who extricated us from a great difficulty, as we found
no convenient logs to ferry us over a large branch of Soak hanatcha, till they
showed us a place half a mile down the stream; and for a small consideration
ferried our goods over, while we swam our horses across: having traveled ten
miles and three quarters, we encamped on the north bank of this stream, called
Hatchatipke.

5th. We came after half a mile's journey to a deserted town, called Etuck
Chukke (i. e.) Blue Wood. This morning, at daybreak, we heard the report of
fire arms, at a little distance, which, being very often repeated, we soon
guessed it was what we found it to be a little while after; that is, an action;
the savages always attacking either at daybreak, or at sunset; crossed many
paths and fields, and after ten miles and an half journey, we found one of the
victorious Chactaws, presenting us the fresh scalp of one of his enemies. Here
were the first inhabited houses being a kind of suburb to the town of east
Abecka; here we crossed the branch of Sookhanatcha river, which gives name to
all the rest, and at a mile and an half further, we came to the town itself,
and put up at the house of an old trader, called Hewitt, and were civilly
treated by both savages and whites. Of the first we found here three chiefs,
not a little exulting in their late victory, and the women in every part of the
town were performing their savage orgies and dances; we staid here till the
9th, when part of my company proceeded to the Chicasaw nation.

9th. Agreed with a very worthy young man, one Mr. George Dow, to serve me as a
guide through the Chactaw nation; and that day we went through Ebeetap-Oocoola,
a town on a hill, where the savages have a large stockade fort in their own
manner. Such there are also at Abeika, which two places are the frontiers
against the Creeks. We went this day south westward, through Chooka-hoola, part
of Oka-hoolah, through Hoola-tassa, which last is four miles from Abeeka; then
nearly south three miles more to the ridge of east Moka-Lassa, then about a
mile and an half westward to Ebeetap-oocoolo-cho, where we stopped at the house
of one Foster, a trader; then went nearly S. E. for two miles, and came to the
middle of east Moka Lassa; from here continued S. E. a little more than two
miles, and entered Haanka-Ullah; still went on the same course for a mile and a
quarter, and then were at the middle of said town, and refreshed ourselves for
an hour. The town of Oka Loosa lays S. E. three miles from here; then returned,
in a round about manner, through another road back to Mr. Foster's house where
we slept.

10th. Proceeded first W. N. W. about two miles, afterward W. S. W. for a mile
and a quarter; this brought us into Oka-attakkala, a neat little place for a
town of savages; went about a quarter of a mile into it, and put up at the
house of Mr. Dow, my guide. About three miles W. S. W. from this are the ruins
of East Congeata, destroyed in the civil war of these people, by the western
party. Hitherto traveled chiefly through cornfieldsd; we lay here till the
21st, partly to refresh our horses, and partly on account of a violent fever,
which i was troubled with; during this time agreed with a savage to join us as
a guide to the S. W. of the nation, his name was Pooscoos-Mingo, or king of the
children.

21st. Went S. westward, a mile and an half into Yanatoe, crossing many paths,
and several old, as well as some cultivated fields, which lay interspersed in
the woods; crossed Bague-fooka, and the heads of Poreetamogue, with several
other creeks, and after riding something better than seven miles and an half,
mostly S. W. we ascended a long hill, steep in its first rising, and when on
its top we had the view of a high ridge, to N. W. with a deep valley between
them Went south, and after a mile and a half crossed Bogue Chitto, a large
creek, which runs S. E. into the river Bogue-aithe-Tanne, in three quarters of
a mile more went through the deserted old field of Coosak Baloagtaw; about a
mile and a half further we crossed a creek of that name, emptying into
Bogue-Chitto: a quarter of a mile further we crossed a large pond upon a beaver
dam, and in half a mile more stopped to bait, at a creek called Pooscoos te
Kale, in a deserted village of that name. At near three o'clock proceeded S. W.
by W. after a little more than two miles, crossed a deserted field called
Pooscoos tekale, Hoca; two miles and three quarters further crossed Talle
Katta, a large branch of Chicasaw-hay river, then came into pine land, for the
first time of these fourteen days: went south, a little westerly, and came to
camp at a place, where we found some old camps convenient, near the head of a
branch of Talle Hatta; having this day traveled twenty-two miles and an half,
all in woods.

22d. We traveled through various kinds of wood, and something of uneven
ground, chiefly to south; and at twelve miles from our camp we crossed a river
near eighty feet wide, here said to be the principal branch of Chicasawhay
river; and is called Aitheesuka; the ford is a flat rock, the land on each side
here is pine land, and rises high above the bed of the river: continue in pine
land four miles and a half more, then come into low land, cross some creeks and
savannahs, and after having traveled twelve miles more, chiefly S. E. from the
river, i came to camp on the side of a pine hill. My weakness not suffering me
to go further, i ordered our people forward to Chicasawhay, to provide
necessaries, except one lad, whom I kept to accompany me.

23d. South eastward through some hurricane and other uneven ground for five
miles and an half, then went through intervale for a mile and a half, at the
end of this we go up a considerable hill, from whose top we see a very high
blue ridge to E. and S. E. a great way from us, and at the end of nine miles
and three quarters we arrived at Chicasawhay, and stayed at the house of Ben
James.

24th and 25th. Employed in going to and coming from Yoani. The road that leads
to this place is chiefly pine and shrubby oak land: at five miles from
Chicasawhay, a middling branch of Chicasawhay is crossed: it is called Owhan
lowy; judging this sufficient to give an idea of the face of the country here,
i shall only subjoin that on the 7th November, having made a circuit of the
nation, we returned to Hewitt's house at Abeeka, our road from Chicasawhay,
leading chiefly through fine improved, and many among them rich fields, and a
large number of considerable towns and villages of the savages.

10th November, having dismissed Pooscoos-Mingo, we went to the Chicasaw
nation, through a road leading in general over stiff clay land; saw very little
else but white oak, and that no where tall, occasioned by the stiffness of the
land; crossed only two rivers of note, one Nashooba, the other Oka tebbee haw;
no remarkable ascent or descent on the whole road; crossed many savannahs, the
distance is about an hundred and fifty-nine miles from Abeeka, to the Chicasaw
towns; (described in page 63) where we arrived on the 18th November, and put up
at the house of one Buckles, a trader: our course hitherto has chiefly been
north. Here i stayed till the 8th December, and observed this house to lie in
nearly 35 north latitude.

I cannot help relating in this place an anecdote of Mr. Commissary in this
nation; this Gentleman had engaged to me, and promised Mr. Stuart, that i
should have all the necessary assistance i might want; i went to his
plantation, which lays at Paon titack, eleven miles from the place where he
ought to reside, and to my astonishment i was here treated worse than in any
place i had been at: so far from providing horses, which was one of the
articles i wanted, i was obliged to give him one back, which i had borrowed at
the Chactaw, in lieu of one that failed me. I saw clearly, that i was an
unwelcome guest in every respect; however, i procured from him a recommendatory
note, to the above Buckles, and he told me that Buckles knew of two canoes, the
choice of which i might have for my intended voyage, down the river; but when i
spoke to Mr. Buckles on the subject, he denied ever having spoke about any
canoes, nor did he know of any, and as to the note, i might have any thing i
wanted on my own credit, by giving an order on Mr. Stuart; but with the
commissary he had nothing to do. Thus i was obliged to do all myself at last;
this is in some measure an instance of the inutility of the commissary's
office; i sent Mr. Dow with three negroes to the river, to make a canoe. During
my stay here, on the first December, it began to freeze very hard; on the
fourth the ice in town-creek was four or five inches thick; and on the 6th in
the morning we could scarce keep water from freezing in a close house, and near
a good fire; but i saw no snow during all the time of my stay. Nothing was more
entertaining than the surprise of the savages, at seeing me take observations
of the solar altitude, the mercury i used for an artificial horizon, was a
matter of great wonder to them, particularly, when i showed them its
divisibility, and the succeeding cohesion of the globules.

8th December, in the afternoon i proceeded from Buckles's house, and traveled
E. by S. nearly five miles and a half; then crossed Nohoola-inalchubba, or the
town Creek, mentioned in page 63, then went about S. S. E. for a mile and a
quarter more, and encamped on a hill, near a small lake, in which we heard all
night a great number of ducks. We met this day eleven savages, of the Creek
nation, and three more of the Natchez, who live with the Upper Creeks, coming
through the Chicasaw field, with the Death Whoop: they had surprised a hunting
camp of Chactaws, on a branch of the river Yaasoo, called Talle Hatcha, at a
time when the hunters were absent, and took away all their skins, two horses,
and five women of the Chacchooma tribe, belonging to west Congeta, in the
Chactaw nation: they took care not to stay for the return of the men, as the
camp indicated them to be numerous; but because they had not a scalp to show,
these devils incarnate had scalped the eldest of the women they carried into
captivity, yet let the wretch live, and she was one of the number we saw. The
Chicasaws were all abroad that day; but i observed by the behavior of some
superannuated fellows, that they disliked the Creeks behavior of bawling the
Death Whoop through the field; and having asked the reason, i was told, that as
they were neutrals in this war, they did not like to give umbrage, which the
Chactaws might take at this, and if their men had been at home, they would not
have suffered this small victorious party to make use of this kind of triumphal
entry here; thus we see these savages strictly observing a neutrality in form.

9th. Proceeded, and at 3 miles, saw a large tumulus, which was the only
remarkable thing in this road, we went over one steep hill, and crossed three
or four branches, and the last two miles and a half of the road we saw much
pine mixed with the oak; having traveled nearly twenty three miles on a course
S. E. by S. we arrived about four o'clock P. M. on the bank of Tombechbe river,
here called the twenty mile creek.

10th. Examined the canoe, but found her too heavy for our purpose, therefore
dispatched Mr. Dow (who knew the ground, and was well acquainted with the
woods) to see if he could not find some canoe of the savages; he found one
about noon, in the mouth of Nahoola inalchubba, two miles and a half west from
our camp, therefore went and encamped on the bank of said creek; the opposite
bank was very high steep hills, above hundred and twenty feet perpendicular,
and some pines on their summits; found the canoe a very sorry one, but it being
Hopson's choice, must venture in her.

11th. We spent in fitting our craft; since the 7th we had very bad weather
here, one hour it is sharp, clear, and intensely cold, the next cloudy, sultry,
with lightning, thunder, rain and hail, the wind veering round the horizon in
an incredible manner, which made my situation very disagreeable.

12th. We had some tolerable weather, and finished fitting our boat, but she
was so miserable a tool, that i believe few men would have ventured in her.

13th. All the company returned to the nation with the horses; kept only Mr.
Dow, and my servant, to be the companions of this fluvial expedition; while we
staid here we caught some beavers. At half an hour past one, P. M. we proceeded
from our camp in Nahoola Inalchubba, or Town Creek, and in twenty minutes were
in the river. We passed one bluff, where the French formerly had a fortified
trading house, about one mile below the mouth of the creek, on the west bank;
we passed one creek on each side, and left three small gravelly islands on our
left; for the rest of the land was low on both sides; -- having come five miles
and an half we came to camp on a sand bar at half an hour past three, P. M. the
river pretty rapid, and found only one log, which detained us a quarter of an
hour.

14th. Proceeded at ten o'clock, A. M. in half an hour past a bluff on the east
side, and in half an hour more found a very tall cypress laying across the
river, by which we were detained an hour; but cutting the top away we passed
on; about three quarters of an hour after had some pine land When the pine is
mentioned hereabouts, I mean the Pinus Abies Virginiana, conis parvis
subrotundis, or the balm of Gilead pine.
on the west bank; in general the land on both sides is low. About two o'clock
P. M. past a small island; about half an hour after two the bank on the west
side was about seventy feet high; N. B. The river was high.
continued between pretty high banks till half an hour after three, when we
encamped on a high sand bar, on the west side of the river, current unequal,
and the obstructions of no note, since we cut the tree; traveled this day nine
miles.

15th. Departed half an hour past ten o'clock A. M. past several islands, and
found the bank, on the west side, in many places high, we saw in many others
high and intervale oak land; -- not so much drowned land as the former days; --
passed through several rapids, and at half an hour past three, P. M. came to
camp at the end of a large high pine bluff, on the east side, having traveled
this day fifteen miles.

16th. At half an hour past nine o'clock, A. M. proceeded and came past a
variety of high and low land; shot some ducks and teals; but unfortunately this
forenoon lost our gun, being torn out of my hands by a snag of a tree, and as
it sunk in deep water, it was irrecoverable, the river being rapid. About two
o'clock P. M. past a short hill, on the west shore, upwards of eighty feet high
above the present level of the water; -- passed a few creeks and lagoons, three
islands and several rapids; we came down fourteen miles and three quarters, and
at half an hour past three, encamped on the east side in an hollow.

17th. Proceeded a quarter before nine A. M. and in less than half an hour saw
a hill, a little inland, on the west side; and an hour after this we had the
mouth of a river on the east, this is called, at its fording place, in the
trading path, the last branch of Tombechbe; none of the banks we past this
morning were very low, and on the west side, opposite this mouth of a river,
the banks fifty or sixty feet higher than the present surface of the water. The
weather being severely cold i was obliged to go on shore and make a fire, on
this highland, half a mile below the above river, near the mouth of a stony
creek, which we took to be the Sonac Tocale, which we had crossed in the road
going up; here we remained till noon. We passed three islands this day, and the
general run of the land is middling high on both sides. The weather was very
severe, which obliged us to encamp at one o'clock, in the mouth of a creek,
called Old Town Creek, at the foot of an hill, rising about seventy feet out of
the water, having come about seven miles: it rained very hard all the
afternoon, and the next two days, by which means we kept in camp till the

20th, at noon. Half a mile from our camp the high land ends, and we traveled
but one hour and twenty minutes, when the severity of the weather obliged us
again to encamp, having come six miles, and in that distance found chiefly low
land: past four islands, and as many rapids, one of them a bad pass: our camp
was on a piece of fine rich, middling high land, which Mr. Dew reported to be
very extensive. We lay here on account of bad weather; such as cold, rain and
snow, till the

26th, when at a little past twelve we departed. During our stay here the water
gained near four feet in height: in one hour and an half, having gone near five
miles, and past six or seven islands and rapids, we were at the mouth of the
river Oca Tibehaw, the lower road between the Choct^ws and Chicasaws; --
crossed this river about two miles above this place; -- about one mile below
this, having past an island, we saw a very remarkable bluff on the west side,
rising above fifty feet out of the present level of the water; this is near a
mile and a half long; the bluff is covered principally with Juniper, or cedar
shrubs, and in it are two or three gullies, in which as many springs come
trickling down for about two thirds of its length: a bank projects out at its
foot, having a flat and very even surface, without any plants, (a little grass
excepted) growing thereon. This surface projects about nine or ten feet from
the bluff into the river, and was about eight feet above the level of the
water, it looks as if made by art, and if placed near any town of note, i do
not doubt would be much used as a walk. The bluff ends in two little hills, and
a small island is at the lower end of it; all which, added to its being in the
form of a crescent, makes it have a very romantic appearance. From hence we
went past one more bluff, a considerable island, and a rapid; in which last we
had low pine land on the east bank, and got into the mouth of a creek, called
eleven mile creek, which we went up half a mile, and at three P. M. we were
forced by the rain to come to camp, having traveled this day, ten miles and a
half.

27th. The rain obliged us to lay by all day.

28th. At 11 o'clock we embarked, and had more rapids to go through than on any
of the former days; likewise saw more high land than before. I think it
remarkable, that we see so very few outwaterings of creeks, or rivers, into the
great river. An hour and an half after leaving camp we saw a bark log, just
landed on the west side, and evident marks of people having just landed; this
was in a long reach, and we had seen a smoke, but when we came near the bark
log, the smoke vanished all at once. We soon found these people to be a war
party of Creeks, who perceiving our boat, had put out their fire, which on
these occasions they make of hickory bark and other oily matters, that yield
little smoke. We therefore put on our hats, which we had not on before, it
being a fine agreeable day, and rather warm, and laying on the paddles, did all
we could to show that we were white people. It was fortunate for me that i had
not brought a savage guide with me, which would have exposed us to a volley
from those warriors; we did not see them, but we knew by the suppression of the
smoke, that they had discovered us; they were ^ndoubtedly on the top of a
pretty high bank, in ambush, so we let the boat flow past them. N. B. We have
discovered many of those bark ^gs, made of cones, both above and below this
place, upon which the war party ferry over. Half a mile lower down we saw the
mouth of a middling large creek, on the east side. We past four islands this
day, in two hours and an half's time. We saw one of the high savannahs, which
bounds here on the river, with a delightful grassy bluff: the river is here
above two hundred feet wide. Having come twenty three miles, we encamped at
four o'clock, on a gravel bar. We saw many places that appeared like old
fields, as having been formerly cultivated.

29th. At nine o'clock proceeded; the first half hour we passed chiefly through
drowned lands, and then came to a large lagoon, going to N. W. in which were
innumerable geese and ducks; but the west bank of the lagoon is a handsome
bluff. In half an hour more we came to a creek's mouth on the west: we saw
again some spots bearing marks of former cultivation, and more of drowned land;
the river in general this day rapid, with many islands: at half an hour past
three, P. M. having traveled thirty-five miles, we encamped on the east side,
in a lagoon, on a high bank, where, for the first time, we saw the rich ground
clear of large canes; this being timbered, chiefly with the shag b^ hickory,
iron wood and Spanish oak.

30th. This morning we had our boat laden, but it began to rain, and thus were
obliged to unload again. Here we found a canoe which was well made, but had
been by the savages, on account of the war, scuttled, and rendered unfit for
use, however we found, that if we could make her any ways tight, she would be
more safe than the one we had, and this we effected by the help of wedges, clay
and leather. Our provisions beginning to grow scant, and having lost the only
gun i had taken with me, i began to be uneasy, especially as we found the
beavers become less plenty. This weather was uncommonly bad till the evening of
the third of January, 1772, when it cleared up, and next morning

4th January, 1772, at a quarter before 11 of clock, A. M. we proceeded in our
new craft* and by half an hour past one, P. M. we had pa^ high banks, and two
islands: at this hour we had one of the savannahs on the west side, the bank
being here about four feet out of the water: at a quarter before four we were
at a considerable island, having gone since the last savannah between low
banks; a quarter before five o'clock came to camp under a low bluff, on the
east side. The canoe proves very leaky, and on unloading we find a great deal
of our bread spoiled. This day came twenty-two miles and an half, the canes and
timber are here exceeding large.

5th. At a quarter past ten embarked: high banks on both sides. At half an hour
after eleven, past the mouth of a river from the east; this is called by the
savages Nashebaw. The and here is exceeding rich, the canes very large, and we
saw a species of phaseolus, in great abundance, along the banks. About a mile
and a quarter below the creek, we met four savages from Abeka, in the Chactaw
nation, to whom Mr. Dow was known. The river has risen considerably since
yesterday; the current has been for these two days almost uniformly at the rate
of three miles per hour. It is remarkable, that though the velocity of our way
was not much above two miles per hour, independent of the current, yet we had
several instances of having evidently outrun the flood at night, in so much
that it would scarce reach us again before morning. We came to camp near the
savages abovementioned, having come seven miles and an half; they had a good
canoe which i intended to purchase. The weather was very cold to day. Lost a
silver spoon at our last camp, which Mr. Dow proposed to go and fetch; but he
found it impracticable to cross the Nashehaw river. I agreed with the savages
that they should hunt for us to procure provisions. At night it rained; our
camp was on the east side, in a very rich spot. We have not yet seen any sand
or gravel, except on the bars and islands in the river, the soil in general
being clay, or loam, with a dry black mould.

6th. After a great deal of persuasion, i bought the canoe from the savages;
and they brought me in two deer, and a turkey; for all which i gave them five
yards of blue strouds, two powder horns, a knife, and some small shot. I
described our last camp to them, and desired them to look for the
abovementioned spoon, directing them to leave it in their own country, with Mr.
Dow's partner, who lived just by their homes, and gave them a note to him,
desiring him to pay them for their trouble; but when they understood it to be
the white stone (i. e.) silver, they declined going purposely for it; but
promised, if chance led them to the place to carry it as directed, for they,
not being able to work it, in case the trader refused to pay them, they would
lose their labor; but had it been the fat of the earth (i. e.) lead or pewter,
in that case they might make bullets, or earrings of it, and then they would
not take pains in vain: toward evening they left us, and during night we
barbecued our venison, to preserve it.

7th. At half an hour past seven o'clock A. M. embarked in our new craft; all
day we past between high banks, some steep, some sloping; several as high as
eighty feet above the surface of the water; one of these has an extensive
savannah on the top. At the end of nineteen miles and an half, on the west
side, we saw the mouth of the river Noxshubby, or Hatcha oose, its banks are
high on both sides: here seems to be the true theater of the war, for the bark
logs are very numerous. The river is widened now from two hundred to two
hundred and fifty feet. A mile and a half below the mouth of Noxshubby is the
first bluff of arid ochre, like earth, very high and steep; and about eight
miles lower a white one, being a kind of stone almost as soft as chalk. Toward
evening we met with several sand bars, and little isles. At four o'clock P. M.
we came to camp on a low spot, on the east side, having gone done the river
forty-two miles and a half; all day dull weather, and at night rain.

8th. Proceeded half an hour after 8 A. M. and having gone a little more than a
mile, we reached the mouth of the creek called Ectombogue be (i. e.) Crooked
Creek, on the west side; from this creek's name the French derive their
Tombechbe, the name of the fort which stood here, and which has again given
that name to the whole river. We went about half a mile further down, under a
high and steep bank of chalky stone, and arrived at the ruins of the fort, by
means of which the French kept all the savages in awe. I went ashore in the old
fields, and drew a view of the ruins; this is about forty miles east from the
town of Abeeka. The river is not sixty feet wide here. About a mile and a half
below these ruins is a pretty high, but sloping slaty bluff: having come about
nine miles, we arrived at a hunting camp of Chactaws, on the west side; who
invited us on shore, treated us very kindly, and spared us some venison, bear's
meat and oil. The afternoon being stormy, with hail and rain, we encamped at a
small distance from them: the canes were not very plenty here, but the land
rich: a great deal of the plant called Indian Hemp grows in this place; but the
season deprived me of the satisfaction of knowing what genus it is of.

9th. At half an hour past eleven proceeded, and in an hour and a quarter we
passed by Chickianoee, a white bluff, with a savannah on its top, on the west
side; it is upwards of seventy feet high above the water's level: we past
several high bluffs, among which one is yellow like Ochre. We saw many bars
also, and lagoo^ having traveled twenty-four miles, came to camp at four
o'clock P. M. on the east side, at the beginning of a steep slaty bluff.

10th. At half an hour past nine, A. M. proceeded; we went between high bluffs,
and in two hours time came to the mouth of Tuscaloosa river from the east; and
a little below it is the steep white chalky bluff, on whose top is a vast
plain, and some remains of huts in it, the bluff is called the Chicasow
Gallery, because from here the savages used to annoy the French boats going up
to the fort, or down from it. The river is hereabouts full of rapids, and bad
passes: we came past a number of high bluffs, most of them chalky. At half an
hour past three we past the mouth of Sookhanatcha from the west, and three
miles below it came to camp, at four o'clock P. M. at the foot of the hill,
where formerly the Coosadas were settled: this place is called Suktaloosa (i.
e.) Black Bluff, from its being a kind of coal; it is a great thorough-fare for
warring savages, therefore we took the usual precaution of large fires, and
hanging our hats on stakes, which we had reason to think not in vain; for in
the night we heard the report of small arms. This day we came thirty-six miles.
It is worthy of remark, that although we have come ne^ seventy miles from the
ruins of Tombechbe, yet by land the distance is not above twenty-four, or
twenty-five miles. The land here is very fine, and Mr. Dow told me, that he had
lived here with the Coosadas, and that the common yield of corn was from sixty
to eighty bushels per acre; that they increased horses and hogs to any degree
they pleased, and that venison, turkies and fish were uncommonly plenty.

11th. Last night and this morning, being rainy, we could not proceed till
eleven o'clock. All this day we passed through the remains of the Coosada and
Occhoy settlements, being all a fine tract of ground, of which much had been
cleared; but it is now again overgrown with ^eeds; the grand, or public
plantation in particular is an excellent tract. At four o'clock P. M. we
encamped on a little plain, under a bluff, where was a large hunting camp, to
appearance about two years old: here we saw some stones, having been deeply
marked by the savages, with some uncouth marks, but most of them being straight
lines and crossed, i have since been led to conjecture, whether they were not
occasioned by these people grinding their ^wls on these stones; yet they do not
ill resemble inscriptions: this place is a pretty situation, and i^ near two
miles below the deserted Occhoy town, which stood likewise near a black coaly
bluff; the distance we made this day is twenty one miles, we had fine weather
during the day; but the night was showery.

12th. At half an hour past eight A. M. proceeded. All this day we saw marks of
great fertility of soil, and much tolerably high land: at half an hour past
ten, we were at a creek called Abeshai, at a quarter past eleven at the last
Occhoy field, by a creek called Bashailawaw; at eleven A. M. at the hills of
Nanna Falaya, on the east side; which rise steep out of the water, about
fifteen, or twenty feet, then slope up into very high short pine hills. Some
parts of the rock are red, others gray. Here we were overtaken by very bad
weather, from which took shelter; at half an hour past one, P. M. we encamped
about three quarters of a mile below the hill, on the slope of a pretty high
bank, where we found the remains of a camp, that had been occupied lately by
white people; we came about eleven miles and an half this day; the rain
continued till two o'clock A. M. next day, when the wind shifting to W. N. W,
it grew excessively cold.

13th. At half an hour past ten A. M. proceeded; at one o'clock we came to a
hill on the east side, with an old field on its summit; this hill is called
Batcha-Chooka; here we found a notorious gang of thieves, belonging to the town
of Oka Loosa, a town in the Chactaw nation; when we saw their raft, we took
them to be a Creek war party, therefore, being hailed by them, and not choosing
to be shot at, we went near the shore; but on discovering who they were i
refused to land; they still insisted we must, but my obstinate persisting to
the contrary disappointed their sanguine hopes of plunder; and after some
altercation i proceeded. This day the marks of fertility of soil are not so
uninterrupted as on the former days. Our weather was clear, and a strong
northerly wind prevailed; -- we came nineteen miles since morning, and encamped
on the west side, in a low spot of ground.

14th. Last night the frost was severe; at a quarter past nine, A. M.
proceeded; -- in half an hour's time we saw very high hills, at a mile, or
better, from the river, seemingly covered with pine timber; these hills the
savages call Nanna Chahaws. Here is a steep place above forty feet
perpendicular out of the water, and another steep above it; the last is a gray
slaty rock; this place is called Teeakhaily Ekutapa, and the people from
Chicasahay had a settlement here before the war. About a mile and a quarter
from hence is a remarkable white sand hill on the east side; four miles lower
we came to Yagna-hoolah (i. e.) the Beloved Ground, which lies on the east
side, and is very high, continuing above two miles along the river bank; its
lower part is steep and of a whitish gray, and at the end above two hundred
feet high, reckoning perpendicularly. A mile below this is a white sand hill on
the west side; we saw the pine hills all this day, at various distances from
the river, sometimes close to it, and the canes brgin to diminish, and pine
trees mix among the timber. The current for these two last days, is very
considerably slackened, and the river widened to above five hundred feet. We
came about thirty miles and an half this day, and encamped at four o'clock P.
M. on the side of a kind of bluff, about six miles below a branch called
Isawaya: all day cold, the latter part and night dull and hazy, at a quarter
past nine proceeded. Eight miles below our camp we were at the mouth of Senti
Bogue (i. e.) Snake Creek, having an island in its mouth, and coming from the
westward. Two miles and a quarter lower is Atchatickpe, a large bay, or lagoon,
on the same side: at this place is the beginning of our boundary with the
Chactaws, running from the west till it strikes Senti-Bogue, and then follows
the course of said creek, up to a certain sugar loaf hill, and so over to Bogue
Hooma, and Bakkatane. A mile below this, at the bending of the river is a
bluff, but not very high, of a dark gray stone; above this it rises gradually
sloping into a very high hill, variegated into small ridges. We saw many spots
of pines, and some white sand hills; but in general the soil has a better
appearance than yesterday. About an hour before we encamped, we came to the
last rapids, or the first from below; here is a remarkable spot of yellow rocks
in the western bank, beginning with a high, perpendicular, white rock, with
some grass spots; it is above fifty feet above the present surface of the
water; its top is level and shrubby; in the middle projects a remarkable lump,
which, in coming down looks exactly like a buttress against a wall. At four
o'clock P. M. we encamped on the east side in the low ground, above a mile
below the rocks, having come thirty-one miles. The weather has been clear and
cold all this day. Stout sloops and schooners may come up to this rapid;
therefore i judge that here some considerable settlement will take place.

16th. Proceeded at half an hour past eight, A. M. Having come about fifteen
miles, we saw the remains of the old Weetumpkee settlement: about seven miles
below this, on the east side is an odd rocky bluff, appearing to be sandy, and
is covered with cedar trees. The river here is very crooked, and about six
miles below on the west side, we saw a spacious old field, and a smoke in one
edge of it; but nobody near it, and two miles lower down, hearing a rustling in
the canes, we looked that way, and saw a savage in a war dress, lying flat;
finding himself perceived, he got up and beckoned to us; but although we were
within ten feet of him, we seemed not to have remarked him, upon which he lay
down again: it is to be imagined that he was not alone, and that this was a war
party, who had been at the smoke, in the old field, and having perceived us,
had come to this place, knowing that here we must come near the bank; but
seeing that we were no Chactaws, and thinking themselves undiscovered, they
kept close. At a quarter past four o'clock, P. M. we came to a camp on the
west side, which we supposed by the boats, etc. to be occupied by white people;
in which opinion we were soon confirmed. When they invited us on shore, we
found they were one Thomas Baskett, with two white hunters, and some Chactaws;
we were here well regaled with excellent meat, and very good bread, which being
prepared in an excellent manner, was a noble feast to us. I purchased some
bear, bacon and venison hams of them, and staid all night at their camp; the
distance we came this day was thirty-one miles.

17th. Embarked at half an hour past nine, A. M. and proceeded, accompanied by
two canoes with savages: we soon past by some high pine hills on the east side;
and at their end, having come about two miles, we were at the little creek
called Ape Bogue oose, which is a spring so intensely salt, that the savages
told us, three kettles of its water, yields one of salt. Having then proceeded
for four hours through low land on each side, we arrived at the place called by
the French, The Forks being a lagoon divided into three branches, whereof the
first is called Ape Tonsa, the second Beelofa, and the third Caantacalamoo:
here the savages left us; we still proceeded for half an hour more through low
land, and then came to a large bay, at the end whereof begins the Tomeehettee
bluff, where formerly a tribe of that nation resided; this is the first time we
have the real pine barren butting on the river, it is very level. About five
miles below this place, we came to the first islands that are of note; the land
continues low and pretty rich: here we see the first summer canes. At six
o'clock P. M. we came to the Coosadas bluff, having had the Naniabe (i. e.)
Fish Killer's island above an hour on our west side; this place was the last
settlement of the Coosadas, after they left S^kta loosa; and in little more
than half an hour we were at the mouth of the great Alibamo river. We past the
Nita Abe, or Bear Killer's Bluff on the left, and at nine o'clock P. M. we came
to the north end of the island, which divides the branch called Dog River, from
the west branch of the river. Here we staid all night at the plantation of the
Chevalier de Lucere, but found only three or four old slaves and children, the
whole of the able hands, and the overseer, being gone to make tar-kilns, so
that we had but indifferent fare. We came this day forty-two miles and an half.
N. B. Those islands are very fertile, and have a great many plantations on
them, on the branches which lay out of our way, particularly on the Taensa, and
Dog Rivers.

18th. At a quarter past nine, A. M. proceeded, past several plantations, as
well on the islands, as on the main, particularly Campbell's, Stuart's,
Ardry's, and Mc Gillivray's: at half an hour past eleven, A. M. arrived at Mr.
Favre's house, where i staid in order to get some refreshment; this being the
first Christian habitation i had been at since the 20th September, last year.
Mr. Favre treated us in a most friendly, genteel and hospitable manner. At one
o'clock some boats went up the river, which i heard were Mr. Stuart's people,
with a provincial deputy surveyor, going up to ascertain the boundary between
us and the Chactaws. At two o'clock some gentlemen, among whom was Major Dixon,
of the sixteenth regiment, and Charles Stuart, deputy superintendant of Indian
affairs (to whom i described Atchatikpe and Senti-Bogue, where they were to
begin) followed them: they proceeded up to Mr. Stuart's plantation, about three
miles higher up the river. We had come seven miles and a quarter this day. In
the afternoon it began to rain, and all night was a prodigious storm of wind
and rain, which i had the pleasure of weathering out under a good roof: here we
found several families of Chactaw savages.

19th. At a quarter past nine, A. M. we proceeded, went past Chastang's,
Strother's, and Narbonne's plantations, having chiefly pine land on the main,
and the rich islands on our left all this day. Having gone five miles and three
quarters, we passed by the ruins of Fort Conde, or old Mobile, and near six
miles lower down we past by the ruins of a fine plantation, formerly belonging
to the French Intendant at Mobile, now to Mr. Lizars at the same place: 4 miles
and 3 quarters lower down we met with the first marsh, the river being very
full, we could not learn how far the salt water had its effect, the bay itself
being fresh and good at this time; but Mr. Dow, who had been several times up
and down this river, and had lived with the Coosadas for some years, assured
me, that the tide was very visible at the old Wetumpkee settlements, and in
extraordinary tides even as far as Seekta Loosa, where, during his residence on
the spot, he has frequently seen it ebb and flow about an inch. We came this
day thirty-five miles and a half, and at nine o'clock P. M. we arrived at
Mobile.

N. B. It is to be observed that the general course of this river is from north
to south; but it is very crooked.

Journals are tedious, and i believe the above account will sufficiently give
an idea of the country, else i might record more of this kind, especially a
journey from Pensacola to Manchac, and down the Mississipi, from thence to the
sea; but i will content myself with publishing a copy of a paper which was
given me by Captain Rufus Putnam, with liberty to make what use i pleased of
it. This gentleman was one of the committee appointed by the people of
Connecticut, to explore the country about the Natchez. He sent a letter of the
same contents to my very worthy friend Doctor J. Lorimer, at Pensacola; this
paper will complete the intention of my giving an idea of the country, and with
it i will conclude this my first volume.

It is as follows:

SIR!
According to my promise, when i left Pensacola, i now send you the
observations which i made af the Mississipi country, more especially that part
we were sent to explore, and i choose rather to do it from ^tracts of the
minutes i made in the wood than by any general observation on them, ^d i am
sure that your goodness will excuse very fault in my vulgar way of writing,
since if you have but the facts, you will be able to form a general account in
such language as you please, and i shall begin my account first the Natchez.

26th April. 1772, arrived at fort Rosalie, which is buil^ on ^high eminence,
that overlooks the whole country, about two hundred yards from the river; it
was built of a heptagon figure, with one side fronting the river; each s^ide,
or angle, was about thirty yards clear, with two gates in the eastern angles. I
took here the meridional altitude of the sun, by Davis's quadrant, as i did
again on my return, and i make the latitude of this place to be 31 15 north;
from hence i also saw the ^nge of high lands from Loftus's cliffs, and those on
the east side of the Hooma-Chitto, which is near twenty miles distant, the
lands hereabouts are very uneven, no creeks, and much worn out.

27th Visited St. Catharine's creek; found the lands very good, timber walnut,
hickory, oak, ash, etc. Mr. Thompson's well was perfect good water, without
stone or curve.

30th. On the point above Boyd's creek traveled two or three miles into the
country, found it mostly cane land, but subject to overflowing.

1st May. Arrived at Petit Goufre, where is a firm rock on the east side for
near a mile, partaking (in my opinion) of the nature of ^e stone, the land near
the river is much bro^n and very high, perhaps three hundred if no^ five
hundred feet high; about four miles fa^er up the river is a point of land
somewhat ^w, but good, and stocked amazing thick with mulberry.

3d. About four miles up the bay one Pierre landed and spent some time in
exploring the country, found the land ^o the N. N. W. and N. E. low, southerly
the lands make higher; but broken into hills and vales, but then the low lands
are not often overflowed, -- white oak, live oak abound here, intermixed with
copalm, and other timber, common on the Mississipi: -- going up this to the
fork, which is called seven leagues, we saw several stone quarries, in the bank
some gravel bottom and sand banks, went unto a hill to view, found it broken as
far as we could see, clay foil, and some gravel stones on the top of the
grounds.

4th. Arrived at the forks, where the river parts almost at right angles, and
which is the biggest branch i cannot tell: traveled N. E about 3 miles and a
half up, until we fell on a small creek that falls into the south fork of the
Basonne Pierre, down which we came to our boat; this branch we found winding as
the main creek; the lands we saw are clay and marl soil, not so uneven as we
had before seen on the creek; arrived at the big black, (Petite riviere des
Teaux) where part of our company set off by land to the Yasoo, and the rest of
us by water, found many parts of the bank high enough to build on before we
came to the Yasoo cliffs, which are very high. Nine miles up the river Yasoo
found Captain Enos, and those that went with him, at a place where it is said
the French formerly had a fort and settlement; the bank on the right hand,
going up at this place, is a high ridge of rocks, with a fine spring of water,
falling from the quarne, the Yasoo river is about four hundred, or five hundred
feet broad, its course is east, about two miles and an half up N. E. to the
above place, is a very dead, stagnated water, of bad color, covered with scum,
and abounds with aligators; its banks in some places are high, but cut through
in many places, by the overflowing of the Mississipi; about two miles and a
half from the mouth is a pleasant creek, comes in on the right, to which we
returned and encamped, from whence we made several tours into the country,
found all this point between the Yasoo cliffs and the river, low and full of
ponds.

13th. Colonel Putnam, Mr. Lyman and myself set out about ten o'clock A. M. for
the purpose of farther reconnoitring the lands between the old fields, on the
Yasoo cliffs, we went up the Yasoo, near the old field, or French settlement,
steering south; in about two miles, came to a dead creek, which we traced
eastward, till we found it came out of the high lands; we then bore southward
two or three miles, traveling by some cypress swamps, some lands not
overflowed by the Mississipi, keeping the highlands in sight on our left; this
brought us into an excellent flat piece of land, full of grass, and some cane,
with oak, walnut, and other wood, common in the country, we discovered signs of
water spreading over this land from the hills in several places, we steered
east as we found the highlands bore farther off, but was soon taken up with a
mighty cane break; Colonel Putnam here climbed a tree, discovered highland at
about a hundred rod distance, we traveled for it and arrived at it, in about
two hours, with the utmost difficulty, in our way found a fine running spring
of water; ascending the highest part of the hill i climbed a tree, from which i
had a fine prospect, found the lands N. E. and S. to be hilly, but not
mountainous, nor much broken, then returned to the spring aforementioned and
encamped.

14th. Arrived at the Yasoo cliffs, on the Mississipi, where we met the rest of
our company, we came down under the high lands all the way, found the country
good.

15th. Mr. Lyman, and myself, went unto the cliffs, which shut quite down the
river, on these hills i climbed two trees, and found the land make high north
eastward, and S. S. eastward, bearing off from the river, but somewhat uneven,
full of cane and rich soil, even on the very highest ridges, just below the
cliffs, the bank is low, by which means the water on the Mississipi flows back
and runs between the bank and high land (which range near north and S. S. E. to
the Loosa-chitta, forming much low land, cypress swamp, and dead ponds, without
one brook, or running stream, as Capt. Enos informed me, who went up that way
by;land.

17th. Went up the big Black (Loosa Chitto) which is at the mouth about eighty
feet wide, but within, from eighty to a hundred and forty; in about a mile and
a half came to high land on the right, but broken, a mile and a half further,
the high lands make again on the right; spent much time in reconnoitring the
country, saw several springs of water on the right, but none on the left; at
eight miles past Mr. Cluere, an Indian trader; here the high lands come near
the river on the left, and appear to be the same range that comes from the
Yasoo cliffs.

18th. Being fourteen miles up, lands make high near the river for two or three
miles, but broken, though good and full of springs of water: in the afternoon
made high level land on the left, (which is now reserved for the capital:)
after reconnoitring the country round (which we found very good for a
settlement, or building a town) we encamped.

;19th. Set out in the morning, up the river, reconnoitring both sides for four
or five miles from the river, found the land good, not so much drowned, nor so
uneven; after ^owing the boat about six miles and a half further, we came to a
rapid water, stone or gravel bottom, twenty or thirty rods, and in one place a
firm rock, almost across the river, and much of it bare at this season (which
is neither low nor high water) as confines the water to nearly twenty feet, and
the channel about four feet deep. -- I shall add no more by way of extract, and
shall observe only, that i have said little about the Mississipi, as it is so
generally known that i could afford you but little light in the matter; but
have confined my extracts to the more unknown parts; one thing i would observe
about the postage of the cross, above point coupe, which is, that i do not
believe any such thing, as a communication across here, in high water. I spent
two days up that creek, found it grow less and less, by branching out into
small rivulets, coming from high lands, and not the least appearance of lakes,
or;drowned lands.


It may, perhaps, be agreeable to the inhabitants of East and West-Florida, who
become purchasers of this work, to have a copy of such articles of the late
treaty of peace, in 1762, as immediately concern them. I have therefore
subjoined, by way of appendix, to this volume, the subsequent extract from the
preliminary articles of peace between his Britannick Majesty, the Most
Christian King, and the Catholic King; signed at Fontainbleau, the 3d day of
Nov. 1762.

Article II. HIS Most Christian Majesty renounces all pretensions, which he has
heretofore formed, or might have formed to Nova Scotia, or Acadia, in all its
parts, and guaranties the whole of it, with all its dependencies, to the King
of Great Britain: moreover, his Most Christian Majesty cedes and guaranties to
his said Britannick Majesty, in full right, Canada, with all its dependencies,
as well as the island of Cape Breton, and all the other islands in the gulf
and river of St. Laurence, without restriction, and without any liberty to
depart from this cession and guaranty, under any pretense, or to trouble
Great Britain in the possessions abovementioned. His Britannick Majesty, on his
side, agrees to grant to the inhabitants of Canada, the liberty of the
Catholic religion, he will in consequence give the most exact, and the most
effectual orders, that his new Roman Catholic subjects may profess the worship
of their religion, according to the rites of the Roman church, as far as the
laws of Great Britain permit. His Britannick Majesty further agrees, that the
French inhabitants, or others, who would have been subjects of the Most
Christian King in Canada, may retire in all safety and freedom, where ever they
please, and may sell their estates, provided it be to his Britannick Majesty's
subjects, and transport their effects, as well as their persons, without being
restrained in their emigration, under any pretense whatsoever, except debts or
criminal prosecutions; the term limited for this emigration being fixed to the
space of eighteen months, to be computed from the day of the ratification of
the definitive treaty.

ART. VI. In order to re-establish peace on the most solid and lasting
foundations, and to remove forever every subject of dispute, with regard to the
limits of the British and French territories on the continent of America; it is
agreed, that for the future the confines between the dominions of his
Britannick Majesty, and those of his Most Christian Majesty, in that part of
the world, shall be irrevocably fixed, by a line drawn along the middle of the
river Mississipi from the source, as far as the river Iberville, and from
thence by a line drawn along the middle of this river, and of the lakes
Maurepas and Pontchartrain to the sea, and to this purpose the Most Christian
King cedes in full right, and guaranties to his Britannick Majesty, the river
and port of Mobile, and every thing that he possesses, or ought to have
possessed, on the left side of the river Mississipi, except the town of New
Orleans, and the island in which it is situated, which shall remain to France;
provided, that the navigation of the river Mississipi shall be equally free, as
well to the subjects of Great Britain as to those of France, in its whole
length and breadth, from its source to the sea, and that part expressly, which
is between the said island of New-Orleans, and the right bank of that river, as
well as the passage both in and out of its mouth: it is further stipulated,
that the vessels belonging to the subjects of either nation, shall not be
stopped, visited, or subject to the payment of any duty whatsoever. The
stipulations in favor of the inhabitants of Canada, inserted in the second
article, shall also take place, with regard to the inhabitants of the country,
ceded by this article.

ART. XIX. His Catholic Majesty cedes and guaranties in full right to his
Britannick Majesty, all that Spain possesses on the continent of North America,
to the east, or to the south-east of the river Mississipi, and his Britannic
Majesty agrees to grant to the inhabitants of this country above ceded, the
liberty of the Catholic religion: He will in consequence give the most exact,
and the most effectual orders, that his new Roman Catholic subjects may
profess the worship of their religion, according to the rites of the Roman
church, as far as the laws of Great Britain permit. His Britannick Majesty
further agrees, that the Spanish inhabitants, or others, who would have been
subjects to the Catholic King, in the said countries, may retire in all safety
and freedom, etc.

FINIS.
APPENDIX.

A LIST of SUBSCRIBERS, whose Names came too late to be prefixed to the Work.
(B) Mr. Elias Beers, New Haven, Book only. Capt. Nathan Briggs, Newport, R.
Island. (C) Mr. Christopher Champlin, Newport R. Isl. Mr George Champlin,
Ditto. Honorable John Collins, Esquire Ditto. (D) Benjamin Douglas, Esquire New Haven.
(E) Capt. Robert Elliot, Newport, Rhode Island. (F) Mr. Samuel Fowler, Newport,
Rhode Island. Capt. Laurence Furlong, Newbury-Port. (G) Capt. Caleb Gardner,
Newport, Rhode Island, Capt, George Gibbs, Ditto. Capt. Robert Grant,
New Haven. (H) James A. Hillhouse, Esquire New Haven. Henry Hunter, Esquire Newport,
Rhode Island. (M) Francis Malbone, Esquire Newport, R. Island. Col. John Malbone,
Ditto. Henry Merchant, Esquire Ditto. John Mawdsley, Esquire Ditto. Capt. Charles
Moore, Ditto. Capt. William Morony, Ditto. Thomas Mumford, Esquire New London. (P)
Samuel Holden Parsons, Esquire New London. Mr. Henry Pelham, Boston. (R) Mess'rs
Reak and Okey, Newport, R. Island, 25 Copies of the Book. Abraham Redwood, Esquire
Newport, R. Island. Capt. James Rice, New Haven. Mr. James Rodman, Newport,
Rhode Island. (S) Capt. Thomas G. Stelle, Newport, R. Island. Mr. Robert
Stoddard, Ditto. Mr. Thomas Stewart, New York. (T) John Tillinghast, Esquire
Newport, R. Island. Mr. Nicholas P. Tillinghast, Ditto. Mr. William Tweedy.
Ditto.
APPENDIX.
THE following directions to navigators were originally intended as an appendix
to the whole work; but i have since found it requisite to publish them sooner;
and therefore end this first volume with that necessary part of my work.

These directions i beg leave to affirm, are entirely founded on my own
experience; the first spur to this undertaking was the loss of a vessel in
1766, on the coast of Florida: by which I received a wound in my circumstances,
which is as yet far from being healed. I had before this, in the same vessel,
at a time when I was myself on board, struck on the south part of the Dry
Tortugus, when having accidentally a tolerable pilot with me, i passed for the
first time, inside of the reef; and made my first observations toward this
present work: Since that i have pursued it partly during the opportunities i
had at the time when i was a provincial deputy surveyor, and partly when i was
appointed deputy for the southern district of America; and had the honor of
commanding the vessels on that service. Likewise, while employed by the
superintendant in West-Florida; but far most at my own great expense, and
fatigue. For even when i was employed, i can safely affirm, that when i could
do it without detriment to the service, and at times when i did that business,
in a manner which is vulgarly called by the jobb, i have done more than was
desired of me; which, however, has never been the occasion of any favor being
bestowed on me, any more than you did well, and i am glad you did it. Therefore
i am under no manner of obligation to any of the LITTLE GREAT ONES, who have
occasionally used me, (sometimes as the monkey did the cat) and this production
being undoubtedly my own, as such i have a right to publish it.

Thus having shown how i got my information, i declare myself free of copying
or compiling from prior works, except in that part lying west from the
Missisippi, which is taken from French manuscript draughts; and the shape of
the coast and bays eastward from Pensacola, to Cape St. Blas, which i have
followed from draughts occasionally seen in the hands of Mr. Stuart, (the
super-intendant) and my good friend Dr. J. Lorimer, which draughts i take to be
the work of Mr. Gauld, a very able and accurate observer; but though i kept the
shape, the distances are different from his; and are such as i have reason to
believe nearer the mark, during a long and tedious cruize i made on this coast
in 1771. As for the soundings, i never had his draughts long enough, to have an
opportunity of perusing them, but they are such as i have obtained during the
same tedious cruize; as for those from Cape St. Blas, round to St. Mary's, i
have obtained them during the regular pursuit of gaining surveys of the coast
for above seven years.

And as i have in the opinion of many of my friends in my proposals published
before i begun this work, reflected a little too severely on the wretched
map-makers who have attempted to explain this so intricate navigation, it is
still my opinion, that such exhibitions can not be too much despised, when
attempted on so loose a foundation, as has been generally done; and we must
still form a worse idea of those who impose on the public against their better
knowledge. Both the one and the other has been done. I therefore publish the
present work with no other view than that of pointing out the sad mistakes of
the scandalous maps daily published by persons who either not at all, or at
best scarce ever saw the ground they treat of, and thus merely for the sake of
catching a penny, endanger such numbers of lives, and such a vast deal of
property; -- such imposters are the shame of the nation to which they belong.

I have carefully avoided the change of well-known names of places; but
preserved the old ones, except only in two or three places where the name was
not well known, or where there was none at all. Nothing can be more absurd, or
productive of confusion, than the assuming new and fantastical names in places
of so much danger; yet the author of a certain pamphlet, published two years
ago, has done this at no small rate.

And for the safety of navigation, i think it a duty incumbent on me, to
declare that the soundings of what the said author calls the Newfound passage
or channel (although the knowledge thereof is as old as that of America itself)
are marked much deeper than they really are; and whoever depends on that
pamphlet, will find himself much imposed upon; nor do i think my work to be
absolutely clear of faults; no, but i venture to say, that the errors are very
few; and as they are unknown to me, therefore, whatever mistakes may be
discovered, if communicated by men of knowledge, i shall gladly receive, and
willingly amend them.

Vessels bound from Europe to St. Augustine, Georgia, or South Carolina, would
(in my opinion) shorten their passages considerably, by making the south end of
Abaco, or the Hole in the Rock, in lat. 26 4 and from that run WbS to make the
Berry-Islands; from thence WbN, or WNW, till they get into the gulf stream;
the only precaution to be observed is to steer to the westward of north, after
you are clear of the Grand Bahama island, because the bank stretches NbW
nearly, and the current sets partly on the NW part of the bank; particularly
near the member or memory rock. You may, in case of necessity, venture on the
bank, to the south of the rock, and beat up to the eastward, till you bring the
rock to bear WNW, and you will not find less than five fathoms water: -- The
tide ebbs and flows here about five feet, but you cannot come out on the north
of the rock; however, by keeping in the stream, i dare venture to say you will
find a visible benefit in coming this way.

DESCRIPTION OF THE STATIONS FOR CRUIZERS, WITHIN THE FLORIDA REEF.
THE first of these is at Ceyo Biscayo, in lat. 25 35 N. Here we enter within
the reef, from the northward; directions for an easy approach to the entrance
will be given hereafter: Suffice it now to speak of the entrance itself; -- for
about five leagues north of the key, the ground is very ^ul, and looks
frightful, but there is no where less than 3 fathoms, though by keeping out
about 5 or 6 miles from the shore, you will find generally 5 or 6 fathoms, on a
fine sandy bottom; and when you approach the reef, you may haul in, observing
to leave the reef a large piece without you, for it has many bad sand bars just
on its inner edge: you will not find less than 3 fathoms, any where within,
till you come a breast the south end of the key, where there is a small bank of
11 feet only, give the key a good birth, for there is a large flat stretching
off from it. At the south end of the key, very good water is obtainable by
digging, but at a time when by accident of drought or other ways, the wells
yield none, then the watering places either in the grand marsh, about 10 miles
to the W by S; or the river Ratones, about as far to the N W of the key, may be
always depended upon; at the watering place on the key, is also an excellent
place for careening of vessels, not exceeding ten feet draught. All these
advantageous circumstances, joined to some of the same kind at the Bemini
islands, make this an excellent station for cruizers to watch every vessel
bound northward; on the bank without the Bemini harbor is good anchorage for
large vessels. The method i would recommend, is to have two vessels, one to
serve as a tender to the larger one, and while the one is on the Bemini side,
the other ought to be on the Florida side; by this means (the passage being
only 15 leagues wide) no vessel could come through during day, without being
seen by one or the other; and as it is always possible to get outside of the
reef, except with a strong N, or N E wind, and flood tide; i need not direct
seamen how to proceed, in order to speak with any vessel they chance to see.
The many breaks that are in the reef, make it not improbable that a passage
might be found through even with a N or N E gale. As for the safety in laying
within side, every seaman knows that a reef makes a safe harbor; good
ground-tackling is the principal point; should a chase lead you far north in
the stream, there is no difficulty in reaching your station again; all that is
necessary, is to make the land as soon as you can, only avoid Cape Canaveral,
in lat. 28: 30; to the south of it, you may make pretty free with the shore,
except in the bight north of Rio d'ais, where there is but 12 feet a league
off. To the south of 26: 50, to about 26 there is 7 fathoms at the very beach:
here you must hug the shore close, because the stream almost touches the beach:
I was once in great danger hereabouts, by the ill working of the vessel I was
in, and had just time to let go an anchor in 9 fathoms, and when the vessel
rode to it, it would have been an easy matter for a man to have jumped off from
the tafferel on the beach; the beach here is for the most part smooth enough
for a canoe to land; there being little or no surf on it in good weather.

In the year 1773, i came a passage from Mississippi, on board the schooner
Liberty, commanded by capt. John Hunt, we had the misfortune to be over-set at
sea, and i conducted the wreck into this place, when having lost our boat^ and
caboose, with every other thing from off the deck, we nailed together three
half hogsheads, in which a man and a boy went on shore, and brought us sand
off, to make a kind of caboose. I mention this the more, because there is water
obtainable in almost every place on this beach, in case of necessity. But to
return to my subject, to keep the shore on board is the way to get to the
southward here; and as on the soundings, the current is chiefly ruled by the
wind, it is preferable to come to an anchor with a southerly wind, instead of
standing out; for the stream will run you out in such a manner, that you will
find it difficult to regain in four or five days, the ground you lose in one.
Yet i would avoid anchoring as much as possible, because the ground to the
south of 27 is almost every where very foul, particularly, if you cast deeper
than 15 fathoms: by observing this method, you will find it an easy matter to
regain your station to the southward.

At this place there is vast abundance and variety of fish, both in the creeks,
and outside at sea, particularly groopers are in great plenty, king-fish,
Spanish mackrel and Barrows are also often caught towing; and if you have one
or two good hunters on board, you may always be provided with plenty of
venison, turkies and bear meat, which are all excellent refreshment, There are
for the most part deer on the key, and sometimes bear; but by sending to the
main, you may depend on finding every kind; in winter, duck and teal abound in
the creeks; turtle is very plenty; in short, i know not any place better
calculated for a cruizer, than the spot i have now described; add to this, that
no fish is poisonous on the Florida shore, not even the amber-fish; but on the
Bahama side ^recaution i^ necessary; and the loggerhead turtle is never rank of
taste here. The watering place on Bemini, is near the east end.

The second place is at the south end of Key-Large, near Sound-point, Tabona,
and Rodriguez; in lat. 25: 3. N. Here is the eastermost pitch of the reef, as
Sound-point, is of the land, and therefore more proper to be called Cape
Florida, than any other part of the shore particularly as Sound-point is a part
of the main land. Key-Tabon^ is a small low key, lying about one mile and a
quarter without the main keys; and two miles and one quarter north of this,
lies another something larger, called Key Rodriguez; these two keys are a good
mark to know the entrance by, they being both overgrown with mangroves, appear
of a darker color than the land before which they lie. When the southernmost or
Key Tabona bears W. 3 leagues off, then you are near the south part of the
outermost reef, which is in general almost dry, and in a few spots entirely
dry; run within musket shot to the southward of this dry reef, and then steer
east, as you go in, and you will have 5 fathoms and upwards; run in on your
lead till you begin to see the inner heads, and then draw northerly till you
shoot within the outer reef; where you may lay pretty safe; however, i would
recommend to have a pilot for the first trial of this entrance, among the
Providence people such may be had; yet it looks more frightful than it is
dangerous; at this place, nine vessels out of ten, that come through the gulf
heave in sight, by reason that this is the land people generally strive to
make, coming from Cuba; on this account also, nine out of ten, that are cast
away, are lost here; if you have a tender, she may sometimes steer over to the
bank, about the riding rocks, or Orange-Key; yet i think it can be but of
little use, except when the season of westerly winds is. The channel from bank
to bank, is here about 14 leagues across; but to reach the bank, you ought to
steer S. E. over from this station.

If from this place a chase should lead you northward, your endeavors ought to
be to make Isaac's Rocks, or from Key-Biscayno, above described, to fall in
with the Bemini, which is by no means difficult; the last is the most eligible,
because the bank is broad, whereas at Isaac's Rocks you have no soundings in
less than a cables length from the shore, and consequently if you cannot make
good a south course, you will be obliged to anchor on the north side of the
rocks, and thus delay much time; but in making the Bermini, which lies nearly
south 7 leagues from the rock, you may keep on soundings on the bank; the
sounding however, as far as Beak's Key, is not very wide. Beak's-Key lies S E 7
leagues from Bemini; from Beak's- Key, to the Riding Rocks, and Roques, there
is working room plenty, and good anchorage; at Orange-Key is a good road to the
S and S W of it; this key lies S S E 8 leagues from Beak's- Key; from
Orange-Key it is an easy matter to get to the Double-Headed-Shot; the way is to
sail early in the morning, steering S W; when you have run about 10 leagues on
that course, you may begin to look out for Key-Sal bank; where, in case of
need, you may anchor any where; the Dog-Keys, and Dead-man's-Keys, show
themselves easily, lying on the N W and W part of this bank; they are bold too
yet dangerous; the soundings are narrow near them from here you may either make
the Cuba shore, or run across W N W, about 14 or 15 leagues, which will bring
you in with the Florida reef, to the southward of your former station.

You may from Key-Biscayo, come southwards along the Florida shore, on the
outside of the reef; but as the sounding is very narrow, this way is by no
means advisable; except in fine and moderate weather, when you may keep your
boats out, for the winds hereabouts being chiefly in the eastern quarter make
the reef a very dangerous lee; whereas the Bahama side is perfectly safe. From
Key-Tabona, to the N W about a mile lies a very small key called Key-Palombo or
Dove-Key; which in many seasons affords good water, but that is seldom; at
about ten miles S W from Key-Tabona is Matacombe, here are several
never-failing wells of excellent water in a rock; whether these are natural, or
artificial is hard to tell: should these wells by accident of extreme drought
happen to fail, which i believe next to impossible, you would in that case be
obliged to send for water to Key-Biscayo; which is near 20 leagues from here.
Fish and turtle are in as great plenty here, as at Biscayo. Matacombe yields a
few deer of a small kind; but large deer, bear, and turkeys are not to be had
without going to the main for them. I was once in great want of provisions at
Matacombe, and sent a hunter with a boy in a skiff to the westward, at
Sandy-point or Cape-Sable; whence he returned in a few days, with thirteen
large and very fat deer, properly salted and cured, which were excellent
provisions for us for several days.

The third station is at Cayo-Huesos, commonly called Key-West; this place is
best calculated to watch those vessels which come from La Vera Cruz, Campeche,
Sisal, etc. Few of those that are bound through the gulf come this way. There
is a harbor, or rather a road stead inside of the westermost point of the key;
but it is very unsafe in northern and western gales; and the ground is foul; so
that in case of notherly or northwesterly winds, it is best to lay outside;
therefore at the season when Norths are frequent, it is not advisable to lay
within side, except for the purpose of hiding yourself: there is 20 to 24 feet
going in to this place; and the way in, is to keep close on board the west side
of the sandy key, which lies about 9 miles to the S E of the west point of the
key; draw close enough along-side of it to chuck a biscuit ashore; and then
steer directly for the west point of the great key, which point is bare, except
one bush of trees which you will see on it: when you come close in, give it a
birth, on account of a small bank lying on the outside of it; to go further in
you will see a black spot, being a small reef to the north of you, avoid this
and shoot in to the eastward; your eye will be your guide; on the point are
wells, but the water is indifferent; half a mile to the eastward is a path
leading to very good water; on this key we find numbers of deer (of the small
kind) generally very good: this place lies right in the way of the Spanish
ships, from the westward; on account that these ships in coming from the
western part of the Mexican gulf, choose to run out of the way of the eastern
or trade wind, and for that reason must go as far north as the coast of
West-Florida will allow them; thus they are forced on an attempt to make the
Tortugas; which often leads them further east, and then the currents generally
render it difficult for them to get out, unless they know Boca Grande passage:
for this reason a vessel in the proper season, cruising to the north of this
key, and those that lay to the westward of it, can hardly fail of meeting them,
and the ground is as safe as can be wished for; there being as regular
soundings just north of those keys as are to be found in any part of the world;
one may perfectly trust to his lead: The Spanish fishermen on the Florida shore
all touch herein their way home: This key lies in lat. 24: 29 N: long. 81: 15
W: from London. In treating of the navigation within the reef, i shall repeat
this account somewhat more at large. But will now proceed to give an account of
the

COURSES ALONG THE EASTERN SHORE OF EAST-FLORIDA.
FROM the mouth of St. Mary's, to the mouth of Nassau river lies the island
Amelia, which is a low even coast with sand-hills, and to be known by a
detached hummock of trees on the south end; the shore is pretty bold too,
except at the two ends, where the bars of said two rivers trench off a great
way; the course is S b E, and N b W, the distance about 4 leagues; the bottom
is a sand ground, the harbors on both ends are spacious, but St. Mary's is the
safest; there is also a passage within, fit for small craft only; the bar at
St. Mary's has 9 feet of water at low spring tides, and in going in the south
shore is the safest, and best to be trusted; the bar at Nassau has generally
about 8 foot water on it, but is subject to shifting; the tides rises about 7
feet, and an ESE moon makes high water here as well as in most places along
this coast; a plan of these two inlets taken exactly from my original survey of
this island, was sometime ago published by Capt. Ful^r, who sounded the bars;
but he has placed the soundings rather too deep, both within and without.

From the mouth of Nassau, or south end of Amelia, we proceed S S E, along the
shore of Talbot island, which forms a bay; the distance is nearly a league and
a half to a narrow inlet, between Talbot and Fort-George islands; this is
scarce fit for boats: -- Continuing our course S S E along Fort-George island
one league more, we arrive at St. John's river's mouth; there are likewise two
passages from Nassau in land, going by Sawpit-Bluff, and Cedar-point into St.
John's; but will not at common tides allow of any thing more than 4 foot
draught of water to pass; one of these is called the Two Sisters, the other
Hannah Mills's Narrows; some spots in these run quite dry; this mouth of St.
John's river is easily known by a remarkable sand-hill, called the General's
Mount, a little to the south of it; there is at this inlet a dangerous bar,
never at the highest tide (in moderate weather) admitting of any vessel drawing
more than 9 feet; this bar is very subject to shift, so that directions for
entering here, might tend to endanger the vessel, whose master should attempt
to follow them; the best direction therefore, which i shall attempt to give, is
to send a boat in to sound the bar, unless a pilot chance to come off; from t
is entrance, to about one hundred miles up this river, (of which 30 go to the
westward, and the rest to the south;) you may go in any vessel which the bar
will suffer to enter.

Still going S S E from here, for 10 leagues, (equal to 36 statute miles) the
distance measured on the land, we meet with the bar of St. Augustine: this bar
is of the same kind as that at St. John's; therefore my best advice is to wait
for a pilot, and trust to him; when the southern channel is open (such as it is
laid down in the map) it is deepest, safest and easiest of access; there being
near 18 inches difference in depth, between this channel and the northern one,
when that is open; the beach between St. John's and St. Augustine, is even and
strait, except a hill about 5 leagues SSE from St. John's (where we find three
springs of fine fresh water,) which is a little higher than the rest of the
sand hills; this place is called the Horse-Guards, from General Oglethorp's
posting a command of horse here, during his expedition against this country.
This is the first place from Long-Bay, in South Carolina southwards, where the
inland navigation is interrupted; we may however by going up St. Pablo's creek,
in St. John's arrive near the head of the North-River, i think within four
miles; and a small boat may with little difficulty be hauled over from one to
the other. St. Augustine bar, is readily known from sea by the signal house on
St. Anastasia island. This Beach of St. John's is tolerably bold, the soundings
are regular; and the bottom is generally a fine white sand: but when you
approach the south end, be sure of giving it a good birth, on account of the
bar, which tends a long piece, (at least one league) north, and east of.

Time of high water at full and change here is half past 7 A. M. or in other
words, an E S E, or W N W moon makes high water.

From the bar of St. Augustine, to the bar of Matanca is near 6 leagues the
course S E b S, the soundings, beach and bottom similar to the above. Matanca
bar will allow a vessel of 7 foot draught to come over: but as there is an
inside passage from St. Augustine, for 5 foot draught, all the business is done
that way, and scarce ever a vessel is bound in here. Matanca bar is known from
sea by the fort, which shows white in a clear day, when the inlet bears W 3
leagues off.

Not much above half a league S E b S from Matanca is el Penon, a small inlet,
scarce fit for boats to enter.

Continuing the same course for somewhat more than 16 leagues (the measured
distance is nearly 57 statute miles on the land) we fall in with the entrance
to New-Smyrna, or Muskeeto Lagoon; the map shows how far an inland passage is
here practicable; the beach is much the same in appearance, the coast middling
bold too, the soundings regular, and the bottom sand; with now and then some
shells, and sometimes green mud.

The following are the position of the above places on the globe, according to
my observations, mensuration and calculations.

lat. lon. Wfr. London. St. Mary Inlet. 30 43 82 Nassau Inlet, 30 30 81 57. St.
John's Inlet, 30 20 81 63. St. Augustine Bar, 29 52 81 35. Matanca Bar, 29 37
81 28. Muskeeto Bar, 28 55 80 59.

Next we meet an even smooth beach, from here to Caneveral, excepting Mount
Tucker, which lies about 5 leagues south of the entrance of Muskeeto River;
this beech extends for 52 statute mile (equal to 15 English leagues) on a
course S E b S: and here we find regular soundings as above, until we come to
the cape which lies within a large and dangerous shoal, leaving a small channel
between it and the land, as the draught expresses; the outer pitch of this head
land lies in latitude 28 16, and longitude 80 28 W. from London, and the pitch
of the shoal extends 8 leagues east from it: in so much that when you are on
the outer breaker, land is scarce visible from it; this remarkable shoal was
never heretofore laid down in any map or chart for marine use, yet i am
sensible that it is very dangerous; and i believe many vessels have been lost
on it, the circumstances of whose misfortunes were never heard of; the wind on
blowing a long and violent gale from ENE to SE makes this shoal almost
unavoidable, to a vessel sailing in this latitude, not having a very large
offing.

From this cape the shore stretches nearly south, to opposite the mouth of
Saint Sebastian river in lat. 27 56, then S E b S 8 leagues to the Tortolas,
(some hilly knowls so called) in lat. 27 33, off this are some heads of rocks
under water; 8 leagues further (7 of which continue in a S E b S course, the
other 1 about S b E E) we find the entrance of Aisa Hatcha or Indian River,
from the shoal of Caneveral to within 2 leagues north of this river the coast
is flat and treacherous; it is remarkable on account of the immense number of
palm trees whence it has acquired the name of Palmar de Ais, or the palm grove
of Ais* this inlet is the mouth of a lagoon lying north of it, communicating
with a sound to the southward; this entrance lies in lat. 27: 15, long. 79: 56,
and has a very shifting bar, sometimes not admitting a boat, and at other times
6, 8 or even 10 feet water has been found on it: therefore whoever has business
here must send a boat to visit the bar, before he runs in, when in, it is a
safe harbor; but a vessel must be moored, the tide ebbs and flows 5 foot, and
runs with violence; the Spaniards come here for the purpose of fishing, and the
quantity of fish and oysters found here is amazing; off this bar the sand has a
peculiar quality of rubbing cables to pieces in the bent, insomuch that I never
lay 24 hours off this place at an anchor, without wholly or nearly losing an
anchor; though the weather was fine, nay i have often in less time found one or
two strands quite chaffed off, i could never find what this was owing to, the
sand is a very fine quicksand, nor do i remember ever to have found the ground
foul, except close in, where there are some stones, and the remains of a wreck;
in this lagoon and sound many streams of fine fresh water empty themselves; the
principal are the rivers St. Sebastian and St. Lucia as the map shows.

From the entrance of Indian river the coast stretches S 26 E or nearly S E b S
S 11 leagues, (answering to nearly 39 statute miles as measured on the beach)
it makes an island, at whose South end is an inlet into the above sound, the
Spaniards call it Hobe; it will only allow of five foot draught, this inlet
lies in lat. 26 46 long. 79 40 west from London: to the north of it, on the
point at its entrance, lies a remarkable spot of rocks on the beach, as there
is also at 1 leagues to the northward of said entrance, and 3 leagues further
north are several high blue or black rocks standing on the beach, these rocks
make this part of the coast remarkable, as does likewise a hill inland full of
white spots, a little to the north of the rocks inland; this hill is called the
Bleech-Yard. A small reef just under water about half a mile from the shore
abreast of the high rocks, forms here a convenient little harbor for boats,
there are two wells of excellent water in a little meadow, back of the sand
hills, near a mile to the south of the high rocks; the river St. Lucia likewise
shows its mouth over the sound, when you stand on the northermost high rock:
the wells have casks in them, and this is in my opinion a very good watering
place for vessels who having had a tedious passage through the gulf, are in
want of a supply of this necessary article; this island affords abundance of
turtle, venison, and bear; as likewise numerous quantities of wild ducks, each
in their season, besides cocoplumbs and palm cabbage; and on the main opposite,
turkeys are abundant. The northermost of the high rock lies in lat. 26 56. N.
the coast is even, bold too; and the soundings regular.

We have now reached the southern extremity of the great bank of regular
soundings which lies before the coast of America, and here the gulf stream
comes very near the beach; the color of the water changes from a muddy green,
to a beautiful saxon blue.

From Hobe inlet we find the coast trenching about S 20 E or nearly SSE for
about 3 leagues to a high ledge of rocks, out of which a large stream of fresh
water rushes into the sea, a little to the north hereof is a small reef with
about 2 fathoms water on it, where vast quantites of groopers, snappers,
amber-fish, porgys, margate-fish, rock-fish, yellow-tails, Jew-fish, etc. may
be taken; from this reef you see a high mount of sand and rocks a little to the
north of you, three miles to the north of which is good fresh water, at the
back of an high sand hill; as there is also a little more than half a mile to
the southward of said rocky mount, this mount we called Grooper-Hill, it is a
remarkable land, cabbage trees, cocoplumbs, and sea grapes are here in
abundance, as are venison and other meat; so that in fair weather a vessel may
refresh here agreeably; the soundings along all this coast are plainly and
truly marked in the map: the coast from here runs very nearly south, and the
beach is bold too, to within 2 leagues of Rio Del Medio, it does not vary above
half a point either way from this general south course all the way to Cayo
Biscayno in lat. 25 35. lon. 79 36 W from London; as it is necessary for
vessels bound southward to keep this beach close on board, i shall discribe it
particularly, in hopes that this treatise may prove a certain guide in every
part of this difficult navigation.

Five leagues to the south of the above point or ledge of rocks, out of which a
large spring of water issues; there is another ledge of rocks, and 1 mile to
the north of it stands a very tall tree by some fresh water, a large quarter of
a mile to the south of this tree is a low sand hill, full of dry trees, whereby
it may be known.

This last ledge of rocks is 1 miles in length, somewhat more than 2 miles
south of these, is another point of rocks, these are very low; 1 miles further
is a high cabbage grove, and about 3 1-2 miles further south is a point of high
rocks near of a mile long, 2 miles further yet is another high point of rocks
about of a mile long, and half a mile south of this is the mouth of Rio Seco
which is very seldom open, having a narrow bar of dry sand before it, the coast
forms here a small kind of cove, which makes a good road stead for small craft,
this river is in lat. 26 16 N long. 79 35; 5 miles to the south of Rio Seco is
another point of rocks, and south of it a small bite, and half a mile further
is the mouth of Rio Nuevo, which is about of a mile wide and generally open but
shallow, here Jew-fish are very abundant both within and without the river; 2
miles south of this river's mouth are five tall cabbage trees on the pine land;
and 4 miles further is a thick scrubby point, and the sand hills in general are
high and covered with thick bushes; here the shore is no longer so bold as
before, but a bank of soundings about 5 leagues broad begins to cover the
beach, and this (in my opinion) is the true beginning of the great Florida
reef, 5 miles S of this is the north end of a marshy point which extends of a
mile to the mouth of Rio Del Medio, which is likewise a quarter of a mile
across and shallow but very full of Jew-fish. From this river the beach has
nothing observable on it except that its hills are higher than further north,
and are covered with shrubs and trees. At 10 miles south of the river, is a
remarkable spot of palm trees. We see water over the land, and the coast is
flat, there being not above 12 foot within a mile and more of the coast and the
bottom solid rocks, about 8 miles south of the aforesaid palm trees is the
mouth of Boca Ratones which will admit small craft, but has a reef stretching a
considerable way to sea.

South of Boca Ratones about 5 miles, is the south point of an island, which
has sillily been called Cape Florida, but since has acquired the name of Fools
Cape, south of this point is a channel of a mile in width, having 6 foot water
at the best of times, the opposite land on the south of said channel is the
north point of Key Biscay, which is near 5 miles long from north to south; this
key is particularly described in the beginning of this tract, as is also the
entrance into its harbor, and its advantageous situation for cruizers,
likewise the watering places on and near it; directly east from it 6 miles lie
the Fowey rocks, which are the first dry spot on the reef, and have many bad
bars within them, the key has likewise a bank lying off of it, but by good
management in giving the key about 1 1-2 or 2 miles birth you are sure to keep
in a good channel, and till you come abreast the Soldier Keys or La Parida you
will not have less than 16 foot water.

La Parida y su Jiguelo, or as we call them Soldiers Keys are two low spots of
mangrove on a bank, their distance from the south end of Key Biscay is 3 miles
and they are inaccessible to any thing but a boat, the map will clearly show
their situation. Let it be observed that besides the watering places above
mentioned, there are many more and that the beach will almost in every part
yield good drinkable water for digging, provided the sand does not cover clay,
wherever clay appears on the beach the labor would be needless.

Having now particularly and minutely described the shore, and the manner of
going close along it, in order that this little tract may be as much as
possible a perfect coasting pilot in this part of the world. I shall subjoin
some

DIRECTIONS TO SAIL FROM ST* AUGUSTINE DIRECTLY TO THE ENTRANCE INTO THE INSIDE
OF FLORIDA OR MARTYR REEF, AT FOOL'S CAPE.
AS soon as you are clear of the bar of St. Augustine, steer SE easterly, the
distance of 8 leagues on this course will bring you within about 4 leagues
right abreast the Matancas, in 10 fathoms water, upon a bottom of fine dark
gray sand. In continuing from here S E b S you will go along shore at an offing
of 4 or 4 leagues; in your way you will meet with soundings from 10 to 15
fathoms, chiefly on various kinds of sand, as the charts fully show; and
sometimes you will meet with a very soft greenish mud, in which the lead will
sink to over the strap. All the soundings are in the charts laid down in feet,
my lines of which i made use, being all marked with that measure.

The above offing you may with safety keep in with vessels of any draught for
25 leagues to the S E ward of the Matanca; you will begin to get shells among
your soundings at 20 leagues, chiefly white and black, sometimes mixed with
black and gray sand, but mostly the shells by themselves, very seldom sand
alone, if you chance to find sand only, it will be a coarse gray kind; at 25
leagues as above, you will begin to get red shells, this is a true sign that
you approach the Cape Canaveral shoal, there being no red shells far to the
north of it; now you may begin to haul off, though you might continue safely
until 7 fathoms, or in the day time even in three; that being the depth half a
mile without the outer breaker: in hauling off, you will find from 10 to 12
fathoms sand and shells, and if you come near to the north east end of the
shoal, you will often find live cockles, on a black sandy bottom, in 10 or 11
fathoms; your offing will be made good on a course S E b E from the first cast
on red shells, till you judge yourself about 9 leagues off, then if you choose
to make Indian River in lat. 27: 15 run south. But if you are bound directly to
the reef, steer S E, which will bring you in with Hobe inlet, where the
soundings are become quite narrow. In running south from the outermost part of
the shore, observe when you begin to get very coarse black sand: and black
shells, for soon after you will find your bottom changed to white sand, and
your water to deepen; when you find 16 fathoms on white sand, you begin to run
clear of it, and in 20 or 21 fathoms, you are quite clear, then in continuing
the same course your water again shoals, and in a run of about three leagues
you once more find red shells, mixed with black, and red sand, continuing a
great way; you still shoal your water, and when you come in about 11 fathoms,
you will have shells alone, without sand: -- all this while you see no land, it
making a bay to the south of the cape, till you come into about 9 fathoms, when
you can just see the Tortolas, some hills so called, in lat. 27: 35 N. If you
want to call at Indian River inlet, it is now time to haul in a little for the
land; from the Tortolas southward you will again find sand, sometimes without
shells; from the 9 fathoms above mentioned, it is 8 leagues to the river's
mouth.

Here observe, that between this inlet, and the Cape Canaveral, the coast is
flat, and not to be trusted so much as the shore north of the cape.

Likewise observe that the red shells extend no further south than this inlet,
and but a little way north of the cape shoal; whereby you have an infallible
mark in coming well in upon soundings, either from the southward or northward,
whereby to know that you are in with, or near to the cape shoal, if even you
should chance to have been without any observation for several days.

If you intend to anchor off the river's mouth, take care to run no nearer in
than 4 1-2 to 5 fathoms, and choose a spot of shelly bottom, as being safer for
your cable than the sand is here.

In going from the mouth of Indian River to the southward, the coast is pretty
bold, and your course is S S E E toward Hobe: at near 7 leagues from the inlet
we meet with some high rocks on the edge of the beach, which are an excellent
mark thereby to know this place; and 4 1-2 leagues further is Hobe or the
Southern entrance of St. Lucia sound, this coast is so particularly described
that further directions to the Fowey Rocks are almost unnecessary. I will
however make a few remarks upon the soundings, etc. When you begin to see the
above rocks of St. Lucia, you will also perceive, a change in the color of
your water, the soundings are here no more then about 5 or 6 leagues broad, and
i have been at an achor in 12 or 13 fathoms water, 3 leagues from the shore,
when upon trying the current with our log it was found to set to the N E at the
rate of 3 1-2 miles per hour, and our water was almost blue in that depth,
therefore it is best to keep the shore on board, at least exceed not 2 leagues
from it, your sounding will be various on sand, green owze, and shells, as
marked in the map; avoid the little reef of Grooper Hill a little north of the
spring in the rock, which spring is in lat 26 46. N. now it is necessary to
keep close along the shore, within the distance of from half a mile to a mile,
and you will find deep water close in; the bottom in many places coral and
gravel, sometimes rocks, and notwithstanding the foulness of the ground it is
yet highly necessary to come to an anchor if it should fall calm, or else you
will loose as much ground in three hours calm as may co^ you three days to
recover.

In lat. 26: 5 is a reef of rocks near the shore, having from 12 to 20 feet of
water on it, this reef you must give a birth, and at its south end you will
find the mouth of Rio Del Medio nearly in lat. 26, from the north end runs off
a bank of soundings 5 leagues broad, reaching to the Fow^ Rocks; this reef and
bank i have before observed is in my opinion the beginning of the Martyr ro^
the soundings on this bank vary from 2 to 25 fathoms, according to your
distance from the shore, and the bottom is chiefly sand; about 2 leagues S of
Rio Del Medio is a pretty broad ledge of firm rocks joining the beach under
water, which continues to Boca Ratones, and is not to be trusted; abreast of
this ledge you will meet with many spots of coral, spunges, rocks, and grass,
which through the clearness of the water look frightful to the stranger, but
have no where less than 3 fathoms water on them; here fish is in great plenty.

When you are got south of Boca Rattones the bottom is again clear sand, and
now observe to give Fools Cape and Bear Cut a good birth, on account of some
flat bars and heads, when you are abreast Bear Cut, keep Key Biscay nearest on
board -- take care to avoid the flat off of it, which runs about 1 1-2 mile
off; your course is S or S b E till you are abreast of the Soldiers, and as far
as them you will at least have 15 foot on a clear white sandy bottom; Key
Biscay affords venison, and some times bear, likewise racoons and doves. It is
mentioned at the beginning of this tract.

DIRECTIONS FOR THE NAVIGATION WITHIN THE FLORIDA REEF.
THE next keys to La Parida y Su Jiguelo, or, as we style them, the Soldiers
Keys, are 7 rocks called This word has been in all the English maps ill copied,
and transformed into Mucare^, a sound without meaning.
Mascaras; the meaning of which word is, that they are but just above water.
There are some mangrove and blackwood bushes on them. Their trenching is neatly
to S S W. Next to these is a small island, on which are two small hills, whence
the Spaniards have called it Las Tetas, or the Paps; but the Providence people
have styled it Saunders's Key, and the inlet to the south of it Saunders's Cut,
where a small vessel drawing about 4 foot, may enter into the wide sound
between these keys and the watering places on the main.

Near 5 miles S S W of this is an inlet called Black Caesar's Creek, made by the
south end of Ledbury Key, so called from the snow Ledbury, commanded by Capt.
John Lorain, cast away here Anno 1760
Ledbury Key; this will likewise admit small craft into the above sound.

Next is a small key which does not exceed two miles in length, at its south
end is an inlet known by the name of Angel Fish Creek; to the south of this are
two very small keys, and the next is an island about 5 miles in length, to
which no particular name has yet been given. At the south end of which is again
a very small shallow inlet, and from this the course and distance to Sound
Point is directly south 2 leagues. Sound Point is the eastermost part of the
land called Key Largo, though in reality it is no island, but a peninsula,
joined by a narrow isthmus to the main, as the maps accurately show. This place
was till 1769, always taken for an island, and together with all the keys from
Las Tetas, and the two next to the S W of this peninsula, been known by the
Spaniards under the appellations of Cayo De doze Leggas and Cayo Largo, which
last name we have adopted, and by it, it is known to every one.

The general rule to sail within the reef from the Soldiers Key to the
southward is, to have a careful man at masthead to look out, he will see all
the heads and other shoals a good way off in a clear day, at least a mile; thus
making the e^ your pilot, come no nearer to the Soldiers Key tha^ 12 foot, nor
no farther E from them than 1^ foot. About E S E a mile outside of Saunders's
Cut lies a small round bank with only 9 foot on it, from this place to Black
Caesar's Creek, the sunke^ heads are very frequent, and the bar of said Creek
reaches a great way out. A little north of this inlet the snow Ledbury was
burnt, after a vast deal of trouble, expense and pains taken to get her off.
Right a breast of this spot, and north of the bar, is very fine anchorage in 12
foot close to the back of the reef, which makes the inlet aforesaid. On the
point of this reef lies the remains of the ship Hubbard, cast away in 1772.

From Saunders's Cut to Sound Point there is only 11 foot of water to be
depended on if you keep in that part of the channel which is clearest of rocks:
you may carry more by going out further toward the reef: but the care
necessary to he taken for the avoiding of the heads, is inconceivable. The
bottom to Black Caesar's Creek is sand, but from thence to the S W ward it
gradually changes into a kind of soft marl of the consistence of dough. When
you are well clear of Angel Fish Creek to the south, the same rule of keeping
within 18 and 12 feet depth for the channel is to be observed; but after all a
careful inspection of my charts, together with a comparison of them with the
course of the land you sail by, and especially a good look out, will constitute
you a better pilot than any directions that can be given for this navigation.

The latitude of Sound Point is 25: 12 ascertained by several good
observations. It is needless to mention that the long disputed situation of
Cape Florida, is obviously fixed in this point; any mariner that sails along
this coast, will by the smallest attention to the changes of his course, find
that it is the only spot that forms a true promontory, from the Spring in the
Rock in lat. 26 46, down to here, in the manner as my charts show.

It is on this promontory that almost every vessel that is cast away meets her
fate, i mean on the large reef that lies before it; the south point of which is
dry, and forms a deep channel to go in toward two little keys called Rodriguez
and Tabona; and its north point extends as far north as Angel Fish Creek. The
people who watch those misfortunes to make a benefit by them, know this so well
that during the summer months, the season for the return of ships from Jamaica,
they station themselves at anchor a little south of the point from whence they
can with certainty wait for the sight of any ship that is unhappy enough to be
drove on shore on this reef.

Since i have mentioned these people, i cannot forbear taking notice of the
abuse generally thrown upon them very undeservedly. I know of more instances
than one, where they have been ill treated for their services. What the
behavior of the wreckers is in the windward passage, i cannot determine; but i
appeal to every candid man, who has been so unfortunate as to have occasion for
the help of the turtlers and wood-cutters, who frequent this coast from
Providence, whether they have not always yielded their assistance with greater
expedition and regularity, and with more disinterestedness than could be
expected? And as for the idle tale which we are told of their making false
lights on the shore, i can, from many years experience, assure it to be an
untruth. Those fires are occasioned by the hunters and timber-cutters, who burn
the woods to clear them of under-wood, and to procure fresh pasture for the
deer. Lightning also often sets fire to trees; and i have frequently, in very
dry seasons, seen spontaneous fires arise in marshy places. But after all what
business has a marinet (who knows the course he must steer) to follow any
light-out of that course? And i would just hint to every one who passes along
this coast, that on seeing a light to the westward, it behooves him to look out
for breakers if he stands in for that quarter.

This promontory is a peninsula, though it has till lately past for an island.
Anno 1769, i with great labor, fatigue, the inconvenience of musketoes, and a
total want of fresh water for 4 or ^ days, explored its inside waters. I was
stimulated to this enterprise by the reports of the Providence and Spanish
fishermen, who told me unanimously that they had often essayed to enter at
Angel Fish Creek, and come out at Boca Herrera, the creek opposite Key Tabona,
or the contrary, but always in vain; nor did any of them know an instance of
its being done. I then entered at Angel Fish Creek, and after a great deal of
time spent and no passage found. I at last entered into the lake specified in
the chart, by drawing the boat over dry ground for above six times her own
length. Out of this Jake i found my way by a very warrow passage at its south
end; but as no part of Key Largo yields any fresh water, and after we got into
the above named lake, all the ground around us was mangrove swamp, we were
unable to find any; two of my people were nearly exhausted and spent by thirst,
which we could not possibly alleviate until we reached the watering place at
Matacombe. This by way of caution, if any stranger might come here. And after
finding abundance of fresh water on every part of the coast, he may not venture
to be out for any purpose, within this peninsula for above half a day, without
a store of that invaluable necessary.

From Cape-Florida, or Sound-Point to Key-Redriguez, the course and distance is
S W six miles* there is a good harbor for small craft to the NW part of the
island, made by a reef running off from its N E end, and another good
sheltering place to the SW of it, but neither has a greater depth than 9 feet
at low water. This island is only a large thicket of mangrove, without a foot
of dry soil on it, and affords only some Aquatic birds and their eggs.

Between Sound Point or Cape Florida, (by which last name i shall henceforth
call it,) and this last island is another sheltering place, or roadstead, for
small vessels, within a ridge or reef on which we generally see some turtle
crawls, but it is seldom occupied except by the timber-cutters, the peninsula
affords in this place Lignum-Vitae, Mastick and Mohogany, the two last are
indeed found on every part thereof, but on none of the keys north of
Saunders-Key or Las-Tetas nor on none to the south of the last key north of
young-Matacombe, all these timbers are however now nearly cut off.

This peninsula affords no living creature except racoons and insects,
especially those troublesome ones, musketoes and scorpions.

From the Cape or Sound Point, the direction of the coast alters to S W; and
the distance to the southern extremity of this peninsula is 10 or 11 miles.
Besides Key Rodriguez we meet with Key Tabona, 2 1-2 miles from Rodriguez, on a
S W course; in going S W ward from the Cape, the same rule as above directed
for keeping within ^8. and without of 12 foot, must be observed. The channel
here is pretty wide; but a man must be kept at mast head to discover heads, as
some rocks lie in this tract; especially near Key Tabona. This Key Tabona has
just such a small harbor within a reef as Key Rodriguez. This key has little
of no high ground on it; it affords land crabs, a few doves, and other birds.
One mile to the west of this key the south point of the peninsula makes a creek
scarce a musket shot wide, admitting only of boats: This creek is by the
Spaniards called Boca Herrera; the bay within abounds with Red Drum and some
other fish, and a great deal of green and loggerhead turtle; lobsters likewise
are in vast plenty between the cape and this creek.

Within and between the above two keys lies a third called Dove-Key, it is very
small, gravelly and rather high, with very few bushes on it; during rainy
seasons it affords good fresh water and a few doves: we also find purslain
growing on it. From Key Tabona due east lies the southern point of the great
reef making a wide channel, this south point is dry, the channel is 5 fathoms
deep, and ships in distress may find shelter under this point; it is almost
impossible to point out any leading mark as the reef lies 10 or 11 miles from
the land; but my chart shows it plain, and a good look out for heads is the
most essential pilotage here.

From the southwest part of the Peninsula the course is S W distance 6 or 7
miles, past two more keys of no note, still belonging to the Groupe of isles
called Key Largo, we then come to an island of some note called Young
Matacombe, it is 4 miles long, trending S W; it has nothing remarkable on it
except a well of good fresh water on its east end, this however is known to few
and consequently little frequented; off the S W end of this key lies a small
drowned mangrove island, and a channel 10 foot deep runs in to the south of it
and shoots up to within the great key, but there being nothing on the key to
attract much notice it is seldom visited.

In coming this way from Key Tabona the channel is in general deeper than
before, but the same rule of keeping without 12 and within 18 feet still holds
good; directly abreast of Young Matacombe, 1 miles E from the land are a parcel
of dangerous sunken heads called the Hen and Chickens, which require a good
look out to be kept.

Next is Old Matacombe, remarkable for being the most handy and best watering
place on all this coast, on its east end are 5 wells in the solid rock, said to
be cut by the savages, but to me they appear natural chasms, they yield
excellent water in abundance, and some ponds near it likewise afford some,
insomuch that in a wet season all the east end of the key is overflown, and
water enough to be had for to supply the necessity of a fleet; the key is 4
miles long, and at its west end are likewise some ponds and wells, but the
water is of a much inferior quality. This key was one of the last habitations
of the savages of the Coloosa nation: about a mile to the east of the N E end
of Matacombe lies a small bushy, gravelly key on the extremity of a reef, this
key is called Matanca, i. e. Murder, from the catastrophe of a French crew said
to have amounted to near three hundred men, who were unfortunate enough to fall
into the hands of the Coloosas, which savages destroyed them to a man on this
spot. This Key Matanca lies SSW 2 miles from the small man-grove key and is the
leading mark for finding the watering place on Matacombe, for come from
whatever quarter you please, the way is to run boldly up to within pistol shot
of the N E part of this small key, when you will find yourself at the chops of
a channel which leads up to the watering place; it admits of 10 foot and is
bounded on its N side by a very shallow reef which divides this channel from
the channel to the south of Young-Matacombe, the channel is so plain that the
best direction is the eye; the tides are very rapid, consequently require to be
consulted both in coming in or going out, the channel is very narrow having
only just room enough for a small vessel to turn to windward.

From the south end of the great reef of Tabona it is no longer a continued
reef, but all in divided spots as the chart shows, and the channel within them
is likewise wider and deeper, but you will find less smooth water than from Key
Biscay to Key Tabona.

To the west end of Matacombe is another channel which is the first that opens
(for a vessel of 6 foot draught) into the gulf of Mexico.

To sail into this channel you must borrow pretty near to the key at its west
end, where you will have 10 foot water, then steer in north toward a cluster
of small mangrove keys for about a league; when you are within half a mile of
the bank of said keys you alter your course to WNW and you will soon find
yourself between two very shallow banks, and shoal your water to 6 foot; now
you will see many points of banks which will oblige you frequently to loof and
bear away between the W, WSW, and WNW, the banks are almost dry, but the
channel of an even depth shows blue; so that a careful eye cannot miss it.
These courses continue for 4 leagues, when you will find your channel to widen
very much. Now steer NNW 3 miles and you will see Cayo Axi, or Sandy Key in the
NW about 1 leagues off; then alter your course to west, come no nearer than
within a league of the key, and in five miles you will deepen your water to 9
feet, continue your course W till the key bears ENE and you have sea room into
the Gulf of Mexico, but the soundings deepen very slowly to the westward and
northward; take care never to attempt this passage without a leading wind.

N. B^ Sandy Key is a low key covered with some bushes and prickly-pears; there
are rabbits on it, and always plenty of flamingoes, plovers, and other
excellent water fowl to be had.

NW four miles from this key is Punto Tancha, or Sandy Point; here was
anciently a settlement of Coloosa savages. Tolerable water, and excellent
venison are to be had here.

From the SW end of Matacombe to the west end of Spanish for Rattle-Snake Key.
Cayo Vivora, the course is SW, and the distance 4 miles, the depth of water 17
or 18 feet on a sandy bottom, give the key a birth of at least 2 miles. At the
SW end is a channel of 9 foot depth into the Gulf of Mexico, plainly marked on
the map, for which a good and careful look-out is the best director.

From Cayo Vivoras S W b W 10 miles brings you to a remarkable contraction of
the channel between the outer reef and the keys, your depth is generally 18
foot, the bottom sandy, and a considerable broad bank runs off from the
islands, which are the Cayos Vacas, i. e. Cow Keys. At this contraction of the
channel your course alters to W S W, and you go through the like draught of
water for 5 leagues, then the reefs are again further off, and you are come to
the westermost of the Cow Keys, in lat 24:41, where another channel of 6 or 7
foot deep goes into the Mexican Gulf. On these keys is tolerable water and
plenty of deer.

The next islands are called the Bahia Honda keys, extending E and W for 5
leagues, your course is W: and your depth of water 17 or 18 feet; at the east
end of the westermost key is another channel 8 feet deep, opening the gulf of
Mexico, and leads as the chart explains; but being difficult, it is seldom
attempted. Midway before these islands 2 leagues to the south is a dry
sand-bar, on which, in the season, the sea-fowl lay a great quantity of eggs.
Five leagues W b S from this, and directly south from newfound harbor, 3
leagues off is another, on which ^is majesty's ship the Loo was lost, from
which accident it has acquired the name of Key-Loo. From here to Spanish for
^on^ Key.
Cayo-Hueso, vulgarly called Key-West, the course is W b S, and the distance
about 6 leagues. At a little more than 2 leagues you find a harbor called
Newfound-Harbour; it is safe, but the bottom foul in many places. The depth of
water in this course is from 17 to 23 feet. About half way between
Newfound-Harbour and Key West, are some heads of rocks, as laid down in the
chart, but they are easily discovered in fair weather. All these keys abound in
venison and water; especially the Pine Keys, on which there is likewise some
honey found.

At the west end of Cayo Hueso, is a passage into the Gulf of Mexico, this
key, or rather these keys (being made up of several) extend about SW and NE for
10 miles, having a shallow bank before it. The S W end lies in lat. 24. N long.
81:15 west; it has a shallow ledge close to it on the south, and the point is a
low kind of savannah, on which one or two single trees appear; near which is a
well of very ordinary water. The way into the channel is to give the south
point a birth till you have the channel well open to the north of you, then
steer in and keep the key close on board within 15 or 20 fathoms, you will find
from 24 to 16 foot water, run in till you bring the N E end of a shoal on your
larboard hand to bear near WNW, then double the point of the island to the
westward, and you may anchor in 16 or 18 foot water, but the bottom is foul and
the roadstead unsafe, especially in N and NW winds. Round the shoal to the
westward is another channel rather deeper, but not so direct; and half a mile
to the north of the shoal is a bar having scarce 14 foot on it; after passing
which you may steer N W and you will in a run of 2 leagues clear the eastern
bank, gradually deepening your water, as the map shows. The tide here runs
violently. Within the anchoring place eastward of the point, is a path leading
to a well or pond of excellent fresh water; round which a low kind of stone
wall is placed, and the trees are marked with many names; the ground is trodden
like a sheep crawl, occasioned by the deer who resort here to drink, of which a
patient man may here shoot 5 or 6 in a day; they are very small, but of
excellent flavor. Doves likewise abound here. This watering place is of a mile
from the beech.

If you are bound to sea from this key, sail from the SW end directly for a
sandy key, which you will see in the SE near 3 leagues off, and you will have
generally about 23 or 24 foot depth, borrow close on the west end of this sand
so as you might chuck a biscuit on shore, and you will find 5 fathoms, which
suddenly deepens, and two miles carry you off of the bank into the gulf
stream. 3 leagues west from this sandy key lies another similar to it, being
the last part of the reef, the Havana bears from here nearly S E, and is about
20 leagues off; but vessels bound there will do well in steering higher up, if
possible, on account of the currents. The tide ebbs and flows here regularly 6
foot, and the time of full sea at full and change of the moon is 8 o'clock, as
it is every where from Key Vacas to the Dry Tortugas, the tides setting as the
darts describe. The tides from Key Vacas northeastward rises not quite so high,
and the time of full sea is from 7 to 8 of clock, being later as you come
westward; the darts show the setting of the tides: to the northward of Key
Biscay the current on soundings is much governed by the wind; but when the wind
has little influence the ebb sets north, and the flood southward. A due
attention to this will much shorten a passage over soundings to the reef.

Next are the Cayos Mulas, to the westward of Cayo Hueso, trending east and
west for 6 leagues; at whose west end we find the principal passage out of the
Gulf of Florida into the Gulf of Mexico, by the Spaniards called Boca Grande,
which i have never passed, but such as it is marked in the map, i have taken it
from a Spanish manuscript, which bore more marks of genuine accuracy than most
of the paltry draughts used by that nation. It was communicated to me by a
gentleman whose name was D^ Manuel Hidalgo, a very experienced commander, who
assured me that the Spanish galloons from La Vera Cruz in order to avoid the
east winds keep far enough north to make the Bay of Tampe, from which they
shape their course so as here to disembogue out of the Gulf of Mexico into
that of Florida, passing a little east of the Key Marquis. I have seen two of
these ships on the coast of West-Florida, not far south of Cape Blas; which
circumstance and that of three galleons being cast away near the bay of St.
Bernard, seem to confirm that gentleman's information. The sounding on the
outside upon the bank are taken by myself.

The bank of Marquis extends east and west for 6 leagues, then NW ward for near
6 more, having no reef before it.

From here to the Dry Tortugas the course is WS, and the distance 44 miles, to
reckon from two miles south from the middle of Key Marquis; water of various
depth* the southern part of the rocks lie in lat. 24.24. but a round bank with
about 6 fathom on it lies before it in lat. 24.18: the longitude is 82:18 west
from London. In August of the year 1766, i was becalmed near this place, and
drifted for 3 days, not having had an observation for 5 days before on account
of fogs. I was very uneasy especially on the appearance of a dove on the
evening of the last day, this kept us all night (more than common) watchful;
and at the break of day next morning we sounded in 30 fathom. We kept the lead
going, and shoaled our water gradually to 20 fathorns, when it was full day,
but still foggy, on which i gave orders if the water shoaled to 12 fathom to
come to an anchor (our drift was then with the current, which i afterward
found to be the tide of flood setting to the northward on the bank) and i left
the deck; but had scarce sat down in the cabin when the vessel which drew
between 8 and 9 foot water struck, and as it were dragged over a coral bank, i
started up and hove the lead overboard, when i found 18 foot water on sand, and
saw a dry bank or key close too to westward, the current still running with
violence. We came immediately to anchor, and threw the boat out, in order to
examine the place where we were, we found ourselves surrounded by three very
small low sand keys (full of prickly pears) on the west, and a reef every where
else. About 9 o'clock the tide began to ebb, setting violently over the reef to
SE of us; at 10 the weather became clear, and we saw bushy islands to the N and
N N W about 4 leagues off. I had a good observation at noon, and found the lat
24. 25. The two following days we were employed in looking for a passage out,
through which on the morning of the third day we warped out to the east. It was
on the day following the full moon in August when we struck, we observed the
tide to rise and fall full 6 foot, and the place where we struck at first to
have between 6 and 7 feet of water on it, when the tide was out, it being 9
o'clock when it began to ebb; i thence fixed the full sea at about 8 o'clock on
the full or change or a S E b E E moon. All these observations i have since
been confirmed in by a more frequent experience. This adventure was my first
knowledge of the Martyrs, and was the raising of the first idea in me of
publishing this work. The calms continuing i tided it up within the reef as far
as Matacombe, where we watered and proceeded out into the stream; i became very
sensible of what a great benefit the knowledge of this reef is to all people,
who by means of calms, or otherwise have a long passage from Cape Antonio up;
especially on account of refreshing. I was then bound from the Isle of Pines to
Georgia, with mahogany on board.

The soundings, as i have marked them, were obtained at several times passing
near and round this shoal, they are remarkable, and for them you may rely on
the draught. I observed the variation of the compass to be 5:47 east.

On the NW corner of the bank is a harbor where i have made the observations
that are laid down in the draught, at three or four different times; but as it
is only planned by the eye, never having had an opportunity to make a
circumstantial survey i shall forbear saying any more about it than that the
northermost part of the bank lies by good and repeated observations taken by
myself in lat 24 48.N.

Before i proceed into the Gulf of Mexico i shall say something more
concerning the reef, and give my advice to such as are bound through the gulf
of Florida.

Many people talk about going southward through the Gulf of Florida by keeping
upon soundings outside the reef, but it is a navigation so dangerous, that i
would wish every body (except in cases of necessity) to avoid it. I will
however, transcribe the remarks of Robert Bishop on this navigation, and add a
few observations of my own on them.

When we were sailed out of Port Royal Harbor, we kept upon soundings, till we
came as far to the southward as Tybee, and then we stood to the E and
afterward to the S till we were got into the lat. of 26 d N and then run down
in that parallel, and made the S end of Abaco, or The hole in the wall, and N W
by W did. 5 or 6 miles from it, we anchored in white water, of about 7 fathom,
off a point where the key falls in, and there we got fish in plenty, for which
purpose we anchored, as also to delay time for 4 or 5 hours. At 2 PM we
weighed, and stood S W for the Berry Islands, which we made and came upon
soundings at 8 ditto. The course is S W distance 8 leagues; and from those
islands to Providence, the course is S S E distance 12 leagues.

When we got soundings, we kept our lead going, and we laid by it all night,
keeping in, or out, as we deepened or shallowed our water; but our course was
between the W and W by N and our did. 15 leagues.

The breadth of soundings (at least from the Berry to Isaac Rock) is from 3 to
5 miles from the banks, being broadest at the rock. Upon the bank's edge are
two small rocks, between the Berry Island and Isaac Rock, which terminates the
N W corner of the bank.

At a cables length off the W side of Isaac Rock, you have no soundings: So
that as you come round it, you immediately get into ocean water, and
consequently into the current of the Gulf. But if it should happen that the
wind be at S S E and you cannot lie S or S by E so as to take the current under
your lee, and keep the bank on board, your best way will be to anchor, or keep
in upon soundings to the northward of Isaac Rock, till the wind comes
favorable.

By this will appear the necessity of getting to Isaac Rock by morning; for
then you get round and keep in on the edge of the sounding, by which you will
plainly discern the bank, the water being clear, and the bank white, with two
small rocks between Isaac Rock and the island of Bimina; the distance between
being 4 or 5 leagues almost N and S.

At Bimina there is a harbor of 9 feet water, and anchorage in the opening,
with a well of water on the E point. The harbor lies in lat. 25 d. 30 m. N.

From the island of Bimina S. did. 8 or 9 leagues, is Cat Key Harbor, or the
beginning of the Rocqueses. From Bimina the sounding is narrow, and,
consequently the current strong. From hence over to the Florida shore, the
breadth is no more than 15 or 16 leagues. From Cat Key abreast of the
Rocqueses, the sounding is pretty broad, with good anchorage, and less current,
as you come to the S E and S E b S.

From the second or Cat Key, the course S E by S did. 12 or 13 leagues, is
Orange Key, having good anchorage to the S W of it 5 or 6 miles, in 20 fathoms
water. When we get upon this slat, we think we have secured our passage through
the Gulf, this way; for then you may make sail either in the morning, or at
midnight, steering S W did. 10 11 leagues, and so you will fall in with Key
Sell Bank, which for ten leagues on the north side stretches E and W and
consequently the current sets stronger as you come to the westward. When you
come over, there is good soundings all along by it, and you may discern by the
bank how far you are to the eastward of the Double-Headed Shot: For as my
draught shows, the number of rocks on the bank, there is anchorage by spots all
the way in; but the soundings are narrow at the Double-headed Shot, the middle
of which lies in lat. 23 d 57 m N and S S E is Key Sell, where there is water,
distance 4 leagues. Here the Spaniards make salt.

From the Double-headed Shot to the edge of the soundings a little to the W of
Cape Florida, is N W by N 15 leagues.

From the Double-headed Shot to the Metances, the course is S W by W did. 23
or 24 leagues, and from the Metances to the Havanna W much the same distance;
off of which we cruised 5 or 6 weeks, and almost every day gave chase. The
first that gave us a jaunt for the Gulf, was a ship from Jamaica bound for
South Carolina; We followed her in a dismal dark night, and at one or two in
the morning had like to have run her down. There was a constant order on board,
to heave the lead every half hour, the whole cruize; and when we brought the
ship to, we had 70 fathom water. As our pilots were no way concerned, we lay
there all night, and fell off to 100 fathom in the mornning; at daylight we
could but just see the bushes of the key off the cape from the poop, and it
falling calm, we drove off soundings, and so got into the current, which
carried us as far as 25 d 30 m N when the easterly wind sprung up, and we went
into soundings and out of the current; so hoisted our boats out, and made them
keep by the outside of the reef. Whilst the ship went upon the edge of
soundings, we did not only know the breadth of sounding by the distance the
boats were from the ship, but they besides supplied the ship's company with
fish in great plenty, and so for 23 leagues, 15 of which to the N E of Cape
Florida, and 8 to the W S W till at last we arrived at a sandy key, where the
Looe was cast away. At that key is the going into the inside of the reef, or
the channel, through which all the Spanish vessels pass, that go from the
Havanna to St. Augustine. In this channel there is 4 and 5 fathom water, but in
some particular places it is shallower. The channel continues as far as lat. 26
d N or as far as the reef runs. Off Cape Florida, is the broadest sounding,
where we met with 100 fathom, with the bushes just in sight from the poop of a
40 gun ship, and distant from the reef 6 or 7 miles. But in lat. 25 d 30 m are
other rocks, where the Fowey was lost: At this place there is sounding two
hawsers length off the reef in 30 fathom; but one mile further it is not so
broad; so that i judge the Looe Key to be the beginning of the sounding off
Cape Florida, and the Fowey Rocks the ending.

In consequence of the foregoing observations, when we chaced we had no
difficulty in going back. If we chanced to chase but as far as 25 d 25 m N we
went immediately in upon sounding, and up to Looe Key. Then we could be off the
Havanna the next day in our station; so that now we had not near so much
trouble as we had at our first coming on our station; for then between Isaacs
Rock and the two Keys of the Rocqueses, we were always afraid of driving quite
through the Gulf; but on this side, if we could but keep in upon sounding, we
were safe.

Indeed most men who have been through the Gulf, when they come so far to the
northward as 24 d 30 m N must be sensible that they meet with a strong current,
with the rippleing and boiling of the water; which current sets between the N E
and E N E and is occasioned by the edge of sounding that comes from Looe Key.

The Florida shore does not go north as has been formerly imagined, till you
arrive in the lat of 25 d 40 m N I could hurtily wish that the Old Streights of
Bahama were thoroughly rummaged; for by what i have seen and heard, it is not
so bad a navagation as many now think it to be. I believe it to be an easy way
to go to the Missisippi, by crossing over to the Florida shore, and so round
the Tortudas Bank.

These remarks of that gentleman are very judicious, and indeed most of his
performance though strangely unconnected is generally pretty just, but his charts
bad. I will however (after asking his pardon) endeavor to rectify a few of his
annotations, which seem rather crude or too hastily penned down. --

The S W course which he mentions from the Hole in the Rock, will carry you to
the Berry Islands, as he says, but so low down as below Little Harbor which is
at least 6 leagues too far to the S E. I would advise running W b S or at most
W S W half W 13 or 14 leagues, which will bring you to Stirrup's Key or Money
Key being the N W part of the Berry Islands.

To the westward of Stirrup's Key is a tongue of ocean water shooting into the
bank, across which your course is W half N or W bN for 10 leagues scarce, to
the little Isaacs Rocks; which rocks i suppose he means when he mentions two
little rocks between Berry Island and Isaacs Rocks, from these to great Isaacs
Rocks, the course is about W and the distance between 9 and 10 leagues.

What he says of great Isaacs Rocks and the getting round them is very just;
but the distance from great Isaacs Rocks to Bemini is near 7 leagues, Mr.
Bishop says but 4 or 5.

The harbor of Bemini is well described. From Bemini to Beaks Key is S half E
7 1-2 leagues* Beaks Key is the southermost of the Cat Keys and affords some
shelter.

A little less than a league from Beaks Key begin the Riding Rocks, being rocks
bare of bushes, and looking like wrecks, the Spaniards call them Los Membros.

S W b S about 7 miles from the southermost Riding Rock is a shoal on which a
very rich Spanish galloon struck in 1765, her bottom beat over, and pieces of
her were found every where as far as Money Key to the eastward; the loss of
this vessel was a profitable ill luck to the people of Providence, the bottom
lies now about E or E b S 7 or 8 miles from the shoal in 17 feet water, and is
yet supposed to contain some treasure.

S S E from the shoal 3 leagues is Orange Key and the Rocquesses, here the
anchorage etc. is as Mr. Bishop describes them, and his directions to Deadmans
Keys, or the west end of the Double-headed Shot, are to be depended upon. His
relation of going southward upon soundings near the reef is very just, and the
method of keeping a boat on the reef a very proper one; but this is too
dangerous a navigation to be attempted by most people, yet if a gale should
come on from the eastward, i do not apprehend the risk to be so great as might
be at the first thought imagined, nor to be so much dreaded as by a person
coming from the southward and bound through the Gulf, who must needs be more
uncertain of his ships place, than him that is bound southward on soundings,
for the nearness of the very rapid current of the gulf, will always enable the
latter to take the proper precautions for clawing off with certainty of success.

The distance from the Fowey rocks to Cape Florida is 15 leagues, as Mr. Bishop
observes, but he makes an egregious mistake in calling it only 8 from the Cape
to Key Loo; for upon supposition that the south end of the reef before the
Matacombe islands, be the true cape, (which indeed it is of the reef, though
not of the land) the distance from there to Key Loo is above 20 leagues on a W
S W course; and from the south part of the true Cape Reef to the south end of
Matacombe Reef is more than 4 leagues more; i therefore guess him to have been
misinformed with respect to the local situation of the loss of the Loo, and
that he mistook the small dry sand-bar upon a reef before Key Vacas for Key
Loo; this sand-bar being the first on the reef, and lies 11 leagues to windward
of Key Loo.

There are five of these dry sandy islands of which Key Loo is the middlemost.

There are many inlets into the reef, but to attempt describing them each
apart, would be to throw more obscurity on the matter, and to open a way to
more danger, which has already been too much done by the absurd author of that
paltry pamphlet, called the Atlantic Pilot. I shall content myself by telling
my reader, that the necessary precaution of keeping a boat on the reef, will
always point out to him these cuts in such a manner that he may safely enter
any one of them in moderate weather, if want of water, contrary wind, or any
thing else make it necessary for him to take shelter under the reef. Two of
these entrances however require a little more to be said of them, one is at the
south end of the Cape Reef in lat. 25 2 directly east of Key Tabona, Tabona is
Spanish for a whame or horsefly.
the other at the south end of Matacombe reef; E S E from the north east end of
Matacombe in lat. 24 52: The first has got a dry knowl of rocks above water on
the S E point of the reef, directly on the edge of the channel, whereby it is
easily known; the other has no such visible marks, but the eye will guide you
for both, especially the northern one, where the land may also help a little,
as the two small mangrove keys Tabona and Rodriguez, lie a good way from the
land, nearer to the reef, and consequently show themselves plainer in the west;
for the rest all the land appears so much alike, that it requires years of
experience to learn to know it. The soundings in, etc. are as my chart directs,
and i need not to any person (who knows that in a gale by reason of a reverting
current, anchoring is full as safe under a reef as under land) to enlarge much
about the utility of the knowledge of the channels, much less to a man who is
either in want of water, or who upon falling in with these shoals and thinks
himself in danger, has manly courage enough not to suffer his fright to
overcome his reason: And whoever happens to be overtaken by the vehemence of
gales, when too near in upon these reefs, may be happy in knowing that there
are such entrances into safety.

Mr. Bishop mentions the depth within the reef at 4 or 5 fathom, which is more
than double the quantity found. This is, i suppose, an error of the press.

N. B. Wherever I have occasion to mention soundings, they are meant at
springtide, low water; and all the soundings are laid down on my maps in feet,
to avoid confusion, occasioned by marking feet in one place, and fathoms in
another. The Roman capital figures denote the time of full sea at the
respective places (where they are marked) on the full or change of the moon.

The quantity of fish and turtle to be caught here is really amazing, which,
joined to the many watering places, with the plenty of venison, and bear-meat,
make this coast a valuable rendezvous for cruizers in time of war: spars may be
had here at all times, either out of the pine woods, back of the keys, or among
the drift on the beeches, which is no small inhancement of the value of the
coast to such vessels; because they are not seldom in the want of them; at
least they are more liable to such losses than merchantmen are.

The fish caught here are in such variety, that a bare catalogue of them would
take up pages. These most commonly caught are such as seamen know by the
following names, viz. King-fish, barracoota, tarpom, bonita, cavallos,
amber-fish, pampus, silver-fish, jew fish, rock fish, groopers, porgys,
margate-fish, French margate-fish, hog-fish, angel-fish, yellowtails, red, gray
and black snappers, dog snappers, mutton-fish, grunts, murenas or muray,
mullets, sprats, mangrove snappers, parrot fish, red and black drum, bone fish,
stingrays, sharks, lobsters, and an immense variety of others, all excellent in
their kinds, and what renders this plenty of more worth is, that we may with
safety eat of all fish caught on the Florida shore, unless it should be of
hog-fish taken on the very outer reef; for i have heard of an instance of one
of this kind having sickened some people, but of my own experience i can say
that i have always eaten that delicate fish with safety, and even the
amber-fish, and yellow billed sprats. The worst, or most violently deleterious
fish in places where fish are poisonous, is here always eaten with safety: On
the contrary, on the Bahama Banks it is requisite to be cautious what fish we
eat before trying, which is most conveniently done by cutting the heart out of
the fish as soon as caught, and to bite in it, when if the fish be bad, it will
leave a very nauseating, bitter, astringent taste on the tongue; but if good,
no such taste will be perceived. The method of boiling silver with the fish is
not so certainly to be depended upon.

I judge now that i have said enough about this mazy navigation; and will
therefore proceed to give some

DIRECTIONS FOR COMING ROUND CAPE St. ANTONIO, THROUGH THE GULF OF FLORIDA.
IT is sufficiently known that from the south point Negril in Jamaica to the
Grand Cayman Island, the course is W N W somewhat westerly, and the distance 53
leagues, that off the S W point of the island a ledge of rocks extends almost a
league into the sea, and from said island to Cape St. Anthony the course is N W
b W 87 leagues, but it is advisable to take rather a little more westing for
fear of falling in with the island of Pines or the Jardins, which reach
eastward and southward, or more properly on a course E by S half S from said
island of Pines for 25 leagues, and are dangerous; should you fall in with this
island, its shore to the southward may be made pretty free with, the course and
distance from the Grand Cayman to this is N W somewhat westerly, 50 leagues,
and from the S W end of the Isle of Pines to Cape Corientas is W half N 24 or
25 leagues; at the S W point of the Isle of Pines i once put in for wood and
water, and found mahogany growing so handy that i took in about 4000 feet of it
in a very few days; but the water was difficult to get, though good; we got it
in wells in a savannah at some fishermen's huts, near the very S W pitch of the
point; this place is however only fit for small vessels to call at: there is a
Bay to the northward of where we lay, in which i was told that a channel of 18
or 20 feet depth might be depended on; we got plenty of fish and turtle while
we stayed here: off the S W end of the island are two very small keys, which
are very shoal all round.

At Cape Corientas is anchorage in 5 or 6 fathom about 2 miles to the NW by N
or NNW of the cape, but you must be careful in going into this bay to give the
cape a birth of a league at least, on account of a shoal that runs to the SW
off from the pitch of the cape; the water in the wells is indifferent, but easy
enough to come at.

From Cape Corientas to Cape St. Anthony the course is W a little northerly
distant 12 or 13 leagues; round the cape under the W end of Cuba is anchorage
in 5 fathom almost every where; to the north of the cape between it, and a
mangrove point about 2 leagues from it: and about half way between them are
some wells of indifferent water.

If you are bound through the Gulf of Florida steer from Cape St. Anthonio N b
W half W or NNW and after a run of about 5 leagues you will find yourself in 15
or 16 fathom water, the south point of the Colorados then bears E b N 5 leagues
off; this point of the reef i observed in lat 22 56 and the Cape St. Anthonio
lies in lat. 22 36 long. 83 52.

I could say more on this subject, but a small matter of inspection into my
maps will show that there is a vortex of current near and within these shoals:
I therefore judge it recommendable to any person bound round this cape, to keep
a N N W course for about 8 or 10 leagues to avoid them, and when you come as
far to the northward as the lat 24:00 N, by all means keep a good lookout, for
in this passage you will nine times in ten meet with a strong current out of
the Mexican Gulf setting eastward, sometimes at the rate of 2 knots; this
current will set you on soundings on the Tortuga bank before you are aware
thereof. In foggy weather these soundings may be a guide, my charts mark them
properly. You do not change the color of your water till you get well in with
the shoal, but there is generally an eddy current as soon as you are on
soundings. The south part of the shoal whereon i struck, as related page xli
lies in lat. 24:23N, and the southernmost dry island in lat. 24:25. Therefore
if you stand over to the Florida shore, as soon as you are up to the lat.
23:25, keep as much to the eastward as N N E, or N E b N till you get
soundings. And whatever terrible idea people have of that shore, if the wind
will allow you, keep it on board, especially in the autumn and winter season,
when the N and N W winds are frequent, and the current often runs to leeward.
In that season you may take an advantage of the tides on soundings, by
carefully observing their times, and this conduct will tend to shorten your
passage: When, however, you are got as far windward as the south end of the
Matecombe reef, in lat. 24:52, long. 79:50 W from London, endeavor to get all
the easting you can possibly acquire, in order to get the Bahama shore on
board; which i shall hereafter, by pointing out the soundings, show to be by
much the most eligible for safety in going northward.

If you intend to beat up on the Cuba side, which is the safest on accouut of
its bold shore, and perhaps the most expeditious in case of a weather current,
(which runs here with the most amazing velocity) you had best not go further
north than the lat. 24:00, and on your first tack you will know whether the
current is favorable or not, for if you make not at least the Bay of Honda you
may be certain there is a lee stream, and in that case an attempt to beat up
under Cuba will be nothing better than kicking against the pricks, and the
Florida shore ought to be attempted. Those unlucky persons who tell the
dreadful stories of being 5 or 6 weeks, and even more, in getting from Cape
Antinio through the Gulf of Florida, which is but too frequently true, have
met with such a current, and through fear or ignorance of the north shore, have
lain that long spell wearing and tearing vessels and rigging, expending their
provisions and water, and fatiguing their men to no purpose.

When you are up to the Coloradas, the high land of Punta Abatas, or Cape
Bonavista, shows itself remarkable, as drawn in the map: It is seen to the E 23
or 24 leagues off, which may be of use to know when you are near that dangerous
reef.

The Coloradas are the west end of the reef of St. Ysabella, a steep dangerous
shoal extending a length of 27 leagues from Porto Puercos, or Hog-Harbour, to
the aforesaid Coloradas, on a course chiefly W b S, and on the edge of the reef
nearly half way between these two extremes, lies an island called Key Lavasa,
from whence you see the notch of the Cox Combs, nearly ESE ward 6 or 7 leagues
off. At this key is anchorage. The entrance of Porto Puercos is readily known
by two bluff islands at its mouth, and the notch of the Saddle-Hill, which in
the charts is marked * bearing south over it. The Table Land and the Saddle
Hill over it, show as i have delineated them. When you bring it to bear about
E, and the western part of Punta Abates about S E, you will then be within less
than a league off from the reef, and in standing northward again, you will soon
open the Saddle Hill from the Table Land, which is a certain mark for keeping
clear of the reef of St. Ysabella, and may be made use of in beating up under
the reef, which method is however not to be advised.

N. B. This Table Land is called Mesa Maria, but must not be confounded with
another of the same name 8 leagues to the leeward of the Havana.

Mr. Bishop remarks, that keeping the Saddle Hill open with the notch of the
Cox-Combs, will likewise serve as a mark for working to windward under said
reef, but i never saw his performance till after i had been the last time here;
thus i could not compare it on the spot, nor do i remember exactly to have
taken notice of this.

He also says, that if you bring the Saddle-Hill on S W b W, and keep that
bearing, it will lead you into the harbor of Babia Honda, where he says there
is a little island in the middle of the bay with a good well on it; and S E
from this island is the Rio Honda, a fresh river. These remarks i never had an
opportunity to experience, but being of importance, i have inserted them here
on his credit.

This Bahia Honda lies near 6 leagues east of Porto Puercos and the Havana 19
leagues to windward of Babia Honda.

I have given as near as i could, a representation of the land from Havana to
Pan de Matanca, the paps are very easily known, and by bringing them to bear S,
or S E, then running for them, it will lead you into the port of Havana.

This place, by my observations, lies in lat. 23: 20, and its long. i judge to
be nearest 81: west from London.

From the Havana to Punto Mr. Bishop calls this point Jacke. Yeaco is Spanish
for a Goco Plumb, of which fruit there is abundance on the point.
Ycaco is 23 leagues, the course is E S nearly. From this point we see the Pan
de Matanca to the W S W of us.

I have always observed that a lee current does not extend eastward of Bahia
Honda, at least i have found it so during 5 or 6 times that i met the current
setting westward; but at those times and in 8 or 10 other passages along this
coast have always found a strong windward current east of that place, so that
if i once weathered it, i was seldom more than 12 hours in getting up to Punta
Guana, being the west point of the Bay of Matanca.

From this point most people choose to stretch over, and Mr. Bishop advises the
bringing of the Pan de Matanca S, or S b E, before one puts over for the gulf,
and then to steer N N E; both are right enough; but i shall endeavor to point
out a safer way.

From Punta Guanos to Key Sal, the course is E N E somewhat easterly 23 leagues.

From the small key of Punta Ycaco to Key Sal, is N E b E near 13 leagues.

From Key Sal to Deadmans Keys, on the Double-headed-shot bank, is N b W 5
leagues. And,

From Deadmans Keys to the south point of the Cape Reef, is N W b N 19 or 20
leagues.

From the same Deadmans Keys to the Riding Rocks, is N E b N 23 leagues.

And the Riding Rocks lie E b N 19 leagues from the south point of the Cape
Reef.

Hence it follows, that from Punta Ycaco to the south point of the Cape Reef,
the course is nearly N, and the distance 29 leagues.

It is hardly possible that a vessel should fall so far leeward as the sand bar
of Key Vacos, or Key Loo, unless that supine carelessness and drowsy humor too
common among the greatest part of the English sailors, might cause the crew to
let her run 4 or 5 points leeward of her course.

For those, however, that may meet with such an accideat, i will point out the
situation of those keys.

Mr. Bishop has evidently mistaken the sand bar of Key Vacas for Key Loo, which
may easily be the case without my impeaching his judgment, for they look
exactly alike: I am led to think so when he says, "from the Havana to -- Looe
Key, is N E b N, distant 32 leagues." And again, "from the Metances to Looe Key
is N westerly, distance 25 leagues." Whereas the true bearing is from the
Havana to Key Loo N b E 21 leagues, and from Punta Guanos, or the west point of
Matanca Bay, to the same key, the course is NNW 24 leagues. But from the Havana
to the sand bar of Key Vacas is N E northerly 32 leagues. And from Punta Guenos
to the said sand bar, it is North about 24 leagues.

From the foregoing Courses and distances the Intelligent mariner will easily
see, that Punta Ycaco is the most eligible place from whence to take his
departure when bound through the Gulf of Florida. My advice therefore is, that
if he makes the keys of Punta Ycaco early in the day, to delay time till 3
o'clock P. M. at least, or rather 4, his time may be usefully employed in
fishing on the reef north of the point; for his labor and delay will be amply
compensated by the excellent refreshment and store of fine fish it will afford
him. The depth of water is from 4 to 14 fathom; but venture no nearer than 4
fathom, and beware of a sunken rock lying about a mile westward from the
westernmost key.

By doing this, and toward evening taking your departure from here, and
steering NbE, or rather NNE, if you are to see land on the western shore, you
will see it early in the morning, (provided you have wind enough) and thus your
safety through is secured, but by all means endeavor to get as much easting as
you can, (unless in winter when the winds hang to the westward, for in that
case Florida is safest) to get next to the Bahama Bank, for here you find
pretty broad regular soundings, and have a weather shore, whereas Florida has
little or no soundings and is a lee shore. For nine tenths of the year, you may
venture on the Bahama Bank always safely as far as in 6 or 7 fathom, which
circumstance will acquaint you of your safety in the night, should you be more
than one day getting through, and be on the weather side of the passage: Let me
however caution you to get off the bank before you pass the lat. 25:30 to the N
ward for fear of Isaacs Rocks.

During my several cruizes within the Martyr reef, i have seen a great number
of vessels borrow so close on the reef, as that they appeared to be within it,
and sometimes i could even see the people with help of a glass, such i suppose
are well acquainted, or very bold: but be the man who does this never so
experienced, he must be careful to keep a strict look-out; for my part i would
not come nearer than just to raise the land, especially as tides may have their
influence further off than we are aware of. See the end of this appendix.


The Florida shore does not run north till you are past the Fowey rocks in lat.
25:35 N; to say more about it would be no better than needless repetition, as i
have already so amply treated of it. But as most people, even at this day,
imagine it to run N from the lat. 25:00 N. The night leads too many into a
voyage to eternity, by depending too much on this falacious information; i
could therefore not forbear again hinting at it in this place. Nor can we in
the very instance under the present consideration, too much admire the
extensive goodness of the All-gracious Ruler of the universe toward us weak
mortals, by providing so facile a navigation for the regions of the west, by
means of a velocious current, and by so disposing the several shores of this
mazy labyrinth of reefs and keys, as to cause this useful current to run in a
direction N E, and at so great a rate as 3 or 3 miles an hour, by which means
we are enabled better to avoid the eminent dangers of this reef, when it
becomes a lee shore, for the violence of the easterly gales beats the gulf
water over the reef, so as to destroy the effects of the flood tides, by
causing a constant reverberating current from the shore over the reef, insomuch
that a vessel riding under the reef will lay with her stern to windward. I once
came out from Matacombe, and was scarce clear of the reef before i was
overtaken by a gale from the eastward, which was very violent; it was 5 o'clock
in the evening, and it being too dark to attempt a re-entrance of the reef, i
was forced to heave the vessel too, which i did under her balanced mainsail;
she was a heavy schooner of about 70 tons, and a dull sailor: the succeeding
night i passed in the deepest distress of mind, seeing the burning of the
breakers in constant succession on the reef till past 1 o'clock; the storm
continued till 10 next morning, when i made sail to the northward, and at noon
to my utter astonishment, i had an observation of the sun's altitude, which
proved me to be in lat 26: 50, by which i had made a difference of lat. of 118
minutes in the short space of 19 hours (17 of which i lay too.) I think this so
extraordinary an instance of the rapidity of this current, and so evident a
proof of the reason of the increased velocity thereof, that i could not omit
relating it. When i treat of the Behama bank, it will however appear, that on
that side the shore is not so steep, and therefore not so dangerous.

I am an utter enemy to all theoratical systematic positions, which has caused
in me an indefatigable thirst for finding in my experience, causes for all
extraordinary appearances, be they what they will. And my experimental position
of the cause of the increase of the velocity of this current, during the gales
that blow contrary to its direction, is no other than the reverberating
current, occasioned by the swelling of the water within the reef, which in the
memorable gale of October, Anno 1769, when the Ledbury was lost, was no less
than 30 feet above its ordinary level; which height will appear the more
surprising when we come to consider the spacious surface of the sounds that
were filled by it.

Having thus led the careful mariner through the reefs into the open gulf,
there only remains for me to give a caution against the Memory Rock, for which
ample instructions are given in a hint at the very beginning of this tract. My
next care will be to give some

INSTRUCTIONS TO PEOPLE BOUND FROM THE EASTWARD OVER THE BAHAMA BANK INTO THE
GULF OF MEXICO.
FIRST take care to make the south end of Abaco, commonly called the Hole in
the Rock, in lat. 26 4, from thence steer W b S 13 or 14 leagues, which course
and distance will carry you to Stirrups Key, being the N westernmost of the
Berry Islands, then run S W till you can but just see it off the deck of a
vessel of about 100 tons burden, you will then be in 8 or 9 fathom water, and
by my calculation 7 leagues from it; next hawl up S W b S, and keep no nearer
to the southermost Berry Islands than in 3 fathom, which will be when you have
run on that course 12 or 13 leagues; you will then begin to come on the middle
of the bank, where you may depend on finding no where less than 15 foot.

Both on coming on to the bank, and in going off from it, you will find a very
strong tide, which sets right on or right off: it is easily observed to go
along by the ground, the water being very clear and transparent; on the middle
of the bank you will find little or no tide. If the wind hangs too far to the
southward, it will follow that you are forced to the westward; in that case
make no delay in coming to an anchor, lest you fall in with the bars that lie
to the south and westward of the Bemini's, and extend near three leagues; get
under way as soon as you can steer south; you must see no land after you leave
the Berry Islands, till you make the Roques, or Orange Key; the Roques are four
in number, without bush or shrub on them; from the Roques to the Dog Keys,
which are the westermost of the Double-Headed-Shot, the course is SSW, and
distance about 17 leagues, yet the current will sometimes force you on them in
steering SW.

Should you sail for the Dog Keys in the night, by all means keep clear of
them, they and the Deadman's Keys are a number of bare rocks, perhaps an
hundred, or an hundred and twenty, about the size of a vessel, and some less,
but in general there is water plenty between and about them; S b E about 5
leagues from the Deadman's Keys is Key Sal; here are some sunken rocks; the
best way is to run SW from the Roques, and not to run the 22 leagues before
morning; if in the morning you find yourself in ocean water, run SW b S for the
Matancas, if not keep down west till you be in ocean water, then hawl up for
the coast of Cuba, and run down it till you are abreast of the Bay of Honda,
from whence you must steer over NW, or thereabouts, which will carry you clear
of every thing into the Gulf of Mexico.

DIRECTIONS FOR GOING TO THE MISSISIPPI.
IF you are bound into this river keep the NW course till you are in lat. 29 10
N, then run down for the river on a W course; if you happen to fall in to the
northward of the mouth, come no nearer than 15 fathom, when you will have
coarse brown sand; then run S, or S half W, keeping your lead going, till you
come on soundings so soft that the lead will bring none of the mud up, unless
it be woolded with canvass; if then the wind be free, run the above course or
rather more westerly; but by all means take care you are not to the southward
of the last mentioned latitude when you run down on a W course, for fear of
falling in to the south of the river: When you approach the rivers mouth, which
you will by running about 4 miles on the above soft soundings, you will see the
color of the water alter, and it will appear like a shoal; this is occasioned
by the current of the river mixing with the sea; but you need apprehend no
danger, for there is from 25 to 30 fathom water, therefore run boldly in till
you have about 8 fathom, the bank is pretty steep; when you are in this depth,
you will see some mud islands about as large as a vessel of 150 or 200 tons;
from among which you will perceive the river's mouth; the opening between these
islands is about 100 fathoms wide: there are some Spanish pilots kept at Fort
Balize, who give a very indifferent attendance; but if you see a launch coming
out, you may depend on its being them, and your best way is to run directly for
them, keeping off and on when you think yourself too near.

If no launch come out, and the weather fine, come to an anchor, there is
little or no danger, and if need the current will always carry you out again,
provided you keep opposite the channel.

In going up the river it is necessary to keep within about 20 feet of the
land, or of the drift wood that lies along it, except when you find it lodged
on points or banks, in such places give it a reasonable birth.

Observe also where you see the timber of a dwarfy and shrubby growth, or where
willows grow, on the points in such places the water is shoal, and it is
requisite to give the land a birth of about 100 feet.

There are however no shoals of any consequence, till you are about 10 miles
past the Detour aur Anglois, (Anglice English reach,) here one Mr. Mc Carty has
got a plantation on the larboard side, where is a point called Mc Carty's
point; from this a shoal runs off near one third of the way over.

It is almost needless to mention that in this (as in all other rivers) vessels
ought to keep on the lee side, for on the other side they would be becalmed.

Unless in a case of the utmost necessity, (such as fears of seizure at Orleans
or otherways) let not go an anchor, for it is a thousand to one but you will
loose it if you do; the appearance of the shore will however tell you whether
the logs are numerous or not at the bottom: a buoy will not watch.

DIRECTIONS FOR VESSELS WHO ARE BOUND TO PENSACOLA, AND HAVE RUN DOWN BY
JAMAICA, OR ON THE SOUTH SIDE OF CUBA.
AFTER making Cape Anthony, your course for Pensacola, is N W b W W, the
distance is 178 leagues, go nothing to the westward of this course, and if
there be no currents to deceive you it will carry you about in with the middle
of St Rosa Island; currents are here frequent, and they often change suddenly;
in which case you may be carried many leagues either eastward or westward of
the cape.

When you come as far North as the lat. 2400 N, keep a good look out for the
Dry Tortugas, in order to avoid that danger, if you see them not, till you pass
the lat. 24 4 N, i would advise you to keep as far up as NNE or even NE b N if
the wind allows, till you get soundings; and depend on it, if you are to the
eastward you will strike soundings in about 40 fathom, in lat 25 00 N; from
hence you may steer NNW: it is a sure sign, that the sooner you strike
soundings, the more east^ng you have made; and the longer you run wit out
soundings, the further you are westward.

If you fall in as far eastward as Cape St. Blas, you will strike soundings
above the lat. 2900 or 29^ 5 N, your first soundings will be in about 90
fathom, on a muddy or oozy bottom, which is the same every where on the edge of
the bank; the bank being pretty steep, you will soon be in 60 and 40 fathom,
coarse blackish sand, and a few shells in spots: further in your soundings will
decrease rather irregularly, on account of some knolls; one of these which lies
about 3 leagues south of the cape, has only 18 feet water on it, the depth all
around it is about 4 fathom; the pitch of the cape shoal lies in lat. 29 38 N,
about 5 miles out from the land, and the extreme depth of water on it is only
14 or 15 feet: the soundings continue however to the shoal pretty regularly as
you go in, till about 4 or 5 leagues from the pitch of the cape; therefore if
you come in upon this part of the land during night, you may run in boldly upon
11 fathom, a hard sandy bottom with broken shells, all the knolls lie within
this, they are however only to be dreaded by large ships; this bank is most
plentifully stored with fish, especially dolphin for the low-line-sport; the
pitch of the cape is known by the appearance of a gap in the land about 1 or 2
leagues to the eastward of it, in which gap stands a very large single live oak
tree; about 4 leagues to the NW of the cape is a middling good roadstead, where
in case of easterly winds it is safe riding in 4 or 5 fathom, black mud and
shells; and about 3 leagues further north is the bar of St. Joseph, the
entrance into which harbor will be hereafter described.

If you fall in still more to the eastward, you will find the water clearer,
and even in 12 or 13 fathom, it is of a dark blue like the ocean; the soundings
begin in 28 30, or even sooner, and the bottom is fine sand, mixed with coral,
shells, and some spunges.

In case you fall in with the coast of St. Andrews, you will not strike
soundings before you be in lat. 29 15, or 29 20 N, same ground as off the cape;
but as you advance toward the land you will in many places meet with coarse,
muddy gray sand, mixed with black specks, and at some casts the lead will bring
up fragments of coral; about the lat. 29.30 N you will find 18 fathom, sand
with small shells; and you may then just see the land of St. Andrews, to the
westward of the inlet; which land has a woody flat appearance, with an even
white beach, and a bold shore, so as to have 10 or 11 fathom water within a
mile, or a mile and a half from the strand; the coast trenches nearly W by N
and E b S.

But if you fall in so far to the eastward as to be right off the entrance of
the bay of St. Andrews, or between that and St. Joseph, the coast is not quite
so bold, and the depth of 10 or 11 fathom is but just in sight of land, the
bottom is sand and small shells.

The entrance of St. Andrews bay lies in lat. 29 49 N, and admits only of small
vessels.

If your landfall be any where between the coast and bay of St. Andrews, and
the bay and island of St. Rosa, you will strike soundings from lat. 29 20 to
lat. 29 45; the farther north you run without sounding the farther westward you
are; the land here stretches E half N and W half S, all these are marks by
which the mariner may know the true place of his vessel on this coast, which is
too level to distinguish particulars thereon at a distance: if you strike no
soundings till lat. 29 55 it is a sure mark that you are abreast of some part
of St. Rosa island, which is easily known when you come near, being no more
than a long and narrow slip of sand-hills, with here and there some groves of
pine trees scattered on it; toward the west end the beech is exceeding white,
and some of the sand-hills loom like lofty white buildings, or vessels under
sail, especially when not too near, the bottom here is a white sand, with here
and there a spot of coral, it shoals very gradually; within the island is a
sound which is from 1 to 3 miles wide, narrowest at the east end, so that if
you fall in toward that end it is difficult to know it to be an island, though
you are within 3 miles of it; the shore is so bold that you may run down along
by it at 1 or two miles off, where there is generally 10 or 11 fathom; to the
eastward you can only see the water over the land in spots, though you are at
masthead.

From Cape Blas to St. Rosa bay the course and distance is about N W b W 27
leagues; from that to Pensacola bay is W half S between 16 and 17 leagues; and
from that to Mobile bar W between 14 and 15 leagues: Cape St. Blas being so
surrounded with rocks and shoals, i would advise by all means to avoid falling
in with it, a large ship ought by no means to come nearer than within 6 leagues
of it.

For the better knowing of this coast, i shall make some further remarks,
because the coast's running so nearly E and W, and being every where so nearly
alike in its level and woody appearance; the most skilful and experienced pilot
may here be deceived, especially as the advantage of observations, which is so
great a help on a N and S coast, fail here totally.

In coming on this coast, if your land-fall be off the island St. Rosa, your
first soundings will be about 80 fathom (little more or less) oozy ground, this
depth and bottom is about 15 or 16 leagues from the land.

If you fall in about 10 leagues eastward of St. Rosa bay, you will see the
beech very white, and no sand hills on it, which last circumstance
distinguishes it from the land further westward; near the beech is very little
growth, besides shrubs, and brushy plants; if you stand pretty well in, you
may, from the masthead see that an extensive Savannah (or plain) is situate
within this shrubbery; which is an other mark to distinguish it from the land
to the westward, which being an island, water is seen over it.

The bar of St. Rosa only admits craft of 6 foot draught. As you come near this
inlet or the east end of St. Rosa island, it is difficult to know that it is an
island: the woods grow close to the beach, which is likewise very white, and
full of sand-hills, these being contrasted by the dark green of the bushes, are
of as dazzling a white as snow: the island as before observed is a narrow slip
of sand-hills, with a very few trees scattered over it, mostly toward the west
end, and from masthead seems about a cables length over, within appears the
sound; the wood-land on the north shore of it is of a middling stout growth,
and the trees stand pretty close to the waterside; having run down about two
thirds of the length of this island, (in other words) about 12 leagues or
upwards, you will see several of those remarkable sand-hills above mentioned
which appear at a distance like buildings or vessels; approaching the bar of
Pensacola still nearer, you will see a pretty high bluff point of a redish
color, about 3 or 3 miles north of the island, on the main land, this point is
called Deer-Point; when you come abreast of this, you will see the vessels (if
any there are) riding at anchor before the town of Pensacola, and a watch-house
(nicknamed a fort,) on St. Rosa Island. If a guard is kept here, which is
commonly the case, you will see a flag hoisted on it if your vessel is a
topsail vessel, or a pendant, if she be boomsailed, and a gun fired; which
signal is made on account of your approach: if the weather is good, (and the
attendance a little better than it was during the time of my residence there) a
canoe or barge will come off with a pilot; if none comes off, you may freely
venture with a leading wind to run in by my plans. Off of the Look-out on St.
Rosa Island lies a spit, which you must avoid by not bringing the watch house
more northerly than N N W, till you run off in 5 or 6 fathom water, then by all
means keep that depth, until you b^ the middlemost or highest red cliff, which
opens with the west end of St. Rosa island, to bear N E by the compass, and
steer directly for it; this course will carry you over the bar in 20 or 21 foot
water. The tops of these cliffs are built full of barracks, block-houses, and
other military works; so as to appear like a small town. When you are over the
bar steer N b W, or N N W, to clear a shoal that stretches near two thirds over
from the west end of St. Rosa island, on which is 10 foot water, hence it is
called the 10 foot bank. The lat. of this bar is 30:19 N.

If you fall in to the westward of Pensacola, on the Mobilian coast, you will
get no soundings till you are near or in lat. 30: N, the edge of the bank is 80
or 90 fathom deep, on a soft muddy and oozy bottom; but it is steep and shoals
suddenly, and by the time you run about 2 leagues, you will not have more than
30 or 40 fathom on a soft bottom of very fine white or gray sand, mixed with
mud and shells, and you will be in 8 or 9 fathom when 3 or 4 leagues from the
land. The coast runs due E and W; large trees come close down to the water
side; the beach is not so white; the sand-hills few, and neither water nor
savannah to be seen within land; all which circumstances sufficiently
distinguish it from the eastern coast. Observe also that the further you go
westward the softer the bottom is.

West of Mobile the coast is lined with islands, as represented in the map; the
bank is steeper, the ground softer, and the land in sight almost as soon as you
strike bottom, at least when you are not above 5 or 6 ^es on upon soundings.
The principal harbor here is between Cat Island and Ship-Island. The whole of
the navigation in and about those islands, through the Rigolets, and by the
lakes to Manchac, is so plainly laid down in my map, that any wordy elucidation
of so minute a matter, chiefly for the use of boats, would be prolixity in me.

I will therefore finish this account of the coast of West-Florida, by
informing my reader that the Chandeleur or Candlemas islands, were formerly
only two islands; but the hurricane of 1772 has cut them into so many parts,
that they lie, or at least did lie in near the same number and form as in the
map is represented, the channels between them are deep, but barred at each end.
Just within the north end of these islands, about 5 miles north of the
Free-Masons islands is a good road, as there is also between Breton island and
the back of the Grand Gozier, a land of islands about 12 miles S S W from the
southernmost of the Candlemas islands; Breton island lies about 3 leagues W
from Grand Gozier, and this last about 8 or 9 leagues north of the entrance of
Missisippi river. The depth of water in both these roads is from 20 to 24 feet,
and the bottom a fine sand.

If you are bound out of the Missisippi eastward, to go through the gulf of
Florida, you ought to endeavor to make the Tortugas, in order for this steer E
S E from the Balize, run that course till you come on the edge of soundings,
between lat. 26: and 27 N, by this means you will not be plagued with the trade
wind, in the way of which you would fall too soon, before you got your easting.
I remember a vessel bound from Pensacola to Carolina, who was drove as far to
leeward as Cape Catoche, and after being a long while (i think 4 or 5 weeks)
out, was obliged to return to recruit her stock of provisions; this was
doubtless occasioned by not getting her easting while she was out of the way of
the trade. After you are on this edge of soundings, direct your course more
southward, you will find very regular gradations of the depth, such as my map
lays them down, you may depend on them. It frequently happens that vessels fall
too far to the westward, as was the case with one from North Carolina some four
or five years ago, who was either lost or taken near the bay of St. Bernard and
the people underwent numberless hardships, as well among the Spaniards as
savages; I will for the sake of such who will at any rate avoid this danger set
down some

INSTRUCTIONS TO GO TO PENSACOLA, ON A ROUT DIFFERING FROM THE FORMER.
THE Dry Tortugas lie in lat. 24:25 and stretch northward as far as lat 24:43
N. the south end lies N 40: W. 31 leagues from the Havana, or N W 22 leagues
from Babia Honda, the direct course from the Tortugas to Pensacola is N 34 W,
and the distance 142 leagues. But the safest way is to run N E 35 leagues, by
which means you will make the land in lat. 26 46 N; where is a large harbor
called Charlotte harbor; here, in case of necessity, you may refresh, as it
affords excellent water in many places, especially on a high island, whose
north end is a broken bluff, and which shows itself very remarkable as soon as
you are well shot in; there is likewise plenty of fish, and the islands are
stocked with large herds of deer; there are 4 or 5 inlets into this bay; but
the one that lies in the above latitude is deepest, it has 15 or 16 feet water
on its bar; the southernmost is the next best, and has 14 feet on its bar; this
lies in lat. 26 30, and is remarkable for the coast taking a sudden turn from N
N W, to directly west, only for about 9 or 10 miles; when it again resumes its
former direction: this nook in the land, forms what the Spaniards call Ensenada
de Carlos, i. e. Charles's-Bay, the piece of coast that trends E and W, is the
beach of an island called Sanybel, this place is further remarkable for a great
number of pine-trees without tops standing at the bottom of the bay, there is
no place like to it, in the whole extent of this coast; the northernmost
entrance is likewise remarkable for a singular hommock of pine-trees, or a
grove standing very near the beach, than which there is none like it any where
hereabouts; the course and distance from this place to Pensacola is N 49 W 109
leagues; N 36 W about 20 leagues from this place is the bay of Tampe or Spirito
Santo, from whence to Pensacola the course and distance is N 52 W 80 leagues,
either of these courses will steer clear of Cape St. Blas shoals, and you may
in case of currents humor your course so as to have easting enough.

The navigation in and through the bay of Juan Ponce de Leon, to Punta Largo,
or Cape Roman, and as far as Charlotte harbor, being fit only for turtlers,
fishermen, and other small craft, I will not say much about it; inspection of
my charts, where that part of the coast is very faithfully laid down, will
suffice such small fry.

Juan Ponce de Leon, was one of the first discoverers and explorers of Florida,
and some remarkable transactions between him and the Coloosa savages at this
place, have given occasion to the bay being called after that adventurer. But
our wise map-makers, from the compilers of the quarter waggoners, down to the
sagacious William Gerrard de Brahm, Esquire have corrupted it into Ponio bay; though
the latter has not forgot to change it into Chatham-bay; but what connection the
earl or the fort of that name have, or had with this place, is to me a secret;
Mr. de Brahm does little honor to either, in calling this flat after them.

The fort at Apalache being deserted, the coast very flat, and the bay
inconsiderable; i shall omit saying any thing about it, as my maps show with
sufficient accuracy what may be expected and done by such small craft, as may
have occasion to call there.

Having already said what was most wanted of the passage over the Bahama banks,
and having nothing material to say concerning the old streights of Bahama: I
shall end this general account of the coast, with some further

REMARKS CONCERNING NEW PROVIDENCE, AND THE BAHAMA BANKS.
THIS island is (by some mistake) laid down in my map, about 5 or 6 miles
further northward than it ought to have been; my observation of lat. in the
harbor was lat. 25:4 N. and i rekon its long. about 77: W from London.

From Providence to the S Eastermost key of the Berry Islands the course and
distance is about N W 11 leagues.

From this key to the entrance on upon the bank between the Blackwood Bush and
Joulter Keys, at the North end of Andros island, is about W 8 or 9 leagues: as
the bank is bound with a reef here, you must pick your way through that, which
you may, as there are several swashes, which though they are narrow, have no
less than 11 or 12 feet through. The water being very clear in this part of the
world, this picking ones way through a shoal, is attended with little or no
difficulty.

When you first come on upon the bank, you will see some scattered heads of
rocks and spunges; but there being no danger, except what is very visible, i
need only tell, that by running. W S W about 12 or 13 leagues you will come out
1 leagues to the southward of the Riding Rocks, on the west part of the bank;
from whence by inspection of the charts, and some attention to former remarks,
you may easily find your way either to Cuba, or the Florida shore.

N. B. In coming from the Florida shore this way, by the Riding Rocks, you
ought to endeavor the making of the South Eastermost Berry Island, early in the
morning, which precaution will give you a great benefit with regard to safety
in your run to Providence. I need not tell how great the danger is of coming
among shoals and broken land during night.

Entrances of Tampa Bay


I would say something with regard to the passage by Bemini, but it being the
shoalest, and the bars to the Eastward of Bemini making it very dangerous, i
think no new comer ought to go there, without a pilot; i shall therefore say
nothing of it.

There are several small harbors on the N E part of the Berry where water and
other refreshment may be had; but as they are seldom frequented, but by the
people of Providence, it may be superfluous to say any thing about them; the
maps show their situation.

From Providence to the Hole in the rock, South end of Abaco, is N about 20
leagues.

The North, or Grand Bahama bank, is little frequented but by whalers and
turtlers; and on account of its iron bound reefs is dangerous to approach.

The passage from the Hole in the Rock, toward the Gulf of Florida, is
already explained; yet i will here add, that it is necessary to give the West
end of the Grand Bahama Island a birth; both on account of its shoals, and if
the wind should hang Southwestward you might be imbayed.

I shall conclude this part of the work, with some directions for the entrances
of particular places; and begin with

DIRECTIONS FOR THE HARBOR OF SPIRITO SANTO, OR TAMPA BAY.
THIS harbor which is very capacious, will admit large ships and is extremely
well calculated for a place to refresh at; here is abundance of wood, water,
fish, oysters, clams, venison, turkies, large and small waterfowl, etc. The
harbor is made by a range of islands lying before it; the southernmost of
which is called Long Island; its North end is called Grant's point, in honor of
governor Grant; the next lying about a mile North of it, is called Pollux Key;
another about 1 mile to the N W b N of that is named Castor Key, in honor of
two privateers, one of which was commanded by the late Capt. Braddock of
Georgia: these two vessels cruized in those seas about the year 1744 or 1745;
and Capt. Braddock was generally acknowledged the first Englishman who explored
this bay. I have seen his original draught which (considering the circumstances
under which it was taken) was pretty exact. Next is a cluster of keys called
Mullet keys, lying between 2 and 3 miles E b N N from the north end of Castor
key; a shoal runs off from each of these to the westward, to that which runs
off from the Mullet keys the Spaniards give the name of Restingo Largo. On the
Mullet keys are huts built by the Spaniards, who resort here for the purpose of
fishing. Grant's point lies in lat 27, 44, and the south end of the Mullet keys
in lat. 27:48 N.

The coast, as has been already observed, has pretty regular soundings, but
none very deep; to enter this bay by either of its inlets, observe the
following directions, and they can hardly fail of carrying you safe.

The land is low and not visible till you are within about 8 miles from it,
where you will have 6 or 6 fathom water; the chief growth on the keys are
mangrove and blackwood bushes.

To run in by Grant's point, bring that to bear N E E, then run in on that
course till the south end of Pollux key bears N E N, when you will be on the
bar of this inlet, where you will find 16 foot water; the bar is short, you
must run in on the same course till you are nearly abreast Pollux key, and you
will have 3, 4, and 5 fathoms; when you be almost abreast of the key, steer E,
and you may run in as the draught shows.

To run in between Castor and Pollux keys, keep in about 5 fathom, till you
bring the north end of Pollux to bear about E b N E, then run in on that course
till the south end of Castor bears N E b E E, and you will presently be in
about 17 feet, then steer about E N E directly for the midway between the two
keys, and you will continue for about of a mile in 16 or 17 foot, shoalest
under the north bank; when you are over this you will have 3 or 4 fathom, and
by keeping a little to the northward of your last course after you have cleared
the keys, you may run up the bay without scruple.

To go in between Mullet keys and Castor key, which is the principal inlet, and
by the Spaniards called Boca Grande, you must run in about 5 fathoms, till you
bring the south part of the Mullet keys to bear E S, then sail on that course
till the north end of Castor key bears EbSS, and you will find 22 or 23 foot
water, steer that course till you deepen your water to 6 fathom, then run E
inclining rather to the south shore, if any; as soon as you have doubled Castor
key you may anchor under it, or run up by the Mullet keys, or farther in, as
the draught points out.

Small vessels need not be so scrupulous in regard to these marks, the banks or
shoals themselves are pretty deep, as the draughts point out. A. D. 1769, i was
employed above 6 weeks in surveying this bay, and after sinking my boat in
Manatee river, where i suppose she lays now, i went across the Peninsula to St.
Augustine on foot.

DIRECTIONS TO SAIL INTO CHARLOTTE HARBOR
THE northernmost inlet to this harbor is in lat. 26, 46 N; the surest mark to
find it by, is the clump or hommock of pine trees standing near the north end
of the island, as mentioned page lxxvi; bring those trees to bear E S E, and
run in for them till you are in 15 foot water, which is the bar, then change
your course to E N E, and you will presently deepen your water to 4, 5, 6, and
even 10 fathom, with working room between the banks for a fleet; keep the
north-breaker on board, and run in close to the north shore, which is the south
end of Gasparilla island, when in, you may pick your anchoring ground; but the
bay is flat when in, and the further you go in the less water you will find.

DIRECTIONS FOR ST. JOSEPH'S BAY.
THE best way in coming either from the southward or westward, is to make the
coast to the northward of Cape St. Blas, which lies in lat. 29, 42 N, about 10
miles from the cape, where you will find 6 or 7 fathom, within about 2 miles
from the shore, and 4 fathom within a mile or less. This coast is a narrow slip
of land, with some bushes and very few trees on it, it trenches N b W and S b
E, up to the place i advise to make, and from there almost due N and S. At this
place where it changes its direction, are two remarkable trees on a very narrow
neck of land; the water in the bay may be seen in many places over this slip of
strand. From these two trees you may coast it to the northward within a mile of
the shore; and when you have run about two miles you will see two more
remarkable trees standing a little further in land; you will then continue
about a mile or a little more, and you will have the depth of 4 or 4 fathom
water, but here a narrow spit runs off for a mile, on which is only 12 foot,
therefore keep your lead going, and when you once lessen your depth to 3
fathom, draw off, steering N W or W N W till you deepen again to 5 fathom* you
will then open a large red bluff on the main land in the N E quarter, bring the
east end of it to bear N E b N, and then run on that course till you deepen
your water to 6 fathom, and you will see two trees, one large the other small,
close together; to the eastward of the bluff steer eastward till you bring
these on with the east end of the bluff, keep them so and you will be in the
best channel. In running on this course about 2 miles or 2, you will be on the
bar, which has 17 foot water on it in spring tides at low water; as soon as you
are on this bar hawl round to the eastward with an easy sweep, and you will
presently be in 5 or 6 fathom: by degrees draw round to the southward, and you
may anchor any where in that depth, near the west shore. To know exactly when
you are on the bar, take notice of four clumps of trees on the eastern shore,
and bring the third (counting from the northward) as marked in my draught, to
bear S 40 E, in one with the point of St. Joseph's, when you have this mark on,
you are on the bar.

DIRECTIONS FOR PENSACOLA HARBOR.
HAVING, as before directed, brought the highest or middlemost red cliff to
bear N E, you will see a clump of trees (in land) on with that part of the
cliff, this is the best mark to lead you over the bar in the best water, being
no less than 20 foot. When you are over the bar, you will have from 4 to 6
fathom within a cable's length and an half off the western breakers; these show
themselves very plain in fine weather; and at their north end is a small dry
sand bar.

When you are over the bar, run west till you bring the aforesaid trees in one
with the hollow between the high cliff and the west cliff, by this means you
will avoid the 10 foot bank before taken notice of on page lxxiii.

To know when you are up with this bank, observe when you open the straggling
woods of Deer Point, with the west end of St. Rosa island; when this mark is
well open, you may hawl eastward for Tartar Point. Take care not to approach
the starboard shore nearer than 3 fathom, nor the larboard shore more than 4
fathom. In mid channel you will have 5 or 6 fathom. The bottom is a regular
hollow, therefore you may depend on your soundings shoaling gradually down to
the above depths on each side.

In working up after you are within the 10 foot bank, keep the block-house, or
fort, open with St. Rosa Point, by this means you are in no danger MOBILE Bar
from the ten feet bank, and in standing northward keep Deer-point open with
Tartar-point; off this last point you will have three fathom within less than a
cable's length of the beech, in standing for St. Rosa island, you have no
danger but what is visible.

After you have doubled Tartar-point, your course up to town is NNE E; mid
channel you have 6 fathom, and it shoals gradually down to 4 on each side; in
beating up, come no nearer the west shore than to bring a large white-house
(the highest in town) to bear NNE, and in standing over to the east shore,
bring it no further west than N W; this house was the government house, and
stands at the east end of the garrison. The best anchorage is to bring the
above house to bear N E, English-point NEbN, and Deer-point SEbE E; at the
distance of about a mile from the shore, the depth is about 4 fathom.

DIRECTIONS FOR MOBILE BAR.
IN going westward from Pensacola, come no nearer than within 5 miles from
Mobile-point, and when that bears N, run till you bring the east end of the
Sand-key to bear N 27: W in one with the east end of Dauphin-island; then you
will be on the bar in 13 or 14 feet, run up on said course, and you will soon
have 18, 24, 30, 40 feet; the bar is short: continue to go so till you are
abreast and pretty near the Sand-Key, then haul up N E, and run in, observing
not to borrow too nigh on the starboard breakers; after you are abreast
Mobile-point, you may gradually haul up more eastward; then bring the point to
bear about SW, or SWbS 2 or 2 miles off, and you may anchor in from 3 to 4
fathom depth. Or you may bring the south end of the sand key just shut in with
the S E end of Pelican key, and run in till you are in 15 foot, which is the
bar; then steer W, or W N, till you bring the first-mentioned marks on, and run
in as before directed: This way is deeper, but not so certain.

There are two swatches through the east breaker, and the old harbor (which
according to Charlevoix, was ruined by an earthquake) lies back of Pelican
Island, and the west breaker; the draught explains them. On shore, are the
ruins of the French settlement, which formerly was on that island; what is left
most perfect, is the remains of a guard-house, in the sand-hills, and a remnant
of a salt-work on the beach, all the rest has been swallowed by the sea; after
great storms, it is not uncommon to find numbers of human bones at this place.
Being got into this bay, the way up to town is easy, but the whole of the way
is shallow, no where exceeding 16 feet; there are no shallows, except between
Point Claire and Roebuck river; where is an oyster-bank, which is easily
avoided by keeping nearest to the larboard or west shore.

Having been pretty explicit about the tides on the eastern coast, it may
naturally be expected that i should say as much about the tides in the Gulf of
Mexico; but little or nothing can be said about so unstable a matter, from
Sandy-Key and Sandy-Point, or Punta Tancha, through the whole bay of Juan Ponce
de Leon, up as far as Punta Largo or Cape-Roman, it runs tide and half tide in
the same manner as at Plymouth, the Needles and Wight, in England; that is to
say, three hours flood, then three hours ebb, next nine hours flood, and lastly
nine hours ebb, it does not rise to an equal height in all places, nor does it
run equally rapid in every part; in some narrow places, I have met it a mere
fall, and in almost every gut among the many islands in this bay, i have found
it as much as four stout men could do, to stem the current in a Moses. From
Cape-Roman northward and westward in every part of the Mexican Sea, the tide
seems to ebb and flow once in 24 hours; but it being very much governed by the
winds, this circumstance happens very irregular; for with a S or SW and W wind,
it will flow much longer than it will fall; whereas with a N or NE and E wind,
it will ebb much longer than it will rise; consequently, it happens frequently
that at the time of springs, we find less water on a bar than at neap times,
and vice versa. I never could observe it to rise above two feet any where at
the highest times; yet its effect on the current of the rivers, is in dry
summers very visible, a great way from the sea; and i have been told that
instances are not wanting, when the water of Missisippi, was brackish above the
town of Orleans.

There is a constant current in the open Gulf, setting ESE, or thereabouts, at
the rate of 1 or 1 knot per hour, of which all observing people coming through
that sea are very soon sensible.

The passage to the eastward of the Tortugas, is to be depended upon as laid
down in my maps; coming through it from the northward, you will see a rip
appear like breakers; but in the rip is 18 or 20 fathom, and the moment a ship
gets into this rip, she jumps out of soundings.

A note in page lxi of the appendix, refers to the end; the note was
accidentally omitted, and intended to be as follows, --

Besides this reason for standing longer off than in, there is one still
greater. Every experienced mariner knows, that a vessel will run a distance
toward shore in much less time, than she can run the same distance from it;
and that the higher the land is she works under, the quicker she runs in,
consequently the slower off; hence almost every one in beating upon a
lee-shore, will stand out a longer time than in; but few even among the most
experienced know the philosophy of this phenomenon, against which they so
carefully guard. It is that great law of nature whereby all light bodies must
fall on the heavier ones, i mean ATTRACTION. To explain this by an experiment,
take any vessel, fill it almost with water, put a cork or chip in it, while
that remains in the center, it is attracted from ever side alike, and therefore
stands fixed, but no sooner is it thrown out of the center, than it will begin
to approach the side, and as it draws near, attraction is increased, till at
last the velocity of the chip becomes so great, as to run with a considerable
violence against the vessel, where it remains fixed; and if it is an oblong
piece in shape of a vessel, the same will happen, as when a ship runs ashore
stem on, viz. it will wind broadside too. The explanation of this affair, i am
indebted for to the hon. John Collins Esquire of Newport, Rhode Island, first
counselor of the colony, and an experienced commander.

It may not be amiss to conclude this appendix with an answer to a question
which has been very often put to me, viz. Why are books intended to elucidate
navigation on any coast called Waggoners? What connection is there between a
waggoner and any thing that concerns the sea, or a ship?

In answer to this, i say from the best authority, that the first book of the
kind ever published, called the Mirror of Navigation, was wrote and printed at
Enkhuyzen, the author's name was Lucas Jansen Wagenaar; and his book remaining
a very long while the only one of that sort, it was usually enquired for by
that name, and in course of usuage the name fixed on all that followed it.

FINIS.
ERRATUM in APPENDIX.
Page x, line 18, for many, read wet.

ERRATA.
Page 3 Line 16 for was, read is. 17 1771. I felt, read 1771, i felt. 18 after
N^ssan, a full stop. do dele and 5 7 for vegitables, read vegetables. 10 5
regad, read regard. 14 12 unweary, read unwary: 20 penetrates pervades. 15 17
mud, read effluvia of small animals. 16 26 dele so. 31 13 this, the. do 24 the
best very good. 37 19 after the above named, add bituminous one^ 46 2 for
separation, read separation. 49 ^^ America joins, America nearly joins, -- 31
dele by land. 80 17 for caly, clay. 88 last, voyage, voyages. 91 34 Ga^phus,
Ga^phin. 94 20 or the, of the. 112 33 temporary, temporal. ^15 18 leaks, leeks.
116 22 of the art, for the art. 154 7 Cortex Elenthera, ^. Cassia Cinna^ -- 10
Cascartila, read Cinnamo^. 173 7 the ^ame, a small. 226 25 form, forming. ^6
and thus form, read erect. pa. 221 line 3 for a period, read a long period. --
note, combenaisones, combinaisons. 252 note, Chryso Calanus, read
Chrysobalanus. 276 line 20 course, read coast. 280 last, after river, add,
Apa^achicola. 281 13 for maintain, read mention. 283 21 Bromelia, Tillandfia.
284 19 NW N 286 12 stumps swamps. 287 32 after page add 274 290 15 for
cultivated, read cultivable. 293 18 Panao, read papao. 296 10 Black, read back.
-- 12 dele 12^ 297 11 for grand, read Grant. 302 21 Matto Chatto. 304 19 Bea^
camp. read Bea^-Camp. 319 24 Chicasaws; -- crossed, r. Chicasaws crosses. -- 32
after ^ickling down, p^t; -- 33 after length, dele: 321 10 for c^n^, read
canes. 324 29 and oc^e, like earth, r. a red och^e -- like earth. 35 done, read
down.

In the Subscribers Na^ after William Vassal Esquire for ditto, read Boston.

For Robert William Yates, read Robert Waldron Yates.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE map of the country of the savage nations, intended to be put, facing page
72, was engraved by a Gentleman who resides in the country 60 or 70 miles from
New York, to whom the plate was sent; but when it was sent back, it miscarried,
through the carelessness of the waggoner; and though the publication has been
delayed some time on that account, it is not yet come to hand; the reader will
therefore please to expect said map with the second volume.

At the first planning of this publication, it was intended only to be a single
volume, not exceeding 300 pages, appendix and all; but at the request of some
Gentlemen, my friends, i have subjoined so many articles, that it swelled
imperceptibly to about 800 pages, which made it necessary to print it in two
volumes; and as some unexpected accidents, especially the want of a
copper-plate printer, have occasioned delays; i will therefore, to atone in
some measure (for said delays) to those kind Gentlemen who favored me with
their subscriptions for the maps, deliver them the second volume gratis, as
soon as it is published: It is now in the press.

I return my most sincere thanks for the liberal encouragement that has been
afforded me; and hope my work will be deemed deserving it.

Bernard Romans.


