APPENDIX TO THE CONSIDERATIONS ON THE MEASURES CARRYING ON WITH RESPECT TO THE
BRITISH COLONIES IN NORTH AMERICA.

PHILADELPHIA. REPRINTED and SOLD by BENJAMIN TOWN, near the COFFEE-HOUSE,
M,DCC,LXXV.

APPENDIX. TO THE CONSIDERATIONS, etc.
THE foregoing sheets were first published in April, 1774, and we are now in
the next November; time and events have, in the short intervening space of
seven months, but too plainly and too strongly confirmed the opinions
respecting our American measures, and their consequences, which were then
presumed by the author to be laid before the public. It is in the preceding
pages explained, that the plan proposed, and confided in by the Administration
on that occasion, appeared to be, that the removal of the custom-house, and the
suspension of the commerce of Boston, would soon bring on their knees, and
subject to our commands, the inhabitants of that town and of its colony; who
were by that means to become, besides their own obedience, an example likewise
and a terror to the rest of their brethren on that continent; but the policy
and the probability of this fine spun scheme are there doubted of, questioned
and discussed. It is represented, that the harsh and violent measures then
carrying on, would in America be received no otherwise than as a declaration of
war, and depend upon the same issue; that it could only be by force and by
conquest, if they were submitted to; that we must expect to have to do with an
union of that continent; that it would among them be made a common cause not to
be taxed by us, and that they would certainly join, combine and associate
together for their general and mutual assistance and defense. Is there any
occasion to say whether or no these things have proved true?

We were at the same time warned, that if it was intended to use force and
violence, the decision might not be so very soon or so very sure; that these
being a truly free people, and their government democratical, they would be
able to arm every man in their country; that necessity would, besides their
Committees of Correspondence then subsisting, teach them other means of moving
and of acting together; that they would probably have at their head some of the
wisest and of the ablest men of their country; that the influence of our
Governors, and of our other civil officers would shrink to nothing, nor our own
authority probably extend farther than where it was enforced by our own troops;
that our very soldiery would desire and endeavor to leave us, and to go over
to the Americans. Has one word of all this fallen to the ground, or is there
almost a single sentence of it which is not now become a matter of fact?

It was farther set forth, that no immediate impressions upon the town of
Boston, or possession taken of it by a fleet or an army would carry the command
of all that continent, or force them to submit to measures so universally
against their bent and inclinations, but that on the contrary, the most
strenuous and most vigorous exertions were from that whole people to be
expected in support of their common liberties and properties. May I call on our
Ministers, and demand whether they are not themselves sensible by this time of
all these things?

I will pass by other particulars of the same sort, that I may not tire my
reader with the repetition of them However I hope, that the presumption will be
pardoned, should it be asked, Whether there is any one event as yet come on, in
the order of time and the course of things, which has contradicted or happened
otherwise than what was before pointed out? This gives a great prejudice and
suspicion with respect to the farther train remaining yet to follow. However
there is behind, and among the things in suspense, one particular circumstance
of such a magnitude, that all these other incidents are, in comparison of it,
but as the dust upon the balance. I mean, that should, by these measures,
either the public expenses increase, or income decrease, or both together, so
that the national revenue shall fail, and we be rendered unable to proceed in
paying the whole interest of our debt, then will, in all appearance, be no
longer delayed the day and the hour of our destruction, but that conjuncture
prove the latest and the uttermost term of our peace, our prosperity and our
stability, as a state and a nation. This point is much pressed in the former
sheets; however Heaven avert, that fate should in the due order of things, and
at some perhaps not very distant moment of time, demonstrate it to be as well
grounded, as have already been found so many other cautions and warnings before
given! But if we sow the seeds, it may be depended on that the fruits will
follow; causes and effects keep their course like day and night; events appear
to be preparing and bringing on that period; men and things, counsels and
actions, signs and appearances seem to tend to that catastrophe. However the
writer presumes to offer once more to the public the mite of his sentiments
upon the state of our affairs in America, as it stands now altered since the
date of the preceding pages; while we have yet allotted a time to do it, while
there is room for reflection, and that any thing remains more for Britons than
only to relate the story of their ruin.

This attack upon the continent appeared to many people most unreasonable and
most unpromising from the very beginning; futurity has nevertheless before it a
constant cloud and obscurity, which no human eye can perfectly penetrate;
rashness and inconsiderateness do sometimes make this more of a pretense than
the case will well warrant; but however doubtful the matter might then be or
not, time has now opened events, and fact and certainty have in many respects
taken place on the subject. It is clear and sure, that the proposed plan and
project have failed and miscarried. We sent out, at first, forces fit for our
intended design. The common language used in commendation of the measure was,
that a few regiments and a few small ships of war would do the business. But we
are now calling and gathering together an army from all quarters, from England,
from Ireland, from several different parts of America, and even our newly
conquered province of Quebec is to be unguarded and unfurnished, that we may be
enabled to carry on a war against our ancient colonies, and our own countrymen.
We have instead of commanding and of bringing to taxation and to subjection all
America, by the means of the town of Boston, lost the rest of that continent,
and not gained the town. We have with our own hands, and by our own counsels,
got things into such a state; that our colonies obey their Governors no farther
than they please; and that they are unanimously and publicly preparing to
oppose measure to measure, or force to force, as they shall upon the event
judge most necessary; while that b^^oque of New England looks us in the face
upon an equality, and holds up its head as highly as we do ourselves. Matters
are ten times more embroiled than they were; wear ten times a worse and a more
threatening aspect than they did seven months ago, and before that we entered on
these measures, every step taken forwards, in our present track, seems only to
lead us into farther mischief and difficulties. Our administration is, in the
mean time, become the wonder and the contempt of all Europe. When we find
therefore, that we are going on in a road directly wrong, why don't we take a
contrary course? This appears to be a most obvious step; there is no uncommon
reach of reason, or extraordinary depth of human wisdom demanded, to make that
conclusion. It is an old proverb; that wise men do often, but fools never
change their opinion. No one little or great need scruple to alter for the
better his actions or his measures; it is surely his first praise and first
prudence so to do. But what must be thought of those, whom facts and events
themselves will not convince; or, who being convinced, are nevertheless
determined to strive and to contend against the irresistible force of them? Our
political pilots have a fair and a direct wind for the port, to which the
commonwealth is bound; but they are obstinately bent to run counter to it, to
buffet storms and tempests, to risque rocks and quicksands, and to endanger in
the greatest degree the common adventure and fortunes of us all. We read a
fabulous story of an ancient Roman said to have leaped into a gulf to save
Rome; but what will posterity believe, when they shall be told of the men of
these times, who run headlong down a precipice for no apparent end, but to
carry along with them their country into the same ruin?

The original design and expectation were at least sufficiently plain and
intelligible; but the administration having been deceived in them, there is now
no longer left the least appearance of prudence or of policy in our
proceedings. It is become difficult to comprehend, what the authors or the
friends of these measures pursue even in their own breasts. Let any one within
the bounds of probability or almost of possibility fancy in his mind, events at
pleasure, and let him reflect by what steps, what means, what chain of
incidents and accidents, what train within the wit of man to trace, it can be
expected, that we shall in this violent and military method of going on come to
a good and advantageous conclusion, and I believe, that he will evidently find
himself at a default on the subject. I am persuaded, that our rulers would
themselves be put to it, to lay down fairly and clearly their own plan, nor is
any such commonly known and understood. The facts are public, the other would,
no doubt not be difficult to find, if reason, appearances, and probability
suggested or admitted of any such. The chaplains of our regiments are not to
chop logic with the Americans, and to reason them into the being taxed at
Westminster: That is not the intention, nor will hard words bring this about,
from whencesoever trumpeted -- No: We will force them to it -- Be it so. Let
us, without considering the chance of war or resistance, suppose Boston in
ashes, no one stone of it standing on another, the inhabitants, men, women and
children buried under its ruins, and all this havoc and destruction the effect
of our cannon, bombs and mortars. This would no doubt be a noble event; Europe
would stare, and it would exceedingly redound to the honor and the glory of the
government that should atchieve it. However, let us come to the consequences;
the mischief and the evil are easily found, rage and despair reigning every
where, all our colonies crying out for vengeance, America in arms, and in open
and avowed revolt against Great Britain; these things need not to be pointed
out. But how are butchery and massacre to conduct us to peace, to a settlement,
to a restoration of union and of harmony, or to any desirable end whatsoever?
All regard for the Americans being banished out of the question, either as
brethren or as men, it can nevertheless not be pretended, that we ought
likewise to lose sight of the true interest and the benefit of our more
immediate country of Great Britain, nor are we surely to seek for any other
views or motives of our public counsels on the occasion, than those. God
forbid, that there should instead prevail passion, resentment, an impatience of
opposition and of disappointment, a thirst for revenge and for the blood of the
people of Boston and of New England: Heaven avert, that there should directly
or indirectly, more nearly or more remotely, be at this moment preparing or
meditating any desperate stroke, which may disjoin America and Great Britain in
a manner to be never united more! I will not deny, but that the question
respecting the plan of our conduct may with less difficulty be explained, if
some such unfit principles and considerations are to be taken into the account.

But some one may say, What a strange tragedy and image have here been
introduced? Who thinks of any such thing? We would not for the world be the
aggressors; but if the people of Boston or of New England shall begin first,
and shall attack or unlawfully resist us, you know, that the wrong will then be
with them, and that all, which we shall do, will be nothing but self-defence
and the execution of the law, nor do we wage war but with men. I answer; that
this is too high, too home and too serious a subject, on which for any one to
refuse himself or to be readily refused by others freedom of speech. I presume,
that it is within the lawful liberty of an Englishman to demand, in return, to
what end are then intended a military Governor, a fleet, an army, artillery,
warlike provision and ammunition and supplies and reinforcements of these
things, together with acts of Parliament, which, it was known, would not be
obeyed? Are all these red coats and regiments mustered there only to assist the
people of America in the clearing of their plantations, the reaping of their
harvests, or the watching of their flocks and their herds? Should any one start
at the idea of Boston being overthrown, what would he say, were he in plain
English told, that there is no appearance or probability of carrying into
execution some certain measures, without cutting the throats of almost all our
America, without dying its forests, its swamps and its savannahs, with the
blood of those, whose ancestors fled from their country, and went thither in
hopes of finding refuge from the tyranny and the oppression of the Governors of
Great Britain? What does it matter, who dies a victim; the first or the last,
and whether by the sword, the musket and the bayonet, or by famine, distress
and misery, when a whole region shall be laid waste and depopulated? Is it
difficult to pick a quarrel on any subject, or to drive a people into despair
and then to destroy them for being desperate, or are there wanting writers or
speakers to defend any action or any measure? But will the glossing, the
quibbling, the flattery of pensioners or of sycop ants heal the wounds, calm
the minds, appease the passions, reconcile the affections, or blind and
confound the understandings of an injured and exasperated continent, consisting
of many numerous and flourishing provinces, and inhabited by a people possessed
and inspired with a love of liberty almost lost to the shame of the human
species, out of Europe, but most pwerful and irresistible wherever it prevails
and is united with the means of defense? I do not mean to talk to Ministers and
to Statesmen about right and wrong, humanity, compassion and the cardinal
virtues; but I repeat, that there is in these measures full as little of the
policy of Machiavel as of the morality of Grotius, or the religion of the Whole
Duty of Man; not a whit more of the wisdom of the serpent than of the innocence
of the dove.

The sense of the nation is in the mean time most strong against these
transactions; people were not at the beginning so much moved; they appear not
to have believed, that any men at the head of a state would really be so wild
and so headlong, as to bring about in effect what now stares them most strongly
and most fully in the face; it is well understood that the all of the public
and of every private person is upon a desperate cast, at stake against nothing;
men raise their eyes and their hands with horror, when they speak on the
occasion; they sympathise in common with the Americans, and express plainly and
roundly their own sentiments on their account; such are on the contrary silent
and reserved on the subject, who are used to direct their discourse by mean
motives; the change or discharge of these measures would be a most sincere and
universal satisfaction. Shall then a great nation, with its eyes open and
sensible of its situation and its danger, be drawn or driven upon its ruin, by
a few men among them, and those perhaps entrusted for its safety and its
protection? Where is in that case the constitution, or what is our pretended
and our boasted representation? Is there nothing, nothing even to the utmost
extremity of our destruction, but what corruption can compass, and prostitution
will perform? These proceedings are of that dangerous and destructive tendency,
that whoever promotes or unites in them, does, as a private man, light a brand
to fire his own house, and to lay waste his own estate; but as one of the
public he concurs with his own hand to thrust a dagger into the heart of his
already wounded, helpless and almost expiring country. It may be wondered how
any such person can hold up his hands toward heaven, to pray for prosperity on
him or his, which he does himself so directly counteract. Can then any nation,
famous for its freedom, want in such an extremity some proper remedy and
resource against the rage, the madness, or the incapacity of an administration?

I answer, that our ancestors were far from being so careless of those to come
after them, as to have left us in concerns depending on our own domestic
government without means very sufficient for our safety and our welfare. The
people of Great Britain have a lawful, constitutional, acknowledged,
undisputed, undoubted power of application and petition. This is an inherent
right of every county, every city, every borough, every body of men in it, and
which any one may be confident, that no King, no Minister, and, let me add, no
Parliament will resist or withstand; if the exertion of it shall be general,
universal and unanimous, such as shall evidently speak with the full and the
clear voice of the whole nation, it may in such a case be depended upon for
sufficient and effectual. Never did perhaps any period of our history more
require such an exertion than the present moment. I will not repeat what has
been said with respect to the stake, either of the public or of private
persons; but even the Minister must, in all appearance, be in his own breast
pleased with it. It might afford him a fair opportunity, or almost force him,
to withdraw his foot out of difficulties; in which he cannot but by this time
be sensible how rashly and inconsiderately he has involved both himself and his
country. What unaccountable fatality is it, which can prevent any one at the
helm of a nation from taking of his own accord so prudent and so salutary a
step. But this matter mounts higher. The King is blessed with a fair and a
large family, from whom even a private parent might promise himself the
greatest comfort and felicity, but much more may his Majesty, if they near him
shall by their fatal and unfortunate counsels mingle no bitter in his cup.
However let all loyal subjects well reflect, and especially they first in
favor, whether these measures are not of such a magnitude and a malignity,
that they may either immediately or in their consequences throw the whole state
into the last confusion, endanger our becoming a prey to foreign powers, shake
the throne itself, and disturb one day the peace and the happiness of our
gracious Prince, even within his own palace, and in the midst of his numerous
royal progeny. To whomsoever we may therefore presume on this subject to offer
up our humble petitions, we shall beseech those respectable perssons to bless
and to secure equally both the public and themselves.

It seems the more necessary to use this last safe resource of the
constitution, as it is difficult to find any other help, that is left for us
under heaven. Our political parties and their leaders bear a suspicion of
covering and concealing, under pretenses of the general good designs of
personal ambition and advancement. The people of England have had but too much
experience in that respect. What division, what connection, what denomination
of men among us have not in their turn spoiled and plundered this poor country?
Our liberties and our properties were before the Revolution attacked, under the
pretense of prerogative, by a set of men who bore the name, and who invented or
advanced the doctrine of Tories; but the virtue of our ancestors saved us then.
Through how long a series of successive administrations has since that time
this nation been sold, bartered and betrayed by a race of false, pretended,
unworthy and venal Whigs; whose endeavors toward our destruction have
unfortunately been more successful than those of their predecessors? God
forbid, that we should now be ready to receive our fatal and our final stroke
from the joint force of both these causes, from the accursed practice of
corruption, united with the senseless principles of a boundless obedience of
the people, and of an extravagant power of the crown! These evils do not
perhaps least prevail in the very places, which ought most to be a sanctuary
and a security against them. What is become of the ancient public spirit of
England, when the first in rank and in fortune were ever the foremost to
protect the rights of the whole? It is for the honor of our name and our nation
to be hoped, that this noble passion of the human breast is retired, and is
setting up its standard among our countrymen on the continent, if it has
totally fled from this once free and fortunate island. It must grieve any one
to ask, Whether there are none, even in the respected band of our professed
patriots, who had it once in their power to have utterly extinguished, but who
left unhappily and purposely to lurk and to smother in their proceedings and in
their own acts of parliament this very pretension, and, as it were, the same
fire, which has since broken out so fiercely, and which threatens now to
consume in one common flame both Britain and America? However, it is to be
hoped that these persons will, from such violent and such evident mischiefs, be
at length convinced, nor continue backward to concur and to contribute toward
some sufficient measures for the lasting peace and relief of our country and
our colonies. But we are now upon the brink of the precipice; our situation
admits no longer of our being led blindfold; it is too late for us to trust
either to thorough-paced ministers or to half-paced patriots; the time requires
this nation to declare its own genuine sense, perhaps its last sense of its
condition and its circumstances. How can we otherwise expect in this case the
assistance of providence itself than in employing the powers, which his
goodness has, by the means of the constitution and the provision of our
ancestors, been pleased to lodge with us for that apparent purpose?

But it may be said, have not we a legal representative, and is not that
sufficient? I shall leave the matter of fact to answer with respect to the
sufficiency, but I desire to say something in explanation of the point itself.
I hope to be perfectly understood, that I do not at all mean to deny our having
such a legal representative; but it is surely just and becoming for us to
discourse on subjects of this consequence with one another, like men. I
presume, that it is permitted for any one to ask, whether there is not some
distinction between a legal representative and a real one. All bodies of men
speak and act by their majority. It is a handful of people in comparison of the
whole nation, which choose the major part of our House of Commons. I may in
saying this express myself freely, but I offend no worthy or honest man. No
such will ever take offense at a notorious truth, and none can well be more so
than the fact, which is now mentioned. How can then, in the common use and
sense of the English language, any body of men really represent any others,
than those by whom the greater part of them are named and appointed for that
purpose? This may not interfere with a legal representation, nor do I declare
myself any opinion about a real one. I am on the subject ready to receive with
respect the dictates of my betters. It may perhaps be a mystery in politics, or
something not at this moment comprehended by the writer. However this legal,
this real representative, or in what manner soever that honorable body is to be
described, they do ever suffer their fellow subjects to apply to them by
petition, through the hands of any one of their own members. This circumstance
is there necessary, but it seems to make no effectual difference. The right or
practice itself has never been denied or disputed, nor therefore has it stood
in need of the sanction of an act of parliament. The road is yet more direct to
the throne; the subject presents of himself, and without intervention, his
petition there. This right was at the Revolution confirmed in as fit terms as
the truest frind of the freedom of his country could have found. There are
therefore required no strings or belts to clear either of these ways; they
remain ever plain and open, and lead immediately to those who can afford us
effectual redress and assistance. Thus stands then this point: Our throne is
hereditary, our peerage is hereditary, the major part of our House of Commons
is appointed by an inconsiderable proportion of the nation; can then many words
be wanted to recommend or to enforce the practice of petition by the people and
the public, or is the community to have no share in its own costitution, in its
legislature, its government, and the determination of its most important and
most essential concerns?

However, as we have in our hands proper, prudent, and peaceable means of
stopping or of diverting these measures, so let us on the other side consider;
whether we shall not by a neglect of them become partakers in the guilt of the
wrongs done to the Americans, and of the ruin brought on ourselves and our
posterity. All people are responsible for the public conduct of those, whom
they appoint or consent to be over them; this is the law of men and of nations,
but it is likewise that of a higher power; it is the law of nature. I observe
with reverence, that providence seems to unite together the interests and
concerns, the fate and fortunes of each state and of each kingdom, and to
demand at their hands an account of the actions of their respective rulers,
whether princes, ministers, or any other; their prosperity and their adversity
appear to be in a great degree dealt out to them according to that
circumstance. It is strange, on what ground some people found their
presumption; for the public does not only appoint government in its first
original; but it is most evident, that it does afterward continue at all times
to answer for the conduct and the measures of its governors both to God and to
man. But with respect to our own case in the present instance, can there be in
the affairs of humanity a fairer or a more equitable condition than for people
to have in their own power the means of removing their danger, and of securing
their stability? However it behooves us to remember on what terms we enjoy it.
The Americans may one day require at our hands, and retaliate upon us their own
sufferings, and most certainly will do so, if we shall not exert to effect
these means inherent in us, but that the things and the events already begun
and in motion shall come to extremity. The story of the war carried on by the
Dutch in support of their liberty, against the Portuguese and the Spaniards,
will sufficiently teach us this; if we need to go beyond our own reason for
such a piece of instruction. We have in ourselves, and placed in our hands, the
power on this occasion of insuring our own safety, and of restoring to our
colonies and our countrymen of America their rights, their peace, their
properties, and their liberties, a most noble and inestimable privilege, but in
all appearance not entrusted to us without account.

It may however be asked, what way is then to be taken, what clue can be found,
that may lead us out of our present perplexity and difficulties? I answer, that
it is much more easy to embroil a state, which is in peace and in tranquillity,
than it is to reduce it again to the same desirable situation, when it shall
once be so embroiled. However I will in so important a matter venture to hazard
an opinion, although with some uncertainty of the future fact whereon it is
grounded. There is said to be sitting, at Philadelphia, a Congress of some of
the most respectable persons of that continent. It appears probable, that there
may from them come in some shape or another propositions to the public or to
the government. Should that be so, let not these be out of an ill-judged pride
or idea of superiority despised and refused, but on the contrary adopted and
made the ground and the foundation of a future settlement and establishment
between us and America: I will not prevaricate or deny that, I mean in some
measure a new one; for of returning again exactly and precisely to the former
and ancient one, there is not the least appearance of probability; although
there shall in the way be nothing more than what is known to have already
happened. They have once trusted to our experience and our prudence; however
they have found these but a weak and a slender security. They will undoubtedly
expect some stronger and better barrier, some line to be drawn, or some
landmark to be fixed, in futurity between us. I speak it with the utmost
sincerity; that I verily believe them to understand the joint interests of
Great Britain and of America better than we do, and that they will in the first
instance propose nothing unfit or unbecoming with respect to this country; but
should we neglect or reject proper terms, when they are offered, we may perhaps
afterward not come readily to the same again. On Charles the first granted ten
times more at last, than would have contented and have satisfied at first; but
he ever suffered himself to be forced; that was his evil policy and evil
fortune. None thanked him for what he did. He lost at length all, his head not
excepted. Do not let our state or our government imitate in their conduct that
unfortunate prince. There may directly be for a kingdom no block or scaffold;
but there are just and equal laws, and a severe and irresistible fatality
attending upon the transgression of them. What is in the general course of an
infinite universe, perpetually proceeding in obedience to those laws, the
existence, the rise, or the fall of a state, any more upon the comparison than
that of a single person? These are not light and trifling matters, which are
now in operation, a midsummer night's dream, or the story of a day; with which
we may divert ourselves at our will. It may be depended upon; that it is for
ever, if these provinces shall once be severed from us. The command and the
government of great countries are not to be taken up again at pleasure, when
they shall have fallen from the hand that holds them, like the playthings of
children.

But it may be observed to have been thrown out, that France and Spain would
interfere; whereas nothing of that kind has happened, nor are we disturbed by
either of them. I answer, that their ministers of state must otherwise have
been much as thoughtless and as inconsiderate as our own. It is fit, that the
fish should fasten on the hook or be entangled in the net, beyond the power of
getting free, before the hand appears which is to strike or to make a prey of
it. He is surely but a poor politician, who can be laid asleep by those two
cabinets, being more cunning than to stay or to turn us in the beginning of a
career, which must be so much to their satisfaction and their inclination. It
is an old proverb, that any one should make a bridge of gold for his enemy when
he is flying from him. Is it to be doubted, but that these powers would
willingly pave, almost with any materials and at any expense, a way for us to
march and to attack our own provinces; those provinces which have so long been
the support of ourselves, and the envy of other nations. It has been said, that
they have before now found the means of paving the way to their own peace with
us; but heaven forbid that they should ever find that of putting us at
daggers-draw among ourselves, of engaging in a war with one another the mother
country and our colonies of North America! Whenever that illstarred hour shall
arrive, and by whose folly or artifice soever brought about, the arms of our
rivals will hardly he wanted to lay the glory and the greatness of Britain in
the dust. France and Spain laugh and sing in the mean time to see what we are
doing, and it may be depended upon, that they know better than to meddle at
this moment in our broils.

There is another point, to which I would speak a word, before I have done.
Some sycophants and makers of mischief on the other side of the Atlantic seem
to have had no small part in causing the present disturbances. Why should
otherwise all these have rather arisen in Massachusetts Bay than in Connecticut
or in Rhode Island; except that we appoint the Governors in the former, and
that the people themselves do so in the latter. The counsels of these men must,
upon experience, have been found wrong and mistaken. They magnified the mighty
power of parliaments, and appear to have flattered some people here, as if
their singer was irresistible. Had they pointed out events, as they have really
happened; it is impossible that we should have conducted ourselves as we have
actually done. All this may clearly be accounted for, if we suppose one
principle, which is that they meant to advance themselves in Great Britain,
however their endeavors might turn out either for us or for America. It would
be a most strange thing, should these same persons be still consulted,
countenanced and encouraged. We ought to be sensible how clearly we have
already paid on that article. The writer does not know the face of one of them;
I speak singly for the sake of the public; but there can in all appearance no
common good come to the two countries of Great Britain and of North America,
until that these fatal authors of our mutual evils shall be banished from all
counsels and confidence.

So much for my present object. I have on this occasion not entered into the
difficulty, or rather the apparent impossibility, of subduing with a few
thousands of soldiers from England a very great continent, most strong in
itself, and defended by some hundreds of thousands of its inhabitants naturally
placed over the different parts, and commanding all the produce and the
advantages of the country, and who are armed, trained and ready to take the
field in defense of what they believe to be their all; men of tried bravery,
and that have upon experience performed many actions of remark. I have not
insisted on the absolute certainty of their finding, in case of a direct
rupture and revolt from Great Britain, foreign assistance. I have not mentioned
our ministers having wantonly, and in all appearance out of personal ambition,
taken upon themselves the affairs of our East India Company, and having by that
means subjected on any contention with the native powers of those regions, the
nation to the danger of being one day found between the two fires of the
West Indies and the East, and perhaps at the same time a fire in Europe hotter
than either of the others. I have not examined the burden of our national debt
pressing in the midst of these circumstances most heavily upon us. I have not
touched on very many other topics respecting our present ill-judged and
ill-omened attempt; these were of a preceding subject. This matter has now been
only taken up on the ground where it was left upon a former argument, and upon
our measures and the change and the state of affairs in America since that
time; here will I likewise leave it once more.

It is not owing to a want of information, to a want of understanding, to a
want of a sense and a knowledge of the importance or the imprudence of our
American measures, if some people of property, of capacity, of independence
seem to sleep supinely, while a rock is ready to fall and to crush their
country. There is in public concerns an abjectness, which obtains and daily
increases among us, and that in a rank of men where it ought least to prevail,
and to whom others are entitled to look up in a time of danger or of
difficulty. The rise and the beginning of this might readily be pointed out, it
was not first in this reign; but these men may truly be told, that there is no
support for themselves, but in the stability of all; that their private fortune
and possessions will in the common destruction most inevitably go to wreck and
to ruin with the rest; the cloud from the Atlantic threatens them, as well as
the merchant and the manufacturer, the farmer and the labourer. But we seem not
to remember, that we are born Britons; that governments are instituted for the
good of the governed, and for that only; that we have in our immediate,
personal and collective capacity an inherent right to signify our sentiments of
the national measures to those who contrive, govern and direct them; that the
concern therein of many is upon the comparison much as considerable one for one
as their own, but that of all united and taken together almost at the ocean to
a drop of water; that we are men and not a stock of sheep forced to follow our
fellow, because be happens to bear a bell about his neck. The writer has thrown
out these things from a sincere and earnest desire of the general safety and
welfare; he heartily hopes that the seed is sown in good ground, and that it
will bear fruit for the benefit of the whole; but if, after all, the hand of
fate is upon this nation; if the period approaches in which we are doomed to
perish; if there is at once an incurable madness in our councils, and a
boundless obsequiousness in our proper guardians and protectors; if the
constitution is forgotten, and men of weight and of respect abandon their
country; I must say, that his will be done, who governs both individuals and
communities. I trust nevertheless, that these words will not be so lost, but
that they shall at least preserve one private person from the charge and the
consciousness of having scrupled to speak plainly his opinion, and his
expectation of the dangers and the evils impending over the public.

Nov. 1775.
End of the APPENDIX.
P. S. During the printing of these sheets, authentic accounts are come of
resolutions, respecting a suspension of commerce between America and
Great Britain being entered into, and recommended by the Congress held at
Philadelphia. This is another material circumstance and consideration, pointed
out and pressed in the foregoing book. I mean now to make no reflections on the
subject; time will tell, whether the consequences shall also be such as are
there supposed or conceived. There is another vote of the same meeting, which
is both so very plain and so very important, that I cannot omit to repeat it in
its own words, which are That the Congress approve of the opposition by the
inhabitants of the Massachusetts Bay, to the execution of the late acts of
parliament, and if the same should be attempted to be carried into execution by
force, all America ought in such a case to support them in their opposition.
This neither needs nor admits of any comment; but how amply does it fulfill what
we were on that head forewarned! However, let us at least not neglect the
caution which it contains, for the time to come. It is likewise almost
impossible for an Englishman not to observe, with the most sincere regret, that
the first proceedings of a new and an essential assembly among ourselves have
been such, as must by all men in our America be understood to approve and to
maintain, in the highest and the harshest of language, the measures carrying on
against them. It becomes the writer to receive with respect these resolves of
our legislature; however I shall, in regard thereto, desire once more every
person having for his country any concern, most seriously to consider, whether
humble, constitutional, general and universal petitions, are not our last and
our only remaining, although at the same time our sure and our certain
resource, if they shall duly and properly be employed and applied.



THE END.

