Mr. STEARNS's FAST-SERMON, Preached May 11, 1775

A View of the Controversy subsisting between Great Britain and the American
Colonies. A SERMON PREACHED AT A FAST, IN MARLBOROUGH in MASSACHUSETTS BAY, ON
Thursday May, 11, 1775. Agreeable to a Recommendation of the PROVINCIAL
CONGRESS.

By William Stearns, A. M.

Published at the Desire of the Hearers.

Lord, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many or with them that
have no Power: Help us O Lord our God, for we rest on Thee, and in thy Name we
go against this Multitude. O Lord, thou art our God, let not Man prevail
against thee. ASA, King of Judah. WATERTOWN: Printed by BENJAMIN EDES. 1775.

To the honorable General Officers, Commanders of the New England Forces,
encamped in and about Cambridge and Roxbury, in defense of the property, and
rights, sacred and civil, of AMERICANS, against the insults and depredations of
ministerial peculators, and enemies of the British constitution.
Much honored and respectable Gentlemen,
THE following discourse is with humility dedicated to you, by its author, who
solicits your patronage. -- The short notice given me by the good people to
whom it was preached, -- my avocations -- the great agitation of mind that must
attend every well-wisher to America, at this extremely critical juncture, make
it defective in coherence and pertinency -- When I composed it. I had not the
most distant thought, that it would ever see the light -- I was governed by
that maxim of the ingenious Langhorne. Sermons written to be preached, must not
be written for the press. Therefore I humbly hope the inelegance of diction
will be veiled by your candor. -- My design in making this dedication is, that
I may have an opportunity to exhibit my dutiful respects to you, gentlemen
whose eminent personal merit and invincible patriotism have made you accepted
of the multitude of your brethren; and raised you to stations of
superintendence, where you will have an opportunity to do justice to yourselves
and your country, and thereby make your names forever illustrious, in the
annals of fame: -- And also, that under your auspices, this production may have
a currency among the Soldiery; whereby they may obtain the knowledge of the
merits of the important common cause in miniature, and be roused with military,
zeal and ardour, in pursuit of heroic achievements, whereby they may merit the
applause of admiring nations, who, struck with awe and veneration, shall cause
their same to echo, and re-echo from pole to pole, and future generations to
rise up and call them blessed.

We rejoice in the signal interpositions of divine providence; that every
martial maneuver has hitherto been crowned with success. -- We must that HE
who has delivered will still deliver. -- It is our hearty prayer, that all
your paths may be illuminated by the sun of righteousness; -- that your hearts,
warm with an ardent love of liberty, and of your countrymen, -- with glowing
patriotism -- with the principles of our holy religion -- and fired with zeal
and heroic ardor, may be the source of those counse's, resolutions and martial
mandates, which the monarch of the universe shall own, approve, and crown with
success.

We wish that the divine blessing may attend you, and that, under God, you may
be literally and emphatically the saviors of America -- After you have acted
your parts well on this transitory polemic stage, and with regard to you the
scene of eternity shall be exhibited in lieu of time; may you, under convey of
cheruble legions, be transported to the paradise of God; where, though nation
should rage against nation, and jarring kingdoms sink into political ruin, and
the whole world be convulsed and rent with anarchy and war, you may, secure
from harm, and with infinite satisfaction, "walk high in salvation and the
climes of bliss."

These are the sincere prayers of him who is, Honored Gentlemen, with the
greatest respect, your most obedient humble servant, WILLIAM STEARNS.
Marlborough, June 7, 1775.
A View of the Controversy, etc.
II. CHRON. XX. 11. 12. Behold, how they reward us, to come to cast us out of
thy possession, which thou have given us to inherit. O our God, will thou not
judge them? For we have no might against this great company that comes against
us: neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee.
TO speak with propriety upon a subject so important as is the alarming and
affecting state of political affairs in America, at the present day, is too
arduous for me to attempt. To do it justice, requires the force of the most
sublime genius, and of art. -- Conscious therefore of my being in a great
measure destitute of these accomplishments; I have nothing to rely on but the
divine assistance, and the known candor of this respectable assembly.

Not can I urge your attention by any other motive, than my hearty affection to
this my native country, and the warmest wishes for her political salvation.

It is, my friends, our unhappy lot to live in the day of the American Israel's
trouble -- our enemies are those of our own house.

We were derived from the great family of Britain, and therefore had some
rational foundation to expect of her friendly treatment, her kind care and
affection. But to our great disappointment, and even consternation, she has
like an unnatural mother (entirely void of natural affection) turned against
us, and is now sheathing her sword in our bowels; and thereby has plunged us in
dire calamities, in the last distress of nations, the horrors of A CIVIL WAR!
so that we have reason to cry out in the language of the prophet Jeremiah, My
bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my very heart: My heart makes a noise in me,
I cannot hold my peace, because thou has heard. O my soul, the sound of the
trumpet, the alarm of war. -- We find by dire experience, that "every battle of
the warrior is with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood."

And these calamities, as before observed, were brought upon us by those who
are allied to us by kindred blood; who, not content with their own possessions
and territories in their own proper country, (together with some of our own
children) have sent an army, to cast us out of our possession which God gave to
our forefathers and to us to inherit! and though we have, of ourselves, no
sufficient might against this great company, yet we hope that God will judge
them

Our text, my friends, is part of the prayer of Jehoshaphat, when he was in the
like distress, and proclaimed a fast. -- A part of the army, which came against
him, were the kindred of his own people -- they were the Edomites, the
posterity of Esau, who was the brother of Jacob, the progenitor of the people
of Israel.

This appears from the verse next preceding our text. Now behold the children
of Ammon, and Moab, and Mount Seir, whom thou would not let Israel invade,
etc. -- This Mount Seir was the country which the Edomites inhabited. -- The
children of Israel had it in their power, when they passed through the
territories of the several people above mentioned, when coming out of the land
of Egypt, to have destroyed them, and have laid waste their country -- but they
did not -- they acted toward them the part of a kind, generous, and humane
people, and dealt with them as they might reasonably expect to be treated. --
Notwithstanding this, the Edomites and others no sooner found themselves in the
possession of power, than they raised an army, and came to root out and
exterminate the rightful proprietors of the land of Canaan. -- Jehoshaphat in
this case, did not lean to his own understanding, did not put entire confidence
in his own strength; but proclaimed a fast, and supplicated assistance from the
God of armies: O our God will thou not judge them; will thou not give success
to our arms? Will thou not defeat them, and punish them for their iniquitous
and ungenerous attempts to deprive us of our lives and property.

As our case, at the present time, is in a considerable degree analogous to
his, I shall apply the words of the text to ourselves, and take occasions from
them to show,

I. That this our land is God's possession, which He has given us to inherit.

II. That no other man, or body of men, have a right to this possession, or any
part of it, unless we see cause to give it to him, or them, for some good or
valuable consideration; and therefore,

III. Great Britain in sending an army to turn us out of our possession, merely
because we will not resign up ourselves and property, to be disposed of at her
will and discretion, is unjust and barbarous; and therefore,

IV. As this army is come against us, and as we cannot trust in an arm of flesh
or upon our counsels alone, we ought to have our eyes upon God, for him to
espouse our cause, and put an end to the quarrel. --

First then, I am to show that this our land is God's possession, which he has
given us to inherit.

In province this, I must first give you a short history of the way and manner
in which we became seized of God's possession, which is said to be given to us.
-- Those adventurous worthies, our forefathers, the first settlers of this
country, were eye witnesses of the infringements that were made upon the civil
and religious rights and immunities of their brethren the people of England,
during the unpringely administration of James, and the tyrannic reign of
Charles the first; which last, it is not impossible might be an honest man, but
certainly was a most misguided and impolitic king.

They (our ancestors) saw the seeds of civil war were sprouting, which were
likely to produce a dire harvest of guns, bayonets, swords and spears: and so,
rather than be employed in shedding and trampling in their brethren's gore,
they chose to forsake their native shores, the land of their forefather's
sepulchers, to procure a peaceful seat in some foreign region, where they
should not hear the voice of the oppressor -- where they might be free from the
shackles, forged by popish priests for their bodies and consciences too! --
where they might, without molestation, worship the God of their fathers in
spirit and in truth.

They embarked -- trusting in Jehovah, committed themselves to the merciless
inclemency of the Atlantic -- the everlasting God was their refuge -- they
disembarked and for the first, set their feet upon this western main. -- The
rocks and rough shore were their bed -- the hideous forests and canopy of
Heaven their covering -- their gra^^s, wild bears and wolves, and other beasts
of prey, with that tawny race, whose tender mercies are cruelty.

That part of these lands by them first settled, they purchased by fair bargain
of the natives.

The rest was obtained by conquest, in a war entered into by them for their own
just defense -- and they defended their acquisitions by themselves alone for a
long time with inconceivable expense of blood and treasure! So that if purchase
and conquest give any people a right to any land, territories or hereditaments
whatsoever, then we have an exclusive right to this land, and all the profits
of it. --

It is God's possession, as being a part of his creation, the whole world is
his, and the fullness; consequently he had an indefeasible title to America. --
It is his possession, for that his churches are here erected, and his worship
is not carried on in greater purity and beauty, in any other part of the world.
--

Here the doctrines of the christian faith are known and understood in their
greatest purity -- here are the tabernacles of God -- his sanctuaries where he
delights to dwell, and where he commands the blessing, even life for evermore
-- This, I think, makes our land God's possession, by way of eminence. --

And it appears that he gave it to us to inherit, in that Americans from our
ancestors downward, 'till very lately, have had the peculiar smiles of Heaven.
Where? -- in what country, was it ever known that a people arose from paucity
to populousness so fast? When in any other part of the world, did three
millions of people exist in one collective body, in a country discovered for
them but little more than a century and an half?

This is the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes! --

And most of us (if not all) have had these lands confirmed to us by charters,
which have had the sanction of royal faith! Not that I suppose that the royal
grantors had any legal right to grant these lands, for they were not seized of
them, and consequently had no property in them -- for though we should admit (as
we may with safety) that the discovery of an uninhabited country, may give the
discoverers a right to such lands, yet this rule could not operate in this
case, because this country was actually inhabited by the aboriginal Indians, of
whom our forefathers purchased. --

So that, as I conceive of it, the operation of the charters, relative to this
country, was not a grant of these lands to those who before had no right to
them; but was only a royal promise and assurance, that we should occupy and
enjoy, and not be disturbed in the enjoyment of all those lands, tenements, and
hereditaments, of which the English settlers of America, before the date of
said charters, were seized and in actual possession. The purchasing of these
lands of the Indians, the pretended royal grant notwithstanding, is prima facie
evidence, that the nominal grantees were under a full conviction that the said
grant conveyed a title, in foro juris Naturalis, invalid -- that it was but a
mere Fictio juris, the shadow, without the substance.
And as these lands are thus clearly ours, I am naturally led to say
accordingly -- that no other man, or body of men, have a right to this
possession, or any part of it, unless we see cause to give it to him or them,
for some good or valuable consideration.

This is a doctrine, which has been so often asserted, and proved over and over
again, and is so well understood by people in general, that it seems almost
unnecessary to insist upon it -- But to stir up your minds by way of
remembrance, I will now suggest some of the arguments which support the
assertion. -- What any man acquires by his own labor and toil, he had an
exclusive right to. To whatever is given to a man he has the same right --
Whatever a man obtains by legal purchase, no man has a right to take from him.
-- These are the principal ways in which men acquire property, The systematical
law, writers, mention other ways of acquiring property, such as, Occupancy,
Descent etc. but as they are comprehended in those I have mentioned, it is
unnecessary to give them a distinct consideration.
-- Now as the natural rights of mankind are immutably the same, and as one man
has naturally no pre-eminence above another, hence it undeniably follows (and
it respects communities and their component parts as well as individuals) that
no reason can be given why one man should take away, have and enjoy that which
is another's, without his consent. -- The word property signifies that estate
of substance which a man has and possesses, exclusive of the right and power of
all the world besides.

Now, unless a man can dispose of what he has, as he pleases, and keep it as
long as he pleases, he cannot be said to have any property at all.

This does not extend so far, as to put a man at liberty to withold the payment
of his just debts, or his proportional part of the necessary charges of good
and wholesome government.

For when a man contracts a debt, he is supposed in the judgment of the law,
and of reason, at that time to promise to pay that debt. By this promise, the
property in that matter, or substance which is to pay the same debt (whether
money or any thing else)passes out of the promissor, into the promissee, or him
to whom the promise is made. -- So in regard to paying the charges of civil
government; every man in the community is supposed either explicitly or
implicitly, to consent and engage to be a member of that community; unless he
expressly declares the contrary; and in this case, he is out lowed, and has no
title or claim to any protection or support.

When men thus enter into society they are supposed to consent and promise,
each and every one of them, that they will bear their proportional part of the
charges resulting from the support of good regulation and government.

And this is but the reasonable and legal construction of every man's conduct,
who enters into society. So that, even in the cases of debt, and the charges of
government, the consent of every man is had, previous to the disposal of his
property.

Here I would just observe, that the members of the community, in a free state,
are to be consulted, and are to determine from time to time, the quantity of
their property, which is to go to the support of civil government, and to
defray other contingent charges. And in case any society, or (rather)
community; neglect thus to do, their government falls to the ground, and they
of course revert to the state of nature.

But let us suppose just for the present, that there are a clan of
distinguished, high-privileged mortals in the world, perhaps in Great Britain,
who have a legal right to levy taxes, and dispose of the property of their
fellow-mortals at their own pleasure and discretion! -- Let us see where it
will carry us.

If they have a right in this way to take six pence, by the same rule they may
take a shilling. And when their purses, after a frolic, are grown a little
lank, and their inclination prompts them, they may take a pound -- and so on,
till they have got the whole. Whence it follows, that there are some of our
fellow-mortals, who, however honest and well deserving they may be, and let
them labor ever so hard, and procure ever so much gain, yet LEGALLY they have
no property at all. This doctrine of the disposal of property, without the
consent of the proprietor, is so ridiculous and absurd, that it seems to me it
is not irrational to suppose that it had its origination in Bedlam, or -- a
worse place!

I will conclude this head with producing only one authority from a writer who
understood the nature of civil government, as well (at least) as any writer,
ancient or modern -- the famous ALGERNON SYDNEY -- Says he, "NO MAN CAN GIVE
THAT WHICH IS ANOTHER's." Which leads me to the consideration of the third
thing asserted, viz.

That Great Britain in sending an army to turn us out of our possessions,
merely because we will not tamely resign ourselves and property to be disposed
of at her will and discretion, is unjust and barbarous.

What is said under the last head, is full demonstration of this, viz. that it
is in opposition to that plain dictate of reason and common sense, that no man
is to have his property taken from him without his own consent, or that of his
representative.

If it be said that her design is not to eject us from our possessions, but
only to make us swear allegiance, and submit to the authority of Great Britain
-- I answer, this does not alter the merits of the cause, nor invalidate my
assertion. Let me examine it.

The British troops were sent here expressly and professedly, to FORCE the
Americans to own and acknowledge that the British parliament have a right to
make laws binding upon them in ALL CASES WHATSOEVER. And now should we
Americans acknowledge this as their right, what would be the consequence? The
following! --

First, If they by law bind us in all cases whatsoever, then it is as evident
as that two and two make four, that no possible case is excepted If so, then
secondly, we are completely tenants at will, and have no permanent property.

Now you all, no doubt, know that in law, a tenant at will, is he who holds an
estate of another, determinable at the will and pleasure of either of the
parties. -- Now if this exhorbitant claim of Parliament is acknowledged, viz a
right, etc. then they may, consistently with themselves, enact and ordain that
all the lands and tenements in New England (and more if they please) shall be
deemed and be the King's property alone in FeeSimple; and that we the present
proprietors and possessors shall hold them only during his pleasure.

Now the King may determine his will, whenever he pleases, as well as any other
man: And when his will is determined, we must, let come on us what will, leave
the ground!

And there is but one instance, in which we can have an opportunity to
determine our will, and that is to be beforehand with the King, and evacuate
our habitations, and relinquish our estates, in the same manner, as our
suffering fellow-countrymen of Roxbury and Charleston have done. When this
sermon was preached, not many of the Bostonians had emigrated.


It is a never failing maxim of law, that that is certain, which may be
rendered certain Id certum est, quod certum reddi potest. Ld. Co. 1 Just. 45. a
Now though there may not be a legal, yet there is a moral certainty, that if
they have this right, now they are so loaded and distressed with debt, they, if
they are not born fools, will exercise it.

If it be said that the humanity of Britons will not admit of it, I answer --
we have had a striking specimen of the humanity of Britons, on the 19th of
April -- in the ever memorable battle of Lexington!! -- On the other hand -- If
we do not submit, nor acknowledge the said claims, then we are to be DRAGOONED
into a submission!

Then conquest will be their mode of acquisition. -- If they gain the victory,
then we are to be treated as Traitors, which (by the laws of England) is as
follows; we are to be drawn on hurdles, i. e. carriages made of bundles of
brush, and drawn by horses on the ground, to the place of execution -- then
hanged a while by the neck -- then taken down, and our bowels taken out and
burnt before our eyes -- then beheaded and quartered, and our heads and
quarters disposed of at the King's pleasure! [God Almighty be merciful to our
souls!] -- then ensue a confiscation of estates and corruption of blood, so
that our posterity never can inherit, to the latest generation; 2 Hawk, P. C.
443.
(then she is sure of them) -- and all this because we are desirous of keeping
what little substance we have earned by the sweat of our brow -- by hard labor
and toil, for the support of ourselves and families -- and of that government
under which we may lead lives in all godliness and honesty.

O our God, will thou not judge them?

If it be said, that we ought to pay something in return for the protection we
have received from Great Britain, in our trade and commerce -- I would ask
(admitting it for argument's sake) What in the name of goodness, is the reason
why it may not be paid by our VOLUNTARY GRANT, and in the same manner as the
commons of England raise their subsidies, to defray the charges of their fleets
and armies? -- But, by the way, I don't conceive that we owe her very much, on
this score -- for she has all along had the monopoly of our trade, that is the
exclusive enjoyment of it, by which means MILLIONS of money have yearly accrued
to her, which otherwise she never would have had, the loss of which by our
non-importation it is likely she will soon terribly feel!

Had we enjoyed a free trade with other nations, we should have been much
richer than we now are, and perhaps, have been able to make a better defense in
a time of war.

However, upon the whole, let the friends of government (so called) say what
they will, it is certain, that the intent and design of Great Britain in
sending her fleets and troops here, is by one mean or another to take from us
what we call our PROPERTY, and to change the nature of our freehold. I would
not here be understood as meaning that there is an absolute certainty that she
will, immediately, by an act of Parliament alter the mode of our possession or
fealty: or soon, by statute make us hold our lands of the Lord paramount, or to
be tenants paravail; and the only reason is, that she must of necessity be
under a conviction of the iniquity of such procedure: otherwise, she would
immediately exercise the pretended right in controversy, and of this there is
that moral, though not legal, certainty, above mentioned -- But however this
may be, as the state of things now is, whether we acknowledge the right
aforesaid, or not, what I have suggested must naturally, in the course of
thing, come into event. If we do acknowledge the right claimed by Parliament,
we must hold as she pleases -- If we submit to her impositions, we shall in a
short time be ousted of our lands. -- Our medium of currency will become
insufficient -- Mortgages must ensue -- The mortgagors, destitute of a power of
redemption, must surrender to the Great mortgagees. -- and thus will the
greater fish swallow up the lesser fry.
-- This is what we complain of as unjust just and cruel -- to say nothing
about the destruction of our forms of government and charters -- the regulation
bill -- the Quebec-Bill, and the murder-bill -- these are things of course! --
Woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my pasture, says
the Lord.

When we consider the torrent of troubles -- calamities -- distresses --
miseries and deaths, which overwhelmed our pious progenitors, the first
settlers of this then uncultivated wilderness, how affectingly barbarous is it,
thus to disturb us their peaceable posterity! -- For some time after their
arrival in New England, they were hungry and hardly bestead. -- In 1630 there
was a very cold winter. "From the 24th of December till the 10th of February,
the most they could do, was to keep themselves warm, and from starving with
their scanty provision. The poorer sort were much exposed -- lying in tents and
hovels, and many died of the scurvy and other distempers. They were so short of
provisions, that many were obliged to live upon clams, mussels and other shell
fish, with ground nuts and acorns instead of bread. One that came to the
governor's house to complain of his sufferings was prevented, being informed
that even the last batch was in the oven -- and yet in all this distress, they
discovered great calmness, and resignation -- A good man, who asked his
neighbor to a dish of clams, after dinner returned thanks to God, who had
given them to sack of the abundance of the seas, and of treasure hid in the
sand." Gov. Hutch. Hist. vol. 1. page 23.


This is only a specimen, and yet, without an abject submission, we are to be
deprived of our inheritance. -- Behold how they reward us! -- When we most
wanted their assistance, we had it not -- In our primeval wars with the
Indians, they never lent us a finger (much less a hand!) for our help -- we
always, till the last wars, defended ourselves -- and the great Those.
Hutchinson, Esquire once Captain General of the Massachusetts Bay confesses it --
and what he says you know, MUST BE TRUE. No man can be a witness for himself,
but he is the BEST witness that can be AGAINST himself. Chief Baron Gilbert's
law of evidence.
-- Speaking of one of the most bloody Indian wars, he says -- "This is
certain, that as this colony was at first settled, so it has been preserved
from ruin, without any charge to the mother country" -- This is THE CONFESSION
OF THE PARTY!

In the last general war, we raised much more than our proportion of men and
money. I think I have it from very good authority, that anno 1758, this colony,
then small comparatively, raised near 7000 men: and so considerable was what we
paid over and above our proportional part of the charge, that the then
parliament soon after though it sit to make a reimbursement. -- And always ready
have we been to join in the common defense of the empire -- And yet, behold! --
to reward us, fleets and armies are sent here, to overawe and intimidate us
into a mean submission, or else to cast us out of our possession! O our God,
will thou not judge them!!

I come now to speak of the last thing proposed -- which is -- That since this
army is come against us; and as we cannot trust in an arm of flesh or on our
own counsels alone, we ought to have our eyes upon God, for him to espouse our
cause, and put an end to the quarrel -- as in the text -- we have no might
against this great company that comes against us; neither know we what to do,
but our eyes are upon Thee. -- Before I proceed, I must observe some things, to
ascertain the meaning of this latter part of the text -- When Jehoshaphat says,
we have no might, he does not mean that he was destitute of troops -- for in
the 17th chap. v. 14th and onward, we find that he musters 1,160,000 men ready
prepared for the war.

Nor does he mean, that they were small, weak, and cowardly fellows: for it is
there said, that they were all men of valor -- But his meaning was, and is
evidently this, viz. that without the smiles of heaven, the greatest army can
effect nothing; that the race is not to the swift, not the battle to the
strong. -- He had, no doubt, the same sentiments as Asa his father had, when he
encountrade the huge host of the Ethiopians and Arabians, who cried in the face
of his army, and said, Lord, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many
or with them that have no power: Help us, O Lord our God, for we rest on thee;
and in thy name we go against this multitude. O Lord, thou art our God, let not
man prevail against thee. And when he (Jehosh.) says, we know not what to do,
he intends no more than this, that without the guidance and direction of him
who rules in the armies of heaven above, and of this earth, they must of
necessity go forth to war as it were blindfold; for that God is "peculiarly
concerned in deciding the fate of battles," and victory goes to the side,
which, in all human probability, had the least foundation to expect success. --
To go on then with the proposition -- we ought to have our eyes upon God, for
him to espouse our cause, -- It is the duty of a people, in times of distress,
to acknowledge God in all their ways, that so he may be pleased to direct their
paths. We are not to put our confidence in an arm of flesh, but in the Lord of
Hosts and God of armies.

It is very dangerous, to trust solely in the strength of men. We are not only
liable to the most confounding disappointments, but also there is a terrible
curse pronounced against those who neglect the Lord of hosts, and trust in
their own strength. Cursed be the man that trusts in man and that makes
flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord -- But as it follows,
Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is. --
And the godly in all ages have made it their constant practice, to put their
confidence in the Lord of hosts, the rock of ages, in whom is everlasting
strength -- Hence we find David, the man of war from his youth, who fought so
many successful battles, expressing himself thus, Through THEE will we push
down our enemies; -- through THY NAME will we tread them under that rise up
against us; for I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me, but
THY RIGHT HAND, AND THINE ARM, AND THE LIGHT OF THY COUNTENANCE. -- He also
confesses that God taught his hand to war and his fingers to fight.

And such passages as the following are frequently found in the sacred oracles
-- They that trust in the Lord shall be like Mount Zion, which cannot be moved
-- There is no king (nor people) saved by the multitude of an host -- A mighty
man is not delivered by much strength. -- A horse is a vain thing for safety,
neither shall be deliver any by his great strength -- But whose trusts in the
Lord, shall be safe. -- These passages abundantly prove that the Lord Jehovah
is the Being in whom we are to put our trust and confidence of success.

But, further, they by no means prove that we are to set still; but we are,
relying on HIS assistance, to make preparation for engaging in battle, and to
exert ourselves to our utmost: -- for we may rely upon it, that God will not
assist us, unless we use our own endeavors. -- We ought to do every thing in
our power to promote union and harmony among the people -- to see that no root
of bitterness springs up to divide us, for "BY UNITING WE STAND, BY DIVIDING WE
FALL."

We ought also to consider well the nature of our cause, and realize the
justice of it -- realize that if we now relinquish our rights and privileges --
if we desert our cause, and, like the Issachar, lazily couch down under the
burden, "we shall be guilty of sacrilege to God, and treachery to future
generations." -- "Therefore we are not to neglect the natural means of safety."
Let our troops consist of a respectable number of able-bodied men -- let them
be well equiped with the habiliments of war, and to their arms let them stand,
and play the man for our people, and for the cities of our God; and the Lord do
what seems him good.

I shall now, by way of conclusion, make some reflections on what has been said.

And from hence we learn, that human nature is so depraved, that many among
mankind are so void of generosity, equity, and humanity, as, not content with
what of right belongs to them, they audaciously venture to strip and pillage
their innocent, honest, and industrious friends and neighbors -- and all under
the specious name of RIGHT. Behold how they reward us, to come to cast us out
of thy possession which thou has given us to inherit.

It is melancholy to reflect upon that sordid ambition and avarice which
possess the minds of men, which prompt them with rapacious hands to rob others
of their property, their dear brought substance, earned by hard labor and toil,
on which alone they can subsist. How humiliating, to think that any should
attempt to enslave the freeborn mind -- to compel us meanly to cringe to
usurpation and arbitary power -- should ravage our country -- first pillage,
then burn our dwellings over our heads, and butcher our friends before our eyes!

2dly. It has been suggested in the foregoing discourse, that a great company
is come and coming to make an invasion upon us, against whom we have no might
-- with whom we cannot cope with any hopes of success, without the guidance,
direction and assistance of the God of the armies of Israel. Then surely it
becomes us to humble ourselves before God, for those sins, which have caused
him to bring so heavy a judgment upon us, -- and to bring ourselves into such a
submissive frame, as that we may be in a capacity to receive so great a favor
as the removal of this great company from us, -- or else their defeat, so that
they may have no advantage against us, and that we may still lead quiet and
peaceable lives, and have none to make us afraid.

But can there be any disadvantage accruing to us from our inferiority to this
company of men, which, it is surmised, is coming against us? Surely it seems
there cannot: -- For this great company spoken of, consists of British troops,
who are bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh -- Surely THEY cannot do us
any hurt! In settling this great matter, let us have recourse to facts.

According to the best of my remembrance, some time in the fall of the year
1768, the scheme of posting an armed force in Boston, for certain purposes. was
carried into execution. Then, for the first time, did the inhabitants of this
Province behold Britons, in military hue and equipage, quartered in their
Capital, -- to assist, as was said, the civil magistrate, in carrying his
edicts into execution: Though, as dire experience has made appear, to overawe
and fright the inhabitants into a mean, abject submission to arbitrary power.
Old-England's military-band despised and contemned New-England's virtuous sons
-- they treated them with insult and abuse. The armed soldier, with cowardly
soul, attacks the honest countryman naked of defense -- accosts him with such
language as must shock the most indelicate ear -- with reproachful names he is
stigmatized, and loaded with obloquy, too much for innocence to bear. Our
sabbaths and other holidays profaned. The worship of the GREAT SUPREME
interrupted by harsh sounds of drums and fifes and military parade -- The
soldiery patrolling the streets before the doors of temples reared to God,
while prayers were offered to the Almighty Lord! -- The ears of the virtuous
fair, before used only to delicacy and politeness, now grated with ribaldry;
resulting from the utmost efforts of minds vicious and obscene. -- Thus
striving with Midianitish policy and guiles, to destroy our morals, and debauch
the BEAUTEOUS THRONG of daughters in our land. --

Thus did two years roll heavy and gloomy on -- Till on THE FATAL FIFTH OF
MARCH, 1770; when Beelzebub broke loose, and with infernal train, joined with
the scarlet throng, with George's livery, by name the XXIXth. --

Then were there seen citizens of our now distressed metropolis fallen by one
leaden shower, and weltering in their gore! --

Thus were the soul's of undesigning and politically innocent Americans stripped
of their bodies, and sent to Heaven's dread tribunal, there to settle their
accounts, before they would time to say, Lord have mercy on us!

Now view bereaved relatives -- their bosoms heaving -- wringing their hands
with grief, -- bro't into the list of mourners, they make a melancholy train
-- we pitied them, and sympathized. --

Thus, in our view, did Britons turn ruffians and horribly disgraced their
native country by the change! -- May their consciences harrow up their souls,
-- and like Angel's trumpet-tongued proclaim "THE DEEP DAMNATION OF THE DEED!"

Five years more have now revolved -- In this interval, the same unhallowed
courses, as at first, have been pursued. --

'Till on THE EVER MEMORABLE NINETEENTH OF APRIL, 1775; new bloody scenes were
opened to our view!

As for that day, let its gloominess and the shadow of death forever terrify
those murderous souls who wantonly then spilt OUR BRETHREN's BLOOD! -- Who
could have conceived, that men of CHRISTIAN NAME were capable of thus putting
to the blush wild savages of the desert?

But, however startling to our mind, and troops of Britain's king, set out upon
a plundering expedition, in dead of night, being skilled in works of darkness.
-- At morning light, they arrived at LEXINGTON, THE PORCH OF CIVIL WAR -- There
accosted our innocent countrymen with the infernal, shocking name, damned
rebels -- there wantonly let loose the dogs of war, and with malignant tongues
cried HAVOC!!! -- and by ONE fire dismantled eight dear souls, and sent them
murmuring to the skies! -- are these Britons? -- O our God! will thou not JUDGE
them!

I must forbear -- to go through the history of their conduct at CONCORD, their
ravages and murders in retreat, is too painful to the human mind. -- And what
is now our duty? Must we now sit still and maintain peace with the butchers of
our friends? Shall we maintain it "at the expense of property, liberty and
life, and all that dear"? God forbid! If ever there was a call in providence to
take the sword, there now is -- Therefore to arms! -- to arms! -- lest that
curse fall upon us, which fell upon the dastardly inhabitants of Meroz (Jud. 5.
23.) "Curse ye Meroz, said the angel of the Lord; curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants thereof: because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help
of the Lord against the mighty."

We trust that all, whose circumstances will admit of it, will go -- that none
such will refuse to inlist in defense of his country. When God, in his
providence, calls to take the sword; if any refuse to obey, Heaven's dread
artillery is levelled against him, as you may see, Jer. 48. 10. CURSED BE HE
THAT KEEPS BACK HIS SWORD FROM BLOOD; cursed is that sneaking coward who
neglects the sinking state when called to its defense -- O then, flee this dire
curse -- let America's valorous sons put on the harness, nor take it off till
peace shall be to Israel.

When they have engaged by enlistment, let them act with fidelity, nor ever
desert or leave the ground, till the campaign is ended, till fair, though
banished PEACE is full restored to MASSACHUSETTS BAY, and the whole western
world. -- If any do desert, the thunder bolt divine is directed to their
hearts, in the prophet Jeremiah, Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
deceitfully"

He that by enlistment plights his faith, then leaves the ground a coward,
merits this dire curse. -- But there is another sort of coward, who (to use the
words of a late rousing preacher) are sly hypocritical cowards, who undertake
the work of the Lord, that is, take up arms; but they do it deceitfully -- they
do not faithfully use their arms for the purposes for which they were taken --
they commence soldiers, not that they may serve their country, and do their
duty to God -- but that they may live in ease, idleness and pleasure, and
enrich themselves at the public expense. -- Cursed be he that does the work of
the lord deceitfully, and serves himself under pretense of serving his country.
-- Thus he. --

Let none merit this flagitious character -- but let them act their parts with
fidelity, that so, at last, they may receive the rewards of goodandfaithful
servants -- that they may be found such good soldiers in the temporal militia,
as that, at last, they may be raised to, and mingled with the CHURCH TRIUMPHANT
in heaven. --

To conclude -- Let us all realize, that we are candidates for eternity -- "We
must save our souls, as well as our country." We have no might against the
great company of principalities and powers of darkness, which are come against
our souls to destroy them with an everlasting destruction. -- O our God, will thou not judge and prevent them -- these are more terrible than all the troops
of Britain, France. or Spain, with guns and swords, and all the dreadful
artillery of death. -- May we now put on the whole armor of God, and quit
ourselves like men and be strong, and having done all, make a vigorous stand --
May we all enlist in this spiritual welfare, --

May we now commence eternal hostilities with SIN, and be enabled by our God to
carry on a successful war against it, may be we fight the good fight of faith
and overcome all our spiritual enemies, the world, the flesh and the devil
through him that loved us -- that so fighting as good soldiers of Jesus Christ,
we may be thought worthy to enter into the kingdom of the prince of peace: Even
into that kingdom which cannot be shaken; where are no wars, nor rumors of
wars, but an everlasting rest for the people of God.

AMEN.
ADDENDA.
PAGE 21, last line, after the words change the nature of our freeholds, add or
rather our tenures -- Marginal note, line 2d from the bottom, after the words
tenants paravail, add, during pleasure.

The author having confined himself to the consideration of the iniquitous
parliamentary claim to the unlimited discretionary, and capricious disposal of
the property of the AMERICANS, informs his readers, that this is only taken as
a specimen of the least grievous consequences of the DECLARATORY ACT. -- If
this is so grievous and iniquitous as to justify the most VIGOROUS OPPOSITION,
them, a fortiori, the same opposition, to the more grievous consequences of
said ACT, will admit of the same justification.


