Mr. SAMSON's SERMON Preached JULY 20th, 1775.

A SERMON PREACHED AT ROXBURY-CAMP, Before Col. COTTON's Regiment; On the 20th
of JULY, P. M. 1775. BEING A Day set apart for Fasting and Prayer, throughout
all the United Colonies in AMERICA.

By EZRA SAMSON, Colleague Pastor of the First Church in Plymton.

[Published at the Request of the Officers of said Regiment.]

"My heart is toward the Governors of Israel that offered themselves willingly
among the People."

Judge. v.9. WATERTOWN: Printed and Sold by BENJAMIN EDES. 1775.

A SERMON.
2 CHRONICLES. XX.11, 12. Behold I say how they reward us, to come to cast us out of
thy possession which thou have given us to inherit. O our God, will thou not
judge them? For we have no might against this great Company that comes against
us; neither know we what to do; but our eyes are upon Thee.


WHEN we are called to enter upon any thing that is very arduous or difficult,
it is commonly of no small advantage to consult the lives of the wise and good,
and carefully observe how they conducted on similar occasions.

A variety of beautiful examples as well as admirable rules for the regulation
of our conduct in life, so as to be ornaments to society, and blessings to our
fellow creatures, are scattered in the divine oracles.

Among the numerous examples of this kind, scarce any are either more lovely in
themselves, or more worthy of our observation, especially at the present day,
than those wherein the saint and the soldier were united.

A character like this shines with a peculiarly charming luster.

What can give us a more exalted idea of human nature, than to see Moses,
Joshua, David, and others of a like nobleness of soul going forth undauntedly
against their enemies, with the word of God in their mouths, as well as a
two-edged sword in their hands?

One but little inferior* to them, either as to holiness or heroism, is
presented us in our text, which is part of a concise or short prayer to heaven.

In speaking to the words, I shall by divine leave consider particularly,
though very briefly, the character of the person who makes this prayer; -- the
occasion upon which he prays; -- and also the prayer itself.

The person, who thus solemnly addresses himself to heaven, is the excellent
and renowned king Jehoshaphat. -- A prince very rich, prudent and powerful, of
an amiable disposition and unblemished character.

The sacred Historian observes, that* in the beginning of his reign, he
strengthened himself against Israel, and placed forces in all the fenced cities
of Judah, and set garrisons in the land of Judah and in the cities of Ephraim,
which Asa his father had taken.

This was acting a very prudent and commendable part; but sensible however of
this eternal truth, that there was no wisdom or counsel against the Lord; it is
added, that he sought to the Lord God of his father, and walked in his
commandments: Therefore the Lord established the kingdom in his hand; and all
Judah brought to Johoshaphat presents, and he had riches in abundance.

He now sets upon the very pinnacle of honor, in a situation extremely
critical. For in honor of preferment, there is something intoxicating, which is
commonly too much for weak heads.

But how is it with Jehoshaphat? How does he behave himself in this exalted
station, and under the richest smiles of prosperity?

It Is said, that hereupon his heart was lifted up in the ways of the Lord.

Little contracted souls would have been lifted up with pride; but the noble
Prince was of too generous and exalted a make to be guilty of supercilious
haughtiness. His heart was lifted up in the ways of the Lord. A sublime elation
of spirit this!

Jehoshaphat's pleasantness and affability to his soldiers, is also worthy of
remark.

When they rose up early in the morning, and went forth into the wilderness of
Tek^a to battle; as they went forth, he stood and said, Hear me, O Judah, and
ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye stand;
believe his prophets, so shall ye prosper.

And when he had consulted with the people, he appointed singers unto the Lord,
that should praise the beauty of holiness* as they went out before the Army,
and to say, Praise the Lord, for his mercy endures forever.

Such an apparent tenderness toward his men, accompanied with professed
confidence in the divine protection* was doubtless of very happy consequence,
filling them with great love and respect to their generous commander, and
raising their spirits to a sublime pitch.

How beautiful to see intrepidity, without rashness or pride? Courage guided by
counsel and wisdom, and an air of dignity softened by gentleness and sweetness
of behavior! But I can recollect scarce any thing recorded of this good king
that does him more honor than the prayer in our text; the occasion whereof was
this -- A very numerous host, consisting of the inhabitants of Ammon, Moab and
Mount Seir, had come up against him, and invaded his dominions.

Upon receiving intelligence of which, Jehoshaphat set himself to seek the
Lord, and proclaimed a Fast throughout all Judah: And Judah gathered themselves
together to ask help of the Lord.

And Jehoshaphat stood in the congregation of Judah and Jerusalem, in the house
of the Lord, before the new Court.

When I figure to myself the pious and amiable Monarch, standing on the brazen
Scaffold which Solomon had erected for that purpose, and in the midst of a very
numerous assembly, spreading forth his hands, and solemnly addressing the
blessed and only Potentate, in behalf of himself and his beloved people, I
confess I am struck with admiration.

Behold, on one side, the young, the delicate and fair, sinking under distress
and fear at the present alarm; on another stand the venerable Judges and Elders
of Israel, whose heads were whitened with age.

On one side are fathers anxious for the safety of their dear families and
country; on another, tender afflicted mothers, with their little children.

Here, with countenances sedate, stand rows of statesmen and politicians;
there, a numerous throng of brave and gallant soldiers: All in deepest silence,
and with their eyes fixed on their greatly beloved and much respected Prince,
listening to hear him begin his solemn address to heaven.

Whereupon, with the greatest solemnity, he at length breaks forth in these
pertinent and moving expressions, O Lord God of our fathers, art not thou God
in Heaven? And rulest not thou over all the kingdoms of the heathen? And in
thine hand is there not power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee?

How lovely to see a Prince earnestly interceeding at the throne of grace for
his people, and the people all joining in the intercession, no less anxious for
the preservation of their prince!

The most noble king Jehoshaphat, upon some special occasions, did not disdain
or refuse to officiate as Chaplain.

Far from thinking this beneath his dignity (as too many others have done who
were unworthy to loose the latchet of his shoes) he rather accounts it a great
honor and privilege, that he who feels himself to be but dust, is permited to
speak to the supreme, infinite Majesty.

But I now proceed to a particular consideration of Jehoshaphat's prayer, more
especially that part of it which our text contains; wherein these four things
are very observable:

He pleads the goodness and righteousness of his cause, appeals to God to judge
between him and his enemies, acknowledges his utter inability without divine
assistance, either to conquer or withstand them, and professes to repose an
entire trust and confidence in God.

First, He pleads the goodness and righteousness of his cause. Behold, I say,
how they reward us, to come to cast us out of thy possession, which thou have
given us to inherit. In the preceding verse, he intimates that his people had
always behaved inoffensive toward these invaders; never giving them any
occasion thus to commence hostilities. And now behold, says he, the children of
Ammon, and Moab, and Mount Seir, whom thou would not let Israel invade, when
they came out of the land of Epypt; but they turned from them and destroyed
them (...).

Moses in the second chapter of Deuteronomy relates that God had forbidden
Israel to destroy or distress these nations, commanding them to live peaceably
by them as neighbors and brethren.

This prohibition or command, they had carefully and religiously observed;
insomuch that when the haughty Kings of these nations refused to grant them
leave to march through their territories into the land of Canaan, instead of
making them feel the bitter effects of their resentment, they turned from them
and went to their promised possession another way.

And now what vile returns are made by the children of Ammon, Moab, and Edom,
for this indulgence? Living nigh, they knew full well what wonders God had
wrought for Israel; how he had destroyed the heathen before them, and given
them the land of Canaan for their inheritance.

They could not fail of knowing likewise, that unless propitious Heaven had
forbid, they themselves, no less than the nations round about them, would have
been destroyed by Israel's conquering sword.

Their very existence was, in a great measure, owing to this, that the hearts
of this victorious people were softened and drawn out in benevolence toward
them, so as to let them live quietly by their very borders, while they crushed
and utterly extirpated others.

Why therefore this invasion? What an unprovoked injury are the invaders guilty
of?

Who gave them the license to seize the land of Israel, or endeavor to
dispossess this highly savoured people of the inheritance which their God had
bequeathed them? Or who provoked them thus to over-leap their own boundaries?

Jehoshaphat and his people stood in a good cause; in the just defense of every
thing that was dear and sacred, while their enemies acted the part of bloody
villains and robbers.

And by the way, it is of the last importance that when engaged in matters of
great consequence, we be thoroughly convinced that our cause is just; so fully
convinced of this that we may with humble boldness bring it to the throne of
grace, and plead and vindicate it there.

This necessarily gives life and animation, amidst difficulties and dangers;
for though we should chance to die in defense of such a cause, allowing it to
be sufficiently important and prudently managed, our lives would not be
foolishly thrown away, but honorably laid down in obedience to a divine call.

But secondly, The good King Jehoshaphat appeals to God to judge between him
and his enemies. --

O! our God, will thou not judge them?

As if he had said, is it consistent with the honor of thy wise and righteous
government to suffer such high handed injustice and wickedness to go off
triumphant? while these avaricious and grasping nations, not content with their
own pleasant allotments, have without the least provocation, confederated
together in order to deprive us of this goodly land, of our privileges and
every thing that is dear, can thy thunders sleep? can vengeance be inactive?
With respect to the righteousness of our cause, Lord, we humbly appeal to thee.
Thou know that we are injured and unjustly invaded. Self-preservation is a
law of thine, engraven on our hearts, and written in thy word; a violation of
which would be highly sinful. Therefore not only interest but our own
consciences forbid us to relinquish this cause: And will Thou not plead and
vindicate it, by putting our enemies to shame and confusion?

The judge of all the earth ever did and ever will do right; and whenever he
suffers a righteous cause to be lost, it is through the mismanagement and
wickedness of those who are concerned in it, and because they will not suitably
implore his counsel and assistance, or walk agreeable to his rules and
directions.

The third thing noted as worthy of observation in this excellent prayer of
Jehoshaphat, is, that he acknowledges his utter inability, without divine
assistance, either to conquer or withstand his invading foes.

We have no might against this great company that comes against us.

He does not say our own strength is small and insufficient; but we have no
might -- Of ourselves we are nothing and can do nothing.

And to the want of power be subjoins also his confession of their want of
wisdom.

Neither know we what to do, says he.

Power and wisdom are two most essential things, which they who lack are indeed
very poorly equipt for war.

But could Jehoshaphat with a good grace confess and plead his want of these?

The sacred, infallible history wherein his worthy deeds are recorded, mentions
his having eleven hundred and sixty thousand mighty men of valor (if I rightly
enumerated them) exclusive of those whom the king put in the fenced cities
throughout all Judah.

It is also there observed that he wared great exceedingly, building castles
and cities of store in Judah; that the Philistines were tributary to him, and
the Arabians brought him presents.

And it is universally confessed that he was a wise prince, and had, no doubt, a
number of choice and prudent counselors. How then could he say, we have no
might and know not what to do?

This indeed is no paradox.

He very well knew, and piously and wisely considered that though his walls
were never so lofty and impregnable, or his armies never so numerous and brave,
he must quickly sink and fall, unless favored by divine assistance.

Notwithstanding all his seeming might and prowess, he felt himself to be a
weak and feeble creature, entirely dependant upon God for protection and
success.

Very far from any of us be the impious thought that we can possibly be under
such advantageous circumstances in our warlike engagements as not to need the
aids of Heaven.

To trust in our own bow, is not true courage, but madness.

But lastly, the pious king Jehoshaphat, in his prayer, professes to repose an
entire trust and confidence in God.

Our eyes, he says, are upon thee.

We look to Thee, trust in Thee, and depend upon Thee alone.

Help, Lord, for vain is the help of man.

He seems entirely sensible of this truth, Cursed is the man that trusts in
man, and makes flesh his arm.

His chief strength, he well knew, did not lie in the wisdom of his
politicians, or in the numbers and bravery of his soldiers. -- These, of
themselves, are but broken reeds.

People are apt to repose too great a share of their confidence in an arm of
flesh, as if their own skill and power could do all for them; but (...) the
wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might,
nor let the rich man glory in his riches.

Vain is the boasted power of creatures of the dust, who pride themselves in
their craft and strength, and vain are all their designs and stratagems, any
further than, as they are, for wise and holy ends, ^^^mited by him who is the
high possessor and sovereign ruler of Heaven and earth.

God can with infinite ease baffle and disconcert the deepest laid schemes, or
cause one to chase a thousand and ten to put ten thousand to flight.

Therefore it is the great wisdom and interest, as well as duty of a people or
army, to put their entire trust in Him for deliverence and success, when under
distressing difficulties, and especially if called forth in a righteous cause
to war against their enemies.

For if they do this, they need not fear what man can do unto them.

Though surrounded by innumerable dangers, and all hopes of victory or escape,
in an ordinary way of providence, should be cut off, still they have an
unfailing refuge. Let them, with hearts sincere and duly affected, look up to
Heaven and say, we have no might, neither know we what to do, but our eyes are
upon Thee; and the numerous wheels of divine providence would doubtless soon be
set in swift motion for their relief.

Nay, rather than they should fail of success, the very stars in their courses
would fight for them, and the Lord would bring forth to the destruction of
their enemies, his treasures of hail, the thunder of his power, and the forky
lightning, which he has reserved against the time of trouble, against the day
of battle and war.

You will now suffer me to offer a few reflections that may naturally arise
from the subject, viewed in connection with the present solemn occasion, and
your peculiar situation.

The tokens of divine displeasure that we lie under are too numerous for me to
particularize:

A few of which were hinted at in the morning, when we were called to mourn a
departing God. The sacred passage, which then directed our meditations, was
Hosea ix.12. Yea, woe also to them when I depart from them.


It would be painful to me to continue harping upon the plaintive string,
especially when addressing myself to those who share too deeply in our public
troubles and distresses, not to have an impressive sense of them.

To turn the bright side of things to view is much more pleasant and agreeable.

Let it suffice therefore to say that a dark cloud charged with fearful
artillery, seems to be gathering and blackening around us; insomuch that the
language of divine providence to our long and highly favored land has of late
been evidently this; Blow the trumpet in Zion, call a solemn assembly, proclaim
a fast. The trumpet has been blown, solemn assemblies have been called, and
such a fast is proclaimed as this land never before saw.

The peculiarly solemn day is now revolving, when humble confessions and
fervent prayers from the numerous societies and assemblies, throughout all
these United Colonies, (a much larger extent of territory than Jehoshaphat was
possessed of) are ascending up to the Lord of Sabbath.

The united voice of the colonies in setting apart this day for humiliation and
prayer, as well as their remarkable and very happy union in other respects, I
must interpret as an omen for good: for the infinitely compassionate God never
said to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain.

But of what avail would be to us to fast and cry to Heaven imploring divine
assistance in an unjust and wicked cause?

It was a heavy charge against Israel that they fasted for strife and debate,
and to smite with the fists of wickedness.

And are we also chargeable with this foul imputation? Are we in real rebellion
against our lawful sovereign? Have we risen up in opposition to his just and
salutary laws, and without sufficient reason cast off his government?

And do we then pretend to seek God to aid and assist us in our traitorous
proceedings?

Heaven daring assurance, monstrous impiety, would this be! But though a very
guilty people; thanks be to those kind, divine restraints that have kept us
from being guilty of this charge.

We not only think but know and feel that we have great reason to complain of
oppression and tyranny; that our privileges civil and sacred, and our property
are all at stake, and that we are loudly called upon to defend them at the risk
of life.

If the sight be not too piteous and affecting, turn your eyes to our
metropolis, once princess among these provinces, now a garrison of mercenary
British troops; and its miserable inhabitants exposed to the resentment and
rage of those, whose very tender mercies are cruelty.

See those haughty ships of war: observe their hostile appearance, and consider
their no less hostile designs. View the ashes of pleasant CHARLESTOWN. Remember
LEXINGTON, CHELSEA, and yonder never to be forgotten HILL, Banker Hill.
lately bedewed by some of our richest blood.

Behold, I say, how our unnatural enemies reward us to come to cast us out of
the possession which the Lord our God has given us to inherit; the possession*
which our forefathers purchased with their blood and treasure.

O Britain, Britain! are these sufficiently kind returns for our having
contributed long and largely to thy wealth and grandeur?

That England and not we, have been the aggressors is undeniably evident.

We used ever to consider their interest and happiness as intimately connected
with our own.

Entirely content that they should preside in our government, so far as was
agreeable to our charter-privileges, and aggrandize themselves by monopolizing
our trade; we delighted to treat them with dutiful respect as a parent state;
rejoicing at their rising glory, and pleased to see their lofty spires, though
glittering with American gold.

But this was not enough -- We must be all submission to the supremacy of
parliament: a parliament too the most corrupt and infamous that ever disgraced
any nation.

We must be taxed without our consent.

In a word, we must be slaves, learn to grovel in the dust, and from thence
look up to our imperious masters, in order to receive from their griping hands,
the scanty pittance which they might please to afford us. --

Refusing obedience to these extraordinary mandatos, our charter was mutilated,
or rather entirely vacated and destroyed: fleets and armies were sent to our
capital, our trade was impeded, and almost every branch of business greatly
distressed.

Violence and oppression daily increasing on one hand, and prudent measures
being come into on the other, in order to obtain redress of our numerous
grievances and evade the galling chains, that were prepared for us, the
memorable period at length came, when open hostilities commenced.

That the Lexington battle was begun by the British troops, is what with us
admits of no doubt.

But allowing for once (though far from any color of truth) that our party
begun the fight, still, as the others went out with an avowed design to steal,
and to rob us of our property, they in reality were the first aggressors; for
he that arms himself to commit a robbery and demands the traveller's purse by
the terror of instant death, is the first aggressor, though the other should
take the advantage of discharging his pistol first and killing the robber.
President Langdon's Election Discourse.


Matters being thus stated, does it not plainly follow that our cause is good
and of the last importance, and that we may therefore humbly appeal to God, to
judge between us and our enemies? -- O our God, will thou not judge them? Will thou not graciously interpose in behalf of a much injured, afflicted and
oppressed people, putting their unrighteous invaders and oppressors to shame
and confusion?

Though utterly unworthy of so great a favor, we humbly hope and trust Thou will.

It is recorded of a Turkish general, that being called to engage a christian
army, which had broken through the most solemn ties, he stood up at the head of
his troops, and then taking out the treaty that they had violated, and holding
it up to view, thus addressed the throne of Heaven* O Almighty Being, if thou
art, as they say thou art, these christians God, thou love what is right and
hate perfidy; look down therefore and behold this treaty which they have
broken, and as Thou can not favor what is wrong, render their arms
successless and make mine victorious. -- He ended -- immediately the sword was
drawn -- The two parties vigorously engaged, and the perfidious christians were
beaten off the field.

And may not we also hold up a broken charter, the cruel port bill and the most
impious and infamous Quebec bill; adding to these, the inhuman* unequaled
treachery exercised toward the distressed inhabitants of Boston, as witnesses
of the perfidy of our enemies, and what their designs upon us are?

Kind Heaven has heard our cries owned the JUSTICE OF OUR CAUSE, and appeared
for us in numerous ways almost miraculous.

The holy and mighty arm of God has lately gotten us repeated and most
surprising victories

To Him is the glory due, who has animated our soldiers with courage truly
astonishing.

To Him is the glory due, who has already crowned some of them with the
brightest laurels of victory; and has so dispirited our enemies thereby, that
they are pining away in tormenting disappointment, almost forced to confess
that there is no enchantment against Jacob, or divination against Israel.

What then remains, but that we repose our entire trust and confidence in this
almighty, most kind and gracious Being, who has thus begun to appear for us?

Blessed be God, if we look to second causes, we have wise and able
politicians, gallant officers, and many thousands of as brave, undaunted
soldiers as ever faced a foe; but still there is abundant reason to confess
that of ourselves we have no might against our enemies, neither know what to do.

And to this confession, we may justly add an humble acknowledgment of our
shameful backslidings and sinfulness as a people, and our utter unworthiness of
divine favors.

With hearts deeply affected under a sense of this, may we all break off our
sins by repentance, saying with afflicted Israel, "Come and let us return unto
the Lord; for he has torn, and he will heal us, he has smitten, and he will
bind us up."

O, what a favorable prospect might be afforded us by a universal reformation!
-- The whole face of nature would seem hereby to be changed, and to put on a
cheerful smile.

Our light would break forth as the morning, and our health spring forth
speedily: our righteousness would go before us, and the glory of the Lord be
our rereward.

As this therefore would be so beautiful in itself, and productive of so many
happy consequences, you will not be offended, gentlemen and soldiers, if upon
this solemn occasion I earnestly urge it upon you, not forgetting that I myself
also have great need of the exhortation.

You have come forth to jeopard your lives in defense of your friends and
relations, your country, religion, liberty, and almost every thing that is dear
and sacred. In a nobler cause, mortals were never engaged

Of your cordial love to your country and general courage and resolution to
defend it, none can entertain a doubt.

There is not, I presume, a single one among you all, who would not disdain to
be guilty of cowardice, to desert his colors, or let his sword rest quietly in
its scabbard, whenever the Lord gives it a charge against the invaders of
Boston and the sea shore.

May your abhorrence of every vicious practice, and strict adherence to the
rules of virtue and religion, be no less conspicuous than your courage and
magnanimity.

What a pity it is, dear friends, that the camp should so commonly be a school
of vice? that they who are most exposed to death, should be least careful to
prepare for it?

Will you not endeavor to wipe off this odium, which of late years, I am sorry
to say, has with too much reason, been cast upon soldiers? If you are careful
that your behavior be virtuous and exemplary, those abandoned, dissolute
troops, that disgrace Britain, instead of bringing a soldier's life hare into
contempt, would be foils to set off your characters, and make them shine with a
more beautiful luster.

It has been frequently observed, to the signal honor of our present American
forces, that in general, they are remarkably civil well-behaved, and free from
drunkeness, profaneness, or any other scandalous practices.

How goodly are thy tents. O Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O Israel! -- How
beautiful and lovely to see so large an army of men inspired with heroic
sentiments, engaged in a glorious cause, animated therein by the most generous
motives, and in a general view, strangers to the shameful vices, to which
soldiers of the present age (our provincials excepted) have been commonly and
almost universally addicted!

That each day may set your respective characters in a still fairer light, is
the hearty prayer of every well-wisher to his country. -- I beg and beseech you
industriously to cultivate and promote union, peace, love, harmony and
friendship among yourselves. -- Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for
brethren, or soldiers in one common cause, to dwell together in unity!

With respect to those of you who are in office, may I be allowed, gentlemen,
to say, I flatter myself that you will always endeavor to answer the just
expectations of those, who have voluntarily chosen you for their commanders,
treating your men with affability, kindness and tenderness, setting before them
examples of virtue, and using your utmost influence to suppress all vice and
immorality.

You, who are soldiers, will I trust do honor to yourselves and country, by
being orderly and governable, as well as bold and courageous always paying a
due defference to the commands of your officers.

And may all of you, gentlemen and soldiers, in your several departments, exert
yourselves to purge from the camp every accursed thing. Nor is it sufficient
that you be negatively good or free from open, scandalous vices; but, if you
would be safe and happy here, and at last enjoy the bright unfading glories of
Heaven, you must be born again, washed, sanctified and justified, in the name
of the Lord Jesus, and by his spirit.

You must inlist under the great captain of salvation; and this should be done
speedily or it may be too late. Let me, dear souls, "address you as a dying man
to dying men."

To others and to all, it may with propriety be said, boast not yourselves of
tomorrow; for ye know not what a day may bring forth: but who are so exposed
as you, to be suddenly snatched out of time into eternity?

Think not that your being soldiers bold and brave secures you from the arrests
of death. Is he that rides upon the pale horse afraid to venture upon a
soldier? The dying groans of millions who have fallen in battle, witness that
he is not.

Think not that religion is unbecoming your profession. -- A thousand things
might be said, and numerous instances offered, to show that to join the
christian to the soldier, is highly beautiful and ornamental.

Think not that true, vital piety, is unnecessary for a soldier. If you find
yourselves fatally pierced with the instruments of death; if you feel the
silver cord of life losing, and your souls gushing out in a flow of blood, you
will be convinced of the contrary.

Let me be importunate in pressing upon you the one thing needful, or a
preparation for death, by securing a saving interest in him, who is the
resurrection and the life.

As this is of the last importance, I beg and entreat you by all that is dear
and sacred, dreadful or delightful, not to neglect or postpone it.

What shall I further say? -- I fear I have trespassed already too long upon
your patience. Will therefore add but little more than my ardent wishes for
your success and happiness. You have, dear brethren, the daily prayers of many
thousands. Your ministers, your friends, and your whole country, endeared by
every tender tie. (a very few only excepted) are anxious for your safety and
success.

When, at a distance, we hear the cannons roar, we are paired with anxious
concern for you; and our hearts replete with tenderness inexpressible, re-echo
to every volley, "Heaven protect, defend and succeed the brave and generous
guardians of our privileges and lives." The very infants, at their mothers
breasts, I had almost said, lisp out a prayer for you.

May the infinitely gracious God hear the numerous petitions that are offered
up in your behalf. May He screen you from al harm, render your arms victorious,
and in his own time, gently waft you and all of us to those calm and peaceful
regions, where the ear is not wounded with the confused noise of war nor the
eye tormented with the piteous, affecting sight of mangled bodies, and garments
rolled in blood; where joy unspeakably sublime forever dwells; where hateful
tyrants, cruel oppressors, and traitorous villains, stained with the blood of
their country, without repentance and a thorough change, can never come.

FINIS.

