THE several Assemblies of NEW JERSEY, PENNSYLVANIA and VIRGINIA, having
refered to the Congress a resolution of the House of Commons of GREAT BRITAIN,
which resolution is in these words:

Lunae, 20^ die Feb. 1775.

The House in a Committee on the American papers. Motion made, and question
proposed.

THAT it is the opinion of this Committee, that when the General Council and
Assembly, or General Court of any of his Majesty's provinces, or colonies in
America, shall propose to make provision, according to the condition,
circumstance, or situation of such province or colony, for contributing their
proportion to the common defense, (such proportion to be raised under the
authority of the General Court, or General Assembly of such province or colony,
and disposable by Parliament) and shall engage to make provision also, for the
support of the civil government, and the administration of justice in such
province or colony, it will be proper if such proposal shall be approved by his
Majesty and the two Houses of Parliament, and for so long as such provision
shall be made accordingly, to forbear in respect of such province or colony to
lay any duty, tax, or assessment, or to impose any farther duty, tax, or
assessment, except only such duties as it may be expedient to continue to levy
or impose, for the regulation of commerce; the net produce of the duties last
mentioned, to be carried to the account of such province or colony
respectively.

The Congress took the said resolution into consideration, and are thereupon of
opinion.

THAT the colonies of America are entitled to the sole and exclusive privilege
of giving and granting their own money: that this involves a right of
deliberating whether they will make any gift, for what purposes it shall be
made, and what shall be it is amount: and that it is a high breach of this
privilege for any body of men, extraneous to their constitutions, to prescribe
the purposes for which money shall be levied on them, to take to themselves the
authority of judging of their conditions, circumstances and situations, and of
determining the amount of the contribution to be levied.

THAT as the colonies possess a right of appropriating their gifts, so are they
entitled at all times to enquire into their application, to see that they be
not wasted among the venal and corrupt for the purpose of undermining the civil
rights of the givers, nor yet be diverted to the support of standing armies,
inconsistent with their freedom and subversive of their quiet. To propose
therefore, as this resolution does, that the moneys given by the colonies shall
be subject to the disposal of parliament alone, is to propose that they shall
relinquish this right of enquiry, and put it in the power of others to render
their gifts ruinous, in proportion as they are liberal.

That this privilege of giving or of witholding our moneys is an important
barrier against the undue exertion of prerogative, which, if left altogether
without control, may be exercised to our great oppression; and all history
shows how efficacious is it is intercession for redress of grievances and
re-establishment of rights, and how improvident it would be to part with so
powererful a mediator.

WE are of opinion that the proposition contained in this resolution is
unreasonable and insidious: unreasonable, because, if we declare we accede to
it, we declare without reservation, we will purchase the favor of parliament,
not knowing at the same time at what price they will please to estimate their
favor: it is insidious, because, individual colonies, having bid and bidden
again, till they find the avidity of the seller too great for all their powers
to satisfy; are then to return into opposition, divided from their sister
colonies whom the minister will have previously detached by a grant of easier
terms, or by an artful procrastination of a definitive answer.

THAT the suspension of the exercise of their pretended power of taxation being
expressly made commensurate with the continuance of our gifts, these must be
perpetual to make that so. Whereas no experience has shown that a gift of
perpetual revenue secures a perpetual return of duty or of kind disposition. On
the contrary, the parliament itself, wisely attentive to this observation, are
in the established practice of granting their supplies from year to year only.

DESIROUS and determined as we are to consider in the most dipassionate view
every seeming advance toward a reconciliation made by the British parliament,
let our brethren of Britain reflect what would have been the sacrifice to men
of free spirits had even fair terms been proffered, as these insidious
proposals were with circumstances of insult and defiance. A proposition to give
our money, accompanied with large fleets and armies, seems addressed to our
fears rather than to our freedom. With what patience would Britons have
received articles of treaty from any power on earth when borne on the point of
a bayonet by military plenipotentiaries?

WE think the attempt unnecessary to raise upon us by force or by threats our
proportional contributions to the common defense, when all know, and themselves
acknowledge we have fully contributed, whenever called upon to do so in the
character of freemen.

WE are of opinion it is not just that the colonies should be required to
oblige themselves to other contributions, while Great Britain possesses a
monopoly of their trade. This of itself lays them under heavy contribution. To
demand therefore, additional aids in the form of a tax, is to demand the double
of their equal proportion, if we are to contribute equally with the other parts
of the empire, let us equally with them enjoy free commerce with the whole
world. But while the restrictions on our trade shut to us the resources of
wealth, is it just we should bear all other burdens equally with those to whom
every resource is open?

WE conceive that the British parliament has no right to intermeddle with our
provisions for the support of civil government, or administration of justice.
The provisions we have made are such as please ourselves, and are agreeable to
our own circumstances: they answer the substantial purposes of government and
of justice, and other purposes than these should not be answered. We do not
mean that our people shall be burdened with oppressive taxes, to provide
sinecures for the idle or the wicked, under color of providing for a civil
list. While parliament pursue their plan of civil government within their own
jurisdiction, we also hope to pursue ours without molestation.

WE are of opinion the proposition is altogether unsatisfactory, because it
imports only a suspension of the mode, not a renunciation of the pretended
right to tax us: because too it does not propose to repeal the several Acts of
Parliament passed for the purposes of restraining the trade and altering the
form of government of one of our colonies; extending the boundaries and
changing the government of Quebec; enlarging the jurisdiction of the courts of
Admiralty and vice Admiralty; taking from us the rights of trial by a jury of
the vicinage in cases affecting both life and property; transporting us into
other countries to be tried for criminal offenses; exempting by mock-trial the
murderers of colonists from punishment; and quartering soldiers on us in times
of profound peace. Nor do they renounce the power of suspending our own
legislatures, and of legislating for us themselves in all cases whatsoever. On
the contrary, to show they mean no discontinuance of injury, they pass acts, at
the very time of holding out this proposition, for restraining the commerce and
fisheries of the provinces of New England, and for interdicting the trade of
other colonies with all foreign nations and with each other. This proves
unequivocally they mean not to relinquish the exercise of indiscriminate
legislation over us.

UPON the whole, this proposition seems to have been held up to the world, to
deceive it into a belief that there was nothing in dispute between us but the
mode of levying taxes; and that the parliament having now been so good as to
give up this, the colonies are unreasonable if not perfectly satisfied: whereas
in truth, our adversaries still claim a right of demanding ad libitum, and of
taxing us themselves to the full amount of their demand, if we do not comply
with it. This leaves us without any thing we can call property. But, what is of
more importance, and what in this proposal they keep out of sight, as if no
such point was now in contest between us, they claim a right to alter our
charters and established laws, and leave us without any security for our lives
or liberties. The proposition seems also to have been calculated more
particularly to lull into fa^^^ security our well-affected fellow subjects on
the other side the water, till time should be given for the operation of those
arms, which a British minister pronounced would instantaneously reduce the
"cowardly" sons of America to unreserved submission. But when the world
reflects, how inadequate to justice are these vaunted terms; when it attends to
the rapid and bold succession of injuries, which, during a course of eleven
years, have been aimed at these colonies; when it reviews the pacific and
respectful expostulations which, during that whole time, were the sole arms we
opposed to them; when it observes that our complaints were either not heard at
all, or were answered with new and accumulated injury; when it recollects that
the minister himself on an early occasion declared, "that he would never treat
with America, till he had brought her to his feet,' and that an avowed partisan
of ministry has more lately denounced against us the dreadful sentence '
delendo est Carthago' that this was done in presence of a British senate, and
being unreproved by them, must be taken to be their own sentiment, (especially
as the purpose has already in part been carried into execution, by their
treatment of Boston and burning of Charlestown;) when it considers the great
armaments with which they have invaded us, and the circumstances of cruelty
with which these have commenced and prosecuted hostilities; when these things,
we say, are laid together and attentively considered, can the world be deceived
into an opinion that we are unreasonable, or can it hesitate to believe with
us, that nothing but our own exertions may defeat the ministerial sentence of
death or abject submission.

By Order of the CONGRESS, JOHN HANCOCK, PRESIDENT.
Philadelphia, July 31, 1775.

