MR. BALDWIN's SERMON. DECEMBER 22, 1775.

A SERMON, PREACHED AT PLYMOUTH, DECEMBER 22, 1775. Being the Anniversary
THANKSGIVING, in commemoration of the first landing of the FATHERS of
NEW ENGLAND, there; anno domini, 1620.

BY SAMUEL BALDWIN, A. M. PASTOR of the CHURCH in HANOVER.

AMERICA, MASSACHUSETTS BAY: BOSTON, Printed by POWARS and WILLIS, in
QUEEN STREET. MDCCLXXVI.

HEBREWS XI. 8. By says, Abraham, when he was called to go out into a place,
which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed; and he went out, not
knowing whither he went.
NEXT to the belief of the being of a God, the first cause, the one Supreme; it
is of the last importance to such creatures as we are, to be firmly persuaded
of his providence; concerned in the administration and adjustment of all the
affairs of the universe; that all events are under its control and direction,
and that all mankind are the subjects of it.

TO secure and maintain amongst mankind a practical acknowledgment of the
divine superintendency, has been the care of heaven, in diverse ways and
manners, by natural light, by revelation, and examples the most striking and
illustrious.

A DISPENSATION no less benevolent than wise.

TO make a rank of beings capable of receiving laws, and subjects of moral
government, argues infinite wisdom.

IN case of defection from primitive rectitude, through voluntary
transgression, which is the condition of man; to be put into a state of
probation with capacities of knowing the relation wherein they stand to the
Supreme Being, and performing their various relative obligations to him, and
other beings they are connected with, and with all necessary means to this
purpose, is most favorable and gracious.

THERE is nothing more certain than that the present is a state of imperfection
and vanity, in which we are exposed to distress and misery from different
quarters. In this state of fluctuation, while tossed upon the tempestuous ocean
of this world, to be able to revert to first principles, and to find an asylum
in the first cause, where, with unshaken confidence, we may anchor all our
hopes of safety, and, in every tribulation, be relieved under all our anxious
fears, must afford the higest satisfaction to the human mind.

OUR Savior, who came from, and is returned to the Father, has assured us,
that this providence is concerned in the smallest and most inconsiderable
things amongst men; that the hairs of our heads are all numbered; and that a
sparrow falls not to the ground without the knowledge of our heavenly Father.

IF the smallest things are the subjects of his oversight and care, we may,
without vanity, argue that those which are of greater and more momentous
concern, are most certainly under his cognizance; that those events which are
of greater consequence to the world, are under his more immediate government,
and that they do not take place without his direction, or permission; that they
are designed to accomplish some great and excellent purposes in the kingdom of
providence, though to us many of them may be unknown; God's judgments being
unsearchable, and his ways past finding out from the beginning to the end.

THOROUGHLY impressed with this sentiment, we should be led to yield an
absolute and entire resignation to the divine government, referring all
concernments and their issue to the direction and disposal of infinite wisdom.

WHERE there is a due internal reverence for providence, and a fit and regular
deportment, agreeable to various and different administration, there is nothing
to fear from the divine government; but every thing to hope for and expect,
which is fit for God to grant, and man to receive.

"THE judge of all the earth will do right."

WE cannot but approve the divine administration as just and equal; nay, what
is wanting to give us the highest complacency and delight in the divine
superintendency? -- when we consider him (as we ought) possessed of infinite
goodness, prompting to acts of mercy and kindness; -- of infinite wisdom to
foresee all possible events and contingencies, and of infinite power to execute
all his purposes of grace and favor.

"THE Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice, the world and they that dwell
therein."

IT is true that the children and servants of the most High, are not to expect
an exemption from troubles in this world; but then they have this assurance,
that if they comport themselves to the circumstances and allotments of
providence, they shall be delivered, or receive adequate direction and support.

THE faith and virtue of Abraham, were brought to great trial. He had the
promise of a certain tract of land, from the Lord, proprietor of the universe,
to be given him and his descendants for an inheritance: he believed the
promise, that there would be a fulfillment, and was fully persuaded that he was
called, commanded by that authority which is indisputable, and ought
immediately to be complied with, to quit his native country, that he might be
prepared in due time, to take possession of the promised land. From this
principle, this persuasion, he resolved to yield a compliance with the command.

BY faith, Abraham, when he was called to go out into a place which he should
after receive for an inheritance, obeyed. This he did, when he knew not where
the inheritance was, not when he should receive it. "He went out not knowing
whither he went."

THE veracity of God is a sufficient security for the performance of all his
promises.

THE foundation of moral obligation, is the will and pleasure of the Supreme,
which can never be otherwise than agreeable to the eternal fitness of things.
The divine pleasure may be signified and made known, in a variety of ways; --
by immediate revelation, by visions, voices, or dreams; by the instrumentality
of Angels, or men, or by his written word. In which several ways, God has
communicated his pleasure to the children of men.

IT is not material to our present enquiry, how, or in what manner the mind of
God was announced to Abraham: It is enough that it was sufficiently signified
to him; that this was clear to him, beyond all reasonable doubt.

FAITH is the prime principle of action, adapted to the state of man in this
world of imperfection. Evidently so in Abraham's case, which may be somewhat
peculiar, so far as it relates to an express promise of receiving an
inheritance. He believed in the promise, that it was true, and would be made
good. He believed in the authority of God, that he had an undoubted right to
rule over him, and that an unreserved obedience and subjection were due. From
this principle of faith, when called of God to go forth, he instantly obeys.

THE circumstances attending Abraham, in this peculiar situation, render his
faith and obedience very notable, for which he has been entitled to the
highest encomium, and is exalted to a high station, amongst the most
illustrious worthies.

IT was a hard, though just command -- "get thee out of thy country, and from
thy kindred, and from thy father's house." He quits all his possessions,
foregoes every convenience, in his native land; bids adieu to dearest
relatives, when, or whither ever to return again, he knew not; all was
uncertainty; he departs, not knowing whither he went: How long he must wander
as a pilgrim from city to city, from one kingdom and country to another; what
hardships and difficulties he must undergo, to what dangers he must be exposed,
he was altogether in the dark, ignorant, and unapprized.

UNBELIEVERS in revelation, might be ready to sneer at this account of the
matter, and burlesque the very supposition that God should give a command to
the Patriarch, exacting obedience, under such circumstances, laughing at
Abraham as a hotheaded enthusiast, or a crack-brained fellow, running from
place to place, in his frenzy, under a notion of finding a country which he
should enter and possess, and which of right, should descend, as an
inheritance, to his posterity.

THOSE that believe in a God, a providence, that this is a state of
uncertainty, and that we are accountable, would, upon serious reflection, find
occasion to suppress, at least, some part of their ridicule.

BOTH the foundation of faith and obedience, and the principle on which mankind
are to act, are equally the constitution of heaven.

ABRAHAM, acting agreeable to these, acquitted himself in the best manner, with
honor and dignity, with the approbation of his Maker. And while he wandered
about, as a pilgrim, altogether uncertain of the time of the fulfillment of the
promise, there was a part for him to act, agreeable to his character, as a man
of sense and reason, a servant of the most High, and the father of the church
of Israel. He was not discharged from the duties of moral obligation, in this
state of doubt and uncertainty; but to comport himself agreeable to the
knowledge of his Maker's will, and agreeable to the obligations resulting from
the various diversity of his condition.

GOD, in his ineffable favor and grace, has designed us for another, and
better state, and we are here in a course of trial to be trained up for it; and
to us there is no imaginable way, in which this end could be so well answered,
as by a state of uncertainty, with regard to the events of providence,
consistent with the liberty of action, with which we are endowed; the due
exertion of which, is necessary to denominate our conduct virtuous; the neglect
and abuse of it, vicious.

WE know this, by the word of God, which is confirmed by observation, that
mankind are mortal, and we are to act with a wise reference to this, in the
whole of our conduct, being exhorted hereunto; but infinite wisdom has seen
fit to conceal, entirely from our view, the time, manner, and circumstances of
our departure. We know this, in general, that piety and virtue, shall in no
wise miss of a reward; persevered in to the end, they will conduct us to the
heavenly Canaan, our last, and best settlement, an inheritance unfading, and
eternal. But, as to all intermediate events, we must be content to refer them
to the disposal of infinite and unerring wisdom. It is by religion, a due
cultivation of our hearts, and improvement of certain graces, that we are to be
trained up for the heavenly world.

GOD knows what trials are necessary, or best calculated to advance our highest
interest, and to bring us to complete happiness; from these the best are not
exempted Abraham the friend of God, had great trials; for his own private and
personal benefit, and with this more extensively benevolent view -- the good of
his nation -- the good of mankind: -- That those who came after, might have a
pattern of faith, obedience and resignation, and from the consideration of
divine guidance and support afforded to others in pressing difficulties, be
animated to endure hardness, with like firmness and fortitude.

OUR imitation is expected, under all similar circumstances. God has been
pleased to estimate the virtue of men, in proportion to the difficulties
attending the performance of their obligations.

WHILE we are ultimately to consult his glory, he has furnished us with high,
general motives of interest, to induce our obedience, and in some cases, as in
Abraham's, particular and special ones. He had the promise of a certain country
for an inheritance. He was willing to quit many of the delights of life, and
throw himself, with dependence on providence, upon the wide world, where he
would be exposed to unknown dangers and difficulties: He prized the promised
blessing, and was willing to do and suffer any thing, at the call and under the
guidance of providence, to obtain it.

FROM this view of the subject in general, it appears, that it is of the
greatest concernment, that we ever entertain the most exalted conceptions of an
overruling providence; that we ever live and act under this full persuasion,
that we are entirely dependent upon it; -- that we express our sense of it by
prayer for the blessings we need, praise for mercies received -- all flowing
from the fountain of divine Benignity: -- That we should be penitent, as it is
iniquity which originally made it necessary that we should be visited with
stripes, or exercised with trials -- that we should be humble, under the
rebukes of providence -- any tokens of divine displeasure: -- That we should be
patient in adversity, waiting, with resignation to the will of heaven, the time
of our deliverance, or the bestowment of expected favors; -- and that we
persevere, in the direct line of our duty* in the due use of means, through
tribulation and distress, surmounting every impediment. The different aspects
of providence, require different deportment.

THE grand enquiry in any particular case is, what is my duty? Abraham was
commanded by God to go forth: The command involved an immediate obligation; he
did not hesitate. We may know with sufficient certainty, though not in the same
manner with Abraham, that we should receive an inheritance, because it may be
proved beyond all manner of doubt, that of right, it belongs to us; or it may
be, we may have the greatest assurance, that it is the will and pleasure of
heaven, we should secure and defend an inheritance, the immediate grant of the
Supreme Disposer, or rightfully descended to us.

IN either case, it would become immediate duty, to set ourselves to devise and
adopt the most suitable method and means to obtain or secure, what of right
belongs to us.

ALL possessions, rights and privileges, being the immediate grant of heaven,
or honestly acquired, or rightfully descendeded, as an inheritance, are to be
guarded with care against all encroachments.

THESE are to be estimated, according to their importance to the well-being of
individuals, or the emolument of societies.

SOME will admit of a surrender, at least, in part; others, again, may be ceded
on no pretense whatever.

WHAT are called natural rights, are in part surrendered, whenever mankind
voluntarily enter into society and form into bodies-politick; -- which
surrender, ought ever to be with this express, or at least, tacit view and
design -- the promoting the greater security and advantage of every individual,
and the more extensive happiness of the collective body -- the sole true end of
all government.

THE rights of conscience are unalienable: They are sacred, the common
birthright of every man; they are not to be surrendered to any man, or body of
men; they ought not to be denied to any, nor invaded by any.

THE right of private judgment, in matters purely religious, and of worshipping
God according to their apprehensions of scripture purity and model, was denied
to our worthy and venerable ancestors, the first planters in this colony, in
their native land.

HOW sacred and unalterable a regard they paid to these, and at what an
inestimable price they held them, the history of their sufferings, for their
defense and security, is full and ample testimony.

THEY appeared to be under the most lively and impressive sense of an
overruling providence -- that his aids were necessary to extricate them out of
their embarrassments, -- to give success to their continued attempts, for the
security of their religious liberties, -- and to make them happily instrumental
of handing down this richest inheritance, to posterity, inviolate: For which,
they labored with unabating zeal, and indefatigable ardor.

IT was their great unhappiness to live in an age of great ignorance, and
almost universal bigotry: In an age, when the rulers were disposed to arbitrary
measures in the state; -- when the reigning Prince was grasping at absolute
power -- an undeniable specimen of which, he gave in the face of the world, by
ordering a capital infliction on one of his subjects, without law, without
trial, without judge or jury; of whom, the greatest patriot in Britain, and the
most successful advocate for the Colonies, in former years of distress,
publicly declared, that "he was the meanest Prince that ever sat upon the
British throne!" They lived at a time, when the King of England was more tender
of the Roman Catholics, than of them, and preferred a sect (of whom it was
notorious, that some of their number had been conspirators in the powder plot)
to them, branded by the name of puritans, by way of hatred and contempt, at a
time when the English bishops were lordly and tyrannical.

THEY were persecuted in various ways and forms!

THIS is the account given of the rise of the Fathers of this country: "That
several religious people near the joining borders of Nottinghamshire,
Lincolnshire and Yorkshire, finding that their pious ministers urged with
subscription, or silenced, and the people greatly vexed with the commissary
courts, apparitors and pursevants, which they bore sundry years with much
patience, till they were occasioned by the continuance an increase of these
troubles, and other means, to see further into these things by the light of the
word of God; how that not only the ceremonies were unlawful; but also, the
lordly, and tyrannous power of the Prelates, who would, contrary to the freedom
of the gospel, load the consciences of men, and by their compulsive power, make
a profane mixture of things and persons in divine worship.

"That their offices, courts and canons were unlawful, being such as have no
warrant in the word of God, but the same that were used in popery, and still
retained! upon which, this people shake off this yoke of antichristian bondage;
and, a the Lord's free people, join themselves by covenant, into a church
state, to walk in all his ways, made known or to be made known to them,
according to their best endeavors, whatever it cost them!"

IN this incorporated state, with Mr. Robinson at their head, whom they had
chosen their pastor, they continued many years under great difficulties, till
at length the persecution increasing, and prevailing to so great a height, that
all hope and expectation were cut off, of their being able to defend and secure
their privileges, or that they might enjoy them, unmolested! -- For "they were
extremely harrassed, some cast into prison, some beset in their houses, some
forced to leave their farms and families."

SEEING the wisdom and necessity of attending to the precept, when they
persecute you in this city, flee ye into another: They fly to Holland as many
as could then escape, and others, as opportunity offered, followed after,
through very great difficulty from their pursuers; and there expose themselves
to all the difficulties that of course attend the settlement of a people in a
foreign land; foreseeing that they might by some means or other be involved in
public difficulties, which had arisen in the place of their residence. After
having tarried at Amsterdam a year, they remove to Leyden, to the great
detriment of their secular affairs. After having been at Leyden seven or eight
years, they think of a remove to North America: And in this as in the whole of
their enterprise, they appear to be actuated from the best motives, to avoid
the ill example of the Dutch, which they feared would be infectious, and cause
religion to degenerate amongthem; and with this more extensive view of positive
good, of laying some foundation for propagating the kingdom of Christ to the
remote ends of the earth!

IT is agreed that application should be made to the Virginia company in
England for a patent that they might carry their pious purpose into execution;
and every proper mean is made use of, to induce the King to grant them liberty
of conscience in America.

TO convince the Virginia company that they were in earnest, and suitably
prepared to engage in such an adventurous enterprise, several special reasons
are suggested; -- "That we are well weaned from the delicate milk of our mother
country, and inured to the difficulties of a strange land -- knit together in a
most strict and sacred bond; and it is not with us as with other men, whom
small things can discourage, or small discontentments cause to wish ourselves
at home again."

THE attempt was fruitless as it respected the application to the King. He
utterly refused the grant; the most that could be obtained, was, that he would
connive at them. Upon the return and report of the agents, great were the
discouragements of the people who sent them: Surmounting these, they apply
again to the Virginia company, and, after long and tedious delays succeed,
though without the grant of liberty of conscience.

AFTER having prepared for their voyage, as all could not go, their parting was
most sad and sorrowful in Holland; being to sail from England, similar was
their grief at parting with their friends there, to go to an unknown land.
Having embarked on board two vessels, they put to sea, but fail not far before
one of the ships proving leaky, and being in the utmost danger of foundering,
find themselves under a necessity to put about, and return to the land. After
having repaired sufficiently, as was supposed, putting to sea again -- as
before, under a necessity to put about, and return to the main, one vessel
being adjudged unfit for the voyage; -- the other concludes to proceed -- sad
and melancholy was the parting of friends, endeared to each other by every tie
-- by the strongest -- a sympathetic concern for each other, suffering in a
common cause.

GREAT must have been the distress of our fathers, when, in the midst of the
ocean, all hope of arriving at land appeared to be cut off; -- providentially
relieved, they pursue their voyage.

ARRIVING at these shores, by them unheard of, and to them entirely unknown --
how great their disappointment! how bewildered their condition! -- View them
failing to the southward for Hudson's river* the place of destination, within
twenty-four hours, falling among shoals and breakers, in iminent danger if they
went forward! coming to a conclusion to return to these shores.

How dismal the situation to coast along these inhospitable shores -- and roam
these savage wilds, for five or six weeks, uncertain and undetermined, where to
settle, through storms and tempests, cold and rain, snow and hail, in terror
from barbarians, whose number to them was utterly unknown, and by whom they had
reason to fear that they might be totally cut off!

AFTER having fixed upon a spot and determined where to settle -- favored with
no shelter, but the canopy of the heavens* to screen them from the inclemency
of the season -- the rigor of winter -- only in possession of a scanty and
insufficient pittance of the real necessaries of life, pining with hunger, and
pinched with cold! some few of them, fraught with dark designs against, and
apparently inimical to the colony in its infancy! no civilized settlement near
enough to afford the least relief.

THUS "through a great variety of obstacles and hardships, this small and pious
people, are at length arrived and seated on this strange and distant shore; but
yet a shore, they are conducted to by an overruling providence, beside their
own design, though not without the secret plots of others. Wherever they turn
their eyes, nothing but distress surrounds them. Harrassed for their
scripture-worship in their native land, grieved for the profanation of the holy
sabbath, and other licentiousness in Holland, fatigued with their boisterous
voyage, disappointed of their expected country, forced on this northern shore,
both utterly unknown, and in the advance of winter; none but prejudiced
barbarians round about them, and without any prospect of human succor: without
the help or favor of the court of England, without a patent, without a public
promise of their religious liberties, worn out with toil and sufferings,
without convenient shelter from the rigorous weather; and their hardships
bringing a general sickness on them, which reduces them to great extremities,
bereaves them of their dearest friends, and leaves many of their children
orphans. Within five months time, above half their company are carried off,
whom they account as dying in this noble cause, whose memories they consecrate
to the dear esteem of their successors, and bear all with a christian fortitude
and patience, as extraordinary as their trials."

THE review of the magnanimous ancestors of this land from their persecuted
state in Britain, and the series of disasterous events, and scenes of woe
allotted to them, to the time of their arrival and settlement in this, then
savage and barbarous world, and in the infancy of the colony, is more than
sufficient to excite our wonder and astonishment!

WHAT could have supported them under all their perplexities and fears,
disappointments, depressions and persecutions in their native land,
inexpressible sufferings, and amazing hardships in a foreign country, and in
this then rude and uncultivated wilderness -- through perils by land, perils in
the sea, and perils among false brethren, -- but a thorough consciousness of
the best cause, actuated from the most noble views, motives and designs, and
the concurring efficacious operations of an Almighty providence?

THE cause of liberty is the cause of God -- it is the richest inheritance, the
grant of heaven, never to be alienated, to be defended at every hazard. For the
defense, security and enjoyment of this, the most respectable progenitors of
this colony, viewed themselves as under obligation to flee from their
oppressors, persecutors and tyrants: By faith they obeyed: Went forth as
Abraham, not knowing whither they went.

COMMITTING themselves to the care and guidance of providence, they determined
with submission to go to Holland. Abraham after his call might determine to go
to some particular place, and to conduct himself as to him might appear to be
fittest and best, not knowing where the inheritance was, or when he should
arrive at it. -- And as the fathers viewed themselves as absolutely under the
direction of providence, they held themselves obligated to attend to its calls.

WHERE they should finally be settled in the peaceable enjoyment of their
rights, they knew not, but appeared to have a full persuasion that the time
would come. -- It did; but they were finally settled in a land unsought for,
and undesigned by them. The providence of God brings good out of evil. -- By
the permission of heaven our noble ancestors were persecuted at home. To this
is owing under the guidance of providence, if not the settlement, yet till of
late date the very flourishing state of these colonies.

ON this anniversary, we revere the providence that conducted our ancestors
through so many trials and sufferings, to these inhospitable shores, fraught
with the richest blessings to posterity, then unborn, -- and, we trust, to be
born. A tribute of the highest gratitude is due, and a grateful memory thereof
ought never to be obliterated.

WE admire their faith, patience, resignation, piety, fortitude, bravery,
magnanimity and perseverance; yea, almost every excellent quality, of which the
human mind is capable, or ornamental to the life, as men and christians.

THE best testimony which we can give of our gratitude to providence, and that
we have a due respect for their memories, is to imitate their virtues, to build
and improve upon the foundation which they have laid. Their sufferings should
teach us highly to prize the rich inheritance which they have conveyed to us:
To guard it with the utmost zeal, care, circumspection and vigilance: To
cultivate the same spirit, and in all things to demean ourselves worthy of our
illustrious descent.

HOWEVER, the most liberal and disinterested spirits, the greatest patriots,
are obliged for the present, to contract their views, to turn their whole
attention to the defense and safety of the state, to guard and defend the
inheritance which has been handed down to us, and of which we may justly
conclude, we are liable to be deprived, without every effort on our part, and
the kind aids of an interposing providence.

PROVIDENCE usually works by means, (and further than this we have no reason to
expect) and to neglect any exertions of which we are capable, is to render
ourselves unworthy of the privileges which have descended to us from our noble
and most renowned ancestry, and to provoke heaven to permit a dispossession,
even by the hands of the oppressors of the earth.

THIS people have long since entered upon their labors, and largely partaken
of the happy fruits of their toils and and sufferings.

FORCED into an unnatural civil war, we are followers of them in tribulation*
in defense of the liberties, the mighty blessing, descended from them to us as
a natural inheritance. Duty to God, decent respect to the memories of our first
benefactors, interest, the present common weal, indispensable obligation to
society, with united voice, call upon us to stand forth in this day of uncommon
trial; -- at a time when life, liberty and property are struck at -- when there
appears an unalterable determination to wrest from us every privilege, and to
strip us of every liberty.

IT is not to be concealed or denied, that our progenitors were persecuted
mainly on account of their religious sentiments and practice: That for the
security of these religious rights, etc and that they might transmit them
inviolate, they fled from their native country That our present oppressors have
a design upon our religious liberties, is to be justly apprehended from their
establishment of the Roman Catholic religion upon this Continent. This is
undoubtedly to be viewed as a specimen of the spirit of British administration,
as to religious matters.

THE history of the world shows that the only basis, on which religious liberty
can flourish, is that of a free civil government: Of which, those freeborn
spirits could not be ignorant, but must have the highest sense of their
importance to the well-being of the community, and that without the free
enjoyment of civil privileges, those of a religious nature might not expect to
flourish, but to be checked, borne down, and crushed; -- which, perhaps, has
taken place, without exception, where tyranny and despotism have gained an
ascendency in the state. --

WITH civil we may bid adieu to religious liberty.

THE colonists, in their late, and present struggle for their liberties, have
had occasion to revert to the first principles of the English constitution; and
in opposition to the assumed right of Great Britain, of forcing a tax upon
them, have declared it to be an essential right of Englishmen, to be taxed only
by themselves, or their representatives freely chosen; that they were out of
the realm of England, unrepresented, and therefore ought not to be taxed: They
have been abused, and traduced as broaching a new doctrine, and assuming a
privilege, the right of exemption unthought of, till within a few years. --
These calumniators of mankind, instruments and tools of oppression could not,
were they capable, withhold a blush, when they do, or might know that our
forefathers in the infancy of Plymouth colony, disclaimed all authority of
parliament over them that in their corporate capacity, being legally assembled,
did ordain, constitute and enact, that no act, imposition, law or ordinance
should be made, or imposed upon them, then, or in time to come, but such as
should be made or imposed by consent of the associates or their representatives
legally assembled; which stands as a fundamental at the head of a number of
their law books, new extant, in this town. The general fundamentals.

Anno 1636, and reviled 1671.

1. We the associates of the colony of New-Plymouth, coming hither as freeborn
subjects of the kingdom of England, endowed with all and singular the
privileges belonging to such; being assembled Do enact, ordain and constitute,
that no act, imposition, law or ordinance be made or imposed upon us, at
present, or to come, but such as shall be enacted by consent of the body of
freemen or associates, or their representatives legally assembled; which is
according to the free liberties of the freeborn people of England.

The above act stands in the (...) of three manuscript law books in 1636, 1658
and 1660, and of two printed ones in 1671 and 1685.

In the year 1636, Plymouth colony first formed o^ perfected their body (...)
code of laws, they being before governed by transient regulations or occasional
laws.

Attest. JOHN COTTONS, Reg




LIFE, liberty and property are an inheritance secured by the immutable laws of
nature, the principles of the English constitution, and royal charters or
compacts; neither of which ever were by our ancestors, or their descendants
ceded to any power on earth to be disposed of without their consent. And who,
that had the least feeling for himself, his country or posterity, could stand
unmoved, when he beheld direct attempts made to render them, one and all,
totally insecure and precarious.

IT may not be improper here to take a short view of some of the tyrannick
steps and measures devised and adopted by the British ministry, and their
coadjutors, which led to the unnatural civil war in which we are unhappily, but
necessarily engaged -- together with a short glance at the conduct of the
Colonists, in their various and complicated embarrassments.

FOR years past, who could behold, but with indignation, the various maneuvers
of our enemies both on this and the other side of the atlantic, to deprive the
inhabitants of their unalienable rights and immunities, and to subjugate them
to slavery.

BY ministerial influence and corruption, in concert with their aiders and
abettors, natives, but parricides of this country, acts of parliament have been
procured, which sufficiently indicated that the various regulations of
administration had their origin from a preconcerted plan and system of tyranny
and oppression. Fundamental to this system, was the declaratory act, that the
parliament of Britain had a right to bind the Colonies in all cases whatsoever.

IN consequence of this, acts of parliament were made, under various specious
pretenses, for raising a revenue in the Colonies without their consent.

JURISDICTIONS of certain courts extended beyond their ancient limits.

SUBJECTS deprived, in many instances, of their inestimable privilege of trial
by a jury of their peers.

A COURT erected, to the intent that Colonists should be transported to England
for trial.

THE Governor of Massachusetts Bay, and the judges of the superior court,
rendered totally independent upon the people for their support, and entirely
dependent upon the crown, both for their commissions (which they hold during
pleasure) and for their salaries: -- Which had a direct tendency to an undue
influence, and to introduce corruption into the sacred seat of justice, and to
make them subservient to the schemes of wicked and designing ministers, and to
become the devoted tools of despotism.

HUMBLE, importunate and loyal supplications to the King have been ingulphed in
the dark abyss of ministerial corruption, or hurled from the throne with the
greatest contempt.

ASSEMBLIES frequently, wantonly and arbitrarily dissolved; and never upon a
less virtuous occasion, than when they have proposed to enter into a peaceable
consideration of their grievances -- delegating member from among themselves,
to join with others deputed for the like purpose, that ways and means might be
devised for a radical redress; or for refusing to rescind a rightful, laudable
and patriotic resolution for this purpose.

EXPENSIVE and oppressive offices have been multiplied, and the vile arts of
corruption have, with unabating zeal, been practiced to divide, that they might
destroy the people.

TO awe the inhabitants to a surrender of their rights, the castle voluntarily
surrendered into the hands of our enemy, by a man whose name and memory will be
loaded with execrations to latest time. For years the harbor of Boston filled
with ships of war, and the streets thronged with military executioners.

THE port of Boston shut up, whereby the inhabitants were reduced to this
shocking alternative, either to submit to slavery, or to cast themselves upon
providence for supply, in a threatened famine; -- which they must have felt,
had it not been for the generous donations of their sympathizing brethren
through the Continent, who viewed them as patrons of liberty -- peculiar
sufferers in defense of our common rights.

ADD to these, the charter of the province, that sacred barrier against the
encroachments of tyranny, wrecked, mutilated, and as it were annihilated; the
foundations of government entirely out of course, the governor being made as
arbitrary and despotic as the grand Turk.

MOREOVER, a murderous law made to snatch those bloody villains from the award
of justice, who should embrue their hands in the blood of those noble sons of
freedom, who might have spirit and courage sufficient to assert and defend
their rights.

PUBLIC magazines purchased at the expense of the community, for their defense
and safety, and private property in many instances seized and detained, and
kept in the hands of military plunderers, that the good people of the land
might be in a defenseless condition, and the more easily dragooned to the most
abject slavery.

INDIVIDUALS frequently assaulted, most shamefully abused and insulted by the
rude and brutal soldiery, while in the peace of God and the king, pursuing
their lawful callings!

THEN was trumpeted abroad, by ministerial prostitutes and braying Issachars
the omnipotence of parliament, accompanied with the most tremendous menaces,
that all indiscriminately, without a tame submission, should feel its dreadful
vengeance.

THEN was the matchless and irresistible force of Britain, both by sea and
land, painted in the most horror-giving colors. And, as matters drew toward a
crisis, we were told of a royal standard and proclamation, specifying a certain
time to repair there and swear allegiance, that we might save our necks; but if
not, all that stood out would be considered as rebels, and must die their death.

THIS wrought powerfully on timid spirits, while others treated it as a
bugbear, and conducted if possible, with more life and spirit.

GREAT indeed has been the embarrassment of our public affairs, and great our
distress and perplexity; and innumerable the provocations to drive the locusts
from the land: But such was the loyalty of this people, and such their
affection to the parent state, and so remote the idea of independency and a
separation, that every patriotic heart appeared to be willing to suffer any
thing, consistent with the safety of our country, and the final preservation of
our liberties, in hopes that something in providence would turn up, to convince
the whole nation of the infatuation of the British councils, whereby there
might be a radical redress of our grievances, reconciliation take place, peace
and harmony be restored

AND if the public energies did not keep pace with and were not adequate to the
virulent measures of our oppressors, their undue moderation may, in a sort, be
excused upon the footing of the above considerations.

THIS temper and conduct probably gave life and spirit to the enemy; who,
instead of granting our humble petitions, or regarding our just remonstrances,
and proceedings the most pacific, increased our wrongs and multiplied our
oppressions.

ALARMED at the strides of despotism and arbitrary power, the people became
determined to make every lawful and laudable opposition to ward off tyranny and
slavery.

MANY expedients were devised: It was justly considered as matter of the
highest importance that we should act in concert, and that to this purpose
there should be a union of the Colonies, if possible. How to bring it about was
the concern of many: The implacable and almost unpardonable enemies of American
rights, fearing lest the consequences of such a union might prove fatal to
their measures, to prevent so necessary and desirable a junction, procured the
dissolution of diverse assemblies of the representative bodies, through the
Continent.

THE people knew that they had a right to petition and be heard, but had been
refused -- they knew they had a right by nature and the English constitution,
peaceably to assemble together personally, or by their representatives, to
consider their grievances and devise methods for their redress: -- Being denied
this, according to usual mode by the iron hand of power, laying aside forms,
the people availed themselves of their right, met together in their respective
towns, chose their representatives; collecting themselves into a body, are the
representatives of the people, whither known by the name of a house of
representatives, convention or congress. And the delegates chosen by those
bodies to represent them in general council or congress, are properly the
representatives of the people, and whatever council, advice or measures are
recommended, after mature deliberation, ought as strictly to be adhered to by
the Colonies, as if they came directed in channels more usual and customary.

NOTWITHSTANDING all the evil machinations of our enemies to prevent a union of
the Colonies, a glorious one has been formed; for which I know not that it is
possible to be sufficiently thankful to providence. May God preserve,
strengthen and perfect it.

A UNION formed upon the best principles; the love of liberty, the love of our
country, the love of posterity! Associations entered into for our mutual
defense and safety, and to promote the common weal.

UPON the footing of this union, many expedients have been devised; most of
which have been recommended, or highly approved by the Honorable Continental
Congress, and which have been found eminently beneficial in our day of general
calamity: as county conventions, who recommended a suspension of courts of
justice, lest they should by some means or other, be instrumental of bringing
on that tyranny and slavery which every patriot detests, and against which it
is the duty of every individual to guard: -- a measure highly approved by the
American Congress.

IN like manner, committees of correspondence, inspection and safety have been
bodies of men greatly serviceable to the state, in their respective departments.

THE rising of the people to carry into execution measures dictated by the
united wisdom of bodies delegated for that purpose, was a token for good.

THEIR collecting in large bodies, and repairing to those persons who had taken
out commissions upon the ruins of our once happy constitution, to demand of
them a surrender of those offices, and to make an explicit declaration that
they would not act by virtue thereof, and in no other way do any thing
whatever, prejudicial to the community, had at least a temporary check upon
tyranny, and was preventive of very great mischief, which those men might have
been capable of doing by their corrupt doctrine, influence and example, had
they been unnoticed as obnoxious and odious.

IN the mean while the Congress of this colony extended their views to the last
event, and, agreeable to the advice of the C^^^^^ent, were preparing for
defense.

THE enemy in the capital being reinforced from time to time, at length armed
themselves, and marched forth under the cover of darkness, with intent,
according to the acknowledgment of their General, to destroy a military
magazine, in a distant town, procured solely for the defense and safety of our
country. When on their way, on the memorable 19^^ of April, 1775, they
commenced hostilities, -- shed the blood of war in peace!

AN alarm being given, the inhabitants collecting from neighboring towns, gave
them such a warm reception, that those troops, the flower of Britain, picked
for the purpose of robbery, pillage and plunder, if not for blood, and who had
often bragged and boasted, that one regiment or two, could, at pleasure, march
from one end of the Continent to the other, unmolested, spreading havoc and
desolation, found themselves, two thousand, or at least eighteen hundred in
number, necessitated to retreat with the utmost precipitation, to their strong
hold, pursued and galled by the way by Americans, in number not a quarter equal
to the enemy, at any one time engaged in the action of the day.

FROM that time we may safely date the era of civil war in these colonies,
unnaturally and barbarously commenced by Great Britain.

WITH gratitude to providence, we view our people inspired with courage and
intrepidity, and the fear and dread of them falling upon our unnatural and
merciless enemy.

WE deplore the slaughter of any of our brave patriots and heroes, who fell on
that day; a day which fixes an eternal stigma upon the British arms, stained
with the blood of innocents. They gave undeniable marks of their being totally
destitute of justice, bravery and humanity; they were once characterized for
justice and humanity toward their natural and avowed enemies, without which
qualities of mind, it is impossible that there should be bravery and
magnanimity: They have irretrievably lost their honor. It is a day memorable
for giving victory to a few hundred Americans, brave and determined, armed and
engaged in the best cause, for the defense of their country, and its
inestimable privileges, over an army of British troops, who judged themselves
invincible, especially by Americans, upon whom they had been taught and
acccustomed to look down with as much contempt and disdain, as Goliath of Gath
did upon David the stripling.

AFTER having dropped a tear over the graves of our slaughtered brethren, with
the keenest feelings of sympathy, let us condole with the bereaved, the
surviving relatives; dying in so glorious a cause, they have died in the bed of
honor; the history of this Continent will hand down their names with honor
till time shall be no more; "for it is immortality to sacrifice ourselves for
the salvation of our country."

FROM that memorable day to the present, one instance excepted, our enemies
have been inglorious in arms; the alarm occasioned by their violence, blood and
murder, spread far and wide; and the brave sons of freedom impressed with the
most anxious concern for their distressed, bleeding country, flew to arms, and
by hundreds and thousands, not only from this but neighboring colonies, came
down for the defense of this devoted people; by their means, with the speedy
raising of a continental army, the enemy have been circumscribed within very
narrow limits, cooped up and confined to Boston and its suburbs, disappointed,
mortified and defeated.

REMARKABLE has been the health of our camps, which demands our grateful
acknowledgment; scarcely and enterprise has been formed but what has been
executed with valor, bravery and success.

THE covering which providence has afforded to our troops, upon the lines, and
in the day of battle, during the campaign, is almost without a parallel.

IF we look into the wide extended province of Quebec, how agreeable the
prospect! Where we behold one fortress and strong hold after another
surrendering to the victorious arms of the continent; from the latest accounts
relative to the capital of that department we have good reason to believe that
the whole is reduced to the obedience of the United Colonies.

THESE acquisitions are highly important in themselves, but much more so in
their consequences.

OUR most sanguine expectations are exceeded in the pacifick dispositions of
the Canadians, and the numerous tribes of Indians, with whom every evil
machination has been made use of, that wit or wickedness could devise, to
rouse them to arms by our unnatural foe, that they might be their auxiliaries
in carrying into execution plans most ruinous and destructive to this whole
Continent: How great must the chagrin of those be who have failed in every
maneuver of this sort?

So far have the Canadians and Indians been from being inimical to our troops,
that they have showed many acts of kindness in supplying of them with
provisions in their marches and encampments; not only so, but many of them have
joined our forces to check and subdue the ministerial army.

NO less are we to take notice of our remarkable captures by sea, one of which,
under our present circumstances, is almost inestimable.

"NOT unto us, oh Lord, but unto thy name be the glory."

WE should act quite out of character as men and christians, and should
practically disown a superintending providence, did we impute those manifold
and signal blessings that we have received to any thing short of the
efficacious influences of his providence on the minds of men, and its most
favorable interposition on behalf of this continent, for our defense and
safety in a day of great distress and general calamity.

THE descendents of Abraham, who were to take possession of the promised
inheritance, while they were in Egypt, the house of bondage, suffered much from
the hand of power, the Egyptians fearing they might grow so powerful as to
become independent, determined to stunt them in their growth, and keep them
down by renewing their burdens and oppressions; but the more they were
afflicted, the more they multiplied and grew. God was with them, and the very
means the Egyptians made use of to humble them and prevent their increase, by
an overruling providence, were made the occasion of their growth and
prosperity. There are many traces and footsteps of a like providence in the
late and present day; in the union of the Colonies, after every evil
machination to prevent it; the check upon the Canadians and Savages, and their
friendship to the continent; but these must be waved; time will not permit me
to point out those, which to me appear to be important and obvious. "The Lord
has done great things for us, whereof we are glad!"

It remains that we should be unfeignedly thankful for every instance of past
success; that we be patient under all fatigues an hardships, and that we, at
the call of past providence, adequate to the redemption of our fathers, and
favorable to us, persevere in the direct line of opposition to that tyranny,
which is abominable in the sight of heaven, and destructive of the rights of
mankind.

"OUR fathers trusted in thee -- they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver
them; they cried unto thee, and were delivered; they trusted in thee, and were
not confounded."

GOD has often appeared for this people in days of great darkness and distress.
Such is our cause, so righteous in the sight of heaven, that it will, by no
means, become us to harbor one distrustful thought. How can we say, after such
a series of favorable providence, in the midst of deserved affliction, that
his mercies are clean gone, and that he will be favorable no more.

FOR my own part, I must acknowledge, that I feel animated from this
confidence, that our present noble struggle for our rights, and the unwearied
exertions of the patriots, friends and benefactors of this country, will bring
about a happy termination of all our troubles.

IN the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thine hand, for
thou know not whither this or that shall prosper. Let those who have begun
well endure to the end, leaving our most important concerns with Him, who is
the avenger of wrongs, in confidence that he will finally break and subdue the
power of the oppressors of the earth, and of this Continent in particular.

SHOULD the deportment of this people be, according to the various providence
of God, in every suitable expression of piety and patriotism, then might we all
pray with the most raised expectation, that the petitions we asked of him
should be granted.

"RETURN, oh Lord, we beseech thee, and visit the vine which thine own right
hand has planted, and make it strong for thyself, and give peace in our day."

SHOULD this be the grant of heaven, the most pleasing and glorious prospect
would open to our view.

THEN America and "the desert shall rejoice and blossom as the rose, and the
ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting
joy upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and
sighing shall flee away."

AMEN.

