Mr. Webster's SERMON To two Companies of Minute Men. FEBRUARY 21st, 1775.

Rabshakeh's Proposals Considered, In a SERMON, Delivered at Groton February
21, 1775. At the Desire of the Officers of the Companies of Minute Men in that
Town.

BY SAMUEL WEBSTER, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH AT TEMPLE, in NEW HAMPSHIRE.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by EDES and GILL, in Queen Street. 1775.

A SERMON.
2. KINGS. XVIII.30 -- 32. Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the Lord,
saying, the Lord will surely deliver us, and this City shall not be delivered
into the hand of the King of Assyria. Hearken not unto Hezekiah: For thus says
the King of Assyria, make an agreement with me by a present, and come out to
me, and then eat ye every man of his own vine, and every one of his fig tree,
and drink ye every one the waters of his cistern: Until I come and take you
away to a land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and
vineyards, a land of oyl-olive, and of honey, that ye may live and not die: And
hearken not unto Hezekiah, when he persuadeth you, saying the Lord will deliver
us.


TWO ways, from the word of God, may we learn the mind of God and his counsel
to us -- either from what God enjoins or from what his people under such
circumstances have practiced, or by what Satan and his instruments would
dissuade us from or persuade us to, -- and by the last, often, with the same
evidence as by the first; as Satan and his instruments, according to their
measure of power and craft, are always engaged in endeavors to keep us from
the right ways of the Lord, and lead us into evil; and as, in proportion to the
evil, they ever proportion their desires and endeavors to lead us into it.
Satan is well pleased to throw Job into outward distresses; but he would be
more pleased if, by this means, he may conquer his virtue and induce him to
blaspheme his maker, as far the greater evil. -- In a word, as God is ever
doing good and persuading us to obey and follow him, as the greatest good, so
is Satan, and so, according to their measure, are Satan's instruments, doing us
evil, and, "like Lions seeking whom they may devour," studying to keep us from
God, and lead us, under various guises, to sin the greatest evil, and to all
other evil according as it is evil.

Thus, in the passage before us, does a servant of the King of Assyria, an
eminent emblem of Lucifer, in obedience to his master, endeavor to lead the
Jews to the greatest evil, even to cast off their trust in God and regard to
his servants, and persuade them to a surrender of their earthly all to the mere
will of his master. For this purpose he uses many sounding but unmeaning
promises, and mixes with them the most imperious threatenings.

He tells them that he come from the great King of Assyria -- boasts of what
his master had done -- and would persuade them that it would be no loss to them
to submit -- and that it was in vain to trust in either God or man for help
against such a power. Hezekiah, a servant of God, and they that were with him,
would persuade the Jews not to submit that though their enemies were indeed
strong, yet the Lord was mightier -- and that agreeable to his wanted
righteousness and mercy, they might in a humble obedient regard to him, yet
hope in the Lord. Satan therefore puts Rabshakeh on urging the little
disadvantage and absolute necessity of submission and disuading them from a
trust in God, which he most dreaded, as knowing that their safety must chiefly
depend on this.

Let us consider,

I. The nature and importance of a true trust in God -- from which Rabshakeh
would dissuade the Jews.

II. The nature of the proposals which Rabshakeh makes to the Jews.

III. The motives, addressed to their hopes and fears, by which he enforces
these proposals.

IV. The applicableness of this -- to the temptations of Satan in general, or
to the situation of this land in particular.

I. Let us attempt some view of the nature and importance of a true trust in
God -- from which Rabshakeh would dissuade the Jews.

"Trust in the Lord with all thy heart," says true wisdom -- trust in the Lord
at all times says a servant of God; 'trust not in the Lord," says an
instrument of Satan. Both express its importance. God knows its entire
suitableness, and therefore commends it. His servants know its worth, and
therefore heartily recommend it. Satan is well apprised of the danger from it
to his interest, and therefore does his utmost to prevent it. Its importance is
sealed by the pains God takes to promote and secure this trust, in the display
of divine power, wisdom, sufficiency and faithfulness, in the works, word, and
providence of God; -- and by all the wiles of Satan, from his grand success
with our first parents, through all the temptations he uses with the children
of men -- In all of which, the success of his most dangerous attempts on
mankind have ever depended on his keeping out of view, or leading the soul to
distrust the divine power, wisdom, holiness, or sufficiency.

If in addition to this, we remember the blessed advantages of trusting in God
-- that "they that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Zion", and on the other
hand, the awful doom of the fearful and unbelieving; it may well induce, even
the careless mind to enquire something about its nature, and dispose all to
look to the foundation of their confidence.

Let us employ a few thoughts on the general nature of trust -- the
distinguishing nature of trust in God -- and the principle exercises of this
trust.

1. Let us think a little of the general nature of trust. -- It Is then a
quieting regard to the ability, love, wisdom, or faithfulness of any being;
exercising which, the soul so far rests, as a building on its foundation. Or it
is the expectation of some particular, general, or supreme good from the object
on which the soul leans, as suitable to afford the expected support. It Is then
a reasonable and right confidence when only that is expected which the object,
on which the soul, either partially or fully leans, is fitted to afford, by
power, situation, or will, that which is expected. Thus, in animate things, we
trust in a staff to support us. We trust in wholesome food to nourish us -- we
expect shelter from the rain in a sufficient house -- a good crop from a
fertile soil, and warmth, usually, from clothes.

So in things animate, we expect, usually, labor from the ox; swiftness from
the horse.

So in rational beings -- we trust in the wise for direction -- the faithful
that they will speak the truth -- the holy and righteous that they will set us
a good example. -- And in a degree, we always trust in the good, the faithful,
the rich, the wise, for help, support, comfort, or needful counsel.

Trust is thus allied to expectation; but ever distinguished from it, in that
we expect evil as well as good, but we never trust in any object for
apprehended evil. Trust is also nearly related to hope; but -- ever
distinguished from it, as seeing and traveling toward a firm rock are
distinguished from leaning or standing, and depending upon the stability of
that rock.

Hope is desiring and expecting some good viewed as at a distance. Trust is
delighting in, and leaning upon, and expecting the continuance of some good
viewed as present. Expectation shall be swallowed up; -- hope exchanged; but
trust in the supreme good shall ever remain with the holy.

Trust may differ in degree, and in its objects; but it has still the same
general nature, even when there is much uncertainty; as in our regard to the
testimony of a person of a doubtful character, so long as there is any
expectation of that for which we trust in the object. -- Then only does it
quite vanish, when all the apprehended grounds of trust vanish -- when the
staff breaks -- the rock sinks -- the house is broken up -- the harvest is
quite blasted; -- or, in general, when that comes which quite removes the
ground of our trust; a case which the disciples were ready to think had
happened, when after the death of Christ they say, "we trusted that it was he
that should have delivered Israel."

Thus far the trust in general. -- With regard to the distinguishing nature of
trust in God, we observe -- It Is an entire persuasion of the sufficiency of his
power, wisdom, holiness, and goodness, which quiets, animates, and regulates
the soul, and warms it into a serene calm, and healthy exercise of all its
powers for God; -- or it is a regard to this glorious object according to its
glorious nature.

Of consequence there is a two fold foundation of a right holy trust in God --
the unchangeable glories of God -- and a right relish in our hearts.

The foundation in God is what God is and has done. Here, assuredly, there is
the most perfect foundation of trust.

Do we expect that a rock will support us. "The Lord is a rock". His power
formed and upholds the known and unknown worlds. Unshaken and secure in
himself, though the weight of worlds lies on him, yet he supports them all with
infinite ease, as the massy rock the little dust.

Do we place confidence in the counsels and directions of the wise? Behold, --
"the only wise God", compared with whom the knowledge and wisdom of men and
angels is but folly. Does he counsel and direct us? He cannot be mistaken.
Shall we not trust to his counsels and rely on his directions? Shall our hearts
venture a single movement, as doubtful whether it is infinitely safest and best
for us to depend, and absolutely rely on his determination of our end,
business, path, or happiness?

Do we trust that fellow creatures of approved fidelity will not deceive us?
Shall we not, without wavering, trust that holy "God who cannot lie"?

Do we often trust much to, and build much upon the goodness of a fellow
creature? Shall we not trust the goodness of the Father of the Universe; that
he will do toward us all, that which is, on the whole best? Do we expect much
from a spark of goodness? Shall we not trust in goodness itself?

Do we trust much to the stedfastness of some among our fellow creatures? Shall
we not entirely depend upon it that the unchangeable God will conduct like
himself?

But now of these, and all his infinite glories God has given, and we may find
complete evidence. His power crowds on our view in all we see and know, small
and great. "The heavens proclaim his glory", as their almighty builder. And
earth has as many voices as inhabitants, or even as spires of grass, or
particles of dust; to shout forth to every attentive ear "Lord God Almighty".
His wisdom shines in all the harmony of creation.

His goodness mildly, but brightly beams forth in all the avenues for the
objects of our senses -- in all the pleasing engagements and discoveries of
reason and imagination -- in all the evil prevented and good bestowed.

His Holiness shines in his law -- is discovered by the awakened, and relished
by the sanctified conscience.

His unchangeableness is the result of his other glories -- and is strongly
marked in the ordinances of heaven, and attested by the steady laws of nature.

His grace and promises are rich and large -- in harmony with himself, and
adopted to remove those dreadful bars that sin and guilt had thrown in the way.

Thus is there a foundation in God, large and firm enough to secure the trust
of all those whose hearts are prepared to see and acknowledge God.

But though there is infinite reason, in what God is and does, for entire trust
in him; yet, plainly, many "trust not in the living God". Many forget God, or,
"through pride of countenance will not seek him". Many have no conformity to his
image, concern about his favor, or regard to his Son; or feel sensible
opposition and aversion, directly opposite to trust. There must then be a
belief of the divine Being and Perfections.

We may be supported by we know not what: But we cannot trust in that of which
we have no knowledge. We often mistake indeed, and in our trust in creatures
generally, or universally, rather; yet even here we trust in them as being
sufficient; and can no otherwise trust in any thing, than as thus apprehended
by us.

Further,

There must be also a satisfaction in these perfections.

However grand and august our views of God's glories are; yet we shall trust in
them no otherwise than as we delight in them, or are pleased with them, either
in themselves, or in some relation to us. But if, as is often the case, we
trust in, or expect the continued exercise of the divine power and wisdom in
confined respects, or for foreign reasons, as -- upholding and directing the
sun, rain, and all those things which are agreeable to us: yet this is rather a
secondary trust; since, with our regard to these inferior objects, our trust
ceases; -- as we cease to regard a particular instrument when its use is gone.
Such a secondary trust in God we may have, and often have, while a large view
of the divine power and wisdom in upholding and governing, directing and
enforceing, are painful to us. We trust no further than we are pleased with
these glories. Even he that vainly thinks that these perfections shall be to
his eternal benefit; yet he trusts not in them, so long as he does not relish
the direction of the divine wisdom, and dictates of the divine authority in the
law of God. This has to his view no perfect wisdom; and therefore he ever
contrives some way to cast it aside. In order to this trust, an holy relish of
soul is necessary.

As this relish is not universal or natural to mankind, it is necessary, in
order to trust in God, that we be "born again" -- renewed in the temper of our
hearts, or have a "new heart". We must be broken off from our vain confidence
in the creature and ourselves -- our own strength, wisdom, and righteousness.
For as God looks to the humble; so only the humble can look to God in the
exercise of a holy trust. So far as the heart fails of just views and sense of
its own littleness and lothsomeness, or of an holy relish for the divine
glories; so far must it fail of a right trust.

As to the principal exercises and effects of this trust, we can hint but
briefly.

In general, -- we say

A true trust in God quiets the soul. "He that trusts in the Lord shall be as
Mount Zion". So again, says the Psalmist, "He shall not be afraid of evil
tidings; his heart is fixed trusting in the Lord". Though winds of fears and
troubles blow, yet he is fixed by an holy trust on the rock of ages. "I am",
says the Psalmist, "like a green olive tree; for I trust in thy word". As some
trees are green in winter, so this trust will cause the soul to flourish even
in the cold blasts of outward distress. -- It prevents murmurings as its direct
opposite. -- It keeps us from crooked paths, as opposed to the wise and holy
directions of God; in which we trust as best.

This trust is exercised, principally and universally, in committing the soul
and all its concerns to God for time and eternity -- leaning on him as able and
sufficient to uphold us.

This is actively expressed in various ways. It Is exercised in prayer. As says
the Psalmist, "trust in the Lord at all times, pour out your hearts before
him". It is directly expressed in praise; in which the soul looks over,
delights in, and rests upon the fullness of God. It is exercised in remembering
past support, and in seeking future favors. It has much place in reading and
studying the works and word of God -- that we may know more of the glory, and
learn the mind and will of God.

Again. As we are sinners, this trust is exercised in gospel repentance and
faith -- in hating sin, lothing ourselves, and lying low before God; in all of
which, so far as evangelical, the soul trusts in God, as being, directing, and
doing all that which is right. In faith it is directly exercised in trusting to
a crucified risen Savior, as the image of the Father, the gift of his love, in
whom are displayed, and by whom are established all the declarations of the
divine authority, wisdom, holiness, and love, in the works and law of God. Thus
does this trust imply, and furnish the soul for the exercise of true love to
God and his creatures.

Of consequence Lastly -- this trust flows forth in obedience to the commands
of God. Why are any disobedient; when there is such infinite reason for
obedience to God? God declares the universal cause in the case of Israel --
"She obeyed not my voice; She trusted not in the Lord". Do we trust in God? We
just so far believe and feel the reality of his being, and the perfection and
desirableness of his authority. Do we trust that God's directions are safe and
best? We are, just so far, impelled to walk in the paths, and use the methods
and means -- his authority and wisdom point out.

This is, I think, some sketch of a true trust in God: -- that trust, from
which Rabshakeh would dissuade the Jews. -- And well he might. For so far as
they trusted in God, they built on that which infinitely sunk his master. Did
they trust in the divine power, as sufficient? Where are his proud questions,
"Who is your God, that he should deliver you out of the hand of my master"? Did
they trust in the divine wisdom? Where are his and his master's crafty designs?
Did they trust in the divine righteousness and mercy, to vindicate their cause
against an unjust and cruel invader? It sinks his master and himself into
monsters, mere beasts of prey. Well might he then desire to prevent this trust,
which effectually barred all his proposals to them.

Let us briefly view

2. The nature of the proposals which Rabshakeh makes to the Jews.

As he eagerly dissuades them from trusting God; so he warmly presses them to
trust him and his master.

He proposes then to the Jews to "make an agreement with him by a present".
This is an easy way of ending a great difficulty -- if the present be not too
large. What sort of a present must this needs be that would satisfy him?
Assuredly, nothing short of an entire submission. Nothing short of presenting
their estates to his will -- to be used as he thought proper; -- their bodies
to his service, and their religion to this regulation -- so far, at least, as
to acknowledge that there was no God like the King of Assyria. A present indeed
this! He is willing to compliment them so far, if they will make this entire
submission, as to call it a present. -- But have we not mistaken him? would he
be contented with no present short of this? plainly, he would not. It Is ever
included in entire unreserved submission -- though called by the soft name of a
present. And, as very decisive evidence, we are just before informed that
Hezekiah had given his master "all the silver found in the house of the Lord,
and in the treasures of the Kings house". But this was not enough. Still the
call is for a present -- as long as there is any thing left to present. For no
present -- they could send would answer: But they must "come out", and present
it, and themselves along with it; or else it would never satisfy this
horse-leech, crying, "give, give".

Let us take notice,

3. Of the motives, addressed to their hopes and fears, by which he enforces
these proposals.

There needed assuredly, some very important reasons to enforce such proposals
as these. Rabshakeh has the reasons ready to assign.

He tells them that if they will make an unreserved submission -- presenting
themselves and their all to him, -- he will engage, and surely they may believe
him, after he has prevailed on them to distrust God, -- that he will present
back again to them enough of their own for them to live comfortably upon, and
ensure to them the quiet enjoyment of it. They shall "eat", at least as long as
his master in his wisdom thought best, "every man of his own vine, and every
one of his fig tree, and drink every one the water of his cistern": Which they
were sensible, was the very manner in which their God used to speak of blessing
them. -- They should plant and sew, and have enough for their subsistence at
harvest, and his word for their security from their enemies on all sides. They
should enjoy all this in as great a degree, and as long, as the great King of
Assyria thought best. And, surely, this must be safer for them, than to be left
to their own judgment in disposing of, and their own strength in defending
themselves and substance. He engages that they shall be dressers of their own
fields and vineyards -- for a season; and that if the great King of Assyria
thought best in his wisdom, after a time, to remove them to some other parts of
his dominions, yet, he engages that they should be carried to a land as good as
their own, and of the same kind; where they should enjoy all needful food,
drink and clothing in the cultivation of the country: And as this was all they
could reasonably desire, their case must needs be far better to enjoy these
under the security of such a wise, great, and good King as his master.

Thus far, he addresses their hopes. But, now, to fasten, and give force to,
the reasons for the proposed submission, -- he attacks their fears, -- and
tells them that, if they will not submit, die they must, and die they shall --
that there was no way for them to preserve their lives -- no way that they
might "live and not die", but accepting his offers, -- for neither God or man
would or could defend them. -- He makes the proposals in mere compassion to
them, before he strikes the fatal blow; -- which in the name, and armed with
the strength of his master, he shall immediately deal out to them, unless they
immediately comply with his just and merciful proposals. -- And now what will
they do, "that he may give answer to him that sent him"? Will they submit and
live, and live comfortably, or die miserably?

Let us view a little,

4. The applicableness of this to the temptations of Satan, in general, -- or
the situation of this land in particular.

As to the applicableness of this to the temptations of Satan, in general, --

This is what Satan has always attempted, and that in which he has had dreadful
success, to prevent trust in God.

Thus did he attack, and thus, to the ruin of themselves and the whole family
of mankind, did he succeed with our first parents. -- From the nature and
strictness of the command, arguing against the reality of it -- "yea has God
said ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden": -- And from the severity of
the threatening, and the sensible, or imagined advantages of disobedience,
pressing the conclusion, that the threatening was only a scarecrow; -- "ye shall
not surely die; for God does know that in the day ye eat, your eyes shall be
opened". In both, urging a distrust of the truth, faithfulness, wisdom, and
goodness of God. -- As if, though God would not be much displeased with their
disobedience, yet he begrutch'd them the advantage they would gain by it. Thus
has Satan conducted ever since. So long as he can keep out of view the power,
presence, authority, wisdom, goodness, and holiness of God, or darken the
soul's view and sense of them, so that they shall have on the mind only the
force of doubtful conclusions; so long has he easy access to the soul -- to
unhinge it from all desires, and endeavors to obey God, and, on the contrary,
lead it by hopes and fears addressed to all the common springs of the soul, to
trample on the divine commands, and give the sinful heart flowing reins. A
soul, uninfluenced by trust in God, Satan easily persuades that in the ways of
sin it shall find earthly ease and pleasure, the only things of importance
when, and so far as the soul distrusts God, -- that in this way it may enjoy
riches and honor, gratify the senses, and "fulfill the desires of the flesh and
of the mind", and all without any disturbance or fear: or, that if any set of
pleasures fail, others shall come to supply their places -- that if the
imagined pleasures of godliness fail, the pleasures of sin shall abound -- far
more to our relish -- that if we are taken away, we shall, at least, enjoy
ease, and may expect such good as suits us, if we survive death, so as to be
capable of pain or pleasure. On the other hand, Satan persuades the soul, void
of trust in God, that if it will not hearken to the counsel of lusts, there is
present death to all comforts, in pleasing ourselves, gratifying our lusts, and
enjoying the good our heart relishes -- and that it were as well to die, as to
be deprived of the pleasures of sin, and come under the restraints, and walk in
the glooms of religion.

In this, Satan ever succeeds, just so far as he can introduce distrust of the
truth, holiness, or in general of the perfections of God.

So long as the soul firmly assents to the truth of God, and confides in his
wisdom, and rests in his sufficiency, Satan finds no opening to introduce his
temptations -- here he must and does begin, and here, alas, he has melancholy
success.

As to the applicableness of this to the situation of this land in particular
-- We observe

1. Here is a mighty claim of Rabshakeh, in the name of the king of Assyria,
that they, the Jews, should agree with him, submit, and present their earthly
all to him and his service. Whence is then his right to this? It should seem
that one of these three involve the best title that we can make out for him --

Either -- that their father Abraham, from whom the Jews professed to descend,
came from the land of Chaldea, and so was a subject of that empire; and of
consequence they also, as descendants from him -- or that not long before,
under the reign of Ahaz, the Assyrian King had subdued the City of Damascus and
kingdom of Syria, a neighboring power, which had long been a scourge to the
Jews -- or, if this evidence were not complete, that the King of Assyria had
some hundred thousand men, ready to prove, at the point of the sword, the
argument full and unanswerable.

Thus the Parliament of Britain claim a right to us and ours in America -- to
do with us and ours as they shall think best, -- with respect to life and
property -- all that which can come under the jurisdiction of any earthly
power. They desire that we would agree with them in this, -- and make them a
present of ourselves and our earthly all, to be disposed of as they shall judge
proper. They desire that we should yield their right to this: Or, in their own
language, they claim, and insist on our yielding it to them that, "of right,
they have power to bind the people of these colonies by statutes in all cases
whatsoever": And accordingly they are now attempting to enforce this claim.

Whence, now, arises this right?

It Is urged, that our fathers came from Britain, a century or two ago, and
that, being subjects of Britain, before they came here, they, and their
posterity, to all generations, must and ought to remain so. -- Though it is
observable that if there is any force in this, it is either in a great measure
lost by our fathers coming directly from another country, Holland, where they
had long lived as subjects -- or else the argument will recoil on themselves,
and oblige them to this entire submission to the inhabitants of Asia, from
whence, assuredly, their fathers came. But instead of this, they attempt to
enslave them as well as us.

In addition to this, it is urged that Britain has defended and secured the
Colonies -- and lately conquered Canada, a neighboring power, which had long
been a scourge to us. For this service, without consulting us, they judge
themselves entitled to the disposal of us, and our property. Although it might
seem but fair, first to have stated their accounts, and desired ours, and
proposed a fair reckoning, and then demanded the balance, if any due. Instead
of which, they make the charge, prove their own accounts, and proceed to an
attachment of us and our property, without allowing any appeal from their
decision -- although we, as well as the Jews, and all mankind, should be
unwilling for a pretended creditor to be both judge and executioner; and
although much of their charge against us appear to us, and many among
themselves, either groundless or much too high; and although no credit be
allowed us in balance of that part of their account which is reasonable. -- If
we ask, did Assyria conquer Canaan for Israel? The answer is no. Ask again; did
Britain purchase or conquer America for our Fathers? The plain answer is no,
they did not. The same God that conducted Israel into the land of Canaan,
conducted, and in his providence, made way for our Fathers. -- Enquire further,
did Britain defend these Colonies in their infancy? The answer must still be
no. But we are told, perhaps Britain would have defended us, if we had been
attacked. We hear of no attempts to defend us in the only capital instance of
designs against us. We are then informed these designs would have been
multiplied and surely succeeded, had not fear of the power of Britain
prevented. It Is hard to prove or disapprove this article of charge against us
-- If allowed -- and Britains claim in consequence; we are indebted -- as a
flock of sheep to wolves, that have secured them by their howlings, though
without design, from foxes and small dogs, and then devour them for their pay
-- as, sure, no powers that would have attacked us, would have aimed at more
than to do with us and ours as they should think best. But however this be --
we are desired to remember that, lately, Britain has conquered Canada. Though
here, the argument of the Assyrian king seems to have the advantage; as he
conquered Damascus on some particular desires and submissions of Ahaz, and
without any aid from him: whereas Britain conquered -- with the fully
proportioned help of America, this Province in particular. Both agree in this
-- that both Assyria and Britain have retained the sovereignty and property to
themselves.

But, now, if from these two arguments, there is not a full conviction on our
minds of our obligation to yield the point of right; Britain, as well as
Assyria has another argument at hand, which she supposes must produce
conviction. She has and sends her fleets and armies, to prove every part of the
argument, which might seem otherwise to fail.

This leads us to observe

2. The correspondence in the motives, urged by each to enforce their claims.

The offers made by Rabshakeh are that, if the Jews will agree with him, and
submit to him, and make him a present of their earthly all, themselves and
substance -- they shall for a season, at least, have a subsistence, with his
security, by their labor on their own.

Thus does Britain promise that, if we will part with the right, and peaceably
submit -- we shall, under such limits as they think fit, labor on our own, and
enjoy as much of the fruit and benefit of our labor, as they shall see and
judge best for us. -- If we will submit as dutiful servants, they mean not to
starve us, but to allow us as much food and clothing as they judge we need:
And, sure, they can judge as well or better than we. As to what we can earn,
over and above this, as to be sure, we can make no good use of it, we may
depend upon it, that they will use it wisely, but we need not enquire how. --
Rabshakeh engages -- till he sees sit, to come and remove them to some other
part of the empire -- as masters, we know, may wisely employ their servants,
now in one, now in another part of their estates, as they judge proper.

Thus Britain begins to tell -- of removing us from county to county, from
province to province, or from America to Britain, as she sees best.

Further, to enforce his proposals, Rabshakeh threatens, and produces his
forces; and so does Britain.

Rabshakeh winds of with -- "trust not in the Lord": And Britain affects to
despise our expectations of help from God or from man.

In conclusion,

We may see what is right for us to do in the present day.

The Jews submitted not -- and, in his own time and way, the Lord delivered
them.

They trusted in God; and so may we -- opposing the power of God to Britain's
force; his wisdom to their craft; his righteousness to their injustice. Thus
may we trust in the Lord, and yet hope in his mercy.

We hear not, indeed, how the Jews agreed in their refusals to submit. If,
however, there were some, as generally in similar cases since, who were
disposed to submit; they were overruled in their false humility, or worse
designs.

May we then, prizing the gifts of heaven, feeling our own unworthiness of
them, and knowing whence our effectual help must come, study to preserve them
-- neither proudly trusting in our own strength and deserts, or, lazily and
falsely, pretending trust in God; while we neglect the open paths his providence
points out.

In the 2d Chronicles 32d Chap. -- where we have an account of this same
affair, we are told that "Hezekiah and the people took counsel, and stopped the
fountains of water without the city, and the brook that ran through the midst
of the land". This was, doubtless, an inconvenience to themselves -- to be
obliged, for themselves and cattle, to depend on the walls within the city. But
they chose to submit to it, as the lesser evil -- willing for a season to deny
themselves of things convenient, that they might preserve things necessary --
willing to use probable means, while they depended on God to apply those which
were effectual. Had they submitted, or neglected obvious means, under the
pretense of trusting God; their trust would have contradicted itself.

Thus may we learn to do likewise. Many things are not necessary for us. But it
is necessary for us to obey the voice of that God who has said, " if ye may be
free use it rather".

Let us then hearken to the voice of God -- the calls of justice -- the sighs
of our land -- the example of the wise and good -- and in our respective
spheres, endeavor to stop the waters that would please and strengthen the
enemies of our souls, and of our country -- the waters of contention,
ungodliness, unkindness, and selfishness; which provoke God, oppose trust in
him, and tend to our own ruin. Let us endeavor to do that faithfully, whatever
self-denial it cost us, which demands our concurrence. Let us put ourselves
under the protection of the universal King, and trust in him that Rabshakeh
blasphemed, whose laws of justice, from the influence of designing men, Britain
seems at present disposed to neglect.

Peaceable measures of opposition, if possible, humanity will dictate. Such
measures, to the satisfaction of every benevolent mind, are proposed by the
late grand council of America, with the most desirable union -- Measures which
require but only self denial, or conquering ourselves -- Measures, however, I
add, which will effectually try the virtue and wisdom of America -- which
suppose a degree of both, that selfish minds can hardly believe any capable of.
Our enemies know, that if these measures cannot be defeated, they must and will
defeat them. The various arts of selfish craft, to persuade us of the
unlawfulness, or impracticability of them, and to sow dissentions and
jealousies among us, we have seen exerted, and may further expect. But we are
not sure they will stop here. We have seen some attempts to intimidate us; and
hear many sounding threatenings. Troops, to the amount of thousands, stationed
in the Capital of this Province; the general of the army appointed Governor of
the Province; armed forces sent to stop a legal town meeting -- and called off,
obviously, only for want of strength to secure a retreat; a naval force in our
principal Harbors; batteries erected at the entrance of our Capital; the loud
noise of the enemies of their country, publishing for certain the speedy
arrival of foreign troops, seconded by Canadians and Indians -- in addition to
the brutal threats of North that he would "lay America at his feet" --
explained, by being taken out of the metaphor, to mean "obedience", without
reserve "to the mother country", or, in plainer english, to himself the
minister; -- and this compared with the manifest readiness of the new
Parliament to second, to the utmost of their power, the designs of the Minister
-- scarce leave us even feeble hopes, but from the unsearchable ways of
Providence, but that we must ever long "hear the sound of the trumpet, and the
alarm of war, and of garments rolled in blood". -- From the virtue of the
minister we can hope for nothing. To the utmost of his power we have reason to
fear. From the virtue of a nation, so large a part of which have again sold
themselves to those that have heretofore manifested their resolution to sell
their country and justice, we can expect but little. Luxury and Selfishness,
it is true, have their feelings. To those feelings, in our commercial plan, we
mean to apply: But have little reason to think -- the crafty minister will
choose to hazard the event, while master of the force of the nation. From
foreign alliances, always precarious, and frequently mischievous, we have but
little help to expect. -- Europe is, at length, again in peace. -- The sons of
the north, the Russians, hardened by frost and rugged living; experienced of
late in a successful war; now at leisure; -- we are threatened, -- shall try
further campaigns in the fields of America. Can the minister find means to pay
them; no doubt they may be procured. Their sovereign is a tyrant -- themselves
slaves, -- unacquainted with liberty, unless by distant rumors, or feelings of
humanity -- stifled in their birth by their slavish situation. Worthy
executioners of ministerial justice.

Shall we then be idle: when, under God, we must depend only on our selves?
Duty to almighty God, who has commanded us "not to be the servants of men",
forbids it. Benevolence to mankind, who, in opposition to the laws of nature
and of God, are almost divided into the ignoble characters of tyrants and
slaves, forbids it. Gratitude to the nation, that once taught us how to prize
freedom, forbids it. Justice to our Fathers, who so dearly purchased the
blessings for us, forbids it. Justice to ourselves and unborn millions, forbids
it.

No doubt much is to be suffered, rather than enter on the horrors of war. But
though the issue of war be ever doubtful: equal horrors of slavery are not
doubtful.

If just Heaven should call us to the field; we know not yet all the enemies we
shall have to encounter. We are told -- they will be, mostly or all, regular
troops.

If large bodies act -- it is plainly necessary that there should be some method
in which they may act together. No doubt in this there may be, and often is, as
in clothing, mere finery distinct from use. But a steady series of facts prove,
as well as the nature of the thing, that small comparative bodies of men, who
know how to use their weapons, and act together, and support one another --
have ever been, in a long contest, far superior to those who have rushed on,
without any thing but accidental support from one another. -- Witness, among a
multitude of other instances, the late success of a small part of the force of
Britain, in the hands of the East India Company, against a people as numerous
as the inhabitants of these Colonies. Thus, also, the Russians, who have lately
triumphed over the Turks, were, not long since in the largest numbers, the
sport of the Swedes, their less numerous, but more expert neighbors.

Perhaps the time, necessary to attain the essentials, may not be long: but
some attention and pains are surely necessary.

I think then we have reason to be thankful that a spirit for military
discipline prevails so far in this and the neighboring Provinces. -- It Is pity
there have been heats in any towns about the choice of Officers -- we hear of
none in this. There can be no rule in prudentials, where many are concerned,
but that the minority acquiesce. At this day it is particularly necessary. But I
think we may safely say, that as great difficulties have arisen where Officers
have been appointed in the old channel. Prudent faithful men will, however, be
very cautious how they make a jarr, where so much depends on union.

Some, and we hear a large proportion in this town, have engaged, agreeable to
the plan of the Provincial Council, to hold yourselves in particular readiness
to act in the service of your Country* The friends and enemies of your Country
are much interested in your conduct. -- It Is to be hoped and expected that you
will keep the grand question in view -- are Americans the slaves of Britons? If
they are, your conduct with that of America, is Treason, Rebellion and all that
sober men ought to avoid. If they are not -- avoid this servitude says God. --
avoid it say justice, conscience and interest. -- Oppose it in the most
effectual manner says prudence. That we should be bound by them in all cases
whatsoever, is the unbounded claim and steady pursuit of Briton. -- They tell
us of millions of masters -- the single slave finds it difficult to serve one.
-- But they, and their assistants among us, who seem generally to expect to be
drivers, or to be very much favored in their task, are all earnest to persuade
us that we shall find the best of masters, if we will submit. But this is but
cold comfort, if true. -- I am told that the Negroes, when brought from Africa
-- have often, or generally greater promises.

My friends, I wish you, and your country wishes you calmness of judgment and
firmness in conduct.

The times call for particular industry in acquiring necessary military skill.
-- You have chosen your Officers: -- we hope you will pay them a decent and
necessary respect -- silence and attention, are, I think essentials, without
which no orders can be regarded.

If you endeavor to equal the regulars in the exactness of their motions --
none, I hope will attempt to equal or compare with them in profaneness and
tippling. The courage they hereby gain to destroy costly furniture, and abuse
those that are sober, will scarcely prove them quite invincible.

My friends, though I am not able to assure you of all the events of our
present controversies -- yet sure I am that you are called, in common with the
rest of the world, to a contest in which you must conquer or die eternally --
my highest warmest wish for you is, that you may put on the christian armor,
"and fight the good fight of faith" -- and then, if called to risk, or even
lose your lives in the service of your country -- you shall assuredly triumph
-- in death ye shall conquer -- and, beyond the dark valley, in the service of
that God whose exclusive prerogative it is to bind "in all cases whatsoever",
-- in a world where universal love is the universal law, and vain ambition
finds no admittance, -- you shall enjoy the noblest.

FINIS.

