THE ART OF MAKING COMMON SALT.

PARTICULARLY ADAPTED TO THE USE OF THE AMERICAN COLONIES WITH An EXTRACT from
Dr. BROWNRIGG'S Treatise on the Art of making BAY SALT.

Detached from the Pennsylvania Magazine for March 1776.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by R. AITKEN, Printer and Bookseller, opposite the
London Coffee-House, Front-Street. M.DCC.LXXVI.

AitkenS.


THE ART of making COMMON SALT.
THE French marshes, in which immense quantities of salt are annually made, are
contrived in a much more artful manner; and as they are the most commodious
that have hitherto been invented, it may be proper here to transcribe an
account of them, as given by an ingenious French physician, and published in
the transactions of Royal Society.

Explanation of the Plate.
A A A is the sea.

1. 1. The entry by which the sea water passes into B B.

B B, the first receptacle, in which the water makes three turnings as you
see, and is ten inches deep.

2. 2. The opening by which the first and second receptacle have communication
one with another.

E E F, The third receptacle is properly called the marsh.

d d d d, is a channel very narrow, through which the water must pass, before
it enters into the third from the second receptacle.

3. 3. is the opening by which the water runs out of the second into the third
receptacle. The pricks you see in the water throughout the whole scheme, do
mark the course and turnings which the water is forced to make, before it comes
to h, h, h, h, which are the places where the salt is made.

h, h, h, h, are the beds of the marsh, where the salt is made, and in them the
water must not be above an inch and an half deep; each of these beds is fifteen
feet long, and fourteen feet wide, and framed on every side with wood.

8. 8. 8. 8. are the apertures by which the beds receive the seawater, after
may windings and turnings.

9. 9. 9. 9. are the little channels between the beds.

When it rains the openings 2. 2, 3. 3. are stopped to hinder the water from
running into the marsh. Unless it rains much, the rain water does little hurt
to the marsh; the heat of the sun sufficiently exhaling it, if it be not above
an inch high: only if it have rained very plentifully that day, no salt is
drawn for the three or four days next; but if it rain five or six days, the
people are then necessitated to let all the water out of the beds by a peculiar
channel, which cannot be opened but when it is low water. But it is very seldom
that it rains so long as to constrain men to empty those beds. The hottest
years make the most salt, and in the hottest part of the summer, there is salt
made even during night. Less salt in calm than in windy weather.

The west and north-west winds are the best for this purpose.

Our country people draw the salt every other day, and every time more than an
hundred pound weight of salt.

The instruments used to draw the salt have many small holes to let the water
pass, and to retain nothing but the salt.

The reddish earth in the marshes make the salt more gray, the bluish more
white. Besides, if you let run in a little more water than you ought, the salt
becomes then more white, but then it yields not so much. Generally all the
marshes require a fat earth, neither springy nor sandy.

The salt man who draws the salt must be very dextrous. In this isle of Rhee,
men there are that draw very dark salt, and others that draw it as white as
snow, and so it is at Xaintonge. Chiefly care is to be taken that the earth at
the bottom of the beds mingle not with the salt

The salt we use at our tables is perfectly white, being the cream (or that
salt which is formed on the top of the water) drawn four or five hours before
the salt is to be drawn. The grains of it are smaller than of the other.
Generally the salt of Xaintonge is somewhat whiter than ours. The bigness of
our salt is the size of a pepper grain, and of a cubical shape,

The marshes are preserved from one year to another by overflowing them a foot
high.

The timber of the marshes, if it be of good oak, keeps near thirty years; but
there is used but little wood, all the ditches and apertures being done with
stone.

The foregoing description being in some parts obscure and in others imperfect,
it is necessary to add to it a few remarks by way of explanation, that the
construction of the French salt marsh, and the method of preparing salt
therein, may be better understood. And this seems to be the more necessary,
since although the above account of the French method of making salt has long
been published, yet it has not been brought into use, neither in Great
Britain, nor in the British colonies in America.

These, therefore, who would make a salt marsh, commonly choose a low plot of
ground adjoining to the sea, distant from the mouths of large rivers, but nigh
a convenient harbor for boats or larger vessels: This ground must be free from
springs of fresh water, and no ways subject to land floods, and if possible
should have a clayey bottom; it should also be defended from the sea either by
banks of rising ground, or by an artificial mole raised for that purpose.

The ground so chosen must be hollowed out into three ponds or receptacles: The
first into which the sea water is usually admitted, may be called the
Reservoir; the second receptacle (which is divided into three distinct ponds
communicating with each other by narrow passages, and containing brine of
different degrees of strength) may be called the Brine-ponds; the third
receptacle is furnished with an entrance, between which and the brine-ponds,
there runs a long, winding narrow channel, the rest of it is divided into
several shallow pits, containing a fully saturated brine, which in them is
converted into salt, and may therefore be distinguished by the name of the
Salt Pits.

The first receptacle or reservoir, must have a communication with the sea by a
ditch defended on each side with walls of brick or stone, and made of such a
depth that by it all the water contained in the reservoir and other parts of
the salt marsh, may flow out at low water; and by it also the sea water may be
admitted into the reservoir at full sea; so that at neap tides the marsh may be
filled with sea water to the depth of two feet, when there is occasion to
overflow the marsh, as is done in the winter season, when no salt is made: By
which means the wood work is longer preserved from decay, and the bottom of the
marsh from frost and other injuries. And in order that the marsh may be thus
overflowed when occasion requires, it is necessary that the several receptacles
should be sunk so deep that the ground on all sides may be sufficiently
alerated to keep in the sea water, at the depth above mentioned. The ditch
between the sea and the reservoir must also be provided with a sluice or
floodgate, by which the sea water may be admitted, retained, let out, and the
whole salt-marsh drained, as occasion may require.

The several ponds or receptacles must not have their bottoms all upon the same
level, but must be made of unequal depths, so that the first receptacle or
reservoir must be 8 1-2 inches deeper than the salt pits in the third
receptacle; the three brine ponds situated between the reservoir and the salt
pits, must also be of unequal depths, that adjoining to the reservoir being the
deepest, and that which is nighest the salt pitts the shallowest, but all of
them must be shallower than the reservoir; and the three receptacles being thus
constructed, the water standing at the same height in them all, and forming by
its surface one continued plain, will be ten inches deep in the reservoir, when
only one inch and an half in the salt pits.

The judicious French author has not given us any account of the length and
breadth of the reservoir and brine ponds, but some judgment may be formed of
their size from his plan of the whole work. It will be better to err by making
them too large than too small. In general, they ought to be large enough to
furnish the salt pits with a constant supply of brine, fully saturated with
salt; and for that purpose it is necessary to have them of different dimensions
in different countries, as will be hereafter explained.

It is not necessary that the reservoir should be exactly of the form which the
French author has described, where the ground will admit of another that may
be chosen; and even the brine ponds and salt pits may be made of different
forms, if due regard be had to the general contrivance of the whole work.

For the bottoms of the reservoir and brine ponds, any kind of tough clay or
earth, that will hold water, may serve very well. The French make the bottoms
of their salt pits of any blue or red clay they meet with; but in order to have
a white clean salt, it is necessary that those pits should be carefully laid
with some strong cement, that will retain the brine and cannot easily be broken
up. As to the other particulars relating to the structure of the French salt
marsh, they are sufficiently explained by the ingenious physician whose account
is before inserted.

The marsh being thus constructed, the salt-men at the proper season of the
year, open the floodgate when the tide is out, and drain off all the stagnating
water, and if there be occasion repair the bottom of the marsh, and cleanse the
several receptacles from mud and dirt. Afterward when the tide rises, they by
the same floodgate admit the salt water into the marsh, till it stands in the
reservoir at the height of ten inches. In a day or two most of the water in the
saltpits is exhaled, and what remains in them is a very strong brine. They then
let in more sea water, and so take care every two or three tides (oftener or
seldomer as occasion requires) to admit as much water into the reservoir, as
will supply the place of that which has been wasted in vapors, constantly
raising it to the height of ten inches in the reservoir, and consequently to an
inch and a half in the salt pits; all the parts of the marsh are thus supplied
with water out of the reservoir; but the sea water which flows into the
reservoir is not confusedly mixed with the salt water contained in the other
parts of the works; for as the several parts communicate only by narrow
passages, it is provided that the salt water flowing out of the reservoir never
returns there again, but gently flows along till it arrives at the second brine
pond, and afterward at the third, being forced forward by the sea water from
time to time received into the reservoir. During this slow course, the watery
fluid continually flies off in exhalations, and the brine is continually
preparing for chrystallization as it gently flows along, growing stronger and
stronger the nearer it approaches the salt pits; so that when it enters these
pits it is fully saturated with salt, and particular care is taken to guard the
entrance of the salt pits with a long winding narrow channel, by which means
the strong pickle contained in these pits is prevented from returning back and
mixing with the weaker brine in the brine ponds; care is also taken that the
strong pickle in the salt pits be spread out very thin to the sun and air with
a large surface; by which means the watery vapors more quickly exhale from it,
leaving the salt concreted into chrystals. These the salt-men carefully draw
out, and oftentimes dispose into large pyramidal heaps, which they thatch over
with straw, and so preserve them from the injuries of the weather. Thus, at a
small expense and trouble, a salt is prepared which is found extremely fit for
all domestic uses: and thus France is also furnished with a very profitable
article for exportation into foreign countries.

The French have so many works of this kind that an ingenious author of that
nation affirms, that in favorable seasons, as much salt is sometimes made in a
fortnight, as is sufficient for the annual consumption of that kingdom, and of
all those other nations who purchase much more of it than the French consume
themselves; but after a rainy summer there is often a scarcity of salt, and the
price of it increases.

By attending to the foregoing extract, it appears sufficiently evident, that
bay salt may be made in any of the United Colonies, especially the more
southern ones. Dr. Brownrigg has given us the method of making it in France; by
the description of which it appears, that the grand principle of the operation
is to throw the sea water into a large surface, and thereby cause the watery
parts to be speedily evaporated by the sun and air. An ingenious operator may
apply this principle in many methods different from that above described, and
perhaps in some that may be more profitable. In some cold countries, the Dr.
says, where fuel is dear, they first raise water, not near so salt as rain
water, to the height of twenty or thirty feet by a pump, and thence let it run
down over bundles of sticks, under a roof, but exposed to the air and sun, and
by the time it comes to the bottom it is exceeding salt, and then they boil it
to salt with little expense of fuel. If the water was pumped in some such
manner, only without a roof, into the first receptacle, it would doubtless
accelerate the evaporation.

The Dr. in a proposal to have bay salt made in England, considering the
slowness of the evaporation in that climate, and the heavy rains that often
fall, proposes to have covers of thin boards, or canvas painted white and
stretched on frames to cover the salt-pit when it rains, and when the sun
shines to raise them on hinges nearly perpendicular, fronting to the south,
with a space between their bottom and the ground of a foot wide, for the air to
pass through; by means of which, and the reflection of the sun, a strong
evaporation must take place. When they cover the salt pits with these boards or
canvas to keep off the rain, they also stop the passages to them, to prevent
the rain water which may fall in the other receptacles from getting into them,
and if a heavy rain should fall so as to render the water in the the
receptacles weaker than sea water, it may be best to draw it off, otherwise
not. Those who are acquainted with the exceeding quick evaporation of water in
our summer months, especially in the middle and southern colonies, will judge
whether the advantage of such additional machinery will compensate the expense.
If a fortnight's seasonable weather is sufficient in any part of France to
supply that large kingdom with salt for its own consumption, and as much more
for exportation, we can hardly doubt whether the United Colonies can produce
their own salt, by the natural evaporation of the sun and air.

In some climates where the natural evaporation is not a sufficient
over-balance for the rains that fall, they produce their salt by boiling the
water, and this is called white salt, or boiled salt. The apparatus for this
process is expensive, and the consumption of fuel great, and without skill in
the operation, the salt produced is much inferior to bay salt, as it will not
be so strong, and will retain a certain calcarious or limey earth very
prejudicial to meat, and also a certain liquor called Bittern: both which, the
Dr. says, are in a good measure avoided in the natural process of making bay
salt. The design of this publication being to promote the making bay salt, no
particular description is given of the making white or boiled salt. Perhaps it
may be best to prosecute both methods; but the preparation for boiling salt
being so much greater, it may be best to begin with making bay salt, as it
comes within the the compass of more peoples ability.

The making salt in America has been an object of attention to many persons in
Britain for a long while past, arising from the favourableness of our climate
to the operation. It has been too long neglected, from a prevailing disposition
in the Americans to manufacture nothing among themselves, which could be
imported from abroad: But it is now reasonably to be expected, that the
necessity of America will induce the inhabitants, among many other useful
manufactures, to establish that essential one of making into salt the sea water
that washes their shores.

FINIS.

