SEVERAL METHODS OF MAKING SALTPETER, RECOMMENDED TO THE INHABITANTS OF THE
UNITED COLONIES, By the Honorable CONTINENTAL CONGRESS. AND Re-published by
Order of the GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE Colony of MASSACHUSETTS BAY.

Together with the RESOLVE of said Assembly.

AND AN APPENDIX. By Doctor WILLIAM WHITING.

WATERTOWN. Printed and Said by BENJAMIN EDES, near the Bridge, 1775.

IN CONGRESS.
Philadelphia, July 28, 1775.
WHEREAS the safety and freedom of every community depends greatly upon having
the means of defense in its own power, and that the U^ited Colo^ies may not,
during the continuance of their present important conte^^ for Liberty, nor in
any fu^ure time, be under the expensive, uncertain and dangerous necessity of
relying on foreign importations for Gunpowder: And it being very certain from
observation and experiment, that Salt-Pe^re is to be obtained in great
abundance from most par^s of this Northern Continent; that the surface of the
earth, in long used tobacco ware houses and their yards, or of common
tobacco-houses, is particularly and strongly impregnated with Nitre.

Resolved, That it be recommended to the Provincial Conventions of the tobacco
Colonies, that as quickly as may be, they appoint one or more manufactories on
each river, contiguous to the great inspection^, and under the direction of
persons qualified by their skill and diligence to bring this important business
to a speedy and successful issue.

To the Assemblies and Conventions of the other Co^^nies, it is recommended
immediately to put in practice such other mode of making Saltpeter, as may be
^ound best adapted to their respective circumstances.

That all persons may be encouraged to apply themselves to the manufacture of
Saltpeter, it i^ recommended to the several Assembles and Conventions to buy
up, on account of the United Colonies, all the good and merchantable Saltpeter
at half a dollar for each pound, that is, or shall be made in t^eir respective
Colonies before the first day of October, 1776.

It is recommended that the collecting Sulphur be encouraged: -- And it is
recommended to the several Pr^vincial Conventions, to grant such premiums, for
the refining of Sulphur in their respective Provinces, as man be judged proper.

And it is further recommended to the several Assemblies and Conventions that
they cause mills to be erected, and skilful persons to be procured and employed
for making Gunpowder.

As Saltpeter is a^ article so necessary for defense, and in other respects so
extensively useful, it is an object that not only requires the public
patronage, but demands the attention of individuals: The following systems or
methods of making Saltpeter, suited to different circumstances and different
materials* is recommended to the a^tention of the good people of these United
Colonies.

By Order of the Congress, JOHN HANCOCK, President.

SALT PETRE is to be found in tobacco houses, stables, cow houses, hen, and
pidgeon houses, and in any covered place, where the influence of the Sun seldom
reaches. A sixty feet tobacco house will yield upwards of sixteen hundred
weight a year, and so in proportion for larger or smaller houses. In order to
prepare the fl^ors for attracting Nitre, all dung and other tr^sh mu^^ be
removed; and if the floors are not level, they must be made so by laying on
marle, or any soil not too s^^ff, which must be lightly ^rod down with their
feet. The floor being thus prepared, sprinkle strong amber over it, made from
tobacco trash, and cover it with wet ground leaves, or other tobacco trash for
a fortnight; then clean out the trash, and in any co^l dry morni^g that
succeeds, you will find on the floor the Nitre attracted and condensed like
hoar frost; sweep this off ^ightly, and put it by in hogsheads, or other safe
place in a hou^e, until you have leisu^e to go through the following process:
This wo^k you must carefully repeat as often as you observe the abovementioned
appearance of Nitre on your floors; by which means you will soon be furnished
with a competent quantity to employ a leisure day.

Process. MAKE a lee from this earth, in the same manner as is usually done for
soap, no^ing that the earth is not to be hard packed on the straw in the bo^tom
of your lee vessel, which would retain the water to be poured on it too long,
and overcharge it wi^h saline particles, to the great interruption of the
process: Place the earth hollow in the vessel, for the reception of the water;
the first put to it must be warmer th^n new milk from the cow, afterward add
cold water; fix a vessel to receive the lee as soon as you begin to put the
wa^er in, as it will not remain long upon the earth, but in a few minutes b^gin
to drop into the receiver; if it runs foul, it must be returned upon the earth;
as soon as i^ h^s dropped a g^llon, you may begin to ^^il it in a cast i^on
pot* every bushel of ear^h will require near 8 gall^ns of water; con^inue to
boil i^ gently ^^til you have fully charged your pot with the le^, and (...)
will find the watery particles evaporate, until it is reduced to a thick oily
consistence, shooting into small icy crystals, which you will easily perceive,
by exposing the fuds in a spoon to a cold place, then put the liquor out of the
pot into w^^ted wooden trays, and set it by in a ^ool place for the first
growth; if you accidentally boil it too thick, add a little cold water* when
your trays have stood with the suds a few hours you mu^^ raise one end to let
the lee drain off from the Salt Petre, which is the first growth, and which, by
boiling a second time, will yield you a fresh quantity. After it is thus
drained and become dry, you may put it into casks or tubs, until you have
leisure without prejudice to your crops, to refine it.

To refine Salt Petre. P^^ into your pot about a third of the quantity your po^
will hold of this first growth, and set it over the fire: you are to be
provided with an iron rod or p^ker to stir it; as soon as it begins to melt,
you will see it begin to boil furiously: keep it well stirred down, as at this
time it is very apt to t^ke fire, which will destroy the whole; when you
observe it in the boiling to look of a dirty white, slaken your fire, and stir
it briskly for a quarter of an hour; then increase your fire and continue the
stirring; though the danger of burning it is now over, the pot, before it is
sufficiently melted, will be of a fleming red at the bottom, and the matter
will appear like boiled cream; and when i^ becomes whitish and liquid, pour it
upon a stone, or some earthern vessel or a hard well rammed earthen floor,
clean swept. As soon as it is cold, it will become hard; and if you throw it
upon a stone, will ring like broken China. If you have not leisure immediately
to clarify it, put it into a tub in a dry place, until some convenient
opportunity.

To clarify coagulated cream of nitre.
To every pound of this matter put 6lb. of water, after you have broke it into
small pieces, put your pot upon the fire, and stir it until it is well
dissolved, then make the fire all r^und the pot, which will cause it to b^il in
the middle, and prevent any waste by its drying and sticki^g on the sides of
the pot; and as soon as the earthy ma^ter begins to set^^e in the pot p^ur the
liquid into a tray or other open v^ss^l, that its sediment may settle, pour off
the clear liquor, and evaporate it with a gentle fire, until in a sp^^n it will
shoot into chrystals, then pour it into a tray, with dry sticks sixth across, so
as to be a little below the surf^ce of ^he liqu^r; set this by in a cool place,
where it may stand until it shoots in^o clear transparent crystals, then gently
pour off the liquor, and set the tray so as to drain i^ off perfectly dry. Thus
your salt petre is completely m^de, and in a few days will be dry enough to
remove out of your tr^ys into ^^sks or v^ssels propor^ion^d to the quantities.
The liquor you last poured off, must be again evapora^ed over the fire, for it
will yield salt petre equally as good as the former; and thus continue the
operation until all the watery particles are totally evaporated.

N. B. The e^rth from which you have extracted the s^lt petre, and all the
w^^tings of your v^ss^ls, if you lay it by ^^inly spread in your h^use, will
turn to profit, as it c^ntinues to be peculiarly proper to attract and absorb
the nitr^ floating in the air, and also the ear^hly matter which settles in the
refining; and should y^u be in want of house-room, you may spread i^ upon the
ear^h, covered in the manner that fodder s^acks are; it will produce saltpeter
full as well as a tobacco house, taking ^are that the ^orth end be always open
and defended from rain.

Method of making Saltpeter at Hanover, 1766.
The salt petre works are within two miles of the town, they consi^^ of a
house, that had probably been an old wooden barn; it had an ear^hen floor, on
one side within stood a row of c^sks open at top, filled with earth* and under
each c^sk a tub to receive what water p^ssed through the earth in the casks; on
the other side was an iron kettle set in brick-work which might b^il at once,
perhaps, two or three barrels of water; at the end fu^thest from the
fireplace, the floor was dug deeper about four feet; in this part as a cooler
place, there were tubs of the boiling liquor, set to chrystalize. The ground
belonging to the house, perhaps an acre and an half, was filled with what we
should call mud walls; -- they were three feet thick at the bottom, and tapered
up to one foot at top; height about five feet; these are placed so near each
other that there is only room for a wheelbarrow to pass between: They are
composed of street dirt and the rubbish of old ^uildings, such as plaster,
mortar, etc. they are exposed to sun, wind and rain. THOUGH their mud walls
were exposed to the rain in Hanover, yet it may be a question whether the heavy
rain in America would not wash them too much, if on trial it should prove so,
they may be covered with a light shed.
Four persons were all the famil^ that managed these works; an old woman was
the sk^llfu^ person who conducted the whole; her husband and a servant man were
laborers, a servant maid sometimes assisting. The women attended to the
boiling and chrystalization* the business of the men was to sh^ve off with a
sharp spade, about a quarter of an inch of the surface of the earthen walls,
and bring it in wi^h the wheelbarrow, then fill the casks with it, and fe^ch
water to pour on it in the casks: they also emptied such casks as had been
drained off all their virtue, and carried out the earth, plaistering it up
again on the walls it was shaved from to fill the emptied c^sks. Thus in the
course of a summer they went round all the walls; the first water that passed
through the earth was that which was boiled; the second was reserved, being
weaker, but having some virtue in it, to be poured on fresh earth. This works
supplied all the Electorate of Hanover with Saltpeter. All the gunpowder for
the King's troops 12000 men, the forts etc. was made from this Saltpeter. The
house and utensils could scarce be worth above L. 50 sterling.

An Account of the manufactory of Saltpeter by Benjamin Rush, M. D. professor
of Chemistry in the college of Philadelphia
It has long been an opinion among chemists and natural historians, that salt
petre is a natural production. It has been said to be found in large quantities
on the surface of the earth in Persia, India and China, where it is said to
impart a coldness to the atmosphere; but some late enquiries give us reason to
suspect that the whole of these accounts are without foundation. They were
prob^bly propagated by the natives of these countries, only to preserve in
their hands the manufactory of so useful an article of trade. All the Salt
Petre which is imported from the East Indies is made by art. I would not be
understood to mean, that this salt is never found in a native state. It is
sometimes found adhering to large rocks. It is likewise found in a native state
under the arches of bridges, and in vaults, or wine cellars; but in these
places it is found in such small quantities, that we are seldom at the pains of
collecting it. It is found in a larger quantity in a native state in s^veral
plants; but of this I shall say more hereafter.

The manufactory of salt petre is now no longer confined to the East Indies,
but is carried on with equal advantages in many parts of Europe, particularly
in Germany and France. I shall mention the several processes which are used for
this purpose in each of th^se countries.

C^ommar, a German chemist of c^nsiderable note, recommends the following
meth^d of making Salt Petre, which he says is practiced with great success in
many parts of Germany* He orders lime, rubb^sh of all kinds, garden mould, and
^shes to be mixed together, and moiste^ed from time to time with urine, care
b^ing taken to stir them fr^qu^ntly. They should be all put into a small house*
wi^h a window toward the north east. He does not direct as some have supposed*
to leave this house open toward the north east, because ^he ni^^ous particles
are brought from that quarter, but b^cau^e the winds from the nor^h east in
that country, are generally accompanied with that temperature of the air, which
is most greeable to the formation of the nitre* The north east winds in North
America, are generally accompanied with moisture, which render them improper
for the formation of Salt Petre. The house which contain^ our Saltpeter
materials should therefore, in this country* ^e ^^posed to the north west wind^*
In a few months; this mass will be so much impregnated with Salt, that one
pound of it will yield two ounces of the Ni^re.

The King of Prussia was early sensible of the importance of a Salt Petre
Manuf^ct^ry in his dominions, and has theref^re for this purpose always ob^iged
his farmers to build their f^^ces of common earth, mixed with a quantity of
straw and dung. These substances corrupt in the course of a few years. The
^ences are then sh^ved, or wholly taken down, and afford a large quantity of
Salt Petre.

The sweepings of ^he streets of a si^gle village in Hanover, afford all the
Salt Petre that is used in the whole of that electorate. Dr. Franklin, from
whom I received this piece of information, assur^d me, that the manufactory of
the Saltpeter from the above-materials was so simple, that it was carried on
entirely by an illiterate old man and his wife. -- The greatest part of the
Salt Petre that comes from India is obtained nearly in the same manner. It is
prepared entirely from the ^ffals of the city of Patna

Mr. La Roux of the academy of Rouen informed me, that the following receipt
had been found to answer very well in many parts of France for the manufactory
of this salt. It is taken from Glauber, a German Chemist, I shall deliver it in
his own words.

"I will show a way to such as have no inheritance left them from their
parents* not have any thing to come to them by marriage, by what means they
may, without labor or trouble, get a treasure for their children; --

"First, Let such a one take care to have some shade or hovel made, to j^in to
that side of his dwelling that lies in the middle betwixt the north and east
part of heaven, or some other more convenient place, so as to admit the sun and
air to it, but to ke^p off the rain. Under this penthouse or hovel, let him dig
a large pit, and wit^ the earth he digs out, let him make banks r^und the (...)
mouth, so that it may keep the rain off on every side* Thi^ done, let him each
day, in every year, or whenever he can conveniently, carry and throw into
that pit these following matters, so long till his nec^ssity fore^th him ^o dig
all (...) again, and see how much treasure he has got, even wh^le he slept. Now
these matters are all sharp and ^itter herbs, growing in by places, amongst
b^sa^s, and on the way side, and such as beasts feed no^ on, as efula, cicu^a,
or hemlock, he^bane, fumatory, the thick stalks of tobacco, that are thrown
away in those places where it is planted, the hard stalks of colwort, which the
beasts eat not of, and likewise all those things they leave in their troughs;
likewise ^ir ^ops or apples* if you have them at hand; also the leaves that
fall from the trees in autumn are to be gathered; also pigeons d^^g. ^ens dung
birds and hens feathers; the ashes which women generally make their lee^ with*
and other ashes that is not ^it for that use, as also ^uch out of which the lee
is already extracted; the ^oot of chimnies, hogs hair, the horns of oxe^ and
cows, and the bones the dogs eat not of. All these matters may be thrown into
this pit and that he may the sooner fill it, he may gather as much as he can
from all the bordering places* and throw it therein, so that in one or two
years time he may, with all th^se things fill up his pit: mean while, he must
pour into the pit the urine gathered in his o^n house and that he may have
enough he must get as much as he can from his neighbors, ^o as to keep the
things thr^wn into the pit in continual moisture, wh^r^by they may the so^^er
putrify. In want of urine common water may be taken; if sea water or other salt
water can be had, it will be better. Also the brine of fishes pickle, and the
salting of salt water that flesh is macerated (or pickled in) are of g^od use;
also the blood of oxen, cows, calves, and sheep, which you may easily have at
the butchers; all these things putrefying together, do put on the nature and
property of Salt Petre.

"If now all these matters in your full pit shall h^ve well putrified, then
cease from pouring on any moisture, and all the things are to be left so long
until they are dried -- then if you need money, let a salt petre maker be
sought for, and bargain with him ab^u^ the price of drawing off your Saltpeter
by water, of making it and selling it. This done, cast the remaining earth into
a pit, together with the remaining lixivium that shot into nitre, and there
leave it for a year or two, and moisten it sometimes with urine, or if you have
not this, with comm^n water. This earth will again yield Salt Petre, but not
half so much as at first."

But the greatest quantity of Salt Petre that is consumed in France, is
prepared in Paris from the ruins of old stone buildings, p^dgeon houses,
stables, and all such putrid masses of vegetable or animal matters as have been
long covered.

The earth under the flo^r of old stables, mixed with a quantity of ashes, is a
plentiful source of Saltpeter. When this earth consists chiefly of clay, a
quanti^y of s^nd or gravel should be added to it. The gravel or sand acts
mechanically, by dividing the clay in such a manner as to suffer the water
which is p^^red on it* to pervade all its parts. All the composts which afford
Salt Petre may be made to yield a fresh quantity of the salt by exposing them
for some months to the air.

Nitre, besides being obtained by the artificial process we have described, may
be obtained in a considerable quanti^y in a native state from certain plants.
The tobacco is strongly impregnated with it EVERY one that has taken particular
notice of the stalks of Tobacco that has been well cured, ^h^n bu^ning, must
have observed a defl^gra^^^n of flashing exactly similar to that exhibited by
Salt Petr^ when thrown upon coals. This phenomenon after I had frequently for
many years observed at length induced me at a season of leisure to attempt
making Ni^re out of Tobacco; which I did and I own i^ was with no small
confidence of success, as I knew of no substance but Nitrous S^^ts, which
deflagrated in that peculiar manner. I made therefore a strong ac^oction of
tob^cco stalks, which, by a number of experiments. I f^und replete with two
kinds of Nitrous Sa^ts viz. Nitrous Ammoni^^ and Nitrous Selenites the sa^e
which are contained in the common mother lee of Nitre* In short notwithstan^ing
I wasted a considerable part of the decoction by accidents and experiments, out
of half a pound avoit dupots of dry tobacco stalks, I obtained (by adding pure
fixed vegetable alkali, and disengaging the volatile a^kali and earth) about an
ounce of true Saltpeter: Which, however, was brown by reason of the oily parts
of the sta^ks. Thus far I proceeded that time but for want of leisure have not
as yet proceeded any further I beg leave, however* to recommend it to others,
who may think it worth their while to labor for an improvement of this hint
toward a Salt Petre Manufactory; and I would particularly recommend it to the
Tobacco Colonies, to consider whether it be not an object worthy of their
serious attention; for I own I am so sanguine as to believe, that, by prop^r
management, they might even mak^ Saltpeter a staple commodity. The impurity of
the Nitre I made was undoub^edly owing to the incompleteness of the
putrefaction which proceeds to no great length in the curing of it; but if
under such circumstanc^^ eight ounces of stalks will ^ffo^d an ounce of impure
Nitre, the^^ ^eems reason to believe that if the putrif^ction were to (...)
completed in a bed of mould ti^l the Tobacco was r^duce^ to e^rth and proper
substances mixed therewith during the progress of putrefacti^n to fix the (...)
Acid as it forms, a linivium drawn from such mould would yield a much larger
quantity (with respect to the quantity of Tobacco) of much purer Nitre* and
probably much more than any other su^stance known. Were I, therefore, a Tobacco
Planter, I would certainly try wh^t might be done with a bed of m^uld m^de of
refuse Tobacco, and doubt not but it would ^ully answer my expectations.
Those plants which contain Saltpeter, always sparkle when they are thrown
into the fire. But there is another less equivocal method of knowing whether a
plant contains any quantity of this Salt. Bruise the plant well and press the
juice from it; put th^se juice into an earthern pot, and place it in a cool
cellar, fir^^ pouring a little sweet oil upon the surface of it, to prevent its
becoming moldy. If the plant contains any Nitre, you will find it in the form
of crystals on the sides of the vessel, in six weeks or two months.

The method of extracting the Salt Petre is nearly the same, whatever
ingredients we may employ for making it. The ingredients are put into tubs,
barrels or hogsheads, perforated at their bottoms. Rain, river, or very pure
spring water is poured upon them, which gradually dissolves all the salt they
contain, and conveys it drop by drop into vessels provided to receive it. The
Nitre in this state contains a large quantity of common Salt. Before I explain
in what manner this Salt is to be separated from the Nitre, it will be
necess^ry to premise that bare evaporation, by b^iling or otherways, will
chrystalize common Salt, but that co^d and rest are necessary to chrystalize
Nitre. The Lee, (if I may so call it) made from the materials which yield
Nitre* is put into a large copper vessel, and is gradually boiled away, till
chrystals of common Salt begin to form in it. These are taken out with a ladle
as fast as they form, and thrown into a large basket, which stands directly
over the vessel in which the liquor is boiling -- when no more chrystals of
common Salt can be found, and when a pellicle begins to be formed on the
surface of the liquor, it is taken off the fire, and emptied into a number of
copper or earthen pans, in a cellar, in which it soon shoots into chrystals of
salt petre. The salt has now undergone its first degree of purification. As a
quantity of common salt still adheres to the chrystals of ni^re, it is
necessary to dissolve them in pure water and boil them in the manner we said
before. A much less quantity of common salt is obtained now than formerly The
nitre, after its second chrystalization, is used chiefly for the purposes of
medicine, and caring provisions. But there is a third degree of p^^rification
n^cessary, before all the common salt c^n be com^pleatly separated from it. It
is carried on in the s^m^ manner ss the former (...) were. The ^a^t petre is
now ^^^i^shig ^^st sta^e of purity, in which state only it is used for the
manufact^ry of Gun Powder.

I cannot conclude this memoi^ without observing, that the climate and
productions of the middle and northern colonies of North America render them
ex^remely proper for the manufactory of salt pe^re. And the success which has
attended several experiments in that way gives us reason to believe that it may
be carried on in this country, with as great advantag^s as in France, Germany,
or the East Indies.

By Order of the CONGRESS, JOHN HANCOCK, PRESIDENT.

In the House of REPRESENTATIVES, Watertown, August 23, 1775.
WHEREAS the honorable CONTINENTAL CONGRESS h^ve strongly recommended to the
Assemblies and Conventions of the United Colonies, to appoint one or more
person or persons in each Colony to put in practice the making Salt Petre,
according to such mode as shall be best adapted to their particular
circumstances and to buy up on account of the United Co^onies all the good and
merchantable Saltpeter, that shall be made in said Colonies, by the first day
of October 1776.

Therefore, in compliance with said recommendation, and for the carrying so
valuable a purpose into execution, -- It is RESOLVED That Dr. Whiting, Deacon
Baker of Bolton, and Capt John Peck be a committee; whose busi^ess it shall be
f^i^hfully and diligently to apply themselves to the manufacturing of
Saltpeter, for the space of three months from the first day of September,
1775; j^intly or severally, in such places in this Colony as they shall judge
most suitable for that purpose: -- And they are hereby directed to use all
diligence to discover the most eligible and successful method of manufacturing
that important commodity, and to communicate all the useful knowledge they
shall acquire in said busin^s^ to all such as request it of them: -- And that
they (from t^me to time) publish in the news papers or otherwise, all the
us^ful discoveries they may make in the progress of said busines^; and each of
the said committee shall be allowed and paid out of the public treasu^y of this
Colony, for the said term of three months, four shillings per day, for every
day they shall be employed in said service, as a reward for the aforesaid
services.

And it is further RESOLVED, That said committee are hereby empowered to buy up
all the good and merchantable Salt Petre that shall be made within this Colony,
by the first day of said October, 1776, at half a dollar a pound: And the said
committee are also directed to buy up all the good and merchantable Sulphur
that shall be re^^ned in th^s Colony by the first day of said October, at nine
pence per pound; the sellers of Sulphur producing a certificate from a major
part of the select men, either of the towns to which he or they belong, or the
town where ^^ch Sulphur was refined; certifying that the same was produced and
refined from mines and ores within this Colony* and that said committee shall
deliver such Salt Petre and Sulphur to such person or persons as shall be
appointed by the General Court to receive the same; and shall receive out of
the Colony treasury from time to time, such sums of money as upon
representation, made to them by said committee, they shall judge necessary for
buying up said Salt Petre and Sulphur*

And it is further RESOLVED, That it be strongly recommended to the inhabitants
of the several towns in this Colony, that they exert themselves in promoting
this important manufacture (as the surest means of preserving their own lives,
liberties, and estates, of insuring the salvation of their country and i^s
future prosperity) by erecting one or more Saltpeter works in each town where
it may be done with probable success; and that they not only thoroughly attend
to the working up of those materials from which Saltpeter may be speedily
procured, without any previous management; but that they also take especi^l
care to collect together under pr^per sheds, those m^teri^ls (the knowledge of
which may be easily ob^ained f^^m publications) which by fermenting and
pu^^ifyi^g together will in due time afford Salt Petre with ease and in great
plenty.

And it is further RESOLVED, That the several methods of mak^ng Saltpeter,
recommended by the honorable Continental Congress, to the Uni^ed Colonies, be
immediately reprinted, together with the foregoing Resolves; and that there be
added thereto, by way of Appendix, the method of making Salt Petre, practiced
by Dr. Graham -- And that one of the pamphlets be sent to the select men of
each ^own within this colony; and that Dr. Whiting procure the^re printing the
several methods recommended by the honorable Continental Congress for making
Salt Petre, together with the foregoing Resolves, and distribute them agreeable
thereto.

Read and accepted. Sent up for concurrence. JAMES WARREN, Speaker.
August 24, 1775. In Council read and concurred. P. MORTON, Dep. Secretary.
Consented to,
James Otis, W. Sever, B. Greenleaf, W. Spooner, Caleb Cushing, J. Winthrop, R.
T. Pain, Jed Foster, Enoch Freeman, Eldad Tailor, Benjamin Lincoln, M. Farley,
S Holton, Cha. Chauncy, Benja. White.

A true Copy,

Attest, PEREZ MORTON, Dep. Sec'y.



APPENDIX.
The following Method was communicated to me by a very worthy Gentleman, viz
Doctor GRAHAM, of Westchester County, in the Colony of New York, who (by the
help of a German Servant) made in this Manner between Eight and Nine Hundred
Weight of good Saltpeter in one Season, viz.
HE procured the earth from under old buildings, which had no cellars; but he
always avoided stables, and all other places, where the earths were impregnated
wi^h urinous and excrementici^us salts: He pref^rre^ the earths from under the
oldest buildings and such as sme^l^d strong, and had somewhat of a bitterish or
alum taste upon the tongue; with those kinds of earth he filled six half
hogshead tubs, being previously carefully fixed for leech tubs, in the some
manner as in drawing lee f^r soap or pot ash: he ^^lled them near full of
earth, which he left ho^lowing on the top; he then filled his tubs with light
s^ring or river water, letting them stand twenty-four hours, that the salts
might be thoroughly dissolved: he then drew off the liquor into receivers
placed for that purpose, and if the first running was ^oul, he returned it on
to the earth again* until it came through clear. -- When he had procured forty
gallons of this Lee, he put it into a brass kettle for boiling; he then put
water on the tubs as before, letting them stand other twenty four hours; he
then drew it off, and put this second running on to the next fresh tub of
earth, and so on successively. When he had filled his kettle wi^h forty gallons
of lee^ as above ment^oned ^he boiled it down u^til half was consumed. He then
(...) a half b^rrel tub and fixed it for a leech, which ^e filled near full of
ashes, on which he poured the liquor just boiled; after he had run it through
this, which he called his fi^tering tub* he again boiled it down one ha^f,
which brought it to ten gallons; he then ru^ it ^g^in through the same tub of
ashes* which ashes he never changed thr^ugh the whole course of his maki^g: he
then boiled down the liquor the third time one half, which brought it to five
gallons. He then poured the liquor into cedar kelors, made very flaring,
holding 6 or ^ quarts each, and then set it in a cool ce^^ar, where it would
(in about twelve hours) shoot into chrystals. The earth which he emptied out of
his tubs, he laid in ridges under a shed, with a view (after a certain time) ^o
work them ag^in. After the liquor had stood in his cooler a sufficient time to
chrystalize, he gently ^^r^ed his kelers up an edge, so as carefully to drain
off the liquor from the chrystals, let^ing them stand in that position until
the chrystals were drained dry, which he then took out of the k^lers, and k^pt
in a proper vessel, until he had procured enough for clarifying. -- The liquor
which he drained off from the chrystals, he always mixed with his next la^t
b^iling -- His method of clarifying was this, (viz.) When he had collected
chrystals sufficient to fill a b^ass kettle holding about two pail^ulls, he
fi^led it near full with them; the^ c^vering them with water* he put them over
the fire, and raised the ^eat u^til the chrystals were all dissolved; he then
set the kettle in a cool cellar, where the nitre would ag^in shoot into
chrystals, much more solid and pure than before; after which he drained off the
liquor carefully as before and then turned o^^ the Saltpeter in form of a
large cake, which was now fit to p^ck up for sale.

This account I had from the gentleman's own mou^h, and in (...) thr^^gh six of
the u^ited col^ni^s in quest of knowledge in (...) I could hear of no (...)
with (...) like success. The (...) of the directors of the l^rge (...) works at
Philadelphia* (...) to those under other buildings; but upon making the
exp^riment, I found such a mixture of common salt with the nitrous as to render
the process qui^e unprofitable, notwi^hstanding I endeavored carefully to
follow his directions of d^pping out the common sal^s while the liq^^r was
boiling. However, there is not the least doubt but that the earth under these
places which have forme^ly been used f^r stables, but have been for several
years neglected, will afford plenty of saltpeter. -- It is to be observed,
that all earths are not equally susceptable of nitrous salts, therefore we
shall find the earth under some old buildings plentifully abounding with
saltpeter, or nitre, whilst others are almost wholly destit^^e thereof: so
that it will be the surest way to try a small quantity of the earths under
those buildings which are pitched upon as promising, by taking (for instance)
half a bushel of the earth, put to it water in a sm^ll leech tub properly
fixed, so as to draw off about two gallons; boil this down, and filter it
through a small quantity of ashes, by the same rule as is directed for forty
gallons, which rule will serve for any quantity whatever. But it may be
observed here, that we have the greatest reason to doubt the gentleman's rule
of boiling down all his liquors, so as to leave exactly an eighth part, before
he set it to chrystalize. -- It is natural to suppose that the earths under
buildings are very various as to the quantity of nitre they contain, some being
plentifully charged, whilst others are but lightly impregnated th^rewith. It is
also certain that the nitrous sal^s must be concentrated to a certain degree,
before they will chrystalize; or in ^^her words* the water that contains these
nitrous salts mu^^ ^e so far evaporated as ^o bring the saline particles within
the sphere of each other's attraction, before they will unite and run together
in chrystals; therefor it may (though I believe bu^ seldom) happen, that the
liquor may be fit for chrystalizing before it is reduced to one eighth part;
but that which will happen much more frequently is, that the nitrous salts will
not be sufficiently concentra^ed for chrystalizi^g upon boiling down to an
eighth part; in that case, it will be n^c^ss^ry to continue (...) boiling until
by setting some of the liquor in a cool place in a spoon, or dropping ^ few
d^ops on a cold iron, you ^ind it shooting into small chrystals, or some part
of i^ congealing like ice on the iron, or at least until a particle or hard
scum forms on the top of the boiling liquor.

Although I purpose to avoid entering into an abstruse definition of Salt
Petre, yet it will be proper just to observe, that this substance is rationally
supposed to be compounded of three different materials, (viz) a nitrous acid, a
volatile animal salt, and these two fixed, blended together and petrified by a
vegitable or mineral alkaline salt, and thus form what we commonly call Salt
Petre. -- This short definition of saltpeter will serve to show the propriety
of Mr. Glauber's collection of materials recommended in the forgoing processes;
and it is ardently to be wished, that every gentleman who heartily desires the
salvation and prosperity of America, would exert himself in encouraging and
forwarding such kind of collections as soon as may be throughout this Colony.

But the question will very naturally arise, to know from whence the earths
made use of in the f^regoing process, could derive either their volatile,
annimal, or their vegitable alkaline salts. -- It is no ways unnatural to
suppose that as those earths had imbibed their nitrous qualities from the air
which had found its way to their surfaces, so they might also receive from the
same air a sufficient quantity of animal volatile salts, which had been exhaled
from animal carcases and excrements, always putrefying on the surface of the
earth. As to the vegitable alkaline salt, which is said to be the basis of Salt
Petre, I should not have expected a sufficiency from the unchanged filtering
tub of ashes, which was all the alkaline that gentleman made use of. However,
experiments may be very easily tried, to determine this matter, by mixing a
small quantity of lime or ashes with a tub of the above earth, before it is
lixiviated, and then lixiviating the same qu^ntity and kind of earth, without
either lime or ashes, and see which produces the most Salt Petre.

Wm. WHITING.


