A DECLARATION By the Representatives of the United Colonies Of NORTH AMERICA,
now met in General Congress AT PHILADELPHIA, Setting forth the CAUSES and
NECESSITY OF THEIR TAKING UP ARMS.
IF it was possible for Men, who exercise their Reason, to believe, that the
Divine Author of our Existence intended a Part of the human Race to hold an
absolute Property in, and an unbounded Power over others, marked out by his
infinite Goodness and Wisdom, as the Objects of a legal Domination, never
rightfully resistible, however severe and oppressive, the Inhabitants of these
Colonies might at least require from the Parliament of Great Britain, some
Evidence, that this dreadful Authority over them has been granted to that Body.
But a Reverence for our Great CREATOR, Principles of Humanity, and the Dictates
of common Sense, must convince all those who reflect upon the Subject, that
Government was instituted to promote the Welfare of Mankind, and ought to be
administered for the Attainment of that End. The Legislature of Great Britain,
however stimulated by an inordinate Passion for a Power not only unjustifiable,
but which they know to be peculiarly reprobated by the very Constitution of
that Kingdom, and desperate of Success in any Mode of Contest, where Regard
should be had to Truth, Law, or Right, have at length, deserting those,
attempted to effect their cruel and impolitic Purpose of enslaving these
Colonies by Violence, and have thereby rendered it necessary for us to close
with their last Appeal from Reason to Arms. -- Yet however blinded that
Assembly may be, by their intemperate Rage for unlimited Domination so to
slight Justice and the Opinion of Mankind, we esteem ourselves bound by
Obligations of Respect to the rest of the World, to make known the Justice of
our Cause.

Our Forefather ^^^abitants of the Island of Great Britain, left their native
Land to seek on these Shores a Residence for civil and religious Freedom. At
the Expense of their Blood, at the Hazard of their Fortunes, without the least
Charge to the Country from which they removed, by unceasing Labor and an
unconquerable Spirit, they effected Settlements in the distant and inhospitable
Wilds of America, then filled with numerous and warlike Nations of Barbarians.
-- Societies or Governments, vested with perfect Legislatures, were formed
under Charters from the Crown, and an harmonious Intercourse was established
between the Colonies and the Kingdom from which they derived their Origin. --
The mutual Benefits of this Union became in a short Time so extraordinary, as
to excite Astonishment: It is universally confessed, that the amazing Increase
of the Wealth, Strength and Navigation of the Realm, arose from this Source;
and the Minister who so wisely and successfully directed the Measures of
Great Britain in the late War, publicly declared, that these Colonies enabled
her to triumph over her Enemies. -- Toward the Conclusion of that War, it
pleased our Sovereign to make a Change in his Counsels. -- From that fatal
Moment, the Affairs of the British Empire began to fall into Confusion, and
gradually sliding from the Summit of glorious Prosperity to which they had been
advanced by the Virtues and Abilities of one Man, are at length distrated by
the Convulsions that now shake it to its deepest Foundations. -- The new
Ministry finding the brave Foes of Britain, though frequently defeated, yet
still contending, took up the unfortunate Idea of granting them a hasty Peace,
and of then subduing her faithful Friends.

These devoted Colonies were judged to be in such a State, as to present
Victories without Bloodshed, and all the easy Emoluments of statuteable
Plunder. -- The uninterrupted Tenor of their peaceable and respectful Behavior
from the Beginning of Colonization, their dutiful, zealous and useful Services
during the War, though so recently and amply acknowledged in the most honorable
Manner by his Majesty, by the late King, and by Parliament, could not save them
from the meditated Innovations. -- Parliament was influenced to adopt the
pernicious Project, and assuming a new Power over them, have in the Course of
eleven Years, given such decisive Specimens of the Spirit and Consequences
attending the Power, as to leave no Doubt concerning the Effects of
Acquiescenc^ under it. They have undertaken to give and grant our Money without
our Consent, though A View of that great and flourishing City of BOSTON, when in
its purity, and out of the Hands of the Philistines.
J TURNER

we have ever exercised an exclusive Right to dispose of our own Property;
Statutes have been passed for extending the Jurisdiction of Courts of Admiralty
and Vice Admiralty beyond their ancient Limits: For depriving us of the
accustomed and inestimable Privilege of Trial by Jury in Cases affecting both
Life and Property; for suspending the Legislature of one of the Colonies; for
interdicting all Commerce of another; and for altering fundamentally the Form
of Government established by Charter, and secured by Acts of its own
Legislature solemnly confirmed by the Crown; for exempting the "Murderers" of
Colonists from legal Trial, and in Effect, from Punishment; for erecting in a
neighboring Province acquired by the joint Arms of Great Britain and America,
a Despotism dangerous to our very Existence; and for quartering Soldiers upon
the Colonists in Time of profound Peace. It has also been resolved in
Parliament, that Colonists charged with committing certain Offenses, shall be
transported to England to be tried.

But why should we enumerate our Injuries in Detail? By one Statute it is
declared, that Parliament can of Right make Laws to bind us IN ALL CASES
WHATSOEVER. What is to defend us against so enormous, so unlimited a Power? Not
a single Man of those who assume it, is chosen by us; or is subject to our
Control or Influence: but on the contrary, they are all of them exempt from
the Operation of such Laws, and an American Revenue, if not diverted from the
ostensible Purposes for which it is raised, would actually lighten their own
(...) We saw the Misery to which such Despotism would reduce us. We for ten
Years incessantly and ineffectually besieged the Throne as Supplicants; we
reasoned, we remonstrated with Parliament in the most mild and decent Language.
But Administration, sensible that we should regard those oppressive Measures as
Freemen ought to do, sent over Fleets and Armies to enforce them. The
Indignation of the Americans was roused it is true; but it was the Indignation
of a virtuous, loyal, and affectionate People. A Congress of Delegates from the
united Colonies was assembled at Philadelphia, on the fifth Day of last
September. We resolved again to offer an humble and dutiful Petition to the
King, and also addressed our Fellow Subjects of Great Britain. We have pursued
every temperate, every respectful Measure, we have even proceeded to break off
our commercial Intercourse with our Fellow Subjects, as the last peaceable
Admonition, that our Attachment to no Nation upon Earth should supplant our
Attachment to Liberty. -- This, we flattered ourselves, was the ultimate Step
of the Controversy: But subsequent Events have shown, how vain was this Hope of
finding Moderation in our Enemies.

Several threatening Expressions against the Colonies were inserted in his
Majesty's Speech; our Petition, though we were told it was a decent one, that
his Majesty had been pleased to receive it graciously, and to promise laying it
before his Parliament, was huddled into both Houses amongst a Bundle of
American Papers, and there neglected. The Lords and Commons in their Address,
in the Month of February last, said, that a Rebellion at that Time actually
existed within the Province of Massachusetts Bay; and that those concerned in
it, had been countenanced and encouraged by unlawful Combinations and
Engagements, entered into by his Majesty's Subjects in several of the other
Colonies; and therefore they besought his Majesty, that he would take the most
effectual Measures to enforce due Obedience to the Laws and Authority of the
supreme Legislature. -- Soon after the commercial Intercourse of whole
Colonies, with foreign Countries and with each other, was cut off by an Act of
Parliament; by another, several of them were entirely prohibited from the
Fisheries in the Seas near their Coasts, on which they always depended for
their Sustenance; and large Reinforcements of Ships and Troops were immediately
sent over to General Gage.

Fruitless were all the Entreatie^, Arguments and Eloquence of a^ illustrious
Band of the most distinguished Peers and Commoners, who nobly and strenuously
asserted the Justice of our Cause, to stay, or even to mitigate the heedless
Fury with which these accumulated and unexampled Outrages were hurried on. --
Equally fruitless was the Interferrence of the City of London, of Bristol, and
many other respectable Towns in our Favor. Parliament adopted an insidious
Maneuver calculated to divide us, to establish a perpetual Auction of
Taxations where Colony should bid against Colony, all of them uninformed what
Ransom would redeem their Lives, and thus to extort from us at the Point of the
Bayonet, the unknown Sums that should be sufficient to gratify, if possible to
gratify, Ministerial Rapacity, with the miserable Indulgence left to us of
raising in our own Mode the prescribed Tribute. What Terms more rigid and
humiliating could have been dictated by remorseless Victors to conquered
Enemies? In our Circumstances to accept them would be to deserve them.

Soon after the Intelligence of these Proceedings arrived on this Continent,
General Gage, who, in the Course of the last Year, had taken Possession of the
Town of Boston, in the Province of Massachusetts Bay, and still occupied it as
a Garrison, on the 19th Day of April, sent out from that Place a large
Detachment of his Army, who made an unprovoked Assault on the Inhabitants of
the said Province, at the Town of Lexington, as appears by the Affidavits of a
great Number of Persons, some of whom were Officers and Soldiers of that
Detachment, murdered eight of the Inhabitants, and wounded many others. From
thence the Troops proceeded in warlike Array to the Town of Concord, where they
set upon another Party of the Inhabitants of the same Province, killing several
and wounding more, until compelled to retreat by the Country People suddenly
assembled to repel this cruel Aggression. Hostilities thus commenced by the
British Troops, have been since prosecuted by them without Regard to Faith or
Reputation. -- The Inhabitants of Boston being confined within that Town by the
General their Governor, and having in order to procure their Dismission,
entered into a Treaty with him, it was stipulated that the said Inhabitants
having deposited their Arms with their own Magistrates, should have Liberty to
depart, taking with them their other Effects. They accordingly delivered up
their Arms, but in open Violation of Honor, in Defiance of the Obligation of
Treaties, which even savage Nations esteem sacred, the Governor ordered the
Arms deposited as aforesaid, that they might be preserved for their Owners, to
be seized by a Body of Soldiers; detained the greatest Part of the Inhabitants
in the Town, and compelled the Few who were permitted to retire, to leave their
most valuable Effects behind.

By this Perfidy, Wives are separated from their Husbands, Chil^^^^ (...) and
Sick from their Relations and Friends, who wish to attend and comfort them; and
those who have been used to live in Plenty, and even Elegance, are reduced to
deplorable Distress.

The General further emulating his ministerial Masters, by a Proclamation
bearing date on the 12th Day of June, after venting the grossest Falsehoods and
Calumnies against the good People of these Colonies, proceeds to declare them
all either by Name or Description to be Rebels and Traitors, to supercede the
Course of the common Law, and instead thereof to publish and order the Use and
Exercise of the Law martial. -- His Troops have butchered our Countrymen; have
wantonly burnt Charlestown, besides a considerable Number of Houses in other
Places; our Ships and Vessels are seized; the necessary Supplies of Provisions
are intercepted and he is exerting his utmost Power to spread Devastation and
Destruction around him.

We have received certain Intelligence, that General Carleton, the Governor of
Canada, is instigating the People of that Province and the Indians to fall upon
us; and we have but too much Reason to apprehend, that Schemes have been formed
to excite domestic Enemies against us. In brief a Part of the Colonies now
feels, and all of them are sure of feeling, as far as the Vengeance of
Administration can inflict them, the complicated Calamities of Fire, Sword and
Famine. -- We are reduced to the Alternative of choosing an uncondi^ional
Submission to the Tyranny of iritated Ministers, or resistance by Force. -- The
latter is our Choice. -- We have counted the Cost of this Contest, and find
nothing so dreadful as voluntary Slavery. -- Honor, Justice, and Humanity
forbid us tamely to surrender that Freedom which we received from our gallant
Ancestors, and which our innocent Posterity have a Right to receive from us. We
cannot endure the Infamy and Guilt of resigning succeeding Generations to that
Wretchedness which inevitably awaits them, if we basely entail hereditary
Bondage upon them.

Our Cause is just. Our Union is perfect. Our internal Resources are great; and
if necessary, foreign Assistance is undoubtedly attainable. -- We gratefully
acknowledge, as signal Instances of the Divine Favor toward us, that his
Providence would not permit us to be called into this severe Controversy, until
we were grown up to our present strength, had been previously exercised in
Warlike Operations, and possessed of the Means of defending ourselves. -- With
Hearts fortified with these animating Reflections, we most solemnly, before GOD
and the World declare, that, exerting the utmost Energy of those Powers, which
our benificent Creator has graciously bestowed upon us the Arms we have been
compelled by our Enemies to assume, we will, in defiance of every Hazard, with
unabating Firmness and Perseverance, employ for the Preservation of our
Liberties, being with one Mind resolved, to die Freemen rather than to live
Slaves.

Lest this Declaration should disquiet the Minds of our Friends and fellow
Subjects in any Part of the Empire, we assure them, that we mean not to
dissolve that Union which has so long and so happily subsisted between us, and
which we sincerely wish to see restored. -- Necessity has not yet driven us
into that desperate Measure, or induced us to excite any other Nation to war
against them. -- We have not raised Armies with ambitious Designs of separating
from Great Britain, and establishing independent States. -- We fight not for
Glory or for Conquest. We exhibit to Mankind the remarkable Spectacle of a
People attacked by unprovoked Enemies, without any Imputation, or even
Suspicions of Offense. They boast of their Privileges and Civilization, and yet
proffer no milder Conditions than Servitude or Death. --

In our own native Land, in Defense of the Freedom that is our Birthright, and
which we ever enjoyed till the late Violation of it -- for the Protection of
our Property, acquired solely by the honest Industry of our Forefathers and
ourselves, against Violence actually offered, we have taken up Arms. We shall
lay them down when Hostilities shall cease on the Part of the Agressors, and
all Danger o^ (...)*

With an humble Confidence in the Mercies the supreme and impartial Judge and
Ruler of the Universe, we most devoutly implore his divine Goodness to conduct
us happily through this great Conflict, to dispose our Adversaries to
Reconciliation on reasonable Terms, and thereby to relieve the Empire from the
Calamities of civil War.

By Order of CONGRESS, JOHN HANCOCK, President.
Attested, CHARLES THOMPSON Secretary.
PHILADELPHIA, July 6th, 1775:
Sold at the Printing-Office in Portsmouth.


