THE MIDDLE LINE: OR, AN ATTEMPT

TO FURNISH SOME HINTS For ENDING the DIFFERENCES

SUBSISTING Between Great Britain and the Colonies.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Market-Street.
M.DCC.LXXV.

THE MIDDLE LINE, etc.
I Have read with much attention the various political productions which have
been offered to the public, ever in hopes to find some middle line drawn,
between the Rights of America, and the Claims of England; but most of the
writers have contented themselves with embracing wholly one side or the other:
this may be the policy of nations at war; but where contending states mutually
desire to enter into preliminaries of peace, each should consider what they in
give up, and what they should retain.

An attempt to draw this line, I am sensible, is assuming a task, which may
subject a writer to censure and reproach; and nothing should induce me to
hazard the undertaking, but an anxious wish to ward off the calamities
advancing on this once happy country. If I should be so unfortunate as to
mistake the means, I hope my countrymen will impute it rather to the defect of
my understanding, than to the dishonesty of my hear. I love my country -- my
very soul is in agony for her distress; and every nerve within me shall be
exerted to serve her.

There perhaps never was on earth a more happy people, than the inhabitants of
these colonies, till the late unfortunate disputes with England about taxation,
^ouzed mutual jealousies, and created mutual dislikes. If we search into the
original cause of these disputes, we shall undoubtedly find them to have arisen
from a mistaken apprehension in the parliament of Great Britain, that they
possessed the same power over America, which they exercised over the English
nation; and of consequence, that they had a right to dispose of our property at
pleasure. This power might to them seem plausible enough, as they undoubtedly
thought themselves obliged to protect and defend the colonies in common with
the rest of the empire, and therefore expected some contribution in return; and
had they confined themselves to the ancient mode of requisitions by the crown,
we might yet have been a happy people; but they have now reduced us to the
necessity, of entering into the merits of the connection; and have started
subjects, which, for the peace of both countries, ought to have remained
untouched for centuries to come.

It may not be amiss to take a view of our situation, independent of any
concerns with England, as it may possibly point out to such a connection as is
both reasonable and politic, and which every American might agree to; and here
I bespeak the candid unprejudiced attention of my readers.

It were much to be wished, that national freedom could be maintained without
national force; but unhappily such is the state of mankind, that their ideas of
justice are not sufficiently strong, to preserve them from making inroads and
encroachments on each other, and therefore the princes of empires ever find it
necessary, to hold themselves in readiness to repel the depredations of their
enemies; and the expenses attending such preparations, are supplied by their
subjects; that is, by those who receive protection. This being the general
situation of governments, suppose we enter into a consideration of our own
state.

America from its variety of soil and climate, can produce every necessary of
life; and from a happy mixture of the popular form, in most of our governments,
is so tempting to foreigners, that they are daily adding to our natural
increase: thus our numbers are become so considerable, that whilst we remain in
harmony amongst ourselves, we may defy the united force of all the powers of
Europe, having so grand a barrier as the vast Atlantic; for though a maritime
state might distress our seaports by sudden attacks, yet it would be the
height of madness in any eastern nation, to attempt an invasion of America with
a view or retaining possession. But as the necessaries of life are not
sufficient to gratify the demands of elegance, the desires of taste, and the
pleasures of convenience, we have recourse to the channels of trade to indulge
them from foreign reign climes; thus we have constantly floating on the ocean a
large portion of our wealth; Should we recur to first principles, and insist
that we have an equal right with other nations, to an uninterrupted navigation
to every part of the globe, I should readily accede to the assertion; but as
power and right are distinct principles in the political world, it is not
sufficient for us to prove the latter, without holding forth a convincing
argument of our possessing the former. The seas are undoubtedly the grand
highways of the world, in which all nations have an equal right to travel, and
the inhabitants of this common element, are like the property of all: yet such
are the received maxims of power, that here one nation shall claim an exclusive
privilege to navigate a certain portion of the main, and there another shall
pretend to a sole propriety in the fishes of the sea. Inconsistent as this may
seem to the rules of that benevolent Being, who gave to man in common the
fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the air; it is not only claimed, but
maintained. This being the state of things, it becomes next a question, how we
shall support such a formidable figure, as may entitle us to security and
respect, and ensure to us a tolerable share of the privileges contended for,
and enjoyed by other nations. It will probably be thought that nothing less
than a well equipped navy can answer the purpose; for should our property be
detained in foreign prots, should our ships be insulted or plundered on the
seas, should our country men be imprisoned abroad, we should have no way of
redressing our wrongs, whilst our strength lay confined on our native shores.
Admitting then the necessity of a naval force, to secure to us the continuance
of our trade; we are next to consider, whether it would be most prudent for us
to attempt the establishment of a fleet, or to form an alliance with some naval
power, whose interest it might be to protect us. I conclude that many
considerations, which may be unnecessary to mention, would induce us to prefer
an alliance. Let us then take a view of the eastern world, and search amongst
the various powers for such a friend. As we are generally protestants, we shall
certainly confine our search to protestant princes. On hunting the Continent,
we shall find no naval protestant power of strength sufficient for our purpose,
except the States of Holland, whose attention is so wholly engrossed by
commercial pursuits, that great must be the provocation which would induce them
to strike an offending power even in their own defense, and much greater must
it be to induce them to yield to an American state their aid. In the last war
between the English and the French, they put up with the highest indignities,
rather than sacrifice the benefits arising from a state of peace. Let us then
quit the Continent and turn our eyes to Britain; there we shall find the finest
navy in the world, and shall recognize the inhabitants as our friends and
relations, with similar customs, similar laws; in short the very people we
would wish for our allies; we shall find them capable of supplying us with
almost every article of luxury and convenience, and in want of many of the raw
materials of America; here then we should probably ^ix; but now comes the grand
question. We not only propose to Great Britain to enter into a firm, social,
commercial compact, which is to be reciprocally advantageous, but we have a
further stipulation to make; part of our terms is a stipulation for the
protection of our trade, this will of consequence put them upon examining into
the nature of the contract, and whether it is not mutually beneficial; should
they apprehend this to be the case, they might probably conceive that we
requested more than was just or equitable; for should our coasts be threatened
with a fleet, or our ships trading with other nation^ be seized in their ports,
what should prompt the English nation to resent our injuries, or revenge our
wrongs; so long as we could secure a safe navigation for our ships to the
harbors of England, they would readily receive us with friendship, and grant
us whilst there the protection of our persons and property; and in the course
of their trade with us, in their own bottoms, they would find their way to us
under the guardianship of their cannon, against the combined forces of Europe.
Thus would the matter stand at the first overtures, supposing us to be an
independent state.

We are now to determine the point, whether we will confine our views of trade
and protection to the British nation, or take our chance with the various
powers that navigate the ocean. We should certainly start at the thought of
quitting a nation we once loved, and should therefore demand of them on what
terms they were willing to negotiate. Would it not be reasonable to suppose
they would address us in the following manner? The trade of your continent is
undoubtedly a desirable object, independent of the dearer ties of blood and
friendship; we would wish to preserve it, and to become your customers for many
of the articles of your export, and in return, we will supply you with the
various manufactures of England; we will protect you in your trade to all parts
of the world; we will defend your coasts from foreign (...). We will make your
quarrels our quarrels, and obtain redress for every insult you receive, with as
much readiness as if practiced on ourselves; but you must be sensible, that
this can only be done by maintaining at sea, a continual superiority over our
neighbors, both in peace and in war.

The fleets we constantly have equipped, the ships we are daily building and
repairing, are attended with an immense expense; many of them will necessarily
be kept perpetually in your seas, for the security of your coasts, and many
more always in pay, to sail at an hour's warning: we think then, that you
should either sit out a fleet sufficient (at least in part) for your defense,
to join to the navy of England, or else to make us some allowance for your
share of the joint expense.

I leave every candid dispassionate American to determine on the equity of the
proposal, and whether we should not expend infinitely more in an independent
protection of ourselves, than the British nation would require of us for our
quota. This I take to be pretty near the true state of the situation of
affairs, between England and America, without looking into the claims of
sovereignty, dependence, and subordination; though I cannot but think, that our
best interests point out to us an acknowledgment of the supremacy of the crown
of Great Britain, I would not be understood to mean of the people of
Great Britain, whom I only esteem as our fellow subjects, without any kind of
control over us. But we will wave for the present, the consideration of this
part of the argument.

As we have now unfortunately got into a dispute on the subject of
subordination, I would hope we may fix the matter so incontestable plain and
clear, that no future altercations may arise. Our natural right to independance
is so evident, that no reasoning of weight can be urged in opposition; how far
we ought to give up a part of that for the preservation of the remainder, seems
to be our present business to consider. Precedents, law-cases, and
law-opinions, are entirely beside the question; though I could produce a hundred,
I shall reject them all: it is a point of convenience, founded on a point of
equity, that is now to be determined.

The inhabitants of America live for themselves and not for any other nation
under heaven, and to procure their own greatest happiness, so far as is
consistent with the natural rights of others, ought to be their principal
object. I insist, that if we can maintain our ground, and protect our trade
against the rest of the world, I know of no law, of reason or justice, that
should induce us to capitulate for the full exercise of rights and privileges
derived to us from nature: but on the other hand, if our happiness would be
promoted by connecting ourselves with some foreign power, I frankly give my
voice for it; and if the terms of our connection should call for a contribution
toward the support of a fleet, maintained for our mutual defense, I should be
far from esteeming it a badge of a tributary state, but quite the reverse; we
should thereby have a degree of property in a formidable navy, and should have
a right to demand their assistance and protection, when danger approached;
should this ever be refused, I grant it would be a sufficient reason to
withdraw our allowance, and look elsewhere for an honester alliance; but this I
would willingly hope will never be the case, as the true interest of the
English nation will ever be bound up in our interest.

I would wish to be understood, that any taxes levied on ourselves, by our
assemblies for this purpose, ought not to be esteemed as grants in consequence
of demands from Britain, but as given on a full conviction of its being our
best interest to enter into such a league of defense; but should we on an
extensive and enlarged view of the subject, conceive it to be prejudicial to
the general continental welfare and independance, I think we ought to refuse.

Hitherto an acknowledged subordination has taken place, handed down from
father to son, and both countries were happy under the connection, till within a
few years past. It has always been allowed, that the happiness of the people
was the true end of government, therefore whenever a state has diverged from
that point, it becomes the business, nay duty, of every individual, to bring
about a restoration; and whenever they discover a tendency in ruling power, to
deviate from the general good, they ought with resolute firmness to remonstrate
against it. It has long been a received maxim, that the king can do no wrong,
I think we may with much greater propriety say, that the people can do no
wrong; I mean the whole people collectively, for it is to be presumed, from
that great first principle self-preservation, they will primarily consider
their own happiness; therefore when a whole people complain, we may be certain
it is not without just foundation: now the whole of the people of America do
complain of an unjust usurpation in their fellow subjects of Great Britain,
with intent to wrest from them a portion of their property. I will not pretend
to say the English have done it either from a wanton display of power, or
dishonest principles, but will call it false policy; that part which the
interests of America might probably have induced us to act, they have conceived
themselves possessed of a right to enforce on us, and thus have mistaken both
the right and the means.

On our part, in opposition to this usurped power, we set up the privileges of
Englishmen and the natural rights of men; by the former we contend, that the
principles of the English constitution, include no idea of taxation without
representation; and that as the Americans cannot be represented in parliament,
they cannot with propriety be subject to their laws. This point is now so well
understood, and has been so often handled, that it is difficult, nay indeed
needless, to set it in a new point of light: but when by the latter we recur to
the unlimited freedom of human nature, and establish our claims to independance
upon that ground, we shall swerv^ the true end and intention of all government,
if we refuse to admit those political restrictions, which are necessary for the
security of property, Whilst men lived in common, and the spontaneous
production of the earth satisfied the demands of their nature, few were the
regulations necessary to be observed; but when once the idea of distinct and
separate possessions gained place, men were unavoidably reduced to the
necessity of instituting some laws for protecting the possessor in the
enjoyment of his acquired property; for this end societies were formed, and
defensive leagues entered into by neighboring districts, for their mutual
benefit. If one neighborhood was attacked, it demanded the assistance of the
rest of the confederates; and though this demand could not be made in
consequence of any natural superiority on one side, or submissive dependence on
the other, yet the obligation being reciprocally binding, it became their duty
to desist from the pursuit of their own immediate concerns, and to devote their
lives and their labors in the service of the party attacked. Now should we
insist on a total separation in government from the rest of the world, upon the
principles of a natural right to do so, we ought cautiously and carefully to
investigate the probable consequences of such a separatation. Shoud we
establish a total independency, the eyes of every power in Europe would
instantly be turned toward us with a view to their own emolument; either to
derive a benefit from a trade, hitherto monopolized by the English, or with the
more hostile intention, of possessing some portion of this mighty continent. It
is well known, that the present policy of Europe is not confined to the narrow
limits of justice and right; the divisions of kingdoms, and the acquirement of
fresh territory, are now become the darling objects of crowned heads; and
though the united force of America might be able to repel the most formidable
enemy, yet there is too much reason to fear, that this continent has many
changes to undergo, before such a permanent established form of government
takes place, as will be necessary at all times to support its inhabitants
against foreign invasions. Should we disclaim all allegiance to the king of
Great Britain, and stand on our own bottom, the very first step to be taken,
would be the establishing a navy, and this would take us several years to
effect: during this period, our trade would remain unprotected, and must be
carried on under many disadvantages. As no nation would have reason to fear us,
none would hesitate to annoy or insult us, whenever their interests or their
passions should prompt them: in the mean time, we must submit to great and
heavy imposts and taxes, to prepare such ^leets as may procure us security and
respect.

I think I have been told, that every ship of the line, one with another.
equipped ready for sea, costs the English nation one thousand pounds sterling
for every gun she mounts, that is, fifty thousand pounds for a fifty gun ship.
The present navy of England consists of eighty-two ships of the line in good
r^pair, besides smaller vessels and frigates; the number of seamen upon the
present ^^ace establishment is 20,000, and the sum granted for their
maintenance last year was 960,000 l. sterling: were the whole eighty-two ships
to be manned, they would take 42,000 men, and an expense of 2,016,000 l.
exclusive of small ships, etc. The expense of building, if I am well informed,
would upon an average amount to 5,248,000 l. and we may very safely rate the
expense of build^ng the smaller ships at 752,000 l. which amounts in the whole
to six millions sterling. I do not form these calculations, with a design to
terrify my countrymen into a base subjection; I only mean hereby to point out
the true state of things, that we may take our measures accordingly.

The strength, increase and prosperity of this country, will certainly depend
upon trade; therefore it is absolutely necessary for us to examine, what
foundation we can go on to extend it in safety. If we should determine to stand
alone as an independent state, we may be well assured, that no eastern
potentates will permit us to pursue any branch that interferes with their
interest, unless we can carry it on under cover of a naval ar^ament: this, and
this alone, will procure us friendship, and entitle us to navigate the seas in
common with other nations; but the expense attending the attempt will be
immense; and here it will be highly expedient for us to reflect on the most
prudent means of avoiding them. If England will grant us a property in a fleet
now ready for the sea, which has cost her six millions of money, and the
assistance of 20,000 seamen in actual pay, at the rate of 960,000 l. sterling
per annum, methinks we should not hesitate a moment to embrace the proposal,
upon any reasonable terms; but what those terms shall be, will become a subject
of important debate; all that I would venture to recommend, is, that we might
show a disposition to enter upon the negotiation.

England on her part, will doubtless have more in view, than barely receiving
from us a certain proportion of her naval expenses; the will claim a
sovereign^y over the colonies, and an exclusive uncontrollable right to
regulate their trade. Perhaps it will be best to consider these questions
separately.

The sovereignty of England over the colonies, is what all the courtiers and
court-writers contend for, insisting, that the Americans are the subjects of
Great Britain. Here I must observe, that they the generally first mistake the
connection, and thence draw all their inferences. I shall, therefore, in the
first place, deny that we are the subjects of Great Britain; for if once we
concede that point, every submissive act on our part follows of course, as
undoubtedly it is the duty of the governed to obey the legal injunctions of the
governors, otherways all government is a nullity, a mere sound, and nothing
else. The writers on this subject, have not perhaps considered the extent of
the premises they have laid down.

Great Britain, politically not geographically speaking, is only a collective
name, for the inhabitants of England and Scotland, and the prince on the throne
is styled King of Great Britain, etc. Now the American colonies, having been
discovered under the flag of an English prince they became a part of his
dominions, and a number of his subjects quickly consented to improve and
cultivate the soil. These men, whilst they remained in the realm, constituted a
part of the government, partaking of the powers of legislation, that is,
possessing a voice and interest in the choice of men, who were to make laws to
affect their lives, liberties, and properties; but when they quitted the
English shores, they became deprived of the possibility of enjoying those
privileges, and therefore in law, equity, and reason, were from under the
influence of any legislative acts, made subsequent to their departure. Sensible
of this, the crown granted charters to the several colonies, impowering them to
make laws for their own government; but with this proviso, that they "should
not be contrary, but as nearly as may be agreeable to the laws of England. And
this power of enacting laws, in all cases whatever, has been so long allowed,
and so repeatedly recognized by the English, that the right is established
beyond all reasonable dispute.

It has always been deemed one of the darling rights of the Commons, to give
and grant their own money; and so jealous are they of this privilege, that they
will not suffer a money bill to be touched by the Lords, except to declare
their assent or dissent. Now if the giving and granting be solely in the
Commons of Great Britain, how comes it that they have invariably acquiesced to
allow a right in the people of America, also to give and grant their money to
the crown? If the power of enacting laws in the colonies, was intended to have
been confined to their interious local concerns, why have not the Commons of
Great Britain protested against the usurpations of the colony assemblies, and
petitioned his Majesty to disallow the acts? why have they permitted us to
enjoy this right unmolested for more than a hundred years? The reason is
evident, they knew that the power of giving rested solely in those who
possessed. It was upon this principle they claimed it themselves, and upon this
principle they allowed it to us.

If the colonies are subjects of Great Britain, they must be bound by the laws
of Great Britain, be they ever so cruel or unjust; and even should they pass an
act to confiscate the estates of all the colonists, and to condemn them to the
a^ and the halter; they must necessarily submit to their unhappy fate, and pass
into another world for justice and retribution. Wild and visionary as this may
seem, what security have we, that they will not one day portion amongst
themselves, our fair inheritances, and force us into their new claimed fields,
like Guinea slaves, to till the soil? but here my heart recoils, and smites my
guilty bosom, -- fain would I cast an impenetrable veil around my countrymen,
and hide this horrid simile: but I trust we are gradually removing the
prejudices which support the savage custom that prevails amongst us. I say what
security have we, that shall protect us against their laws, when we have no
voice in the framing them? we have none: we are degraded far beneath the rank
of English subjects, we descend to the humiliating condition of dependants upon
English subjects, and hold our lives and fortune but at their command. But
happy for us, this is not our condition; we rank in legislation equal with the
subjects of the realm; we are a part of the British empire, and only
acknowledge ourselves subjects to the King of Great Britain: under that
connection they have sufficiently have advantage of us, an advantage which
necessarily arises from the present local seat of empire; and I hope every
American will ever keep in view this distinction, that we are the subjects of
the crown of Great Britain, and not of the people of Great Britain.

Some have gone so far in the present subject of our disputes, as to declare,
that Author of the Free-Thoughts.
"were the Americans actually in a state of oppression, it would show their
wisdom and prudence, to submit with patience to their condition, rather than
provoke the power that oppresses them, without some fair prospect of obtaining
relief. This sentiment totally includes every idea of servility; to grant this
reasoning, we must ever be restrained from asserting our rights, and thereby
confirm the usurping power in an opinion, that submission will constantly
follow oppression, till freedom shall be no more. Subjects must never protest
against the en^roachment of a tyrant, but bow submissive to the galling yoke:
however I hope my countrymen will never be dissuaded from attempting every just
and honorable measure for obtaining redress.

We may here adduce an argument founded on their own laws, to refute the claim
of an English legislation over the colonies. If the people of Great Britain
have such a right, it is a perpetual right; but the present English
constitution requires a succession of parliaments, therefore the people of
Great Britain, claiming a constant unchangeable supremacy of government, usurp
a greater power over the Americans, than the British parliaments have over
their constituents; it is of no import to say, that the parliament being
re-chosen every seven years, we have the advantage of the change; it can be no
other way agreeable, than is expressed by the Scotch proverb, "that change of
de' else is blithesome; if members of parliament act inconsistent with their
trust, or betray the interests of the nation, their constituents who will be
the sufferers, may put in other men; but with respect to the colonies, if an
English legislation is granted over them, there can be no change, it is an
English not an American parliament that ever presides; and whenever they can
pass acts, which will not injure themselves, it will become the policy of
England to cast as large a part of their own burdens on our shoulders, as they
shall judge us able to bear; for certainly it must be very desirable to lessen
their own taxes by the increase of ours; and however much we might complain of
the injustice, it would still remain; as the nature of the case would admit of
no remedy, in our power to apply; our lawmakers would remain perpetually the
same, without the voice of one American to dissent, or the power to change the
men who had abused us; men who would learn to esteem us as part of the real
estate of the nation, and being eternal judges in the dispute, would proceed
step by step, to divest us of every blessing of life. We must, therefore,
strenuously insist on an exemption from the control of the people of
Great Britain. It is not merely as inhabitants of Great Britain, that I object
to the sway; for I confess I would as soon trust an Englishman, as an American,
with unlimitted power: there are no men on earth sit to be entrusted with such
a power; and it is on this principle, that I contend for a total legislative
independance.

We have been told, that our situation is but similar to many people in
England, who are natives of the country, and who do not consent, "to
Free-Thoughts.
acts of parliaments; that this is always the case with the minority, whose
votes are overruled by the majority, for the law necessarily passes not only
without, but contrary, to their consent: besides, there are millions of people
in England, who have no votes in elections, and are never consulted about the
expediency of making laws. That mankind can never be brought to one way of
thinking, and that the minority must always give way to the majority, are
obvious and necessary truths; but shall we from hence derive an argument, that
a whole people must give up their voices without the question being put, or
without ever being consulted on the matter? it is disgraceful to human nature to
conceive it. That there are millions in England who have no right to vote, must
be absolutely false; for if Great Britain only contains eight million of
inhabitants, there will be but four million males, half of which, at least will
be under age: thus there cannot not be above two million of males at man's
estate in the kingdom. But admitting the fact, shall this suffice a freeborn
American, for a reason, why he should surrender up his life, liberty and
property, to those few who have a right to vote? The smaller the numbers are,
of those who have this right, the greater is our danger; their great men can
more easily purchase them, and by this means mount into the car of despotism*
besides, shall the whole continent of America, ^e contented to sit down in a
similar station with the rotten part of the British constitution? If there are
such numbers amongst them, who are destitute of the rights of Englishmen, it is
high time they were possessed of them; and I hope no American will suffer the
corrupt part of the nation, to strengthen the argument at our expense.

It is needless to insist, that the cases are by no means similar, of those in
England who are not allowed to vote, and of those in America who from their
distant situation cannot vote; it must occur to every man's understanding, who
investigates the subject, that the parliament cannot tax the non-voters in
England, without taxing themselves; that the happiness of the whole nation,
must eventually include the happiness of every individual; that influence or
interest are possessed in a greater or smaller degree by the meanest inhabitant
of the realm; that clamor, discontent and complaint, are engines which the
lower order of the English can continually play off to advantage: on the other
hand, that it becomes the constant interest of England, to save herself at our
expense; that we have no means direct, or indirect to influence the election of
a single member of Parliament: these, I say, are arguments, which must
naturally arise in every mind, and have been often handed forth to the public.

That the first settlers in America apprehended themselves from under the
jurisdiction of parliament, by virtue of their charters, is very evident; as
they began their several legislations, without ever addressing any of their
laws, to that branch of the legislature for confirmation; the King's
approbation or dissent, were all they expected: nor do I remember to have heard
of a single instance, of the parliaments undertaking expre^ly to annual any of
their laws; they appear to have considered them as their fellow subjects, and
seem to have consigned them into the hands of the crown; it is true, the
parliament early passed some restrictive laws, to which the crown assented, and
of which the colonists complained: but if in some instances, they have
submitted to impositions from their fellow subjects in England, shall we from
thence infer, that such submission becomes a precedent, and that such precedent
shall grant a revocation of every natural right of an American? If the
encroachment of an unfriendly neighbor, beyond a boundary not certainly fixed,
be permitted to remain for a time unrepelled, shall the prior possessor be
thereby for ever deprived of his property? and shall it give the intruder a
right to proceed step by step, till he has seized upon the whole? or, shall ^e
not rather say? -- Come, neighbor, our line of division has been long
uncertain, the premises are become valuable, let us determine the bounds, and
prevent further disputes. This I take to be exactly the situation between
Great Britain and America; it is time the line was run, and the controversy
ended. They appear to be sensible of the present improper state of the
connection; for we have been told, that our agents were informed from " good
authority, that if we chose to send over persons to represent us in parliament,
they should be admitted to seats in the house. here we have a full and ample
concession, from our opponents, of the point we have so long contended for; I
mean, that we are not represented in parliament, otherwise it was unnecessary
to invite us to take our seats; and till that is done, it is evident they can
have no right to bind us by their laws: for if we have a right to seats, we
have a right to a voice; if we have a right to a voice, no act can bind us till
that voice is given: if we had not an equitable right to seats in parliament,
they who made the offer, could have no power so far to infringe the English
constitution, as to tender it: hence it is clear, that they apprehended the
authority of parliament was unjustly exercised, till such representation took
place; for the proposal could only arise from a conviction of injustice, in the
present state of things: thus, I conceive, they have avowed our right to
exemption. I formerly thought, before our disputes with England began, that an
American representation was both eligible and practicable; but I am now clearly
of opinion, that it would be highly impolitic. We have good legislations of our
own; we have the same king they have; and it is properly his business, not
theirs to confine each of us, by his negative, within our proper spheres.

The charters granted to the several colonies, were all derived from the crown,
and not from the parliament; the powers of legislation respecting themselves,
and the liberty of disposing of their property, have been invariably confirmed
from time to time, by the king, through his representatives, whether it were
for the immediate service of their own internal concerns, or in grants for the
general use of the empire. Laws similar to the laws of England, for life,
liberty and property, have passed in all the colonies, and have received the
sanction of the throne; and even the acquiescence of parliament, if that were
deemed necessary for their confirmation. Their laws not only bind their own
inhabitants, but the subjects of every nation, when amongst them, are entitled
to their protection, and subject to their penalties; and even should a member
of the House of Commons commit a criminal action against the common law, he
would be treated with as little respect as the veriest felon. This power over
life, has often been recognized by the crown, in exertions of the royal
prerogative, by special pardons. And in matters of property, decrees of every
court on the continent have been repeatedly confirmed, though the appellants
have frequently been non-residents in America: even the military have always
submitted to the laws of the land in which they were quartered, and have been
tried, condemned and executed, without the power of the jurisdiction being ever
called in question; though they are a kind of distinct body, and in some cases
are vested with a power over life and death amongst themselves.

It has been made a question by some Author of Free-Thoughts.
, "do any of your charters say, that you shall not be bound by laws made in
Great Britain? I will ask a question in my turn. If a gentleman was to purchase
an estate of his neighbor, would he think himself bound to pay certain rents
from time to time, if called for, because the deed did not expressly declare
that ^e should not be bound to pay them? certainly it will be replied, that it
was an unrighteous demand; and that where no rent was reserved in the deed,
none could be claimed: it is impossible that the parliament should establish a
claim upon such negative authority. But we are told that the charter of
Pennsylvania, expressly reserves the right of parliament; this is undoubtedly
true, and did the Pennsylvanians esteem their liberties as men and Englishmen,
encircled by the charter of the province, they are certainly bound by whatever
acts a British legislature may incline to impose; nay further, by the tenor of
the 20th section, they are to be subject "to impositions, customs, or taxation,
rate or contribution of the king alone, provided the same be with the consent
"of the proprietary or chief governor," which is a state of vassalage, so
diametrically opposite to every principle of the British constitution, that no
king of England could grant himself such power; neither could any subject admit
it, either on behalf of himself or others. There are certain liberties,
essential to the constitution of an Englishman, which he cannot, by any joint
act with the king, divest himself of; there is no right so absolutely inherent
in the person of every subject of the crown, as that of being bound by no laws,
but those to which he has actually or virtually consented. And though the first
founder of Pennsylvania, and the early settlers, may have accepted a charter,
in some part, derogatory of the rights of British descendants; yet being
illegal in its nature, the present generation have an undoubted authority to
claim their legal privileges, whenever they shall be attacked under color of a
charter, unconstitutional in some of its parts: had the rights remained
untouched, the charter might have remained unnoticed; but should the
Pennsylvanians consent to the operation of clauses, which would subject them to
the control of a legislature, which they never were concerned in the choice
of, they would deservedly be esteemed aliens to the common weal of the empire,
and enemies to the grand bulwark of English liberty. This may be termed
declamation, by the friends of power, ^ut it is English constitutional
reasoning, and if the force of it be rejected, the noblest part of our long
boasted Magna Charta, drops to the ground, and we return to that state of
dispute and confusion, which preceded its happy establishment.

If America was contiguous to Great Britain, we should undoubtedly have been
connected in legislation, and in a course of years should carry so large a
majority into the House of Commons, that the present high claiming islanders
would be but as a trifling country in the mighty senate; is it possible then,
that distance of situation, can so totally reverse the system of equity and
natural right, as to persuade the people of England, that because we sprang
from their loins, they are to have eternal sway? they may wish it, but it is
impossible they should expect it?

The writers in favor of parliamentary power, ask us, how it comes to pass,
that we pretend to the rights of Englishmen, and yet deny the power, which
established those rights? for say they, the Bill of Rights, which is constantly
in every Americans mouth, was not enjoyed by the English themselves, till the
reign of William and Mary, nor did they possess the Habeas Corpus act, till the
reign of Charles the IId; therefore, say they, the colonies settled prior to
those bills, could not partake of them by virtue of inheritance, unless they
grant themselves under the supremacy of the English government. This might suit
the chicanery of a court, but where we contend for the support of the true end
of government, viz. the happiness of the people governed, we shall not hesitate
to assert, that the Americans have a right to adopt at all times the laws of
England, when such laws shall appear productive of greater benefits to the
people, than they before enjoyed; nor do we apprehend ourselves bound to
support our independancy, by a train of law reasoning; it is the good of the
whole that is to be the perpetual object; were not this the case, how is the
present family established on the throne? how came the reformation to take
place? how shall we support the union of England and Scotland? In matters of
government, there can be no other permanent rule, than that which establishes
the greatest good of the people; and though one party or the other may conceive
themselves aggrieved, yet they must submit, where the public safety can be no
other way preserved: even in matters of property, where the subject can be
litigated upon known and fixed grounds, the possessor is frequently obliged to
surrender it, for the common benefit. It Is true, the public will make him some
recompense; but in doing this, they, and not the owner, shall judge of the
value of the damage. Thus in the case between the colonies and England, even
admitting a right of control once did exist, it appears essential to the
general good of the whole colonies, that England should have no legislative
power over them, as a subordination cannot exist, without too great power on
one side, and loss of liberty on the other. Now as government is not created
for the emolument of the governors, the depriving a British parliament of the
supremacy they contend for, is no real injury; for such supremacy, not being
for the benefit of the parties, over whom it is claimed, the necessity of the
supremacy ceases; otherwise it establishes the doctrine of proper^y in
government. Here I shall rest this part of the argument.

We come next to consider their claim of " an exclusive uncontrollable right to
regulate the trade of the colonies. Many of our political writers, have so far
given up this point, that their opponents plume themselves on the supposed
acknowledgment, and thence infer, that a right to impose duties for the
regulation of trade, implies also a power in parliament, to decide the question
as they please; for the name of regulation, may be given to every duty, and the
Americans have no way of protesting against the imposition, or judicially
entering into the merits of the case; the words, " for the express purpose of
raising a revenue, may be left out in the preamble, and yet it shall operate
with all the force of a revenue act. We have been told that the great American
agent, doctor Franklin, and the celebrated Pennsylvania Farmer, have both given
up this point; perhaps they may: but, humanum est errare, every day casts new
light on the subject, and until the line shall be actually established, and
agreed to by the contending parties, in a firm and solemn treaty; it is our
duty to study the argument, and adopt such fresh sentiments, as naturally and
reasonably arise in the pursuit. Let English statesmen clamor for power, let a
British parliament boast of unlimitted supremacy, yet the continent of America
will contend with equal fervency, for the enjoyment of their rights as men. If
England will consent to treat with us upon an equality, we may possibly agree
to surrender every thing, that is reasonable in them to require. To enter into
the minutia of this part of the argument, is not my intention; it comprizes too
great a scope for the limits of a pamphlet; to say what we should submit to,
what we should give up, and what we should claim, in the various branches of
our connection, will be more properly the business of the parties, who may be
employed to settle the line: I only mean to touch on the principles, by which I
apprehend we should be directed in tracing this important boundary.

In the first place, no point should be insisted on by England, that was
intended to operate in their own favor, to the prejudice of America; unless
where the general good of the whole empire, naturally threw the balance into
their scale; as would be the case, on our being denied the privilege of trading
with the natural enemies of England; for should we be able to trade to greater
advantage amongst French than with the English our being restricted in a
traffic with France, would operate against our own immediate interests, in
favor of the English nation; but when we consider on the other hand, that the
French would thereby gain what the English lost, and of consequence would
become richer by our means; the interests of the whole empire ought to
influence us to forego the immediate gain to ourselves: but whatever state is
in commercial league with England, ought also to be open to America, both for
imports and exports; the li^ens of Russia, and the silks of Persia, should by
no means first be landed in England, if intented for an American market; nor
should the manufactures or trading articles of Britain, be loaded with any
impost or duty, when shipped for America, more than other foreigners pay; for
why should we be considered as men not entitled to the general benefits of the
empire, any more than the English themselves, provided we unite our interests
with their interests, and contribute what may be a reasonable proportion of the
expense, necessary for our mutual defense? That we do not bear an equal share
of the burdens of the inhabitants of England, in the variety of taxes they are
loaded with, may be very true, but it is also true, that we have internal taxes
amongst ourselves, and pretty considerable taxes too, which are annually
increasing.

Neither should we be denied the use and immediate importation of Portugal
wines, lemons, citrons, etc. for a trade with Portugal being deemed beneficial
to England, the argument militates equally in our favor. If the English nation
drink their wines with a duty on them, it by no means enforces a necessity of
our paying a duty; that which they pay, is for the support of their government,
and if we in America should deem such luxuries proper subjects for taxation, we
shall doub^less derive supplies from the same source; indeed in some of the
provinces wine already pays a duty. The trade to the East Indies, being at
present limited to a company, who at their own expense first established it,
and not being enjoyed by the English nation at large, I presume we shall not
contend for the right of interfering in that branch, till such time as the
nation shall judge it expedient to open it to their subjects in common:
whenever that is done, and it is no longer esteemed private property, I
apprehend our right will instantly commence; and as this dissolution of the
East India company's charter, will probably not take place, till some
compensation is made them by the nation, perhaps the Americans would not be
backward in furnishing their quota, to purchase the common right of trade in
the eastern seas. I would wish us always to keep in view, a united interest,
and that we may learn to think them inseparable; for though time and the great
changes of empires, may bring about mighty revolutions, yet so long as a happy
connection can be maintained, let every American endeavor to support it.

Though the grand foundation of our claims in the present dispute, is laid on
natural liberty, as its surest groundwork, yet we must ever be attentive to
the political interests of the continent. It may be asked, why a country whose
claims to independancy are founded on natural right, should choose to
acknowledge themselves subjects of a prince, at three thousand miles distance,
rather than establish a head of their own? many reasons may be offered in
reply, but a few may suffice. In the first place, we are at present fixed in
this state; all our governments are formed under this head; we have been
successful and happy under it, and have found few or no inconveniences from it;
the government of England is so excellent a model, that most of the colonies
think they could not substitute a better in its stead. A revolution in the form
of a government, is too dangerous an experiment to be tried, except in cases of
the utmost extremity; and there are few states which do not choose to persist
even in a bad form, rather than risque the consequence of innovations. As the
Americans are at present circumstanced, they could no way unite themselves to
so much advantage, as in the crown of Great Britain, to which they have been so
long accustomed to confess allegiance; for should they incline to have a
crowned head amongst themselves, great and dreadful would be the dissentions
and confusions, before they would agree to fix on the man. If a common wealth
was to be aimed at, the jarring interests of the colonies, would long employ
them in digesting and settling their several claims and rights. We find in the
most trivial concerns of life, that men often contend with great warmth and
earnestness: a whole neighborhood shall be at irreconcilable variance on the
trifling alteration of a road, when the succeeding generation shall travel it
in company with the most cordial friendship; and such is the case in great
changes, or revolutions in government; if the form be once agreed to, it is
dangerous to touch it; and nothing should tempt a people to risque the public
tranquillity, but a firm persuasion that a change was absolutely necessary. In
the case of the colonies, no change that I know of, could be proposed, which
should induce us to unsettle our present happy form; a form under which we have
lived till lately, like our first parents in paradise; peace and plenty were
our portion, and the pleasures of the golden age flourished in our borders.

To sum up the whole: we have supposed that America has a just, equitable, and
natural right to independance; that to support this independance and protect
her foreign trade, a formidable fleet was necessary; that it might be more
beneficial to the colonies to search for a connection with some maritime power,
than to attempt the establishing one of their own; that o^ ^ll European states,
England was the most eligible to negotiate with; that America might, consistent
with her own freedom, join in a certain proportion of the expenses of a fleet,
kept up for their mutual defense, and that common justice required it; that
parliamentary supremacy, was inconsistent with American liberty, and has no
foundation in law or justice; that though we admit England to pass some laws to
regualte trade, yet they shall only be such as are absolutely intended for the
benefit of the whole empire, and not for her own particular advantage; that the
Americans shall trade on an equal footing with the English; and lastly, that it
is the true interest of America, to continue under the present form of
government, and acknowledge subjection to the crown of Great Britain: how these
several points are to be adjusted and settled, will be a subject of much
importance to the colonies; should we, on our part, discover a disposition to
enter on the negotiation, I have little doubt but England, on her part, will
meet us half way.

FINIS.

