CALCULATIONS ON AMERICAN POPULATION, WITH A TABLE for estimating the annual
Increase of INHABITANTS in the British Colonies: The Manner of its Construction
Explained AND Its Use Illustrated.

BY EDWARD WIGGLESWORTH, M. A. HOLLIS Professor of Divinity at Cambridge.

Look now toward Heaven, and tell the STARS, if thou be able to number them. So
shall thy Posterity be.

BENEDICTION ON ABRAHAM. Let there be NO STRIFE, I pray thee, BETWEEN US; for
we are BRETHREN. Is not the WHOLE COUNTRY before thee?

ABRAHAM to his Kinsman LOT. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by JOHN BOIL in
Marlboro'-Street. MDCCLXXV.

TO THE HONORABLE THOMAS CUSHING, Esquire, SPEAKER of the late HOUSE of
REPRESENTATIVES Of the Province of the MASSACHUSETTS BAY: AND One of their
DELEGATES at the CONTINENTAL CONGRESS, The following Calculations on American
POPULATION, Published under his Patronage, Are humbly inscribed, By his obliged
Friend And obedient Servant,

The AUTHOR.

THE following Calculations were the Employment of some leisure Hours, and
designed as a Recreation after Studies of a more serious Nature. They were at
first undertaken for private Gratification. They are now made public, at the
Recommendation of some Friends, to whom they were communicated in Manuscript.

Cambridge, Jan. 25, 1775.
CALCULATIONS ON AMERICAN POPULATION.
FROM a comparison of the most authentic estimates of the inhabitants in the
several British colonies in America, taken at different times, it appears that
the British Americans have doubled their numbers, in every period of
twenty-five years from their first plantation. A rapidity of population not to
be parallaled in the annals of Europe! It has never been equalled since the
patriarchal ages. This rapid population of the Americans arises, partly from
the great accession of foreigners, but principally from the natural increase of
the inhabitants. The reasons, why the Americans are more prolific than the
Europeans, are, that they are less luxurious in their manner of living, and the
means of supporting a family can be more easily obtained. For the last reason
the Americans are induced to marry earlier in life, and consequently their
families of children are more numerous. And their temperance in diet renders
them more healthy. The ease of procuring subsistence for a family is occasioned
by the boundless tracts of uncultivated forests, bordering on their
plantations. For every new-married couple can, at small expense, purchase a
freehold; which by their industry, will afford them and their children a
comfortable support.

TILL the wilderness back of the old plantations shall be filled with
inhabitants, and brought under as good cultivation as the settlements on the
seacoast, it may be presumed that the future population of these colonies will
be as rapid as the past. By an estimate made, at the late CONTINENTAL CONGRESS,
of the number of persons in eleven of the colonies, it appears that there are
3,026678 souls, inhabiting those colonies. Allowing that there are 526678
slaves, which allowance is probably larger than ought to be made, there are
2,500000 British Americans, which may be reckoned as a CAPTIAL STOCK, on which
a calculation may be made of their future population. Should nothing intervene
to retard their increase, the Americans will be more numerous than their
brethren in Britain, in half a century from the present time: And in less than
seventy years, their numbers will exceed those of the inhabitants of
Great Britain and Ireland, taken collectively. -- Happy had it been for
America, if its present contest with the parent state had been postponed to the
middle of the next century! And more happy still had it always slept in
silence! Britain and America might always have been subservient to each others
prosperity and happiness; and have formed one of the most populous, potent,
wealthy and happy kingdoms that ever existed.

UPON the same principles that Mr. WARD has constructed a table to compute the
compound interest on any sum of money for the component parts of a year, a
table may be formed to compute the number of inhabitants in any American colony
for any given year. -- Let 1 represent the present number of inhabitants, and a
the number at the beginning of the next year. Then it will be as 1: a:: a: a2::
a2: a3:: a3: a4 to a25. That is, As the present number of inhabitants is to the
number of the second year, so is that number to the number of the third year,
and so on in the same proportion to the twenty-fifth year.

THEN the last of the terms will be a25. = 2.

To find the value of a, ^

The Operation. ^

For a second process let r= 1,0281. Then, ^

The Operation. ^

BY this operation we find the value of a true to the 9th figure, and only too
much by 2 in the 10th. -- And by involving the value of a to its 25th power, we
have the amount of unity to the 25th year; the index of the power, denoting the
particular year. If therefore the number, corresponding to any particular power
of a, be multiplied into the present number of inhabitants, either of any one
of the British American colonies, or of the whole continent, the product will
be the amount of inhabitants of that colony, or of the continent, for the year
denoted by the index of the power of a.

THE ratio of annual increase may be found, and a table constructed for
estimating the annual amount of the Americans, by a process less operose and
equally exact. The process is this: Take the logarithm of 2 = a25 from any
table that will afford a sufficient number of figures for the proposed
calculation; divide it by 25 the index of a, and the quotient will be the
logarithm of a. This last logarithm being multiplied by 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. to 24
will give the logarithms of the intermediate powers of a; the several
multiplicators being the indices of their respective powers. Find the natural
number corresponding to each of these logarithms, and it will be the amount of
unity from the 1st to the 25th year inclusively.

THE following table was constructed, by ascertaining the ratio of the annual
increase of the British Americans, according to the method, of solving adfected
equations. But in this method, where the quantities are surd, there will always
be a defect, or excess, in the roots found. The error will increase at every
involution, and be proportionate to its power. In the process the value of a
was taken true to seven figures, but was too little by about 4/10 in the eight.
When this number was involved to its 25th power, it discovered itself, in the
last operation, to be, 000019 less than just; and consequently that there was a
proportionable defect in each involution. The excess or defect arising from the
involution of a root greater or less than just, may be corrected by the
following proportion. As the value found of a25: to its excess or defect:: the
value found of any other power: to the excess or defect of that power. And the
several defects being added to, or the several excesses being subtracted from,
the numbers first found, will be the value of the several powers of a, so near
the truth as to answer all the purposes of a calculation of this kind. -- But
the small error noticed above was corrected by taking the logarithm of 2 from
Mr. Briggs's table, and ascertaining the value of the several powers of a, in
the method already notice. By his table the annual amount of unity may be taken
true to nine places of decimals, which is a greater degree of exactness than
the proposed plan required. For this reason eight decimals only were taken into
the calculation. And therefore by multiplying the inhabitants by the numbers in
the table, we have their amount for each year, without any error, where they
are less than 10,000 000: A degree of exactness, sufficient for any calculation
of this kind.

AT the CONTINENTAL CONGRESS held at Philadelphia the last autumn, an estimate
was made, as has been noticed already, of the number of souls in the provinces
specified. -- The publisher has not informed his readers whether it includes
slaves, (for to the disgrace of America SLAVERY Professor MILLAR in his curious
observations on the distinction of ranks in society; having spoken of "the
slavery established in our colonies," and hinted at some improvements which
would render that state less intolerable, concludes with the following remark.
Nothing can appear more astonishing than the little attention that has hitherto
been paid to any improvements of this nature, after the good effects of them
have been so FULLY ILLUSTRATED in the case of the villains in Europe. At the
same time it affords a curious spectacle to observe, that the same people who
talk in so high a strain of political liberty, and who consider the privilege
of imposing their own taxes as one of the unalienable rights of mankind, should
make no scruple of reducing a great proportion of the inhabitants into
circumstances by which they are not only deprived of property, but almost EVERY
RIGHT whatever. Fortune perhaps never produced a situation more calculated to
ridicule a grave, and even a liberal hypothesis, or to show how little the
conduct of mankind is at bottom directed by any philosophical principle. -- Is
it not right, O ye Americans! that with what measure ye meet, it should be
measured to you again? Happy would it be for America, if the conduct of every
advocate for its political rights, was a just commentary on his principles.
still prevails here) as well as freemen. It is to be regreted that the
publisher has not been more particular in his account of the estimate. For if
the numbers in it are expressive of freemen only, we have a foundation on which
we may with safety build a calculation. But if slaves are included in the
number of souls in the several provinces, they must first be deducted, before
we can proceed to make a computation of their future population with accuracy.
For the Negro-slaves are so far from increasing by propagation, that it
requires a large annual importation from Africa to keep the stock good.

New Hampshire 150,000 Massachusetts 400,000 Rhode Island 59,678 Connecticut
192,000 New York 250,000 New Jersey 130,000 Pennsylvania including the Lower
Counties 350,000 Maryland 320,000 Virginia 650,000 North Carolina 300,000
South Carolina 225,000 Total 3,026,678
THE TABLE.
Years. Amounts of UNITY. 1 1,02811382. 2 1,05701804. 3 1,08673486. 4
1,11728713. 5 1,14^69835 6 1,18099266. 7 1,21419488. 8 1,24833054. 9
1,28342^^9. 10 1,31950791. 11 1,356^0432. 12 1,39474366. 13 1,43395521. 14
1,47426921. 15 1,51571656. 16 1,55832916. 17 1,60213975. 18 1,64718203. 19
1,69349062. 20 1,74110112. 21 1,79005014. 22 1,84037530. 23 1,89211529. 24
1,94530989. 25 2,00000000.

BY this table the number of inhabitants for any future year, the increase of
any particular year, and the increase of any series of years, may readily be
found.

IT will be best to illustrate each of these cases by a rule and example.

RULE I.
DEDUCT the present year 1775, from the year whose inhabitants are required,
and if the difference is less than 25, then the present number of inhabitants
must be multiplied by the figures corresponding to the number equal to such
difference. The product will be the number required, and its decimal parts.
Reject the eight right hand figures, and the remaining left hand figures will
be the number of inhabitants for the year required.

EXAMPLE I.
WHAT will be the number of inhabitants in the Massachusetts Bay A. D. 1793?

DEDUCT 1775 from 1793. The difference is 18, which being less than 25, the
present number of inhabitants must be multiplied by the figures in the table
corresponding to 18. -- The inhabitants are 400000, which multiplied by
1,64718203, the product will be 658872, 81200000. Cut off 8 figures on the
righthand; and the remaining figures on the left 658872 will be the number of
inhabitants in the year 1793.

BUT if the difference between the present year, and that whose inhabitants are
required be greater than 25, the following process must be observed.

RULE II.
DIVIDE the difference by 25, then double the present number of inhabitants as
many times as there are units in the quotient. Multiply the product of the
number so doubled by the figures in the table correspondent to the remainder.
Reject from the product the eight right hand figures, and the figures on the
left will be the number sought.

EXAMPLE II.
WHAT will be the number of British Americans, A. 1890, allowing them to be no
more than 1500000 at present? From 1890, substract 1775, the difference is 115,
which being more than 25 must be divided by it. The quotient of 115 divided by
25 is 4, and the remainder 15. Double 1500000 four times, which will give
24,000000. This sum being multiplied by the figures in the table, answering to
15, being 1,51571656, will give 36377197,44000 000. Reject the 8 figures on the
right hand, and the others will be the number of British Americans, A. D. 1890.
viz. 36,377197 persons.

THE increase of inhabitants in any given year may be determined in the
following method.

RULE III.
FIND the number of inhabitants at the beginning of the year by the 1st or 2d
rule. Multiply the number so found by the decimals in the first line of figures
in the table. Reject 8 figures on the right hand, and those that are left will
give the answer.

EXAMPLE III.
WHAT will be the increase of the British Americans, A. D. 1890?

BY the last example their number at the beginning of that year is found to be
36,377197. Multiply this number by 0,02811382, the decimals in the first line
of figures in the table, and the product will be, 1022701,96856254. Reject the
decimals on the right hand, and the integers will be the answer to the
question, viz. 1,022701 is the addition that will be made to the British
Americans in the year 1890; supposing them to be no more than one million and
an half at present.

THE increase of inhabitants for any series of years may be ascertained in the
manner following.

RULE IV.
FIND the number of inhabitants for the first and last years in the series,
deduct the less from the greater number, and the remainder will be the number
sought.

EXAMPLE IV.
HOW many will the inhabitants of the Massachusetts colony increase by the year
1793? Their number in 1793 will be 658872. Their present number is 400000.
258872
will be the increase at that time.

BY the same table may likewise be determined, in a process something different
from the preceding, both the number of inhabitants in any year past; and also
what proportion of the present inhabitants are descended from original
planters, where the number of them can be ascertained, and what from persons
who left Europe after the first implantation of the particular colony, whose
inhabitants are the subject of disquisition.

THE number of inhabitants for any year past may be determined in one of the
following methods.

RULE V.
TAKE the difference between the present year, and that whose inhabitants are
required, and if it be less than 25, deduct from (...) 25. And one half the
present inhabitants of the colony must be multiplied by the numbers in the
table corresponding to the remainder. The integers in the product will give the
number of inhabitants for the year required.

EXAMPLE V.
WHAT was the number of inhabitants, A. D. 1758, in the Massachusetts?

THE difference of years is 17, this deducted from 25, leaves 8. One half of
the present inhabitants is 200,000. This number multiplied by 1,24833054, the
figures in the table corresponding to 8, the remainder, will give
249666,10800000. Rejecting the decimals, the answer is, the Massachusetts
inhahitants were A. D. 1758, 249666 persons.

BUT if the difference of years be greater than 25, the number of inhabitants
must be determined by

RULE VI.
DIVIDE the difference of years by 25, and substract the remainder from 25.
Take one half of the present inhabitants and divide them successively by 2, as
many times as there are units in the quotient. The inhabitants thus depressed,
being multiplied by the figures in the table, answering to the difference
between the remainder and 25, will be the answer required, after the decimals
are rejected.

EXAMPLE VI.
WHAT was the number of Americans, 1710?

THE difference of years is 65. This number divided by 25 gives 2 for the
quotient, and 15 for the remainder. One half of the present number of Americans
is, 1,250000. This number depressed, by being twice divided by 2, will give
312,500, which multiplied by the figures in the table answering to 10, (which
is the difference between 25 and 15, the remainder,) 1,31950791 will make
412346,22187500. Reject the decimals, which will give the answer. The number of
Americans A. D. 1710, was 412346.

SHOULD the proportion be sought, which the posterity of the first settlers of
any colony bear to the whole inhabitants of it at present, it may be
ascertained in the following method, supposing them to double by natural
increase in twenty-five years.

RULE VII.
DEDUCT the year of the settlement of the colony from the present year. Divide
the difference of years by 2. Then multiply the original settlers by 2, as many
times as there are units in the quotient. The number thus increased, multiply
by the figures in the table, answering to the remainder. The product, when the
decimals are rejected, will give the present number of the posterity of the
original settlers. And the proportion which they bear to the whole, will be as
that number is to the number of the whole.

EXAMPLE VII.
WHAT proportion do the posterity of the original planters of the
Massachusetts, bear to its present inhabitants?

COULD the number of original settlers be ascertained, the question might be
determined with precision. The rule however may be illustrated by taking any
number at pleasure, instead of the true number of original settlers. -- Let us
then suppose the first settlers amounted to 5000.

MASSACHUSETTS was planted A. D. 1630. GOV. WINTHROP arrived at Salem June 12,
1630. The settlement at Plymouth was begun December 20, 16^^.
The difference between that and the present year is 145. This number divided
by 25, gives 5 for the quotient, and 20 for the remainder. 5000 redoubled 5
times makes 160000. This number multiplied by 1,74110112, the figures in the
table corresponding to 20, the remainder, will give 278576,17920000. The
descendants, then, from the original settlers are, on the supposition made,
278576; and they are in proportion to the whole inhabitants, as 278576 is to
400000.

BY doubling the present number of Americans nine times, the number of them
will be found for every twenty fifth year to the end of the twentieth century.
And each of these duplications, being multiplied by the several lines of
figures in the table, will give the amount of the Americans in the intermediate
years. -- Their present number being estimated at two millions and an half,
their duplications will be as follows, A. 1800 -- 5 Millions. 1825 -- 10 Do.
1850 -- 20 Do. 1875 -- 40 Do. 1900 -- 80 Do. A. 1925 -- 160 Millions. 1950 --
320 Do. 1975 -- 640 Do. 2000 -- 1280 Do.


A CAREFUL attention to the preceding rules and examples, will be sufficient,
without any more illustrations, to lead to the knowledge of the various purposes
to which the table may be applied.

WHEN we look back to the state of the colonies at the middle of the last
century, and compare it with the present, we are surprised to find that our
ancestors, amidst all the difficulties they had to encounter, have been able in
so short a period to put a face entirely new on all the country extended from
Nova Scotia to Georgia, by changing the forest into a fruitful field; that they
have opened such an extensive commerce, as is carried on from America; and that
by their cultivation of the liberal arts, they have left a posterity of two
millions and a half, FIVE millions, according to the estimate of -- Dr. Price
and our best modern calculators, is nearest to the true number of the people of
England. The males between sixteen and fifty-six in five millions are 1,250
000, or a fourth part of the whole. -- In North-Britain the number of souls is
about 1,500,000. The males between sixteen and fifty-six are 300,000. Political
disquisitions Vol. I. page 36, 46. -- If the Doctor's proportion is just, the
number of males in America between sixteen and fifty-six is 625,000. -- The
increase of Americans the present year, is 70,284. One fourth part of them are
males between sixteen and fifty-six. There are then 17,571, effective men added
to the Americans the present year. Lord Barrington moved in the House of
Commons, that 17,542 effective men be employed for the land service this year.
enjoying all the necessaries, and most of the elegancies of life. A rapidity
of population and improvement, that fills the mind with admiration! But to
anticipate their population and improvements, at the close of the twentieth
century, overwhelms the mind with astonishment! At that time, should their
future population be as rapid as their past, the Americans would amount to ONE
THOUSAND TWO-HUNDRED AND EIGHTY MILLIONS! The continent extending back to the
south sea, affording them new plantations; and the diversity of climates and
soils, inviting the introduction of all the various productions of the other
quarters of the world.

SHOULD a system of policy be adopted to conciliate the affections of the
Americans, what an amazing source of commerce will be opened to Great Britain?
To what limits will the demand for British manufactures be extended, while the
Americans are busily employed in subduing the wilderness? And should Britain
continue to encourage the cultivation of those materials of commerce, for which
she has been dependent on foreign nations, to what a state of independence may
she arise?

THAT the present unhappy contest between Britain and America, may be amicably
terminated; that the extent of parliamentary authority may be ascertained; and
that the rights of America may be fixed on an immovable foundation, are the
earnest desires of every true friend of Britain and America. Should this ever
be the case, such an union of interest and affection would succeed, as would
render them the envy of Europe and the glory of the WORLD.


