THE LAW OF LIBERTY. A SERMON ON AMERICAN AFFAIRS, PREACHED AT THE OPENING OF
THE PROVINCIAL CONGRESS OF GEORGIA. ADDRESSED TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE EARL
OF DARTMOUTH. WITH AN APPENDIX, GIVING A CONCISE ACCOUNT OF THE STRUGGLES OF
SWISSERLAND TO RECOVER THEIR LIBERTY.

BY JOHN J. ZUBLY, D. D.

IS. XI:13. EPHRAIM SHALL NOT ENVY JUDAH, AND JUDAH SHALL NOT VEX EPHRAIM.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY HENRY MILLER. 1775.

ALSO TO BE HAD OF MESSIEURS BRADFORDS, IN PHILADELPHIA; NOEL AND HAZA^D, AT
NEW YORK; WILLIAM SCOTT, ON THE BAY, IN CHARLESTOWN, SOUTH CAROLINA; AND AT
MR. BARD's STORE, AT SAVANNAH, GEORGIA.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM HENRY, EARL of DARTMOUTH.
MY LORD,
YOUR Lordship's appointment to be Secretary of State for the American
department, by numbers that respected your Lordship's religious character, was
looked upon as a very providential and happy event. Your patronizing of
religious undertakings, confirmed the general opinion, and we were happy in the
expectations of your Lordship's conscientious regard to justice and equity, as
well as to the civil and religious liberties of this great Continent; we
expected the cause of liberty and religion would meet with the strongest
support under your administration, and in your Lordship would ever find a
constant and successful advocate with your royal master.

Unhappily during your administration, measures have been pursued very contrary
to American hopes, and we easily conceive your Lordship may think it not less
strange that many friends of religion in America should be so uneasy under laws
which had your Lordship's concurrence and approbation.

It is to the Man and to the Christian I wish to be permitted to address
myself: Your Lordship ranks among the highest subjects, and has a large share
in all public measures, but anxiety for what may distress, and zeal for the
welfare of the empire, can be no crime even in the meanest; and when a house is
once in flames, every man is inexcusable, or must at least be so in his own
breast, that does not contribute whatever he may think in his power to their
being extinguished. The effects of the present measures are visible, and it
requires no sagacity to foresee what may be the consequence, should they be
continued. Your Lordship may do much toward restoring and perpetuating the
tranquillity of a great empire; persons of my station have nothing to offer but
hints and wishes, should these be beneath your notice, or stand in need of
forgiveness, my sincere wish to contribute any thing toward a just, happy and
perpetual connection between a parent state and an infant country growing apace
to the most astonishing importance, must be my only apology. Pulchrum est been
facere reipublicae, sed and been dicere non est absurdum.

The question, My Lord, which now agitates Great Britain and America, and in
which your Lordship has taken such an active part, is, whether the Parliament
of Great Britain has a right to lay taxes on the Americans, who are not, and
cannot, there be represented, and whether the Parliament has a right to bind
the Americans in all cases whatsoever? Whatever may be said, or whatever the
good people in Great Britain may believe, this is the whole subject of the
dispute. All the severities hitherto exercised upon the Americans professedly
have no other view than to enforce such a dependence, and nothing less than a
claim destructive of all natural and national liberty, could possibly have
united all America in a general opposition, or have aroused them to join all
like one man in their common defense. Let a declaratory bill be passed, that
any law and usage to the contrary notwithstanding, America is entitled to all
the common rights of mankind and all the blessings of the British constitution,
that the sword shall never be drawn to abridge, but to confirm, her birthright,
and the storm instantly becomes a calm, and every American thinks himself happy
to contribute to the necessities, defense and glory of Great Britain to the
utmost of his strength and power.

To bind them in ALL CASES WHATSOEVER, my Lord, the Americans look upon this as
the language of despotism in its utmost perfection. What can, say they, an
Emperor of Morocco pretend more of his slaves than to bind them in all cases
whatsoever. Were it meant to make the Americans hewers of wood and drawers of
water, were it meant to oblige them to make bricks without straw, were it meant
to deprive them of the enjoyment of their religion, and to establish a
hierarchy over them similar to that of the church of Rome in Canada? it would,
say they, be no more than a natural consequence of the right of binding them
(unseen, unheard, unrepresented) in all cases whatsoever.

My Lord, the Americans are no idiots, and they appear determined not to be
slaves. Oppression will make wise men mad, but oppressors in the end frequently
find that they were not wise men: there may be resources even in despair
sufficient to render any set of men strong enough not to be bound in all cases
whatsoever.

Grievous is the thought, my Lord, that a nobleman of your Lordship's character
should be so zealous to make war, and to imbrue his hands in the blood of
millions of your fellow subjects and fellow christians: Pray, my Lord, is it
possible that those, who at three thousand miles distance can be bound in all
cases, may be said to have any liberty at all? Is it nothing in your Lordship's
eye to deprive so considerable a part of the globe of the privilege of
breathing a free air, or to subjugate numbers and generations to slavery and
despotism? Can your Lordship think on these things without horror, or hope they
must be productive of any thing but detestation and disappointment? Your
Lordship believes a Supreme Ruler of the earth, and that the small and great
must stand before him at last: Would your Lordship be willing, at the general
meeting of all mankind, to take a place among those who destroyed or enslaved
empires, or risk your future state on the merit of having, at the expense of
British blood and treasure, taken away the property, the life and liberty of
the largest part of the British empire? Can your Lordship think those that
fear the LORD will not cry to him against their oppressors, and will not the
Father of mankind hear the cries of the oppressed? or would you be willing that
their cries and tears should rise against you as a forward instrument of their
oppression.

I know, my Lord, that this is not courtly language, but your Lordship is a
professor of religion, and of the pure, gentle, benevolent religion of JESUS
CHRIST: The groans of a people pushed on a precipice, and driven on the very
brink of despair, will prove forcible, till it can be proved that any power, in
whose legislation the Americans have no part, may at pleasure bind them in all
cases whatsoever; till it can be proved that such a claim does not constitute
the very essence of slavery and despotism; till it can be proved that the
Americans (whom in this view I can no longer call Britons) may, and of right
ought, to be thus bound; abhorrence of such assertions is only the language of
truth, which in the end will force its way, and rise superior to all the arts
of falsehood and all the powers of oppression.

Right or wrong, my Lord, in all cases whatsoever, but more especially when the
fate of nations is concerned, are words of infinite moment. Your Lordship
doubtless believes that the weighty alternative must have very solemn and
different effects here and hereafter; but waving the right or wrong of this
vile unhappy dispute, let me entreat your Lordship's attention to consider at
what an infinite risk the present measures must be pursued, even were it not
demonstrable that they are in the highest degree wrong, cruel and oppressive.

The bulk of the inhabitants of a continent extending eighteen hundred miles in
front on the atlantic, and permitting an extension in breadth as far as the
south sea, look upon the claim, to bind them in all cases whatsoever, as
unjust, illegal and detestable, let us suppose for a moment that they are
grossly mistaken; yet an error imbibed by millions, and in which they believe
the ALL of the present and future generations lies at stake, may prove a very
dangerous error; destroying the Americans will not cure them, nor will any acts
that condemn to starve or be miserable, have any tendency to persuade them that
these acts were made by their friends. The people in England are made to
believe that the Americans want to separate from them, or are unwilling to bear
their part of the common burden. No representation can be more false; but, my
Lord, a nation cannot be misled always, and when once the good people of
Great Britain get truer notions of the matter, they will naturally wreak their
resentment on those by whom they have been grossly misinformed or wretchedly
deceived.

Review, my Lord, the effects of the present measures; the past and present
will inform your Lordship of what may be to come.

With an unparalleled patience did the Bostonians bear the annihilation of
their trade, the blocking up of their harbor, and many other distresses, till
at Lexington an attack was made upon their lives, and then they gave sufficient
proof that their patience was not the effect of timidity, but of prudence and
an unwillingness to shed British blood. This attack convinced all America (...)
were athirst after their blood, and the behavior of both parties on that day,
and in many little skirmishes since, must convince all the world that in the
cause of liberty the Americans are not afraid to look regulars in the face, and
that in an unjust and oppressive service British troops are far from being
invincible.

The burning of the innocent town of Charlestown, after it had been left by its
inhabitants, is a piece of such wanton cruelty as will fix an overlasting
disgrace on the British arms. In the long civil war in Great Britain nothing of
the kind was attempted by either party, and this barbarity cannot fail being
condemned by all civilized nations.

If at the battle on Bunker's hill the Americans have been surprised,
superiority has cost the regulars dearer than the Americans what is called
their defeat, one or two more such defeats of the Americans would forever put
it out of the power of the present regular army to gain a victory.

The rejecting of the New York petition has effectually silenced all those who
pleaded for, or hoped any good from, petitioning. The cannonading of that town
in the dead of the night, and without the least previous warning, as it has
shown what the inhabitants are indiscriminately to expect, will in history
stand as a lasting monument of such wantonness of cruelty as nations not
remarkable for humanity would be ashamed of.

The destroying of the New England fishery laid all those who were deprived of
their bread and occupation at sea, under an absolute necessity of seeking it in
the American army, and the sense of the injury done them will doubtless exert
itself in the day of battle.

The endeavor to stir up popish Canadians and savage Indians against the
Colonists has been productive of the taking of the important pass of
Ticonderoga, which has been effected without the loss of a single life on
either side.

Detaining the inhabitants of Boston, after they had, in dependence on the
General's word of honor, given up their arms, to be starved and ruined, is an
action worthy of the cause, and can only be equaled by the distresses of
Protestants driven under the walls of Londonderry, at which even a James
relented.

Proposals publicly made by ministerial writers relative to American domestics,
laid the southern provinces under a necessity of arming themselves; a proposal
to put it in the power of domestics to cut the throats of their masters, can
only serve to cover the proposers and abettors with everlasting infamy.

The Americans have been called a rope of sand; but blood and sand will make a
firm cementation, and enough American blood has been already shed to cement
them together into a thirteenfold cord, not easily to be broken.

My Lord, the violence of the present measures has almost instantaneously
created a continental union, a continental currency, a continental army, and
before this can reach your Lordship, they will be as equal in discipline as
they are superior in cause and spirit to any regulars. The most zealous
Americans could not have effected in an age, what the cruelty and violence of
administration has effectually brought to pass in a day.

The regular army employed on this errand, with four able generals, now lies no
better than besieged within the ruins of Charlestown and Boston, unable to
procure the necessaries of life, obliged to import their bread from Europe, and
fuel from Canada, pining away with disease, and affording daily martyrs to
cruelty and arbitrary power, while every day adds to the improbability of their
ever obtaining those unhappy ends, A strange situation for a British army!

Restraining the trade of the Colonies, will effectually annihilate all their
trade with Great Britain. The numbers that crossed the atlantic, or re-exported
American commodities from Great Britain, the manufacturers that wrought for
America, or worked up her raw materials, will now be at full leisure to know
and feel whether the American trade be an object of any importance, and how
much the nation is obliged to a ministry that has so effectually labored its
destruction.

The present dispute has made every American acquainted with, and attentive to,
the principles of the British constitution: In this respect, as well as in a
strong sense of liberty, and the use of firearms almost from the cradle, the
Americans have vastly the advantage over men of their rank almost every where
else. From the constant topic of present conversation, every child unborn will
be impressed with the notion: It is slavery to be bound at the will of another
in all cases whatsoever; every mother's milk will convey a detestation of this
maxim. Were your Lordship in America, you might see little ones acquainted with
the word of command before they can distinctly speak, and shouldering the
resemblance of a gun before they are well able to walk.

When millions of free people at once turn their thoughts from trade, and the
means of acquiring wealth, to agriculture and frugality, it must cause a most
sensible alteration in the state. My Lord, this is the case at present in
America; every new act of violence will strengthen and confirm the spirit that
taught them the necessity of being frugal and virtuous, that they might remain
free, and become invincible.

Admit, my Lord, (for suppositions now become probable in proportion of their
being astonishing and violent) that a British fleet may effectually guard
every harbor, river, creek or inlet on the American coast; admit also that her
troops destroy every town, village or hut along the seashore, what then will be
the consequence? Why, my Lord, it will be the destroying the property of
thousands in Great Britain, and of a few on this side of the water, whom your
Lordship calls your friends; perhaps the attempt may not succeed, but supposing
it should, the Americans, injured beyond a possibility of reparation, and
irritated to the highest degree, will retire where they are inaccessible to
troops and ships; instead of trade and navigation, you will have a desolate
seacoast, the trade of America will be lost, and with it the sinews of war:
And, my Lord, in the natural course of things America, in less than half a
century, will contain more inhabitants than Great Britain and Ireland; and that
period, my Lord, is not so far distant, to put the present treatment entirely
out of remembrance. America and Great Britain joined in arms together, may grow
confident against the world besides; but if Britain continue her arms against
America; if her troops can be persuaded to go on against their brethren and
friends, if they will destroy the last asylum of liberty, and a country which
has saved so many thousands from starving at home, the Americans will fight
like men, who have every thing at stake; the mercenaries with bayonets at their
backs, and at the rate of sixpence a day; if they are once defeated, whence
will they be resupplied; if they return to Britain victorious, they will be fit
instruments to promote that slavery at home which they have been successful in
fastening (probably for a very little while) on their fellow subjects abroad.

In times of public confusion men of all parties are sometimes carried further
than they intended at first setting out. History and the knowledge of human
nature should inform your Lordship how much it is against all sound policy to
secure or strive for punctilios at an infinite risk.

The Americans have always shown an affectionate regard to the king, and they
are truly sensible of the necessity and advantage of a perpetual union with the
parent state; but undeserved severities cannot be productive of any pleasing
returns. The Americans firmly believe that the claim at present endeavoring to
be enforced, would render them mere slaves, and it is their general motto,
"DEATH OR FREEDOM." The parliamentary, or, as they say, ministerial, claim is
now written in letters of blood, and that will be far from making it more
acceptable to American readers.

On the whole, my Lord, should this address be deemed impertinent and
intrusive, I hope it may still be excusable from the importance of the cause,
and the sincerity of its motive. In the event of the present dispute I look
upon all mankind as interested, and though not natural born, his Majesty has
not another subject that more ardently wishes that his own repose and
happiness and that of all his subjects may never meet with any interruption.
Whether British troops shall now drive liberty from out of the greater part of
the British empire, and bury her remains in the American wilderness, or whether
that wilderness shall flourish and cheerfully contribute to make Great Britain
the greatest empire of the universe, is the question now to be decided, and it
is not so unimportant, but it may be expected HE that is higher than the
highest, and takes up the isles like a very little thing, will interpose in
the decision. The whole American process, my Lord, is liable to a revision, and
when righteousness and judgment to come once make an impression, many a Felix
will tremble.

To restore peace and harmony nothing is necessary than to secure to America
the known blessings of the British constitution. This may be done in a moment,
and without any disgrace or risk. Let the Americans enjoy, as hitherto, the
privilege to GIVE and GRANT by their own representatives, and they will give
and grant liberally; but their liberty they will never part with but with their
lives. The day that restores their liberty, restores every thing to the former
channel; to enforce the contrary claim, ages may be insufficient, and every day
increases the danger of a mother's being dashed to pieces on her own children.

That your Lordship, in the hand of Providence, may be a happy instrument to
bring the present unnatural contest to a speedy, just and honorable issue;
that you may live to see much of that happiness which must be the result; is no
less my fervent prayer, than that GOD would blast every counsel and measure
that may have a contrary tendency, -- that would separate Britain and America,
whom GOD has joined together, -- that would abridge the rights, liberties and
happiness of the nation, our rightful Sovereign (whom GOD ever preserve), or
any of his subjects.

I am, my Lord, Your LORDSHIP's most humble servant, J. J. ZUBLY.
September 3, 1775.
A SERMON, etc.
JAMES ii:12. So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the Law
of Liberty.


THERE was a time when there was no king in Israel, and every man did what was
good in his own eyes. The consequence was a civil war in the nation, issuing in
the ruin of one of the tribes, and a considerable loss to all the rest.

And there was a time when there was a king in Israel, and he also did what was
right in his own eyes, a foolish son of a wise father; his own imprudence, the
rashness of his young counselors, his unwillingness to redress the grievances
of the nation, and the harsh treatment he gave to those who applied for relief,
also brought on a civil war, and issued in the separation of the ten tribes
from the house of David. He sent his treasurer to gather an odious duty or
tribute, but the children of Israel stoned him that he died; and when he
gathered one hundred and four score thousand men, that he might bring again the
kingdom unto Roboam, GOD sent them a message, "ye shall not go up, nor sight
against your brethren, return every man to his house, for this thing is done of
me." GOD disapproved of the oppressive measures and ministry of Roboam, and
that king's army appears more ready to obey the command of their GOD, than slay
their brethren by orders of a tyrant. They obeyed the voice of the LORD, and
returned from going against Jeroboam. 2 Chronicles. x:18.xi:4.

The things that happened before are written for our learning. By comparing
past times and proceedings with these that are present, prudence will point out
many salutary and religious lessons. The conduct of Roboam verifies the
lamentation of his father, "Woe to thee, o land, when thy king is a child."
Eccles. x:16. A very small degree of justice and moderation might have
preserved his kingdom, but he thought weapons of war better than wisdom; he
hearkened not, neither to the people, nor to some of his more faithful
counselors, and the consequence was that, instead of enslaving the ten tribes
who stood up for their liberty, GOD gave Judah to be servants to the king of
Egypt, that they might learn the difference between his service and the service
of the kingdoms of the nations. A people that claim no more than their natural
rights, in so doing, do nothing displeasing unto GOD; and the most powerful
monarch that would deprive his subjects of the liberties of man, whatever may
be his success, he must not expect the approbation of GOD, and in due time will
be the abhorrence of all men.

In a time of public and general uneasiness it behooves both superiors and
inferiors to consider. It is easy to extinguish a spark, it is folly to blow up
discontent into a blaze; the beginning of strife is like the letting out of
waters, and no man may know where it will end. There is a rule given to
magistrates and subjects; which, if carefully attended to, would secure the
dignity and safety of both; which, if not duly regarded, is usually attended
with the worst consequences. The present, my hearers, will easily be allowed is
a day of trouble, and surely in this day of adversity we ought to consider.
When a people think themselves oppressed, and in danger, nothing can be more
natural than that they should enquire into the real state of things, trace
their grievances to their source, and endeavor to apply the remedies which are
most likely to procure relief: This I take to be the design of the present
meeting of persons deputed from every part of the country; and as they have
thought proper to open and begin their deliberations with a solemn address unto
GOD, and the consideration of his holy word, I most cheerfully comply with
their request to officiate on this occasion, and shall endeavor, as I may be
enabled, to point out such directions from the holy scriptures as may make us
wise in the knowledge of time, and direct us how to carry ourselves worthy of
the character of good subjects and Christians: Whatever may be necessary for
this purpose, I take to be comprehended in the apostolical rule, which I have
laid down as the subject of this discourse, So speak, and so do, as they that
shall be judged by the law of liberty.

There are two things which properly come before us, viz. I. That we are to be
judged by the law of liberty; and II. The exhortation to act worthy, and under
the influence, of this important truth on every occasion.


A law is a rule of behavior, made under proper authority, and with penalties
annexed, suitable to deter the transgressions. As all laws suppose man to be in
a social state, so all laws ought to be made for the good of man: A law that is
not made by such as have authority for so doing, is of no force; and if
authority makes laws destructive in themselves, no authority can prevent things
from finally taking their natural course.

Wherever there is society, there must also be law; it is impossible that
society should subsist without it. The will, minds, tempers, dispositions,
views and interests of men are so very different, and sometimes so opposite,
that without law, which cements and binds all, every thing would be in endless
disorder and confusion. All laws usually wear the complexion of those by whom
they were made, but it cannot be denied that some bad men, from a sense of
necessity, have made good laws, and that some good men, from mistake, or other
weaknesses, have enacted laws bad in themselves, and pernicious in their
consequences.

All human laws partake of human imperfection; it is not so with the laws of
GOD. He is perfect, and so are all his works and ways. The law of the LORD is
perfect, converting the soul. The testimony of the LORD is sure, making wise
the simple. The statutes of the LORD are right, rejoicing the heart. The
commandment of the LORD is pure, enlightening the eyes. All his judgments are
truth, and righteousness altogether. Psalm xix.

Among men every society and country has its own laws and form of government,
which may be very different, and cannot operate beyond their limits; but those
laws and that form of government is undoubtedly best which has the greatest
tendency to make all those that live under it secure and happy. As soon as we
consider man as formed into society, it is evident that the Salus populi
suprema lex.
safety of the whole must be the grand law which must in^^^ence and direct
every other: Men did not pass from a state of nature into a state of society,
to render their situation more miserable, and their rights more precarious That
government and tyranny is the hereditary right of some, and that slavery and
oppression is the original doom of others, is a doctrine that would reflect
dishonor upon GOD; it is treason against all mankind, it is indeed an enormous
faith that millions were made for one; transubstantiation is but a harmless
absurdity, compared with the notion of a divine right to govern wrong, or of
making laws which are contrary to every idea of liberty, property and justice.

The law which the apostle speaks of in our text, is not a law of man, but of
Him who is the only lawgiver, that can save and condemn, to whom all owe
obedience, and whose laws none can transgress with impunity.

Though all the laws that GOD ever gave unto man are worthy of GOD, and tend to
promote the happiness of those to whom they were given, yet we may observe a
very striking variety in the different laws which he gave at different times
and to different people. He showed his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his
judgments unto Israel; he has not dealt so with any other nation. Psalm
cxlvii:18.19.

To the generality of mankind he gave no written law, but yet left not himself
without a witness among them; the words of the law were written in their
hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean
while excusing or else accusing one another: It cannot be said they were
without law, whilst what they were to do, and what they were to forbear, was
written in their hearts.

To Israel GOD came with a fiery law in his hands, it was given with the most
awful solemnity upon mount Sinai; and as the sum and substance of all their
ceremonial, political and moral law centered in the ten commandments, so the
sum and substance of these is comprehended in love to GOD and love to man,
which, as our LORD himself informs us, contains all the law and all the
prophets.

All manifestations of the will of GOD have been gradual, and it is probable
the means of knowing GOD will be progressive through different ages, till
eternity gives the good man a full sight of GOD in his immediate presence.
During the dispensation of the old testament and the ceremonial law, a spirit
of bondage obtained unto fear, the law was a schoolmaster to bring us unto
CHRIST; neither did the law make any thing perfect, but the bringing in of a
better hope: Grace and truth was brought to light by JESUS CHRIST, and hence
the dispensation of the gospel, under which we live, is called the law of
LIBERTY.

Though there is a manifest distinction between law and gospel, and sometimes
these two things are even opposed to one another, yet the doctrine of the
gospel is also called "the law of faith;" Romans iii:17. partly because it was
usual with the Jewish writers to call every doctrine a law, and partly also
because the doctrine of the gospel presents us with a rule of life, which all
its professors are bound to obey; hence they are said to be "not without law,
but under the law of CHRIST;" 1 Cor. ix:11. and hence our apostle speaks of a
royal law, which, though we cannot obey in perfection, nor derive any merit
from our imperfect obedience, we cannot neglect without danger, nor disobey
without showing our disregard to the doctrine of the gospel in general.

It deserves very particular attention that the doctrine of the gospel is
called a law of LIBERTY. Liberty and law are perfectly consistent; liberty does
not consist in living without all restraint; for were all men to live without
restraint, as they please, there would soon be no liberty at all; the strongest
would be master, the weakest go to the wall; right, justice and property must
give way to power, and, instead of its being a blessing, a more unhappy
situation could not easily be devised unto mankind than that every man should
have it in his power to do what is right in his own eyes: well regulated
liberty of individuals is the natural offspring of laws, which prudentially
regulate the rights of whole communities; and as laws which take away the
natural rights of men, are unjust and oppressive, so all liberty which is not
regulated by law, is a delusive phantom, and unworthy of the glorious name.

The gospel is called a law of liberty, because it bears a most friendly aspect
to the liberty of man; it is a known rule, Evangelium non tollit politias, the
gospel makes no alteration in the civil state; it by no means renders man's
natural and social condition worse than it would be without the knowledge of
the gospel. When the Jews boasted of their freedom, and that they never were in
bondage, our LORD does not reprove them for it, but only observes, that
national freedom still admits of improvement: If the Son shall make you free,
then are you free indeed. John vi^:16. This leads me to observe that the gospel
is a law of liberty in a much higher sense: By whomsoever a man is overcome, of
the same he is brought into bondage; but no external enemy can so completely
tyrannize over a conquered enemy, as sin does over all those who yield
themselves its servants; vicious habits, when once they have gained the
ascendant in the soul, bring man to that unhappy pass that he knows better
things and does worse; sin, like a torrent, carries him away against knowledge
and conviction, while conscience fully convince him that he travels the road of
death, and must expect, if he so continues, to take up his abode in hell;
though his decaying body clearly tells him sin breaks his constitution, as well
as wastes his substance, though he feels the loss of credit and wealth, still
sin has too strong a hold of him to be forsaken, though he faintly resolves to
break off, yet, till the grace of GOD brings salvation, when he would do good,
evil is present with him; in short, instead of being under a law of liberty, he
is under the law of sin and death, but whenever he feels the happy influence of
the grace of the gospel, then this law of liberty makes him free from the law
of sin and death; Romans viii:2. it furnishes him not only with motives to
resist but with power also to subdue sin; sin reigns no longer in his mortal
body, because he is not under the law, but under grace. By this law of liberty
he is made free from sin, and has his fruit unto holiness, and the end of it
eternal life. There is another reason why the gospel is called a law of
liberty, which is to distinguish it from the ceremonial law under the Mosaic
dispensation; a yoke, of which an apostle says, neither they nor their fathers
were able to bear; it was superadded on account of their transgressions, and
suited to the character of a gross and stubborn nation, to whom it was
originally given; they were so prone to idolatry, and so apt to forget their
GOD, their notions were so gross and carnal, that a number of external rites
and ceremonies became necessary, to put them in mind of him, and to attach them
to some degree of his worship and service. This, however necessary, was a heavy
burden; it bid them "touch not, taste not, handle not;" it required of them
expensive sacrifices, and a costly and painful service; it was attended with
the most fearful threatenings, if any man brake Moses law, (...) under two or
three witnesses; and the very spirit they then received, was a spirit of
bondage unto fear: Whereas the gospel dispensation (...) a spirit of
confidence, and under the law of liberty we call upon GOD as Abba Father. By
this law of liberty the professors of the gospel will be judged.

Every man is a rational, and therefore accountable, creature. As a creature he
must needs depend on his Creator, and as a rational creature he must certainly
be accountable for all his actions. Nothing is more evident than that man is
not of himself; and if once we admit that he holds his existence, his faculties
and favors from GOD, that made him, it becomes a very obvious conclusion, that
his Maker must have had some view in giving him existence, and more
understanding than to the beasts of the field, neither can it be a matter of
indifference to him whether man acts agreeably or contrary to his designs. The
Creator of the natural world, is also its moral ruler; and if he is now the
proprietor and ruler of intelligent beings, at some time or other he must also
be their judge.

If GOD had not made his will known unto man, there could have been neither
transgression nor judgment. If it should be said that GOD has not manifested
himself alike unto all men, and that some have much smaller opportunities to
know his will and their duty than others, it is enough to observe, that no man
will be judged by a rule of which it was impossible he should have any
knowledge. Every work and every man will be brought into judgment, and the
judgment of GOD will never be otherwise than according to truth; but those that
never had the law of liberty, will not be judged by that law, and those that
have been favored with the revelation of the gospel will be more inexcusable
than any others, if they neglect the day of their visitation. As many as have
sinned without law, shall also perish without law, and as many as have sinned
in the law, shall be judged by the law. Romans ii:12. All men are under some law,
they feel, they are conscious, that they are so; the thoughts which already
excuse or condemn one another, are an anticipation of a final and decisive
judgment, when every man's reward will be according to his works.

That all those who heard and professed to believe the gospel, will be finally
judged by that, we have the fullest assurance, GOD will judge the secrets of
men by JESUS CHRIST according to his gospel. The word that I have spoken, says
CHRIST, the same will judge them that heard it, on the last day. John xii:48.
It greatly interests us clearly to know what is the import and consequence of
being judged by the gospel ^s a law of liberty; and it contains the following
things,

The general character, all the thoughts, words and actions, together with the
general conduct of all those who professed the gospel, will be brought to the
test, and tried by this rule. Man's own opinion of himself, the good opinion of
others, will here stand him in no stead, his character will not be determined
by his external appearance, but by his inward reality. Man looks on the
outward appearance, but the LORD looks on the heart. 1 Samuel xvii:7. The
self-righteous pharisee will be rejected, notwithstanding his fair appearance
and boasting; the penitent publican will be ^eceived, though he has nothing to
plead but LORD have mercy on me a sinner. The law is spiritual, and no law more
so than the law of the gospel; it requires not merely an external obedience,
but an internal conformity to the will of GOD; it demands truth in the inward
part, it looks not only to (...) are done, but to the principle from which they
flow; we must judge of man's inward disposition by his visible action, but GOD
judges of the actions of men according to their invisible spring; thoughts are
out of the reach of human cognizance, but they are the first object of divine
notice; there is not a word that drops from our tongue but what our judge
hears, whatever we do, or whatever we neglect, is all under his immediate eye,
and he not only attends to our general character, but also to every thought,
word or action, and the prevailing complexion of all these taken together form
our true and real character.

In the judgment, according to this law, our character, words, thoughts and
actions will be brought to the test of this rule, our conduct will be compared
with these precepts, this is the balance of the sanctuary, in which the
professors of the gospel shall be weighed, and as they shall be found approved
or deficient, their case must be determined. Those whose temper and actions
shall be found conformable to the law of liberty, will be acquitted, graciously
accepted, and made ever happy, and those who turned the grace of GOD into
wantonness, and made the liberty of the gospel a cloak for their sins, will be
finally rejected. The gospel informs us, that a day is already appointed for
that purpose; it acquaints us with the person of our judge, and every
circumstance, as well as the rule according to which he will proceed in
judgment. Perhaps on that day when all nations shall appear before the judge,
and he will divide them as a shepherd divides the sheep from the goats,
distinct places will also be allotted to those who are to be judged by natural
conscience and the law of nature, and those who have been favored with a
divine revelation, and especially with the light of the gospel: The people of
Niniveh will arise against empty professors of the gospel, and will condemn
them. Those who have been exalted above others in means and privileges, will
sit proportionably lower than those who have made a better improvement of
lesser means; and notwithstanding the fondest hope and finest profession, it is
a determined rule of the law of liberty, that except our righteousness shall
exceed that of the scribes and pharisees, we shall in no case enter into the
kingdom of heaven.

It deserves our peculiar attention, that the apostle considers the gospel as a
law of liberty, at the same time when he sets it before us as the rule by which
we are to be judged. We are not to imagine because the gospel is a law of
liberty, therefore men will not be judged; on the contrary judgment will be the
more severe against all who have heard and professed the gospel, and yet walked
contrary to its precepts and doctrine. As the transgression of a law of liberty
must be more inexcusable, than the transgression of a law unjust or oppressive
in itself, or even the ceremonial law, which was given only for a certain
period, and to answer temporary purposes, so their judgment and doom must be
proportionably heavier, who have sinned against love and liberty, as well as
against power and justice.

According to this law the fate of men will not only be determined, but
sentence will also be put into execution. GOD sits on the throne of judgment
every day, and judges righteously, but he has moreover appointed a particular
day when he will manifest his power and justice before the whole creation; when
the dead both small and great will stand before GOD; when those that acted
agreeable to the law of liberty, will attain the fullness of glory of the
freedom of the sons of GOD, and when he will also take vengeance on all that
have not known God, and have not obeyed his holy gospel. This naturally leads
to the second thing proposed, to take a nearer view of the importance of the
exhortation, So speak, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law of
liberty.

It seems as though the apostle had an eye to some particular branch of the law
of liberty, i. e. the love which we owe unto our neighbor, and that his design
is to obviate the mistake as though men might be considered as fulfilling the
law of CHRIST, in paying respect to some of its commands and prohibitions, at
the same time that they were entirely regardless of the rest. He assures them,
that whosoever shall keep the whole law, but shall transgress in one point ( e.
g. having respect of persons) "is guilty of all." On this principle the apostle
builds the general exhortation, So speak, and so do, as they that shall be
judged by the law of liberty. This implies:

1. Be thoroughly convinced of the certainty of a judgment to come, and that it
extends to you, to all your thoughts, words and actions. There is not any truth
of greater moment, nor perhaps more easily forgotten. The belief or unbelief of
this important doctrine must have the most sensible effects. All the apostles
frequently put their hearers in mind of a judgment to come; and there is not
any truth more necessary to be frequently inculcated and daily thought on, and
wherever this truth is really believed and felt, it will have a constant and
natural influence on the behavior of those who truly believe it.

2. See to it that in judgment you may stand. All men will be brought into
judgment, but few will be able to stand; none will be excused, or be able to
withdraw, and only those who have acted worthily, will meet with the divine
acceptance. The difference will be amazing and beyond all conception: An
eternity of happiness, which eye has not seen, ear has not heard, and which
never entered into the heart of any man, lies on the one side, and despair,
misery and torment on the other. Those that are able to stand, will meet with
the smiles and approbation of their judge, and to all the rest the king will
say, These mine enemies that would not have me to bear rule over them, bring
them here, and slay them before mine eyes. Those that believe and are convinced
of this awful alternative, should certainly make it their care that they may be
able to stand in judgment; neither should the persuasion of this only influence
their conduct in general, but these words ought to be considered as a rule,
which we ought to have constantly before our eyes in all our discourses and
every undertaking; we should ever so speak, and so act, as they that shall be
judged by the law of liberty.

I shall draw a few inferences, before I conclude with a more particular
address to the worthy Gentlemen at whose request I preach on this occasion.

1. The gospel is a law of Liberty.

A late writer See a tract, entitled, "Chains of slavery." Printed London.
1775.
asserts, Every religion countenances despotism, but none so much as the
Christian. This is a very heavy charge against religion in general, but bears
hardest on the Christian. Whether it proceeds from malice, ignorance, or
misapprehension, it is needless to determine, but if christianity be a law of
liberty, it must be obvious how ill-grounded is such a charge against it. It
cannot be denied but some Christian writers have wrote against the rights of
mankind. All those who stand up for unlimited passive obedience and
non-resistance, may have given but too much cause for such surmises and
suspicions; but the truth is, that both those which make this charge, and those
who gave occasion for it, were alike ignorant of the spirit and temper of
Christianity; and it may well be doubted whether the venders of such odious
doctrines, who foisted tenets, so abominable and injurious to mankind, into the
system of Christian religion, have not done that holy religion greater hurt
under the pretense of friendship and defense than its most barefaced enemies by
all their most violent attacks. Some Christian divines have taught the enormous
faith, that millions were made for one, they have ascribed a divine right to
kings to govern wrong; but what then? Are such abominable doctrines any part of
christianity, because these men say so? does the gospel cease to be a law of
liberty, because some of its professors pervert it into an engine of tyranny,
oppression and injustice.

The assertion, that all religion countenances despotism, and christianity more
than any other, is diametrically opposite to fact. Survey the globe, and you
will find that liberty has taken its seat only in Christendom, and that the
highest degree of freedom is pleaded for and enjoyed by such as make profession
of the gospel.

There are but two religions, which are concerned in this charge; the Jewish
and the Christian. Natural religion writers of this kind I suppose would not
include in their charge; if they do, they set all religion at variance with the
rights of mankind, contrary to the sense of all nations, who are gererally
agreed, that, abstractly of a world to come, religion is of real service and
necessity to mankind, for their better government and order.

As to the Jewish religion, it seems really strange that any should charge it
with favoring despotism, when by one of its express rites at certain times it
proclaimed liberty throughout the land, to the inhabitants thereof. Levit.
xxv:10. It required their kings not to be lifted up in their hearts above their
brethren. Deuteronomy. xvii:20 And the whole system of that religion is so replete
with laws against injustice and oppression, it pays such an extraordinary
regard to property, and gives such strict a charge to rule in justice and the
fear of GOD, and to consider those, over whom they judge, as their brethren,
even when dispensing punishments, and forbids all excess in them, that it is
really surprising any one acquainted with its precepts, should declare it
favorable to despotism or oppression.

The Christian religion, while it commands due respect and obedience to
superiors, no where requires a blind and unlimited obedience on the part of the
subjects; nor does it vest any absolute and arbitrary power in the rulers. It
is an institution for the benefit, and not for the distress, of mankind. It
preaches not only "glory to GOD on high," but also peace on earth, and good
will among men.

The gospel gives no higher authority to magistrates than to be the ministers
of GOD, for the good of the subject. Romans xiii. From whence it must surely
follow, that their power is to edify, and not to destroy: When they abuse their
authority, to distress and destroy their subjects, they deserve not to be
thought ministers of GOD for good; nor is it to be supposed, when they act so
contrary to the nature of their office, that they act agreeable to the will of
GOD, or in conformity to the doctrine of the gospel.

The gospel recommends unto masters to forbear threatenings, and to remember
that they also have a master in heaven; it assures them that the eye of GOD is
equally upon the servant and the master, and that with GOD there is no respect
of persons: It commands masters, from the most solemn considerations, to give
unto servants that which is just and equal; it says to the meanest slave: Art
thou called being a servant, care not for it, but if thou may be made free,
use it rather. 1 Cor. vii:21.

The doctrine of the gospel has that regard to property, that it commands even
soldiers, Do violence to no man, and be content with your wages: Luke iii:14.
-- that a Paul sent back a runaway slave, though now converted, and belonging
to his intimate friend, and at a time when he seems to have stood in real need
of his service, from a delicacy that he would do nothing without the owner's
mind, less his benefit should appear as if it were of necessity, and not
willingly. Philem. 14. From the same spirit of justice a Zacheus, after his
conversion, restored fourfold what before he had taken from any by false
accusation: Surely then the spirit of the gospel is very friendly to the rights
and property of men.

The gospel sets conscience above all human authority in matters of faith, and
bids us to stand fast in that liberty wherewith the Son of GOD has made us
free. Gal. v:1. Freedom is the very spirit and temper of the gospel: He that is
called in the LORD being a servant, is the LORD's freeman. Ye are bought with a
price, be ye not the servants of men. 1 Cor. vii:22 23. At the same time that
it commands us to submit to every ordinance of men, it also directs us to act
as free, and not using liberty as a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants
of GOD. 1 Pet. iii:13-18.

Those therefore that would support arbitrary power, and require an unlimited
obedience, in vain look for precedents or precepts for such things in the
gospel, an institution equally tending to make men just, free and happy here,
and perfectly holy and happy here after.

2. The main design of the gospel is not to direct us in our external and civil
affairs, but how we may at last stand with comfort before GOD, the judge of all.

Human prudence is to be our guide in the concerns of time; the gospel makes us
wise unto salvation, and points out the means to be pursued that it may be well
with us in the world to come. As rational creatures we are to make use of our
reason; as Christians we are to repent and believe the gospel. Motives of a
worldly nature may very properly influence us in our worldly concern, we are
created not only for eternity, but also for time: It is not at all improper for
us to have a due regard for both. The gospel will regulate our desires and
restrain our passions as to earthly things, and will raise us at the same time
above time and sense, to objects of a nature more worthy of ourselves. A due
regard for, and frequent meditation on, a judgment to come, will greatly assist
us in all our concerns; and this very consideration the gospel holds out to us
in the clearest manner. It not only affirms as a truth, what reason and
conscience might consider only as probable, but it takes away as it were the
veil from between us and things to come; it gives us a present view of the
future bliss of saints, and the terrors and despair of sinners; -- rather a
historical account than a prophetic description of all the proceedings of the
dreadful pleasing day; it clearly points our the road to destruction, and the
way to escape; it affords us a plain and general rule to obtain safety and
comfort, when it bids us, So speak, and so do, as they that shall be judged by
the law of liberty.

This general rule may also be of considerable service in extraordinary and
particular cases. It is impossible to provide express directions for every
particular case, and in the course of things circumstances may happen when a
good man may be at a loss to know his duty, and find it difficult so to act as
to obtain his own approbation. There may be danger of going beyond, and danger
in not coming up to, the mark. To act worthy of GOD, who has called us, is the
general rule of the Christian at all times, and upon every occasion, and did we
but always follow this rule, what manner of persons should we then be! But in
cases of intricacy we may still be in doubt what may be most for the glory of
GOD, and most consistent with our duty. Sometimes also our relative duties may
seem to come in competition with one another, and we may hesitate in our own
mind which for the present has the strongest call. We would fain obey our
superiors, and yet we cannot think of giving up our natural, our civil and
religious rights, nor acquiesce in or contribute to render our fellow creatures
or fellow-citizens slaves and miserable. We would willingly follow peace with
all men, and yet would be very unwilling that others should take the advantage
of a pacific disposition, to injure us in hopes of impunity. We would express
duty, respect and obedience to the king, as supreme, and yet we would not wish
to strengthen the hands of tyranny, nor call oppression lawful: In such a
delicate situation it is a golden rule, So to speak, and so to do, as they that
shall be judged by the law of liberty. Nothing has a greater tendency to make
men act wrong than the disbelief of a future judgment, and nothing will more
effectually restrain and direct them than the full persuasion that such an
event will certainly take place: nothing would have a happier tendency to make
us act with prudence, justice and moderation than the firm persuasion that GOD
will, bring every work into judgment, and every secret thing, whether it be
good or bad.

Neither could I think on any direction more applicable to the design of our
present meeting, or which I might more properly recommend to the respectable
Gentlemen, now met together to consult on the recovery and preservation of the
liberties of America, and who chose to begin their deliberations with a solemn
act of worship to almighty GOD who has established government as his ordinance,
and equally abhors licentiousness and oppression; whose singular blessing it is
if subjects enjoy a righteous government, and under such a government lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

You are met, Gentlemen, in a most critical time, and on a most alarming
occasion, not in a legislative capacity, but (while the sitting of the usual
representation is not thought for the king's service, or necessary for the good
of this province) you are chosen by the general voice of this province to meet
on their behalf, to consult on such measures as in our local circumstances may
be most to the real advantage and tend to the honor of our gracious sovereign,
as well as the good and safety of this province and of all this great
continent. For the sake of the auditory, I shall briefly state the immediate
causes that have given rise to this Provincial and a general American Congress,
and then offer such humble advice as appears to me most suitable to our
circumstances.

To enforce some Acts for laying on a duty to raise a perpetual revenue in
America, which the Americans think unjust and unconstitutional, which all
America complains of, and some provinces have in some measure opposed, This
opposition in some provinces consisted in sending the tea on which this duty
was to be paid, back to England, not suffering it to be sold or landed in
others, and in Boston, when they were prevented from sending it back, it was
entirely destroyed, but no person hurt, nor any blood shed.
A fleet and army has been sent to New England, and after a long series of
hardships by that province patiently endured, it is now out of all question
that hostilities have been commenced against them; blood has been shed, and
many lives have been taken away; thousands, never as much as suspected of
having any hand in the action which is made the pretense of all the severity
now used against that province, have been and still are reduced to the greatest
distress. From this other provinces have taken the alarm; an apprehension of
nearer foes, not unlikely to appear as auxiliaries in an unjust cause, has
thrown our neighbors into arms; how far and wide the flame so wantonly kindled
may be permitted to spread, none can tell; but in these alarming circumstances
the liberty of this continent, of which we are a part, the safety and domestic
peace of this province will naturally become a subject of your deliberations;
and here I may well adapt the language of old, There was no such deed done nor
seen from the day that America was first settled unto this day; consider of it,
take advice, and speak your minds. Judges xix:30. I mean not to anticipate and
direct your counsels, but from your desire I should speak on this occasion; I
take it for granted you will permit me to offer such hints as may appear
suitable to the place and design of our present meeting.

In the first place, as there is no evil in a city in which the hand of GOD may
not be seen, so in vain is salvation looked for from the hills and from the
mountains, but can come from him only who has made heaven and earth. This
undoubtedly is a day of trouble, but GOD says to his people, Call upon me in a
day of trouble, and I will deliver thee. Ps. l:15. What nation has GOD so nigh
unto them, as the LORD our GOD is in all things that we call upon him for.
Deuteronomy. iv:7. If this be our first step, if first of all we look unto him from
whom our help comes, we may hope all will be well at last. Let us be
thoroughly convinced of this, we must stand well with GOD, else it can never be
well with us at all; without him and his help we can never prosper. The LORD is
with you, if you are with him; if you seek him, you will find him, but if you
forsake him, you will be forsaken by him. 2 Chronicles. xv:2. If GOD be for us, who
can be against us? if he be against us, who can be for us? Before we think on,
or look any where else, may our eyes be unto GOD, that he may be gracious unto
us. Let us humbly confess and speedily turn from our sins, deprecate his
judgment, and secure his favor. Rent your hearts, and not your garments, and
turn unto the LORD your GOD, for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger and
of great kindness, and repents him of the evil, who knows if he will return
and repent, and leave a blessing behind him, even a meat offering and a
drink offering unto the LORD your GOD. Joel ii:13.14.

Let it be a standing rule with every one that is to sit in council upon this
occasion, so to speak, and so to do, as one that is to be judged by the law of
liberty Let us most carefully avoid every thing that might make us incur the
displeasure of GOD, and wound our own consciences. The effects of your
deliberation may become very serious and extensive, and the consequences
extremely important: Think therefore before you speak, deliberate before you
execute, and let the law of liberty, by which you are hereafter to be judged,
be the constant rule of all your words and actions: Far be it from us to be
reduced under laws inconsistent with liberty, and as far to wish for liberty
without law; let the one be so tempered with the other that when we come to
give our account to the supreme lawgiver, who is the great judge of all, it may
appear we had a due regard to both, and may meet with his approbation.

Such always has been, and such is still, the attachment of America to the
illustrious house of Hanover, that I need not put you in mind of our duty to
the king as supreme. By our law the king can do no wrong; but of his present
Majesty, who is universally known to be adorned with many social virtues, may
we not justly conclude that he would not do any wrong, even though he could.
May we not hope that to the greatness of a monarch, he will superadd the
feelings of the man, the tenderness of a father. May we not hope that when the
truth of things, the tears of his suffering subjects, the distresses caused by
Acts extremely ill advised, once reach his notice, a generous pity will force
his heart, and that pity, when he feels it, will command redress. The heart of
the king is in the hand of the LORD, as the rivers of water, and he turns it
as he pleases; Prove. xxi:1. most earnestly therefore let us pray that in this
great and most important matter also GOD may give unto the king an
understanding heart, that power may be governed by wisdom, and the wheels of
government roll on with justice and moderation.

Should you think that all our present distress is owing to evil counselors,
nothing need to hinder you from praying that GOD would turn their counsels into
foolishness; you may make it your earnest request both in public and in
private, that the wicked being removed from before the king, his throne may be
established in righteousness, that the rod of the oppressor may be broke, and
justice and equity take place of tyranny and oppression.

It may be owing to nothing but the firm attachment to the reigning family that
so many Americans look upon the present measures as a deep laid plan to bring
in the Pretender. Perhaps this jealousy may be very groundless, but so much is
certain, that none but Great-Britain's enemies can be gainers in this unnatural
contest. Were it designed to give the Pretender an opportunity; to raise
divisions in Great Britain, starve the manufacturers, send away troops from
Ireland and Scotland, and breed civil war in America, must all be circumstances
too favorable, and I may say, very tempt^^^ (...)


Never let us loose out of sight that our interest lies in a perpetual
connection with our mother country. Notwithstanding the present unwise and
harsh measures, there are thousands in Great Britain that think with us, and
wish well to the American cause, and make it their own; let us convince our
enemies that the struggles of America have not their rise in a desire of
independency, but from a warm regard to our common constitution; that we esteem
the name of Britons, as being the same with freemen; let every step we take
afford proof how greatly we esteem our mother country, and that, to the wish of
a perpetual connection, we prefer this only consideration, that we may be
virtuous and free The idea of a separation between America and Great Britain is
big with so many and such horrid evils, that every friend to both must shudder
at the thought. Every man that gives the most distant hint of such a wish,
ought instantly to be suspected as a common enemy; nothing would more
effectually serve the cause of our enemies, than any proposal of this kind; all
wise men and all good men would immediately speak, write and act against it;
such a proposal, whenever it should be made, would be an inlet to greater evils
than any we have yet suffered: But what America detests as the greatest evil, a
British ministry has taken the greatest pains to effect; has wasted British
blood and treasure to alienate America and Great Britain; the breach is growing
wider and wider, it is be come great like a sea, every moment is a loss that is
not improved toward bringing about a reconciliation.


Let me entreat you, Gentlemen, think coolly, and act deliberately; rash
counsels are seldom good ones: ministerial rashness and American rashness can
only be productive of untoward compounds; inconsiderate measures, framed on the
other side of the atlantic, are the cause of all our mischiefs, and it is not
in the least probable that inconsiderate measures in America can be productive
of any good. Let nothing be done through strive and vain glory; let no private
resentment or party zeal disgrace your honest warmth for your country's
welfare: Measures determined on by integrity and prudence, are most likely to
be carried into execution by steadiness and moderation. Let neither the frowns
of tyranny, nor pleasure of popularity, sway you from what you clearly
apprehend just and right, and to be your duty. Consider how much lies at stake,
how greatly your religion, your liberty, your property, your posterity, is
interested. Endeavor to act like freemen, like loyal subjects, like real
Christians, and you will so speak, and so act, as they that shall be judged by
the law of liberty. Act conscientiously, and with a view to GOD, then commit
your ways to him, leave the event with GOD, and you will have great reason to
hope that the event will be just, honorable and happy.

And now, Gentlemen, you have the wishes and prayers of every thoughtful
person, that your deliberations may be carried on with candor, unanimity and
prudence, may be blessed to preserve the quietness of this province, and
cooperate in restoring the rights and tranquillity of all America, as well as
promote the prosperity of the whole British empire. This will afford you a
heartfelt satisfaction, and transmit your name to posterity with honor, when
all those who had opposite views, and sought their greatness in the ruins of
others, will be held in abhorrence and detestation.

I have but a few hints to give to my hearers in general.

The times are evil; this is a day of adversity, and in a time of adversity we
ought to consider. It may perhaps soon become impossible, even to the most
indolent, to continue unconcerned, and those that wish no more than to hide
themselves in quiet obscurity, may not always have it in their power to remain
neuter: To know the signs of the time, is a considerable part of human
prudence, and it is a still greater to walk circumspectly, and redeem the time,
because the days are evil. Whatever part you may think yourselves obliged to
take, So speak, and so do, as they that shall be judged hereafter, and judged
by the law of liberty.

In these times of confusion I would press on my hearers a most conscientious
regard to the common lawsof the land. Let our conduct show that we are not
lawless; by well-doing let us put to silence the reproaches of our adversaries.
Let us convince them that we do not complain of law, but of oppression; that we
do not abhor these acts because we are impatient to be under government, but
being destructive of liberty and property, we think them destructive also of
all law. Let us act as free, and yet not make liberty a cloak of maliciousness,
but as the servants of God.

While it is yet peace and quietness with us, let us not think ourselves
inaccessible to the evils which are already come upon others; there are some
evils which we would rather deprecate in private than speak of in public,
against which being forewarned, we should be forearmed; every trifling report
should not alarm us, but it would be folly still greater not to be on our guard
against sudden dangers.

Remember them that suffer adversity, as being yourselves also in the body.
Think on those who are driven from their habitations and all their
conveniences of life, or confined in their own houses by an enraged soldiery,
to starve in their own country, in the midst of property and plenty, not
permitted to enjoy their own, and distressed in every connection, and this
without any cause alleged against numbers of them, without complaint, suspicion
or a legal trial: The like was never heard since the cruel siege of
Londonderry, and is a species of cruelty at which even that hardhearted bigot
James II. relented.

Above all, let every one earnestly pray that HE that is higher than the
highest would soon make a righteous end of all their confusion; that he would
incline the king to hear the cries of his subjects, and that no more innocent
blood may be shed in America.

One thing more: Consider the extreme absurdity of struggling for civil
liberty, and yet to continue slaves to sin and lust. Know ye not to whom ye
yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are, to whom ye obey,
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness. Romans vi:16.
Cease from evil, and do good, seek peace, and pursue it, who will hurt you
while you follow that which is good; become the willing servants of the LORD
JESUS CHRIST, hearken to and obey the voice of his gospel; for where the spirit
of the LORD is, there is liberty; and "if the Son makes you free, THEN, and not
till then, "SHALL YOU BE FREE INDEED."

From the similarity of the subject, an extract from another sermon is added:
THE question between Great Britain and America, which has already been
productive of such alarming effects, is, Whether the parliament of
Great Britain have any power or authority to tax the Americans without their
consent? Every impartial man will allow that this is the foundation of the
whole dispute. It is evident that in this question conscience is deeply
interested, and in this view it becomes a very proper subject for the pulpit.
If any thing is required of subjects which in conscience they are bound to pay,
give or do, the refusal of it is not only a crime against the state, but also a
sin against GOD: I think it therefore not only not improper, but my duty, to
point out unto my hearers such hints and precedents as may illustrate this
matter from the word of GOD.

The case I would state thus, Whether any duty or impost supposed to be laid on
in an illegal manner, and inconsistent with natural and civil rights, from
motives of conscience ought nevertheless to be paid? and to elucidate this, I
observe, the general rule is this: Render therefore to all their dues; tribute
to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear, honor to
whom honor. Romans xiii:7. There is something due to government which cannot be
refused without injustice, and more than which cannot be demanded without
tyranny and oppression. When our LORD was asked, What think thou, is it
lawful to give tribute unto Caesar or not? he gave a very wise and general
answer, Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Cesar's, and unto GOD
the things which are GOD's. Matthew. xxii:17.21. We are informed, that upon
another occasion he paid the tribute-money, and that, after asking Peter of
whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute? and Peter answering of
strangers, he remarked, "Then are the children free;" and yet nevertheless, as
a voluntary act, ordered Peter, Take a piece of money, and give unto them, for
me and thee. Matthew. xvii:25-27.

On these passages I shall make but two remarks, which are very obvious, and
will apply themselves: 1. How far soever the power of the magistrate and the
submission of the subject may be extended, it is plain that by these rules and
precedents property is left to the subject. To render, give, or pay, supposes
property. Those who may be justly deprived of what they possess, at another's
pleasure, cannot be said to be possessed of any property; and therefore they
can neither give, pay, or render; they are themselves the property of another.
I would further observe, 2. That from the answer our LORD gives unto Peter, it
appears that sovereigns ought to treat their subjects as children, and that
children ought to be free. O the free and benevolent spirit of the gospel!

By some it is urged, that sovereigns have a right to take away what their
subjects possess, at pleasure. This right they ground on the following passage,
1 Samuel viii:10 -- This will be the manner of the king that shall reign over
you, he will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his chariots,
and to be horsemen, and some shall run before his chariots -- and he will take
your daughters, to be confectionaries and to be cooks and bakers; and he will
take your fields, and your vineyards, and your oliveyards, even the best of
them, and give them to his servants; and he will take the tenth of your seed,
and of your vineyards, and give to his officers and his servants; and he will
take your menservants and your maidservants, and your goodliest young men,
and your asses, and put them to his work; he will take the tenth of your sheep,
and ye shall be his servants. Here then, according to some, is the warrant of
divine right for arbitrary power. Those however, who found authority to do what
is wrong in a representation, meant to deter the Jews from putting it in any
man's power to treat them thus, would do well to consider that from the text
itself it plainly appears, this was not to be considered as a right, but as a
grievance, which their folly had brought on themselves. You shall cry in that
day, and the LORD will not hear you. Your misery will be the effect of your own
folly. We have another precedent, which seems somewhat in point: Rehoboam was a
foolish son of a wise father; it seems he laid a tribute on Israel: (2 Chronicles.
xiii:18.) The people applied unto him, presented their grievances, and prayed
redress: Thy father made our yoke grievous, now therefore do thou make it
lighter, and we will serve thee. This the council of the old men advised him to
do; they said, If thou will speak good words unto them, they will be thy
servants forever. But more violent counsels prevailed, the acts were enforced,
I will add to your yoke, I will chastise you with scorpions. This the deluded
monarch probably considered as firmness and dignity; but what was the event?
When all Israel saw that the king hearkened not unto them, they said, What
portion have we in David? to your tents, o Israel! now see to thine own house
David. A kind and just answer might have prevented this; and what did the king
himself gain? "The king sent Adoram, who was over the tribute, and all Israel
stoned him, that he died, and the king fled to Jerusalem" Thus far tyranny was
very unsuccessful. But this is not all; when the army of Judah was now ready to
fall upon the ten tribes, GOD himself interposed, Ye shall not fight against
your brethren, the children of Israel; return every man to his house, for this
thing is of me. Thus this matter ended in a separation of the two kingdoms, and
this very Roboam himself afterward became a servant, and tributary to the king
of Egypt.

I leave the application of all these things to those whom it may concern; but
would further observe,

Every government must be supported, and what is necessary for the support of
government, is also justly due, and ought to be GIVEN with readiness and
willingly.

Those that think their superiors have a right to take away their property, or
any part of it, without their consent, upon their own principle are guilty of
sinful resistance and rebellion, if they do not comply with whatever government
may demand. King James the First asked the bishops Nelson and Andrews, whether
he had a right to raise money on his own authority? The former affirmed it,
because your Majesty is the anointed of the LORD, and the breath of our
nostrils. The latter replied, I think your Majesty has a good right to my
brother Nelson's money.
Those that think, every government has no further right than according to the
laws and constitution of its respective country, should be very careful
nevertheless to obey not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake, and
under whatever grievances they may labor never to make use of any methods of
redress unjust in themselves, nor of any remedies that may be worse than the
disease.

A SHORT AND CONCISE ACCOUNT OF THE STRUGGLES OF SWISSERLAND FOR LIBERTY.
TO a benevolent mind taking a survey of the globe, it must be a very
melancholy consideration that liberty, which is the birthright of man, is still
confined to a few small spots of our earth: All Asia and Africa are out of the
question; in the southern hemisphere of America it is unknown, and astonishing
pains are now taken to drive it out of this northern Continent In Europe
Great Britain is commonly viewed as the seat of it; but if the conjecture of
the bishop of St. Asaph be not void of foundation, even there it has a sickly
countenance; SWISSERLAND, by that great man, is the only country which deserves
to be called free, and even Voltaire pronounces it happy. By what means the
Swiss recovered and preserved their freedom, is the subject of the following
narrative.

The three countries (usually called cantons) of Ury, Switz and Underwalden,
which first entered into a confederacy that laid the foundation of the republic
of Swisserland, are but of small extent, all the three cantons together do not
exceed seventy miles in length and about thirty in breadth; they are also very
thinly inhabited, owing to their situation among the Alps, many of which are
covered with everlasting snow, and inaccessible to man or beast; it is usually
said of the climate, that there is nine months winter and three months cold. At
the time of their revolution the country was not nearly so well cultivated as
it is at present, and at present all the inhabitants of the three cantons,
capable of bearing arms, are not estimated above 12,000 men; a small number to
make head with, as they did, against the very powerful house of Austria. Power
and number do not prove the justice of any cause, and it is more honorable to
be defeated in the cause of virtue and (...), than to erect trophies to
injustice and oppression. All Swisserland was subjugated by Julius Caesar; it
became afterward subject to different Lords, and had a nobility which treated
their inferiors with great petulancy and violence. The three cantons chose
Rudolph of Habsburg to be their captain, and on his being chosen Roman emperor
in 1273, the nobility complained against these countries before him, and called
them rebellious; but when the emperor saw their charters, he acquitted them,
confirmed their privileges, and gave them governors that were not inhabitants
of these countries, and were not to tyrannize over, but only from time to time
to come among them, to administer justice. Thus the country was quiet,
submitted to their governors; and had they been always treated with equal
justice, probably would have continued so to this day, but Nullum violentum
diuturnum, "Nothing that is violent lasts long."

After the decease of Rudolph of Habsburg, Adolphus of Nassau was chosen
emperor; he confirmed their liberty, and they continued in submission to his
government. Adolphus was slain in battle by the own hands of his rival,
Albertus of Austria, son of Rudolph; and it has been observed that neither this
Albertus, nor any that were active against Adolphus, died of a natural death.

Albertus of Austria, having a numerous family of children, projected the
establishment of a new principality in Swisserland which then was a part of the
empire; many imperial fiefs he apropriated to the house of Austria, purchased
some jurisdictions which belonged to monasteries, and having made himself
master of some strong places, he thought to subdue these three cantons also,
and sent ambassadors to Ury, Switz and Underwalden, requesting that they would
surrender themselves to him and the house of Austria, under many very fair
promises. When his ambassadors arrived among them, the cantons produced their
charters, and also sent an embassy to the emperor, praying that they might be
confirmed, and that they might not be torn from the empire, and put in
subjection to the then new house of Austria. Instead of being gratified, as
they had hoped, they were not only refused, but the emperor also would not take
the least notice of their complaints against their governors, but appointed two
new governors over them, which from day to day proceeded to new and unheard of
acts of violence. The design was, by such means to excite an insurrection among
the inhabitants, and then, under pretense of being rebellious, to make war upon
them, and entirely to bring them under the yoke. These are the express words of
an historian, and in different times and places, tyranny makes use of the same
arts. The tyranny and cruelty of these governors continually increased. At that
time there lived in Underwalden an aged and honest inhabitant, whose name was
Henry de Melchdall. The governor ordered two oxen to be taken from his plough,
without even charging him with any crime; the honest man wanted at least to
know what had been his fault; but the governor's officer answered it was the
will of the governor that henceforth the peasants should work in the plough
themselves, and took away the oxen by force; the son of the farmer, enraged at
so much injustice and violence, gave the officer a blow with a stick, and
wounded his finger, and then fled the country immediately The governor put his
aged father in prison, and wanted to oblige him to deliver up his son; he
excused himself that he did not know what became of him, but the governor
ordered both his eyes to be put out, and took from him all he had.

The castle of Rozberg was occupied by the governor's deputy of the family of
Wolfenshiess, the same seeing a very handsome woman, wanted to constrain her to
gratify his brutal lust; under some pretense she withdrew, met her husband, who
being informed of it, gave the governor a back-stroke with an axe, and also
immediately fled the country.

Werner Stauffacre, a respectable man in the canton Switz, was building a
handsome new house; the governor riding by, enquired of him whose it was?
Stauffacre, aware of some design if he should dare to call it his own, replied,
My noble governor, the house belongs to my king and you, and it is my fief.
This frustrated the governor's design, but he told him withal, I will not
suffer it that peasants should build houses for themselves as though they were
lords, I will bridle you more closely.

Governor Grisler, of Ury, could not help perceiving the dissatisfaction of the
people, and that he might discover the malcontents, he placed a hat on a pole
at Altdorff, and gave strict orders, that every one should pay that hat the
same honor as if he were present himself; he also placed some spies to observe
who should pay obeisance to his hat and who should neglect it. This insolence
wrought so effectually on the people, that even some of the nobility declared
it impossible any longer to endure such tyrannical proceedings. Among numbers
that thought so in their hearts, there was one that had courage to refuse
submission to such a badge of abject slavery. William Tell passed several times
without pulling his hat; he was informed against, and after some imprisonment,
condemned, at the distance of one hundred and twenty yards, with his bow and
arrow to take off an apple off the head of a beloved child of his, about six
years old, and threatened with death in case he missed. No remonstrance
availed, his life and that of his son was threatened in case of refusal; the
afflicted parent most tenderly took his leave of his child, the spectators
melted in tears, but he providentially hit the apple without doing any injury
to his child. This happened October 30, 1307; and romantic as it may seem,
public monuments to this day confirm the truth of the fact The people
congratulated Tell on his success; but the governor observing he had another
arrow in his quiver, asked him the meaning. Tell at first excused himself with
the common custom of marksmen: but this not satisfying the governor, and he
solemnly promising him his life if he should declare the truth, Tell very
frankly said, that had he had the misfortune to have done any injury to his
child, he was determined to send the next arrow to the heart of the tyrannical
governor. The governor condemned him to imprisonment for the rest of his days.
Tell was permitted to bid farewell to his family, and then bound to be carried
across a lake to the place of his captivity, and in the same vessel the
governor also passed with his attendants. The lake of Lucerne is very liable to
severe and sudden tempests, a storm of this kind brought them all into the most
immediate danger: in this extremity Tell, who was known to be a good pilot, was
ordered to take the helm, and he labored so effectually that he brought the
vessel near the shore; which he had no sooner effected, than he jumped out, and
pushed the vessel off. The governor, with great difficulty, landed at some
distance, but in the way to his castle he was waylaid by Tell in a narrow road,
who placed the reserved arrow in his heart that he instantly fell dead from the
horse; and Tell had time to fly to some of his friends and give them notice of
this event. These were Werner Stauffacre, Walter Furst and Arnold de Melchdall;
these were partly sorry to hear of this event, as it had been agreed upon to do
nothing before the first of January, 1308, when an attempt to recover liberty
was to be made by the three cantons at once; they apprehended the killing of
the governor before they were ready to follow the blow, would frustrate their
attempt, and bring matters to a crisis before they were prepared; but tyrants
frequently hasten their own doom by their own measures.

The oppressive governors were possessed of three castles, and unless these
were reduced, the oppression must become every day more intolerable: One of the
confederates had an amorous connection with a servant-maid in the castle of
Rozberg; she, as usual, furnished him with means of entering, and he introduced
twenty of his friends, who seized the castle and the governor without
difficulty. The castle at Sarnen was taken by another stratagem: It was
customary on new year's day to bring presents to the governor; twenty
confederates accordingly appeared at the castle gates early in the morning, and
made the governor the usual compliments, armed with nothing but long staves;
the governor was just agoing to mass, and as he saw them without arms, ordered
them to carry their gifts into the castle. They had no sooner entered, but they
fixed irons which they had concealed to their sticks, made prisoners of the
garrison, and the castle was demolished. The governors betook themselves to
flight, and nobody offered to pursue them. Thus in one day all the strong holds
were taken and destroyed, and the next day the three cantons solemnly swore to
each other for the space of ten years: This small beginning laid the foundation
of the republic of Swisserland, which has maintained its freedom and
independency until this time, and nearly survived the liberty of most states of
Europe.

The emperor Albert had now obtained his wish, viz. a pretext to reduce the
cantons by open war, under pretense of rebellion. He immediately repaired to
Baden, stopped all commerce with these three cantons, and ordered his vassals to
declare war against them; but while he meditated war against an oppressed
people, he was himself murdered by his nephew, whose inheritance he unjustly
detained from him; his murderer hoped to find a place of retreat among these
cantons, but the Swiss, zealous for their liberty, were incapable to secure it
by giving an asylum unto criminals; his widow was so bent upon avenging the
death of her husband, that she took no measures against the Swiss, who had
resisted the oppressions of their tyrannical governors.

Leopold, the son of Albert, when he came of age, determined to make war
against the three cantons, and collected an army of 20,000 men for that
purpose; his plan was to attack the confederates the 15th of November, 1311, at
a place called Morgarden, situate between a lake and a mountain. In expectation
that the inhabitants of Underwalden would come to the assistance of the
confederates, the Count of Strasberg and the city of Lucern were to invade the
cantons at the same time and at two different places. At dinner he asked the
opinion of his jester, who replied, All advise how to enter into the country,
it seems to me necessary to consider how to come out again. His advise was
despised, but verified by the event. A brave and virtuous people may be
attacked, but woe to tyrants that cannot retreat.

The plan was exactly followed; Leopold made a false attack at Arth, and
perhaps the confederates would have placed all their little force there, if
they had not received an information to "beware at Morgarden." To that place
the cantons Ury and Underwalden sent 700 men, and the canton Swiss an equal
number, who were posted on a mountain called the Saddle. On the day appointed
the duke of Austria advanced at the head of his cavalry, his troops marched in
great confidence, " sure to obtain an easy victory upon peasants, badly armed,
and without military discipline:" Accordingly they proudly pressed into a
defile, when they were stopped by 50 men, who had been banished the cantons for
crimes, and whom, notwithstanding their request, the confederates would not
think worthy to fight for liberty, even upon this pressing occasion. These men,
however, by generously exposing themselves for their country, hoped to deserve
the pardon of former crimes, they posted themselves on a very steep hill, above
a narrow path, where the Austrian army could not march above two men abreast;
they suffered them very quietly to advance, but when a considerable number were
now engaged in these narrow roads, they sent such a shower of stones and rolled
large pieces of timber among the Austrian cavalry, that they were soon put in
confusion; which the Swiss no sooner perceived, than they fell upon them with
such fury, that they were obliged to retreat toward the plain; to gain ground
to form the order of battle, the infantry opened their ranks, to let the
cavalry pass; at this moment the confederates broke in upon them, and standing
on rising ground, their halbards did most dreadful execution. A cotemporary
author says, it was not a fight but a massacre. The prince lost near 1500 of
his horse, the loss of the infantry could not be ascertained, but 52 men from
Zuric, then in the interest of Austria, were all found slain in a heap; the
loss of the confederates was incredibly trifling: Meanwhile the count of
Strasberg, with 4000 men had also invaded Underwalden, who send to their
friends at Morgarden, and 400 of the victorious Swiss instantly fled to their
relief; they came up with a body of their own people, with whom they attacked
the count, who seeing colors among them that had been at Morgarden, judged his
master was defeated, and so fled. The Swiss killed about 300 of his men in the
retreat. After this battle gained, the three cantons entered into a perpetual
alliance, which no power has since been able to break, and which heaven has
remarkably preserved.

One of the next greatest battle the Swiss fought in defense of their liberty,
was in the year 1386. Leopold, duke of Austria* personally repaired to
Swisserland, in order to carry on the war with greater vigor. The duke had
resolved to lay siege to Sempach: the confederates had intelligence of it, and
both opposite armies arrived before this little town the very same day. The
Austrian advanced guard consisting of about 1400 men, committed all manner of
violence on their territory: One of their officers mounted a cart loaded with
halters, and threatened to hang all the inhabitants before sunset. The
Austrians insulted the Swiss, it being in the time of haymaking, they came so
near the walls to speak with them, and desired they would send dinner and wages
to their mowers. The Swiss replied, it was not the custom of the Swiss to pay
wages till they were earned, and that they would prepare a dinner for them,
that many spoons should drop out of their hands. The duke's army consisted of
about 4000 picked men, and among them many princes and noblemen, armed from
head to foot. The confederates were about 1300 men, badly armed, and all on
foot; they had no arms but halbards, and fastened pieces of wood on their arms,
to fend off and break the blows of the enemies; their order of battle was very
close, and represented an angle, one soldier was followed by two, two by four,
and so on; in this order this handful of men courageously advanced against the
enemy. Before they begun the engagement, as was usual with them, they fell down
to prayers which made the duke's jester say, Leopold, my countrymen (for he was
a Swiss) have all lift up their hands, and sworn to almighty GOD, to kill thee.
An Austrian officer, observing their undaunted countenance, advised to delay
the battle till next day* but a nobleman declared, He would deliver that
handful of boors before supper into the hands of the duke roasted or boiled, as
he should best like them. The nobility was so eager to engage, that they
dismounted, gave their horses into the care of their servants, and would not
suffer any but noblemen to share in the honor of the day. It happened that a
young nobleman, in cutting off the long point of his shoe (as all the rest did)
wounded his toe which made him cry, whereupon the nobility ordered him out of
the rank, as unworthy to fight His brethren were all slain, and his life was
saved. The battle begun, the superior power of the Austrians in men and arms
soon appeared, 60 confederates were killed before they could make the least
impression on their enemy in this distress a brave knight of the (...)
sacrifice his life for his country, he accordingly advanced boldly, and with
his arms grasped and bent down as many of their long pikes as he could hold,
the others pressed after him with irresistible fury, broke in with their
halbards upon the Austrians, and made dreadful havoc.

It is said, that before the engagement they proclaimed that every man that
thought himself insufficient to encounter ten Austrians, might withdraw, and
that about 300 withdrew accordingly; but when these saw the Austrians order of
battle broke, they hastened to assist their brethren, and the nobility lost
courage, gave way to the Swiss, and many of them, from the heat of the day and
severity of the engagement, were suffocated by the weight of their own armor.
The duke was several times entreated to withdraw, but seeing his banner in
danger, he generously advanced to rescue it, but fell in the attempt. When the
servants, who had been ordered in the rear with the horses saw the defeat of
their masters, they mounted their masters horses, and left their masters to
shift for themselves. It is supposed the loss of the Austrians amounted to
2000. including 667 of the nobility, and among them 350 with crowned caskets.
The Swiss lost about 200, who were all carried to their respective homes. The
third day they permitted the enemy to carry off their dead, among whom the duke
was the principal; he was carried of the field of battle in a great box (still
extant), which, it is said, had been full of halters, to hang the confederates.
The Swiss, in hopes of obtaining peace, were sparing of the blood of the
Austrians, and did not pursue them in their retreat; they had reason to repent
their lenity, but the continuance of the war served only to increase the
victories and fame of the Swiss confederates. The sons of the defeated Leopold
made great preparation for war, and many imperial cities joined with them
against the Swiss; a truce was indeed concluded, which the Austrians badly
kept, and by surprise and secret intelligence made themselves masters of Wesen,
the possession of which laid the whole canton of Glaris open to their ravages.
The Swiss confederates advised that canton to get the best terms possible, but
those proposed by the Austrians were so excessive severe, that that treaty came
to nothing. The Austrians proposed themselves to invade that country with about
8000 men; the inhabitants had cast up an entrenchment, which was guarded by
about 350 men; when the Austrians advanced, these finding themselves to weak to
resist, retreated to a rising ground, the Austrians penetrated into the
country, and burned the village of Nasels, and then attacked the abovementioned
handful of inhabitants, who received them with a shower of stones; the
Austrians having retreated a little to put themselves under cover, the Swiss
seized the favorable moment, and fell upon them with such fury, that after an
engagement of five hours, they were forced to fly. The Swiss pursued and came
up with them at a bridge, where about 700 Swiss had gathered; the Austrians, in
their confusion not aware that the bridge was broke, pressed on* and numbers
were drowned. The loss of the Austrians was computed at 20^0, while that of the
Swiss did not exceed 55 men.

The dukes of Austria again consented to a truce, by which the Swiss were to
remain in possession of all their conquests; this truce in 1314 was renewed for
twenty, and in 1412 for fifty years longer. The Swiss made use of these times
of tranquillity to give stability and perfection to their military disciplines.
In 1393 they agreed upon the following regulations among themselves: 1. No
church nor chapel to be attacked, unless it is made use of as an asylum to the
enemy. 2. No woman to be violated or insulted. 3. Every Swiss engages to
sacrifice his substance and life for his country. 4. No Swiss to forsake his
post, even though wounded. 5. Forbids to pillage without leave of the commander,
and orders the spoils to be equally divided 7. All that send provisions to the
Swiss shall be protected. 8. No canton to make war without the consent of the
rest. 9. No Swiss to take away any thing by violence from another, neither in
time of war nor peace.

The Swiss carried their military discipline to such perfection, that Machiavel
pretends no nations ever exceeded them in that respect, except the Romans.

On the whole then we may conceive the rise and progress of liberty in
Swisserland thus: 1. They had some rights and liberties granted them by
emperors, which do not appear very considerable. 2. The emperors of the house
of Austria endeavored to separate them from the Roman empire, and bring them
in subjection to the then rising house of Austria. 3. Against this the Swiss
remonstrated, petitioned and pleaded their charters. 4. Governors were sent
among them, who were to, and did, oppress them, in order to drive them to some
act of despair, which their enemies intended to term rebellion, and under
pretense of it reduce them by force of arms. This, 5. at length produced
confederacies, first only of three men, by degrees of three small countries,
which increased gradually to thirteen cantons, besides some confederates. 6. To
subdue them, a stop was first put to their trade, and afterward they were
attacked by force. 7. When attacked, they defended themselves with incredible
bravery, and under every possible disadvantage resisted every attack and at
last obliged their enemies not only to desist, but to declare them a free
state; and surrounded by Austria, France and Savoy they have continued free and
brave ever since, and may they do so to the end of time.

The following Tracts are to be had at the Printer:
THE Christian's Hope in Death, exemplified in the last Hours of several pious
Persons. 3 s. A Sermon on the Repeal of the Stamp Act. 6d. A funeral Sermon for
the Rev. Mr. Whitefield. 6d. Pious Advice of an affectionate Father. 3d. A
Sermon on Faith, with an Appendix in Vindication of the Rev. Mr. Harvey. 1 s. A
Letter to the Rev. Mr. Frink, on Fees demanded of Dissenters. 3d. Thoughts when
the day of Judgment may be expected. 9d.
Also to be had:

Great-Britain's Right to tax the Colonies, placed in the clearest Light, by a
Swiss. 1 s.


