THE GENUINE PRINCIPLES OF THE ANCIENT SAXON, OR ENGLISH CONSTITUTION.

Carefully collected from the best AUTHORITIES; With some OBSERVATIONS, on
their peculiar fitness, for the UNITED COLONIES in general, and PENNSYLVANIA in
particular.

By DEMOPHILUS.

All human Constitutions are subject to Corruption, and must perish, unless
they are timely renewed by reducing them to their first Principles.

SIDNEY. Where ANNUAL ELECTION ends, TYRANNY begins.

HISTORICAL ESSAY. PHILADELPHIA: Printed, and Sold, by ROBERT BELL, in
Third-Street. MDCCLXXVI.

INTRODUCTION.
AS, by the tyranny of GEORGE the Third, the compact of allegiance and
protection between him and the good people of this Colony is totally dissolved,
and the whole power of government is by that means returned to the people at
large; it is become absolutely necessary to have this power collected and again
reposed in such hands as may be judged most likely to employ it for the common
good.

IN most states, men have been too careless in the delegation of their
governmental power; and not only disposed of it in a very improper manner, but
suffered it to continue so long in the same hands, that the deputies have, like
the King and Lords of Great Britain, at length become possessors in their own
right; and instead of public servants, are in fact the masters of the public.
Our new Republics should use the utmost caution to avoid those fatal errors;
and be supremely careful in placing that dangerous power of controlling the
actions of individuals, in such a manner that it may not counteract the end for
which it was established.

GOVERNMENT may be considered, a deposite of the power of society in certain
hands, whose business it is to restrain, and in some cases to take off such
members of the community as disturb the quiet and destroy the security of the
honest and peaceable subject. This government is founded in the nature of man,
and is the (...) of civil society; "yet such is the thist of power in most men,
that they will sacrifice heaven and earth to wrest it from its foundation; to
establish a power in themselves to tyrannize over the persons and properties of
others." To prevent this, let every article of the constitution or set of
fundamental rules by which even the supreme power of the state shall be
governed, be formed by a convention of the delegates of the people, appointed
for that express purpose: which constitution shall neither be added to,
diminished from, nor altered in any respect by any power besides the power
which first framed it. By this means an effectual bar will be opposed to those
enterprizing spirits, who have told us with much assurance, that after the
people had made their annual or septennial offering, they had no more to do
with government than their cattle.

A CONVENTION being soon to sit in PHILADELPHIA; I have thought it my duty to
collect some sentiments from a certain very scarce book, entitled an Historical
Essay on the English Constitution, and publish them, with whatever improving
observations our different circumstances may suggest, for the perusal of the
gentlemen concerned in the arduous task of framing a constitution.

"THAT beautiful system, formed, (as Montesquieu says,) in the German woods,
was introduced into England about the year four hundred and fifty." The
peculiar excellence of this system consisted in its incorporating small parcels
of the people into little communities by themselves. These petty states held
parliaments often; for whatever concerned them in common, they met together and
debated in com^^^; and after due consideration of the matter, they called a
vote, and decided the question, by a majority of voices. In these councils
every man had a voice, who had a residence of his own in the tithing, (or
township) and paid his tax and performed his share of the public duties. This
salutary institution, our honorable Conference of Committees has again revived
at their late sitting.

To avoid the tumult, which always must attend the hearing and determining
civil and criminal cases, by a popular tribunal, they had their executive
courts in every township; and still kept the legislative and executive
departments separate, in all cases whatsoever.

AMONG these people we find the origin of the inestimable trial by juries; and
I am much mistaken if our present Justices of the Peace, may not also trace
their derivation from the same salubrious source. The ancient Conservatores,
were to all valuable purposes Justices of the Peace.
However that may be, one thing is certain, that "they founded their government
on the common rights of mankind. They made the elective power of the people the
first principle of the constitution, and delegated that power to such men as
they could best confide in. But they were curiously cautious in that respect,
knowing well the degenerating principles of mankind; that power makes a vast
difference in the temper and behavior of men, and often converts a good man in
private life to a tyrant in office. For this reason they never gave up their
natural liberty or delegated their power for making laws, to any man for a
longer time than one year."

"THE object upon which our elective power acts is remarkably different from
that of the Romans. Theirs was directed to operate in the election of their
chief officers, and particularly their consuls; or those who were vested with
the executive authority whom they changed annually. But the senate where the
principal power in their state was lodged, was a more fixed body of men; and
not subject to the elective power of the people."

"OUR Saxon forefathers almost reversed this principle; for they made their
wittenagemot or parliament, where the principal power was lodged, annually
moveable and entirely subject to the elective power of the people; and gave a
more fixed state to the executive authority. This last they confined within a
certain sphere of action, prescribed by law; so that it could not operate to
the injury of any individual, either in his person or property; and was
controllable in all acts of state, by the elective power which they vested
annually in their wittenagemot, or parliament."

"THE annual exercise of the elective power, was the quintessence, the life and
soul of the constitution; and the basis of the whole fabric of their
government, from the internal police of the minutest part of the country, to
the administration of the government of the whole kingdom. This Saxon
institution, formed a perfect model of government; where the natural rights of
mankind were preserved, in their full exercise, pure and perfect, as far as the
nature of society will admit of."

"It would be something very surprising to find the people of England
continually disputing about the principles and powers, vested in the
constituent parts of their government; did we not know that at this day it
consists of a mixture of the old, or first establishment, and that which took
place at (and since) what is commonly called the conquest, by William the
First. These two forms of government, the first founded upon the principles of
liberty, and the latter upon the principles of slavery, it is no wonder they
are continually at war, one with the other. For the first is grounded upon the
natural rights of mankind, in the constant annual exercise of their elective
power, and the latter upon the despotic rule of one man. Hence our disputants,
drawing their arguments from two principles, widely different, must of course
differ in their conclusions."

"OUR Saxon forefathers established their government in Britain, before the
transactions of mankind were recorded in writing; at least among the northern
nations. They therefore handed down to posterity, the principles of their
government, by the actual exercise of their rights; which became the ancient
usage and custom of the people, and the law of the land. And hence it came to
pass, that when this ancient custom and usage ceased to act, the remembrance of
the custom ceased with it. We may add to this, that, since the conquest, our
arbitrary kings and men of arbitrary principles, have endeavored to destroy the
few remaining records, and historical facts that might keep in remembrance a
form of government so kind, friendly and hospitable to the human species. It is
for these reasons that we have such a scarcity of historical evidence,
concerning the principles and manner of conducting the first establishment of
our mode of government in this kingdom."

"HOWEVER, notwithstanding these difficulties, there are many customs, forms,
principles and doctrines, that have been handed down to us by tradition; which
will serve as so many landmarks, to guide our steps to the foundation of this
ancient structure, which, is only buried under the rubbish collected by time,
and new establishments. Whatever is of Saxon establishment is truly
constitutional; but whatever is Norman, is beterogeneous to it, and partakes of
a tyrannical spirit."

"FROM these sources it is, that I would endeavor to draw the outlines of this
ancient model of government, established in this kingdom by our Saxon
forefathers; where it continued to grow and flourish, for six hundred years;
'till it was overwhelmed and destroyed by William the First, commonly called
the Conqueror, and lay buried under a load of tyranny for one hundred and forty
seven years. When it arose again, like a phoenix from its own ashes in the
reign of Henry the Third, by the assistance of many concurrent causes; but
principally by the bravery of the English people, under the conduct and
intrepidity of our ancient and immortal barons, who restored it, in part, once
more to this Isle. And though much impaired, maimed, and disfigured, it has stood
the admiration of many ages; and still remains the most noble and ancient
monument of Gothic antiquity."

IT was indeed restored in an impaired condition; as a free constitution must
necessarily be, when attempted to be introduced among a people, distinguished
by the odious difference of condition of Lord and Vassal.

THE ENGLISH CONSTITUTION.
The first establishment of our CONSTITUTION, by the SAXONS, to what is
commonly called the NORMAN CONQUEST, under the HEPTARCHY.

"THE first principle of a government that is founded on the natural rights of
mankind is the principle of annual election. Liberty and election are in this
case synonimous terms; for where there is no election there can be no liberty.
And therefore the preservation of this elective power, in its full extent, is
the preservation of liberty in its full extent: and where that is restrained in
any degree, liberty is restrained in just the same proportion; and where that
is destroyed by any power in a state, whether military or civil, liberty is
also destroyed by that power, whether it be lodged in the hands of one man, one
hundred or one thousand."

"IT is reported by historians that our Saxon forefathers had no kings in their
own country, but lived in tribes or small communities, governed by laws of
their own making, and magistrates of their own electing; and further, that a
number of these communities were united together for their mutual defense and
protection. But by what particular bond of union they were united, I know of no
historian, that has given us any information. There were seven tribes of
Saxons, that arrived in Britain about the same time, under so many different
leaders; but as they had all the same intentions so far as to establish the
same form of government, I shall consider them in this respect
indiscriminately."

"THEY first divided the land into small parts, and that divided the
inhabitants upon that land; and made them a distinct and separate people from
any other. This division they called a tithing. Here they established a
government, which was, no doubt the same as that under which they lived in
their Mother Country. They had two sorts of tithings, one called a town
tithing, and the other called a rural tithing. These were governed upon the
same principles, only thus distinguished; as one is expressive of a town having
such a number of inhabitants as to make a tithing of itself; and the other of a
tithing situated in the rural part of the kingdom. Thus they went on, as they
conquered the country, to divide the land, till they had cut out the whole
kingdom into tithings, and established the same form of government in each."

"IN this manner they provided for the internal police of the whole country,
which they vested in the respective tithings, who annually elected the
magistrates that were to administer justice to them, agreeable to the laws and
customs they had brought with them from their Mother Country. And this internal
police was so excellent in its nature, that it has had the encomiums of most
authors of our history."

"THEY had a legislative authority in every tithing, which made laws and
regulations for the good government of the tithing. Besides these, they had a
court of law, whose jurisdiction was confined to the same limits. All which
were created by the elective power of the people, who were resident inhabitants
of the tithing; and the right of election, was placed in every man who paid his
shot and bore his lot. From hence we may easily perceive, that, under the
establishment of these tithings, by reason of their smallness, the natural
rights of mankind might very well be preserved in their fullest extent; as they
could delegate their power by election without any confusion or inconvenience
to the inhabitants."

"THE first connection the tithings had with one another, was to form an
establishment for the military defense of the country. For this end a number of
these tithings were united together, so far as related to their military
concerns. This union necessarily created a larger division of the land, equal
to the number of tithings that were thus united; and this they called a
wapentake or weapontake, and might take in as many tithings as would make a
Brigade under a Brigadier General. Here likewise they established a court of
council and a court of law, which last was called a wapentake court. In the
court of council the chief magistrates of every tithing assembled to elect
officers of the militia to their respective command, and regulate all matters
relating to the militia; in which, every individual tithing was concerned. The
court of law was to enforce these regulations within the jurisdiction." "Let us
now consider the third and last division, which they made of the land. This was
composed of a certain number of wapentakes, united together; which they called
a shire or one complete share or part into which they divided the land. This
division completed their system of internal police; by uniting all the tithings
within the shire into one body, subject to such laws and regulations as should
be made in their shiregemots or shire parliaments; for the benefit and good
government of the shire."

"As this division comprehended many tithings and many people, so it had the
greatest court of council in England except the high court of parliament; and
the chief officer was vested with as high jurisdiction in the shire, as the
king in the kingdom."

"THEY had likewise a court of law, called the shire court; to which. I make no
doubt every man might appeal who thought himself injured by the inferior courts
in the shire. These divisions in the land, are what I call the skeleton of the
constitution which was animated and put in motion by all these establishments."

"WE may consider each shire as a complete government; furnished with both a
civil and a military power within its own jurisdiction."

"LET us now see by what mode of union, these shires became united together
into a kingdom: and it will be found. I apprehend, that they pursued the same
principles, which they had used in every other establishment. That is to say,
wherever a combined interest was concerned and the people at large were
affected by it, the immediate deputies of the people, met together to attend
the respective interests of their constituents, and a majority of voices always
bound the whole, and determined for any measure, that was supposed to operate
for the good of the whole combined body. This meeting of the deputies of the
people, was called by the Saxons the wittenagemote, or assembly of the wise men
of the nation; which composed their national council and legislative authority."

THE ENGLISH CONSTITUTION, Under the MONARCHY.
"I HAVE already remarked that a number of the Saxon tribes, while in their own
country, were united together for their mutual protection and defense. In like
manner was our Heptarchy connected; and their mode of union became a part of
the constitution, when the seven kingdoms united together under one king. The
matter was simply this: one of the seven kings was always chosen generalissimo
over the whole body; and they appointed him a standing council of a certain
number of deputies, from each state, without whose advice and concurrence, it
is probable he could not act."

"HOWEVER I do not mean to make any observation upon the powers vested in this
standing council; but only to point out that body of men as the origin of our
house of lords. Those deputies who composed this great standing council, were
appointed to their trust by the joint consent of the king and parliament of the
little kingdom from whence they were sent. And when Alfred the great, united
the seven kingdoms into one, he undoubtedly, with the approbation of the
people, incorporated this great council as a separate branch of the
wittenagemote or parliament; so that they still continued to be the king's
great council, and a branch of the legislative authority, which they are at
this day. In confirmation of which, it is observable, that the consent of the
parliament continued necessary for creating a baron of the realm about as low
down as Henry the Seventh; which is the only title by which any man can obtain
his seat in our House of Lords; and not as Duke, Marquis, Earl, Viscount, etc."

"IT is needless to mention, that after the union of the seven kingdoms under
Alfred, a reduction of the members to serve in parliament became absolutely
necessary, because it was then impracticable, by reason of their numbers, for
the same members to attend, in one parliament, that used to attend in seven,
without such anarchy and confusion as must counteract the end of their meeting."

"NATURE herself has confined, or limited the number of men in all societies,
that meet together to inform and be informed, by argument and debate, within
the natural powers of hearing and speech. So that the question in this case
must have been how to reduce the representatives of the people in parliament,
to be a convenient number, to transact the business of the nation; and at the
same time, to preserve the elective power of the people unhurt? a question of
no small difficulty to determine, considering the various interests that were
affected by it." And how was this effected?

OUR historian informs us; "they excluded from this parliament, all the
representatives of the rural tithings, as being a body of men the most numerous
of any, considered collectively, and yet elected by the fewest people in
proportion, which, must be very evident, since the rural part of the kingdom
must be more thinly inhabited than the towns. Besides the town tithings or
boroughs, where a great number of inhabitants are collected together, upon a
small compass of ground, were undoubtedly, the most conveniently situated, for
the commodious exercise of the elective power of the people. And the towns,
being few in comparison of the rural tithings, and at the same time dispersed
over the whole country, were best adapted to receive the regulations they
intended to make in their plan of forming the constituent parts of the new
parliament."

"THOUGH the barons of the realm being great freeholders, carried into parliament
the greatest concern for the interest of the rural part of the kingdom; yet not
being elective, they were not such a body of men as the constitution, and the
safety of the inhabitants of the rural tithings required. And therefore, they
constituted shire elections, for two members, to represent the shire in
parliament, and those representatives were the origin of our knights of the
shire."

"The barons of the realm, and the knights of the shires, I consider as two
bodies of men that were substituted, at the establishment of the monarchy,
under Alfred the Great, in place of those representatives that used to serve
under the Heptarchy for the rural tithings. The alteration that was made with
respect to the towns and boroughs was simply this: that all boroughs that used
to send one member to the little parliament, to which they belonged, under the
Heptarchy, should for the future send two to the great parliament of England."

FROM the above concise view of the Saxon affairs, it is plain, that in their
own country, and for many years after they settled in England, they maintained
that natural, wise and equal government, which has deservedly obtained the
admiration of every civilized age and country. In their small republics, they
often met in council upon their common concerns; and being all equally
interested in every question that could be moved in their meetings, they must
of course be drawn in to consider, and offer their sentiments on many
occasions. It is from the prevalence of this custom among the savages, that
they have been enabled to astonish our great lawyers, judges and governors,
commissioned to treat with them, by displays of their sublime policy. By
Alfred's constitution, all occasions for exercising these talents were cut off
from the body of the people: the making and amending of laws, being in a manner
entirely referred to that great deliverer and his sublime council, whose wisdom
and honesty were implicitly confided in by the whole nation; and at the same
time distributive justice, was so uprightly administered by his commissioners of
the peace, that men fell into a political stupor, and have never, to this day,
thoroughly awakened, to a sense of the necessity there is, to watch over both
legislative and executive departments in the state. If they have now and then
opened their eyes, it is only to survey, with silent indignation, a state from
whence they despair of being able to recover themselves. Fixed establishments
on the one hand, rooted habits and prejudices on the other, are not easily got
over Power, like wealth, draws many admirers to its possessor: and though all men
will confess, that, without a check, it is dangerous in any community, they
often flatter themselves, that the rising Augustus, having smiled upon them, in
his early adventures, they (in particular) have nothing to fear from him, and
therefore will not oppose him. For an example of such fatal policy, read the
history of the samed Marcus Tullius Cicero.


THIS Colony, having now but one order of freemen in it; and to the honor of
Pennsylvania, but very few slaves, it will need but little argument to convince
the bulk of an understanding people, that this ancient and justly admired
pattern, the old Saxon form of government, will be the best model, that human
wisdom, improved by experience, has left them to copy.

To effect which,

LET the first care of our approaching Convention be to incorporate every
society of a convenient extent into a Township, which shall be a body politic
and corporate by itself, having power of electing annually by ballot a
town clerk to record all the public proceedings of the township, town council
etc. -- to draw up, sign, and issue warrants by order of the town-council for
calling town meetings, and transact all such public business as the laws of the
colony shall point out as his duty. -- A town council consisting of five or
seven respectable men, the major part of whom shall be a quorum, invested with
full power to manage the affairs and interest of the town; and to order
warrants to be issued for calling annual town meetings on such days as shall be
stated for that purpose, by law, and occasionally, on the petition of ten or
more freemen of the town, setting forth the cause of the requested meeting. --
A town treasurer -- a town sealer of weights and measures -- assessors --
collectors -- overseers of the poor -- constables -- pound keeper -- sealer of
leather -- surveyors of highways -- fence viewers -- gaugers -- and all such
other officers as have been or may be found necessary and shall be instituted
by the present or any future convention appointed to amend the constitution of
this colony.

APPROACHING that gulf, where all former projectors have found their systems
shipwrecked; I shall, with becoming diffidence, propose a method of conducting
elections, which I presume will be sound a considerable improvement upon
Harrington's plan.

AFTER seating all the qualified electors in pews or squares by themselves, let
them be numbered, and a box handed round to receive nomination tickets for the
officers to be chosen. These tickets being sorted and numbered, let the clerk
enter the names of the proposed candidates; beginning with his, who has the
highest number of tickets; and thus proceed 'till all are entered. Where there
are ties, let one ticket of each be taken and shaken in a hat, to be drawn out
in fair lot and registered. Then in this order let the name or names, being
first read over distinctly, be proposed by the Moderator, and balloted for by
the bean; and if the first name fails of a majority of yeas, let the next in
course be put, 'till the choice is made.

To render this mode of voting as fair and convenient as possible, let beans,
or balls of opposite colors, be wrapped in small pellets of the same sort of
paper, and one of each sort served to every voter. By opening the paper a
little, the elector sees the color; returns the paper to its former condition,
and drops which he pleases in the bag, first holding it up between his thumb
and finger, that the collector may see there is but one; by proceeding in this
manner, a corrupt influence can hardly be exercised; which cannot be said of
the common custom of balloting. Besides very little writing is needful: and
when the whole meeting is told that white is yea and black nay, every one is
alike knowing in the exercise of his elective power, without having occasion to
recur to any man for advice or assistance.

FOR the first election of a governor, deputygovernor, secretary etc. it may be
well for the Convention, to send out a nomination to the respective towns or
districts; as the present urgency of public affairs requires that no time be
lost 'till an established government be erected

FOR the future, as all debates will undoubtedly be held in public, the
consideration of warlike matters being best managed by Committees, the body of
the people will soon become acquainted with the true characters of the
delegates, and will continue or withdraw their confidence accordingly.

THE judges of the supreme judicatory should be nominated by the Governor and
executive council, and balloted for by the Assembly.

THE Conservatores, or justices of the peace should, according to ancient
custom be again elected by the districts; and to carry the salutary practice
throughout, the justices thus chosen, should, soon after their election, meet
at the county town, and ballot for the judges of the county court, the clerk
and solicitor for the peace, in the county. This I conceive the proper title of
the officer lately called King's Attorney.


ALL judiciary officers should have moderate salaries; and that they might be
encouraged to apply their minds to gain a thorough knowledge of their important
business, they should have in their commissions, an estate for life, provided
they did not forfeit it by misbehaviour.

JUDGES of the probate of wills, registers of conveyances, deputy-coroners, and
officers of such importance to the people, should be established in every
convenient district; it being a great hardship, for people in narrow
circumstances, to travel far, to have business of so pressing a nature
performed for them.

SHERIFFS, coroners, county treasurers, and all such county officers, can be
elected no other way, with so much convenience, as to ballot by ticket, in each
district, and to send the tickets to the townsmen of the shire-town by a sworn
officer, under the seals of the respective moderators, where the votes are
taken. And should the tickets, when sorted and numbered, fail to afford any one
name, balloted for, a clear majority of votes, that is, that one half, more by
one vote, for some certain person, than all the rest; the bench of justices for
the whole county being for that purpose summoned by the clerk of that township,
should meet, and for that year, supply the place of the officer, thus failing
of appointment, by nomination and ballot as before described.

A STANDING grand jury, conducing much to the peace and good order of society,
twenty four members for each county should be annually chosen, in the
respective districts, as the representatives; having proper regard to the
proportion belonging to each district, to serve for the whole year, and watch
over the behavior of the people.

TRAVERSE juries, should be drawn from a box, furnished annually, with the
names of all nonexempt freeholders, written each fairly on a ticket, shaken
together, and taken by lot.

JURORS serving one year, should be exempt the two following.

NOTWITHSTANDING it may be difficult to find men properly qualified to sustain
every office proposed to be established in each district; yet the electors
should be supremely careful, never to heap offices or indeed confer more than
one on the same person. No governor, counselor, representative, sheriff,
coroner, attorney at law, or clerk of the peace should ever be a justice of the
peace. Neither, should any one in the executive departments, civil or military,
have a seat in the legislature.

SALARIES and fees ought to be competent: that able men may not be deterred
from accepting them, nor covetous men conceive them a bait. The latter
condition of salaries has been the evident ruin of England; while those
Commonwealths who have preserved a strict economy in that respect, continue
happy and flourishing.

"IF we were to select the attributes of good government, we should find them
to consist in wisdom and justice. And if we could divide those virtues, from
all bad qualities, in men, and place such men, and such only, to rule over us,
we should establish an heaven upon earth. The power of election which our
government has diffused through the whole nation, will always produce this happy
effect, when left to operate according to its genuine principles. For by
dividing the country into small parts, as our tithings were, the character of
every man, that was fit to bear an office, was well known amongst his
neighbors. And therefore, when the choice of an officer to preside over them
was their object of election, the concurrent sentiments of an uninfluenced
majority, of a multitude of people, would naturally fall upon those men only,
who were most eminent for their wisdom and justice."

THE best constructed civil government that (...) was devised, having but a
poor chance for duration, unless it be defended by arms, against external force
as well as internal conspiracies of bad men, it will be the next concern of the
convention, to put the colony militia on the most respectable footing.

THE Militia is the natural support of a government, founded on the authority
of the people only.

AND to render both the people and the government, perfectly free from any
jealousy of each other, it seems proper that the associators should have the
choice of all officers immediately commanding them, inclusive of their
respective captains -- that deputations from a convenient number of companies,
consisting both of officers and privates, should ballot for their field
officers, and that the legislature should appoint every general officer.

AND at length, to come to that dangerous, but necessary engine of state, a
standing army, whose operations must be conducted with all possible secrecy and
dispatch; and for that reason, must be entrusted in few hands; I would propose
that a committee of three gentlemen be chosen by joint ballot of the governor,
council, and assembly, to be called the committee of war; and to have the
conducting of all military affairs, under the direction of the governor and
privy council, to whom in matters of great importance, they should always have
recourse: but being competent in lesser matters, business would be less subject
to delay. This committee being the joint choice of the whole legislature, and
by them removeable annually, or at any time, on conviction of misbehaviour,
would have a sufficient confidence placed in them, and yet no power that might
become dangerous to the liberty of the people.

WHILE all kinds of governmental power reverts annually to the people, there
can be little danger of their liberty. Because no maxim was ever more true than
that, WHERE ANNUAL ELECTION ENDS, SLAVERY BEGINS.

HAVING, in as brief and particular a manner as I was able, in the very short
time allotted me, deduced the general outlines of a free government from the
purest fountain yet known to man; it may not be uninteresting to give a short
extract of the history of

The destruction of the Saxon mode of government by a combination of the clergy
with William the bastard, duke of Normandy.

"BEFORE I proceed to observe the destruction that was made in the
constitution, or mode of government, by the fatal union of the church with
William of Normandy, I must not forget to take notice, that I have not given
the clergy a place, in the Saxon parliaments; because they were foreign to the
original institution, and only grafted themselves upon it, after it was
established in England. But as they afterward obtained a considerable share,
both in the legislative authority and the administration of government, it may
not be amiss to give some account how they came by it."

"THE Roman Pontiff had already extended his plan of church power to a great
degree; and the nature of the government introduced into Europe, by the
northern nations, greatly contributed to his success. All history is full of
the dreadful consequences, that have attended the baleful influence, which
every religious hierarchy has always had upon the bulk of mankind. And a
government founded upon the elective power of the people, where their favor was
the high road to riches, power and grandeur, gave a fine opportunity to such an
artful designing set of men by their intrigues and influence, to procure
themselves or their devotees to be elected into the chief magistracy of the
country divisions. But this means they possessed themselves, in a great measure
of the legislative authority; and consequently became, in proportion, the
masters of the state. For whoever is master of the legislative authority in any
state, is undoubtedly master of that state."

"HAVING thus taken possession, as it were of the mansion, they were not long
before they began to plunder it. However they first established, and secured
the power of the church, by a variety of laws, made in her favor; and defended
them by every ecclesiastical establishment, that papal cunning could invent. So
that they were now prepared to receive, in the name of the church, all the
riches, honors and power, which they could by any means obtain. And what is
more, they knew too how to keep them when they had obtained them. For according
to their maxim, whatever was given to the church, was given to God, and
therefore was never afterward subject to be taken away by any earthly power
whatever."

"THUS they endeavored to provide against all revolutions in the state, that
the property of the clergy might be safe, under the name of the church. Upon
this ground, the clergy have grafted themselves upon every state in Europe. And
as they are plants that will grow in any soil, they have taken such deep root,
that scarce any state, except Holland, has been so unfriendly to their
vegetation, as to exclude them from having some share in government; though
they have no more business with ours, as a separate body of men, than the
company of apothecaries or parish clerks."

"THE church continually acquiring riches and power, and never discharging
either, it must follow that the clergy would, in a short time, be the richest
and most powerful body in any state where they were thus established. Such was
the situation of this kingdom, at the death of Edward the confessor; when
England may be said to be governed by the power, and influence of the clergy.
And we shall see, presently, how these shepherds betrayed their flocks, and
surrendered them to the Norman tyranny."

"UNDER all tyranny, whether of kings, or priests, or both, it is the people
who are to be made the sacrifice; it is the people who are to be plundered of
their property; it is the people who are to wear the yoke of slavery; it is
they who are to be made the hewers of wood and drawers of water. But so long as
the English government continued upon the original principles, upon which it
was founded; and the people annually exercised their elective power; so long it
was out of the power, either of the king or the clergy to commit any acts of
violence, with impunity."

"INDEED the clergy might recommend, and the people might consent to many
things, that were wrong, and even ruinous in their consequences; yet the latter
had always in their own hands, a correcting remedy for all their errors. It was
this correcting power in the people, that hung, like a millstone, over the
pride, and riches of the clergy; and made them apprehensive that, at some time
or other, it would crush them to pieces; and put an end to all their schemes of
authority riches and grandeur."

"THE parliament in the reign of Edward the confessor, had given such a
specimen of their correcting power, as was enough to shake the foundation of
the papal chair; and that was by banishing Robert, Archbishop of Canterbury, as
an incendiary and fomentor of divisions, between the king and his subjects, and
appointing one Stigand, Archbishop in his room. By this they saw there was only
one way to avoid the danger, and preserve and extend their tyranny over the
people; and that was to destroy the elective power, and establish an arbitrary
government in the state. This, they were so bold as to attempt, and so happy as
to see effected by William the Bastard duke of Normandy; who in the year one
thousand and sixty six, put an end to the Saxon mode of government, which had
subsisted six hundred years from its first establishment."

What is commonly called the conquest by William the first.

"WE are now come to that period of the English history, which contaminated the
purity of the English constitution, or mode of government, with a despotic
spirit, which time has not been able totally to eradicate."

"AFTER the death of Edward the confessor, there were two candidates for the
crown of England, which had always been elective, and continued so to this last
Saxon king. The one was Harold, an Englishman of great natural abilities, much
merit, and vastly beloved by the people; who had been elected chief magistrate
of three shires, Kent, Sussex and Surry, at the death of his father earl
Goodwin, who before him had held the same offices."

"THE other was William the bastard duke of Normandy, who was a man of a
warlike genius and a very powerful prince, whose dominions being situated
opposite to our coast, rendered it more convenient for him, than for any other
prince, to transport an army into England, and consequently to enslave the
nation. For which reason no one who was a friend to his country, would ever
think of electing a man, who would be so notoriously dangerous to it is laws,
liberty and constitution."

"INDEED the dangerous consequence of his election was so apparent, that, though
the clergy had marked William for their man, yet they could not hinder the
choice of Harold; and therefore he was elected king of England, by the
wittenagemot or parliament; and was accordingly crowned next day by the
Archbishop of York."

"THE Pope, and William, finding themselves frustrated in all their previous
intrigues and secret cabals, in obtaining the crown of England, for the latter,
were resolved to obtain it by open force: but the states of Normandy having
refused the duke an aid of money for the undertaking, he was obliged to have
recourse to some other means for assistance. The pope, therefore, was now
obliged to pull off the mask, and declare openly against England, and make a
crusading business of it; which, was done with a view to encourage individuals
to engage in the enterprise. And that all men might see that William was the
champion of the church, he first made the duke a present of a consecrated
standard, with a golden agnus dei, and one of Saint Peter's hairs; and then
solemnly excommunicated every man that should oppose him."

"THE duke on his part offered the lands of England as a prize to be fought
for, and to be divided amongst all those that should assist him in the
conquest; by which means he engaged not only great numbers of his own subjects,
but many of his neighbors to assist him. Thus the duke of Normandy was enabled
to fit out a fleet and an army, with which he invaded England; and, on the 14th
of October 1066, was fought the ever memorable battle of Hastings, in which the
English army was routed, and king Harold slain; which flung the whole nation
into confusion, and soon after procured the crown of England to William."

"MORCAR and Edwin, two brave officers who distinguished themselves all that
day in battle, retired in the night, with the broken remains of the army to
London; in hopes to recover the people from their fright and consternation, and
to apply some remedy to so pressing an evil. Historians observe, that, in all
probability, they would have succeeded, if the treacherous behavior of the
clergy in London had not broken all their measures, by secretly caballing
amongst the people. These two officers, and some others who were zealous
friends to the liberty of their country, assembled the people; and represented
to them, that the first thing to be done was to come out of that state of
anarchy and confusion they were in, and immediately elect some person to the
chief command. That Edgar Atheling was upon the spot, and one of the family of
their ancient kings; and that no man could have any just objection against his
advancement to the throne. That as soon as he should be proclaimed king, he
would send orders to all parts of the kingdom to levy troops, and that the duke
of Normandy should soon find to his cost, that the gaining a single battle was
not sufficient to render him master of the kingdom. And to spirit up the people
the more to action, they put them in mind how they had defended their country,
inch by inch against the Danes, for a great many years; and had at last drove
them out of the kingdom; and that there was no doubt but they would do the same
by this new invader."

"THE clergy knew that this was the critical moment, and that if they could but
keep things a little longer in confusion, their business was done, and
therefore they openly opposed every proposal of resistance. The declaration of
the pope in favor of William was sufficient to induce all the clergy, then in
London, with the two archbishops at their head, to cab^^ amongst the people in
order to hinder Edgar's election; which it so effectually did, that Morcar and
Edwin seeing every proposal overruled, and dispairing of success, retired into
the north to take their own measures."

"THEY were no sooner gone, than the archbishop of Canterbury, the archbishop
of York, the bishop of Winchester, and the clergy about London, and some say
prince Edgar himself (by their persuasion) went to the duke at Berkhamstead and
swore fealty to him; as if he had been already their lawful sovereign. Hence we
may justly say, that the lives, liberty, and property of the people of England,
were surrendered into the hands of the Normans, by the baneful interest of the
clergy. For the city of London, following the example of the clergy,
surrendered, afterward the whole kingdom, without any further resistance."

"THUS William the first obtained the crown of England by the favor of the
clergy, and not by the power of the sword, as, they would seem to intimate, by
his surname the conqueror. A name inposed upon him after his death, by the
clergy, in order to screen the infamy of their own actions from posterity, that
future generations might ascribe, the miserable state of the people, to the
conquest of William, and not to the dark treachery of a body of men, who had,
under the mask of religion, abused every trust of of confidence reposed in
them; and betrayed their flocks, bound hand and foot, like sheep to the
slaughter."

"FROM this time, civil and religious tyranny, walked hand in hand, two
monsters till then unknown in England; which are, equally, the common enemies
to mankind, and have at all times, united against every principle of civil and
religious liberty. This is the true origin of the alliance between church and
state, so much contended for by some of our ecclesiastics; who have renounced
the penances of popery, but would fain retain both its pride and its power."

AND on the proceedings of Charles the first's parliament, in the expulsion of
the bishops, the same author observes,

"THAT it was their duty, as law makers, to remove from parliament, a body of
men who had, constitutionally, no right there; and who had invariably, directed
their whole influence, against every principle of civil and religious liberty;
and were now particularly dangerous to the state."

"IT is undoubtedly the most absurd and pernicious principle, that ever was
received into any society of men, to permit the clergy of any denomination, to
have the least distant share, or influence, upon the legislative authority of
any nation. And had the motives of the house of Commons, for excluding the
bishops from the house of Lords been as good as their motion, they would have
done this kingdom a most essential piece of service; but their intent was only
to pull down one nuisance, in order to establish another almost as bad. Their
business, as law makers, was to protect every man in his right of private
judgment, in point of religion; and not suffer any set of men to dictate to
others in a matter that merely subsists between God and a man's own soul" --
"Had they destroyed all ecclesiastical power, they had destroyed an evil in the
state, and abundant matter of vexation. Had they protected all men alike, in
their different modes of worshipping God, they would have taken away all just
occasion of offense and established peace amongst men."

NOTHING can be more evident, than the mischief that has ever followed the
requisition of a declaration of faith in doctrines acknowledged to be above
human comprehension, as a qualification for any civil trust.

To believe that God is, and a rewarder according to our works; is the firm
foundation of natural and revealed religion; and though he deigned to inform
Moses, I AM, we find him pleased, at that time, to make no further discovery of
himself. Neither are we hitherto convinced, that any, by searching, have found
him out to greater perfection.

WHAT is here, faithfully quoted or modestly suggested, is intended to give no
offense to any man, or body of men existing. In matters wherein all are
concerned, it is the duty of all to give notice of any thing they conceive
might be hurtful to the public, if suffered to pass without examination. It is
a time when all the sagacity and diligence, all the temper and moderation of
this vast Continent, is necessary to separate the precious from the vile.

WE are happy that such plain and salutary paths have been marked out before
us. Whatever rubbish has been thrown into them, should be carefully removed,
that, like wisdom's ways, they may be pleasant, and conduct us to a secure and
virtuous PEACE.

MEN entrusted with the formation of civil constitutions, should remember they
are painting for eternity: that the smallest defect or redundancy in the system
they frame may prove the destruction of millions.

ABOVE all things, the greatest care should be taken, that the persons who
grant the public money, and should of course have the power of enquiring into
its disposal, should have no hand in contracts; or any connection with persons
through whose hands the public treasure passes. A house of commons should indeed
be the guardians of common right, and the interest of the public. Places,
pensions and other emoluments, from the public treasury having, for near a
century past, been open to British commoners, their power of bringing
peculators to account, has been of no use to the oppressed people. They have
indeed united with them, and formed such powerful factions as have bid defiance
to the whole nation. By this means, the legislative and executive authority,
which our wise and virtuous ancestors, carefully kept asunder, are become
confounded together, in the hands of the same men. This has principally arisen
from another fatal inattention of the people to the usurpations of their
deputies, when they took upon them to alter the first principle of the
constitution by acts of parliament.

"UPON this foundation, they may mould it into what shape they please; and in
the end make us slaves by law. The house of commons are constituted, a body of
men, merely passive, with regard to their creation, duration, and dissolution;
and therefore have no consent to give to their own duration, even for an hour."

"THERE cannot be a more dangerous doctrine adopted in a state, than to admit
that the legislative authority has a right to alter the constitution."

THIS shrewd observation needs little to be said in proof of it. For as the
constitution limits the authority of the legislature; if the legislature can
alter the constitution, they can give themselves what bounds they please.

IT is therefore, I beg leave to repeat, that after the approaching Convention
has met, and settled the grand outlines of a constitution, let the legislature
go on with the affairs of government, without sensible deviation from the
obvious meaning of their digest; and whatever inconveniences may be found
unprovided for, may be heartily advertised to the public, and amended by
another Convention.

The powers of the several parts of the LEGISLATURE.
THE respective powers of the several branches of the Legislature come next
into consideration. And it must be confessed, that on this question I find the
greatest difference of opinion among the really wise and learned, of any
pertaining to our system. Some talk of having two councils, one legislative,
and the other executive: some of a small executive council only; which should
have nothing to do with framing the laws. Some would have the Governor, an
integral part of the legislature: others, only president of the council with a
casting vote.

The latter opinion appears to me most consonant to the intentions of wise
framers of Governments. The Governor should have a seat in some part of the
Legislature, that he might be fully acquainted with the necessity and reasons
for passing any bill into a law, and on the other hand, to prevent any one
person from possessing too much, or a dangerous power, he should have no more
than a casting vote when necessary.

Some are strenuous for only one legislative body namely, the house of
representatives: but a council will be found necessary for the following
reasons.

An Act, ever so well intended, and in appearance ever so well framed to
promote the public good, will notwithstanding, throw the society into
confusion, if it can be made appear that it is founded on principles which will
not bear examination.

The persons selected to compose a council, are of course always supposed to
have a superior degree of acquaintance with the history, laws, and manners of
mankind; and by that means they will be more likely to foresee the mischievous
consequences, that might follow a proceeding, which at first view did not
appear to have any thing dangerous in it, to many honest men, who may however,
be very worthy of a seat in the house of representatives.

For on no circumstance does the public peace and prosperity more immediately
depend, than on the clearness, fullness and consistency of the laws.

The Governor should be furnished with a small privy council, to afford him
their advice and assistance in the executive department; but they should have
no share whatever in the Legislature.

In this capacity they should take cognizance of high crimes; such as
mal-administration of Judges in their offices; being the proper inquest for
this purpose -- The Assembly and Legislative Council, in like manner to enquire
into the conduct of the Governor and privy council, and the cause of complaint
being found, a regular trial by the country should determine all causes
whatever.

A COUNCIL, annually eligible, will endeavor to maintain their feats by the
rectitude of their conduct.

To suppose they can inveterate themselves, is to suppose that mankind will
forget the mischiefs which have overspread the world from the days of Sylla to
the present bloody period, from the same tyrannic source.

WE should make all prudent provision for posterity, and indeed the most
salutary provision we can possibly make for them, is to enable them to provide
for themselves; but we ought never to run into one extreme to avoid another.

THE last important measure I would propose, is, that, whereas the heat of war
in our very neighborhood, may well be supposed to agitate the minds of the
delegates in convention, and render it impossible to have every provision made
for the security of our liberties, that cool and continued reflection would
suggest, after the principal parts of the constitution are established, an
adjounment might be made to a convenient day; and mean while every man might be
invited to give his sentiments freely and discreetly upon any part of the
system he might conceive could be altered for the better.

PROBABLY a decennial meeting of delegates, to examine the state of the
constitution, and conduct of the government, would not be an imprudent
provision for keeping the constitution in health and vigor, by having an
opportunity to see that it did not depart from its first principles. This would
be effectually holding the supreme power in its only safe repository the hands
of THE PEOPLE.

CONCLUSION.
THE last and greatest security that men can have for a permanent enjoyment of
their rights, is to learn, what they are from their very elements, as they are
well explained by Burlamaqui and others; and besides, to learn the art of
defending them with their arms.

I, ALIKE discommend a heedless inattention to the concerns of our country and
posterity; and a despairing anxiety, grounded on a supposition, that if some
particular matters are not settled in just such particular manners, that all
will be lost irrecoverably.

THIS is a day of cool and impartial enquiry. Adversity sobers our spirits and
causes us to give each other a patient hearing. We learn from our troubles that
each man needs the advice and assistance of his neighbor: and perhaps this is
not the most trivial lesson.

THE varying circumstances of our situation, have gradually pointed out
arrangements already which no man could have foreseen some months ago: those
successive improvements which will thence arise, and the advantage of such a
communication of sentiments as will accrue from the establishment of frequent
town meetings among the people, will give such a new face to the affairs of
this colony, and raise up so many able men to improve its internal police; that
as arts and manufactures have already made it their peculiar, or at least
principal residence, so we trust in God that the principal science that ever
rendered mankind happy and glorious, the science of just and equal government,
will shine conspicuous in Pennsylvania.

The events which have given birth to this mighty revolution; and will
vindicate the provisions that shall be wisely made against our ever again
relapsing into a state of bondage and misery, cannot be better set forth than
in the following Declaration of AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

IN CONGRESS, JULY 4, 1776.
A DECLARATION by the REPRESENTATIVES of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA, in
General CONGRESS assembled.
WHEN in the course of human Events, it becomes necessary for one people to
dissolve the Political Bands which have connected them with another, and to
assume among the Powers of the Earth, the separate and equal Station to which
the Laws of Nature and of Nature's God entitle them, a decent Respect to the
Opinions of Mankind requires, that they should declare the causes; which impel
them to the Separation.

WE hold these Truths to be self-evident, that all Men are created equal, that
they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among
these are Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit of Happiness -- That to secure these
Rights, Governments are instituted among Men; deriving their just Powers from
the Consent of the Governed, that whenever any Form of Government becomes
destructive of these Ends, it is the Right of the People to alter or to abolish
it, and to institute new Government, laying its soundation on such principles,
and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to
effect their safety and happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate that
governments long established should not be changed for light and transient
causes; and accordingly all experience has shown, that mankind are more
disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by
abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when a long train of
abures and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces a design
to reduce them under absolute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty,
to throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their future
security. Such has been the patient sufferance of these colonies, and such is
now the necessity which constrains them to alter their former systems of
government. The history of the present King of Great Britain is a history of
repeated injuries and usurpations, all having in direct object the
establishment of an absolute tyranny over these states. To prove this, let
facts be submitted to a candid world.

HE has refused his assent to laws, the most wholesome and necessary for the
public good.

HE has forbidden his Governors to pass laws of immediate and pressing
importance, unless suspended in their operation till his assent should be
obtained; and, when so suspended, he has utterly neglected to attend to them.

HE has refused to pass other laws for the accommodation of large districts of
people, unless those people would relinquish the right of representation in the
legislature, a right inestimable to them, and formidable to tyrants only.

He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual, uncomfortable,
and distant from the depository of their public records, for the sole purpose
of fatiguing them into compliance with his measures.

HE has dissolved Representative Houses repeatedly, for opposing with manly
firmness his invasions on the Rights of the people.

HE has refused for a long time, after such dissolutions, to cause others to be
elected; whereby the legislative powers, incapable of annihilation, have
returned to the people at large for their exercise; the state remaining in the
mean time exposed to all the dangers of invasion from without, and convulsions
within.

He has endeavored to prevent the population of these states; for that purpose
obstructing the laws for naturalization of foreigners; refusing to pass others
to encourage their migrations hither, and raising the conditions of new
appropriations of lands.

He has obstructed the administration of justice, by refusing his assent to
laws for establishing judiciary powers.

He has made Judges dependent on his will alone, for the tenure of their
offices, and the amount and payment of their salaries.

He has erected a multitude of new offices, and sent hither swarms of officers
to harrass our people, and eat out their substance.

He has kept among us, in times of peace, standing armies, without the consent
of our legislatures.

He has affected to render the military independent of, and superior to the
civil power.

He has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our
constitution, and unacknowledged by our laws; giving his assent to their acts
of pretended legislation:

For quartering large bodies of armed troops among us:

For protecting them, by a mock trial, from punishment for any murders which
they should commit on the inhabitants of these states:

For cutting off our trade with all parts of the world:

For imposing taxes on us without our consent:

For depriving us, in many cases, of the benefits of trial by jury:

For transporting us beyond seas to be tried for pretended offenses:

For abolishing the free system of English laws in a neighboring province,
establishing therein an arbitrary government, and enlarging its boundaries, so
as to render it at once an example and sit instrument for introducing the same
absolute rule into these Colonies:

For taking away our charters, abolishing our most valuable laws, and altering
fundamentally the forms of our governments:

For suspending our own legislatures, and declaring themselves invested with
power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.

He has abdicated government here, by declaring us out of his protection and
waging war against us.

He has plundered our seas, ravaged our coasts, burnt our towns, and destroyed
the lives of our people.

He is, at this time, transporting large armies of foreign mercenaries to
complete the works of death, desolation, and tyranny, already begun with
circumstances of cruelty and perfidy scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous
ages, and totally unworthy the head of a civilized nation.

He has constrained our fellow Citizens taken captive on the high seas to bear
arms against their country, to become the executioners of their friends and
brethren, or to fall themselves by their hands.

He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and has endeavored to bring
on the inhabitants of our frontiers, the merciless Indian savages, whose known
rule of warfare, is an undistinguished destruction, of all ages, sexes and
conditions.

In every stage of these oppressions we have petitioned for redress in the most
humble terms: Our repeated petitions have been answered only by repeated
injury. A prince, whose character is thus marked by every act which may define
a tyrant, is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.

Nor have we been wanting in attentions to our British brethren. We have warned
them from time to time of attempts by their legislature to extend an
unwarrantable jurisdiction over us. We have reminded them of the circumstances
of our emigration and settlement here. We have appealed to their native justice
and magnanimity, and we have conjured them by the ties of our common kindred to
disavow these usurpations, which, would inevitably interrupt our connexions and
correspondence. They too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of
consanguinity. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity, which denounces
our separation, and hold them, as we hold the rest of mankind, enemies in war,
in peace, friends.

We, therefore, the Representatives of the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, in GENERAL
CONGRESS, assembled, appealing, to the Supreme Judge of the world for the
rectitude of our intentions, do, in the name, and by authority of the good
people of these colonies, solemnly publish and declare, that these United
Colonies are, and of Right ought to be, FREE AND INDEPENDENT STATES; that they
are absolved from all allegiance to the British Crown, and that all political
connection between them and the state of Great Britain is and ought to be
totally dissolved; and that, as FREE and INDEPENDENT STATES, they have full
power to levy war, conclude peace, contract alliances, establish commerce, and
to do all other acts and things which INDEPENDENT STATES may of right do. And
for the support of this declaration, with a firm reliance on the protection of
Divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our lives, our fortunes,
and our sacred honor.

Signed by ORDER and in behalf of the CONGRESS,

JOHN HANCOCK, President.
Attest. CHARLES THOMSON, Sec.

Philadelphia, July 8, 1776.
In a few days will be published by R. BELL, in Third-Street.

AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE THE INTEREST AND GLORY OF GREAT BRITAIN; OR, ARGUMENTS
to prove, that not only in TAXATION, but in TRADE, MANUFACTURES, and
GOVERNMENT, the Colonies are entitled to an entire Independency on the BRITISH
LEGISLATURE; and that it can only be by a formal DECLARATION of these Rights,
and forming thereupon a friendly LEAGUE with them, that the true and lasting
Welfare of both Countries can be promoted. In a SERIES of LETTERS to the
LEGISLATURE.

It is not to be hoped, in the corrupt State of Human Nature, that any Nation
will be subject to another, any longer than it finds its own Account in it, and
cannot help itself.

No Creatures suck the Teats of their Dams longer than they can draw Milk from
thence, or can provide themselves with better Food; nor will any Country
continue their subjection to another, only because their great Grand-Mothers
were acquainted. This is the course of human affairs, and all wise States will
always have it before their eyes.

Trenchard on Plantations and Colonies, in Cato's Letters, No. 106.
