A DISCOURSE ON THE TIMES.

NORWICH: Printed by JUDAH P. SPOONER, for the AUTHOR, 1776.

ROMANS VIII.31. What shall we say to these Things? -- If GOD be for us, who
can be against us?


FROM the words we may note, I. The importance of GOD's being for us. II. What
must absolutely be done on our part, that the blessed GOD may be on our side,
or for us. III. How blessed it will be to have GOD for us.


AND here,

I. The importance of GOD's being for us.

WE have, my dear Countrymen, entered into the most solemn, weighty, and
extraordinary affair, that ever concerned America; an affair that will
terminate in our final ruin, unless GOD be for us. -- We have though I trust
with the greatest reluctance, taken up arms against the King of Great Britain,
who is the most powerful prince in the known world, who has been a terror to
all nations, who is the strongest by sea, and can command the greatest navy of
any nation whatever; a great part of which is now employed in bringing
soldiers, arms, ammunition and (...) to America, with a determination to subdue
us -- have taken Boston, the metropolis of New England -- have made it a strong
garrison to guard themselves -- many first blocked in as prisoners -- others
obliged to leave their pleasant habitations; -- have burned Charlestown, a very
fine and beautiful place, to ashes -- caused the inhabitants to ^^ave their
habitations in flames; -- have proceeded ^^rther -- have burned Falmouth, a
place of vast value -- men, women, and children, in the greatest confusion and
consternation, occasioned by the roaring of their cannon, the devouring flames
of their buildings -- obliged to leave their dwellings in ruins -- have
immediate orders to burn all the seaports from thence to Carolina -- will
certainly execute their cruel design, which in the issue will damage America
not less than 50 millions of money. Now all this will certainly be effected,
unless GOD be for us. -- To have this great and mighty nation against us, and
the great and dreadful GOD against us too, must be dreadful indeed! For if GOD
be against us, all the victories we have already gained, will only serve to
augment their fury, and bring all the power and force of Great Britain on us,
and perhaps joined with the strength of other nations. -- If GOD be against us,
all the wise consultations of assemblies and congresses will prove abortive,
our armies will be defeated, our country will be ravaged, we shall be destroyed
by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence; the sword without, and
terror within, will consume us -- a fire will be enkindled in his anger, that
will burn to the lowest hell -- He will scatter us into corners -- he will
cause the remembrance of us to cease, and deliver us up to the greatest
reproach -- those that hate us will rule over us, and we shall be treated as
the worst of rebels. -- This will certainly be the fate of America, unless GOD
be for us, and on our side. -- Now, What shall we say to these things? If GOD
be for us, who can be against us? And if he be against us who can be for us,
that is able to deliver us?

Showing the way, and the only way for the deliverance of America from the most
distressing calamities that ever befell any people.

THUS we see, my dear friends and countrymen, that it is all-important that GOD
be for us. Which brings us to consider, in the

II. Place, What must absolutely be done on our part, that the blessed GOD may
be for us.

AND here, First, Was is Liberty that first caused the settlement of this
country? -- Was this land designed by God himself for a land of liberty? -- Was
this the tenor and condition of the grant of this country from God to our
forefathers, that no tyrant should ever reign here? -- Is this the only thing
the Americans are suing for? -- Was it their asserting their rights to this
precious jewel, that has drawn the sword against us? -- Is it liberty that has
set the nation in such a terrible convulsion? -- Then it will certainly appear,
that all those laws, customs, and practices, that infringe on the liberties of
mankind, and are repugnant to the law of God, must be done away. Every thing
that has any tendency to bind the consciences of God's Children, of what name
or denomination soever, must be done away. As we would have the Lord on our
side, we must set at Liberty those vast numbers of Africans, which have so long
time been inslaved by us, who have as good a right to Liberty as we have -- We
must no longer exercise that Cruelty and Barbarity toward them, as we have
heretofore done -- We must put a final stop to all vexatious Law suits, and no
longer exercise that Cruelty among ourselves that even heathens would not be
found guilty of -- We must for ever cease from this so ruinous a Practice -- We
must be kind and benevolent to the Poor -- help and deliver them out of all
their troubles and distresses -- break every yoke, and every heavy burden, and
let the oppressed go free. See Isa. 58, 7, and on -- We must be sincere in our
endeavors for Liberty, without any wicked or avaricious ends or designs for
riches or honors to aggrandize ourselves or children -- We must faithfully
improve all our spiritual privileges, and prize them above every thing else --
We must have as much zeal to improve them as we have to contend for them, and
then the Lord will never suffer them to be taken from us. -- We must heartily
ascribe the glory of all the victories obtained by us, to GOD alone; and go, if
called to it, against our enemies, as King David went against Goliath, in the
name and strength of the LORD GOD of Israel -- We must continue that union and
unanimity that subsists between the colonies, and unite, as one man, in putting
away all those sins and abominations which is the cause of God's controversy
with us, -- and continue to humble our selves in the united public manner as
was once appointed by the Grand Continental Congress; which was the most
extraordinary affair that ever happened in America: since which time we have
been wonderfully defended; and we have the greatest encouragement to take this
method for deliverance, whenever thought proper by those wise Men who are set
at the helm of affairs, and are appointed guardians for the several Colonies --
We must break off all our sins by righteousness, and our iniquities by showing
mercy to the Poor; -- then God will be for us, and all the powers of Earth and
Hell will never deprive us of those privileges. Now, What shall we say to these
things? If GOD be for us, who can be against us? If GOD be for us, he can
easily defeat the cruel designs of our enemies many ways: He can raise a
tempest in the sea, that shall toss their shipping to the heavens, and bury
them in the depths, and hurl them back from whence they came, or to some other
remote part of the earth, or dash them one against another, or against some
unseen reef in the sea, and sink them to the bottom. He can defeat them by
sending sickness among them, and destroy them by the pestilence, or by sending
faintness into their hearts, or granting us the victory if engaged in battle.
He that sits at the helm of all the affairs of the universe, and rules in the
court of heaven above, can so overruled things in the court of Great Britain,
as to cause all those cruel acts to be nullified, their shipping and armies
recalled, our seaports all opened, Boston and other places all restored to
their proper owners, the great breach healed, that ancient union restored, and
the Americans put into the possession of all their rights on a lasting
foundation.

THUS we see, my dear friends and countrymen, how many ways the blessed GOD may
interpose in our behalf -- the last of which is to be the most desired by every
American; for it seems a pity the English nation should be broke like a
potter's vessel; the nation whom God has exalted to heaven -- in which has been
more of the glory of God to be seen, than in all the nations in the world
besides -- the nation whom God has exalted to such glory, honor and dignity. --
O Britons! why will thou ruin thy self, rip out thine own bowels, run the sword
into thine own heart, undo thy self and thy most obedient children, the most
loyal subjects in all thy vast dominions! Why should thou, who have been the
glory of all nations, become the reproach to all nations! Why will thou do that
which will provoke God to cast off the nation forever, and withhold his glory
forever! Thou who have been the admiration of all foreigners for thy most
excellent constitution, and have excelled all nations for thy kindness and
hospitality, even to strangers! Witness the vast numbers of French and others
in the City of London, from all parts of the world -- distressed strangers and
foreigners have been received with the greatest kindness and indulgence. --
Great numbers of French and others have been naturalized and permitted to set
up trade in the city of London, and have grown very rich thereby, by the
unexampled beauty of the natives; for hither they came destitute of every
thing, and by public and private charity were put into a way to provide for
themselves and families. From the Revolution to this time, fifteen or twenty
thousand pounds has been paid to them annually by authority, toward supporting
their poor. Now who could have thought the nation that has been so full of
kindness and benevolence to strangers, could become so cruel to their own
Children? Who could have thought a few years past, that saw the English nation
in her meridian glory -- that saw the universities in England, Oxford and
Cambridge, which consisted of near 40 Colleges, out of which proceeded swarms
of the best men who have appeared most eminent both in Church and state -- that
saw the present King ascending the throne to sway the British scepter -- that
saw the Proclamations issued forth from under his royal hand and seal,
discountenancing vice and immorality, and encouraging virtue and true religion.
Who was there, 20 years past, that beheld the harmony that subsisted between
Britain and her Colonies -- that saw the wide Atlantic full of vessels laden
with effects from America, bound to our native country -- who could have
thought, I say, that all the powers of Earth and Hell could have produced so
sudden an alteration, as to see the same ocean full of shipping from our mother
country, bound to America, laden with soldiers, arms and ammunition, and all
manner of instruments of death and cruelty, to destroy her own Children! Who
could have thought a little detestable Tea, thrown into the ocean by a factious
mob, should be the cause of an ocean of bloodshed, and forever dissolve that
union that was worth more Tea than the East Indies produced? How much below the
dignity of the nation are those severe proceedings? Consider, whilst thou art
pouring out thy hot thunder bolts on the Americans, what thou art doing, lest
the Almighty God pour out his wrath on thee for every drop of Blood shed in
this unnatural controversy, binds the curse of GOD on the nation, and will
provoke GOD to leave it, and forever withdraw his glory from it never more to
return, as he has from other nations and kingdoms. Methinks the words of the
Prophet are applicable here, O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be, ere
thou will be quiet? Put up thyself into thy scabbard, rest and be still -- or
turn thyself against some avowed enemy, not thy best friends: And those of our
Savior, when he wept over the city of Jerusalem, saying, O Jerusalem! had
thou but known in this thy day the things that belong to thy peace; but now
they are hid from thine eyes! And, O Jerusalem! Jerusalem! how often would I
have gathered thee, as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye
would not! And as in Hosea 9. 8. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim! How shall I
deliver thee, Israel! How shall I make thee as Admah! How shall I set thee as
Zeboim! My heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together! --
How shall I leave the nation whom I have taken into such a near relation to
myself, and made comely through my comeliness; which I have put upon high! Must I
leave her, as I have other nations and places! -- How shall I forsake
Great Britain, as I have left Jerusalem! -- Go ye now into my place which was
at Shiloh, and see what I did to it for the wickedness of my people Israel. --
Go ye throughout all the eastern parts of the world, where they were once
illuminated with the light of the glorious gospel, and see how they are
overwhelmed with ignorance, superstitions and heresies -- What I have done to
the seven churches of Asia -- Look into Africa -- time was when there were
thousands of glorious churches there -- Into Europe, and see from how many
places GOD has removed his glory. -- There was once in Rome itself a glorious
church. -- Look into Spain, and the Spanish low countries, which had once the
glorious gospel in them; but how has the bloody inquisition extinguished the
light of the glorious gospel in that unhappy kingdom! -- Into Bohemia, and see
now where is their glory? -- Into Hungary, and the great kingdom of France; how
has their wickedness provoked God to leave that unhappy kingdom! -- Time was
when there were hundreds of protestant ministers and churches there; but how
has a Babylonish king made them an empty vessel, swallowed them up like a
dragon, and cast them out! And now, must Great Britain share the same fate?
Must Great Britain come to nothing, to destruction and dissolution? for this is
the certain fate of every kingdom divided against itself. -- O that my head
were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, then would I weep day and night
for the ruin of the English nation. -- Is there no way to prevent this ruin? --
Is there no balm in Gilead? no physician there, for the healing this deadly
wound? -- Why will thou not hold out terms for reconciliation, and let the
breach be healed?

O America! what is the cause of GOD's controversy with thee? -- What have thou
done, that has provoked GOD to write his displeasure against thee in such
bloody and fiery corrections? -- Can thou behold all the misery that is come
on thee, and immagine thou have done nothing to offend a holy, just, and
righteous GOD? -- Can thou cast thine eye upon thy seaports, from Falmouth to
Carolina, and see the ocean full of engines of death, destined for the
destruction of America -- look into Boston, that fine metropolis -- view it
taken out of the hands of the proper owners -- look into those fine and
beautiful houses, once devoted to the worship and service of GOD, once filled
with his glorious presence, now turned play houses and riding-houses, places,
to furnish their horse for our destruction! -- Who was there that saw the
burning Charlestown -- that saw the flames ascending from the lofty steeples of
those beautiful buildings, once devoted to the worship of the great GOD; -- I
say, to see the flames ascending to the heavens -- to hear the cracking and
falling of the buildings -- that heard the roaring of the cannon -- the cries
and groans of the wounded, they wallowing in their blood -- the dead lying in
heaps -- look into Cambridge, and see those colleges, which were once
seminaries of learning, places to fit and train up persons for the most sacred
work of the gospel ministry, and to be physicians for wounded immortal souls --
I say, shall we see those colleges, that were once consecrated to this sacred
and important business, now turned into hospitals, full of wounded bodies, and
not suspect something has been amiss in those colleges? -- See the ruin that
has come on those churches, and not suppose there are things introduced
contrary to the word of GOD, and very provoking to him? -- Methinks we can have
no greater precedent of the wrath of Almighty GOD, than these things are.
Surely we can have no greater evidence that our sins have reached to heaven,
and cry for vengeance upon us; and that he will not be for us, but against us,
unless we turn to him by unfeigned repentance: For so long as we hold fast our
sins, and retain our iniquities, and do not turn to GOD, do not regard the
works of the LORD, nor the operation of his hands, notwithstanding he has been
speaking to us by terrible things in righteousness -- been threatening us with
drought and sore sickness -- taking away many by death; -- and now, add to all
this the withdrawing of GOD's holy Spirit -- suspense of divine influence --
hardness of heart -- blindness of mind; -- Now, all these together, makes it
very evident there never was a people nigher the brink of final ruin than we
are; and as long as we continue in this careless, stupid, and indifferent
state, we declare by our practice, we have not done amiss, our ways are equal,
we have not done any thing to merit those evils from the hand of the Lord. We
answer by our practice, as Pharaoh answered Moses, Who is the Lord, that we
should obey him? -- By this means we reflect infinite dishonor on the wise
Governor of the universe, for punishing an innocent people. And here arises the
controversy between the great GOD and us -- just as when a kind father corrects
a rebellious child, his aim is to bring him to obedience, and to his duty; now
if the child is regardless of his father's corrections, and will not turn for
the stripes his father gives him, there is an absolute necessity for a more
severe correction; -- and if he will not finally turn, he casts him off as a
rebel, and lets him go on, and fill up the measure of his cup: But if the child
turns to his father, and to his obedience, the father's heart is full of pity,
his bowels yearn with compassion, his arms are open to receive him, and treat
him with the most parental affection. -- Just so the blessed GOD has for many
years been dealing with America -- he has been manifesting his sore displeasure
against us -- he has been most severely correcting us -- his stripes have been
most severely laid upon us. -- Now, if we still go on, and will not remove the
cause of his controversy, there is a necessity of his stripes being laid on
more severe; for GOD never began a controversy with any people, that ever ended
in any thing short of their reformation or final ruin. And this is the case
with us. If we turn to GOD, put away those laws, customs and practices, those
sins and abominations that are the cause of his controversy, and turn to him by
unfeigned repentance, take his word for our rule, shake the dust from off our
bibles, and let this be the compass to steer our course by, and walk so that
our ways please the LORD; our calamities will soon cease, our enemies will be
at peace with us, the great and eternal GOD will be for us and on our side.
It Is in this way, and no other, that we can have the LORD for us. Thus it was
when God punished Israel with three years famine, king David was very
solicitous to know the cause of GOD's anger; and no sooner had he found out,
and done as the LORD required in this matter, the heavens could no longer
withhold the rain, the earth was replenished, and bro't forth her fruit. So it
was with Joshua, after his defeat at Ai. The next step he takes, is to search
after the cause of GOD's anger; and as soon as he had put the accused thing out
of the camp, GOD was for him, and with him, and his enemies could not stand
before him. In like manner, when the mariners had taken Jonah into their ship,
it caused a terrible storm in the sea, which mounted her to the heavens, and
buried her in the depths, and filled them with dreadful distress; they were
very solicitous to know the cause of GOD's anger, and as soon as they had
thrown Jonah overboard, the sea was a perfect calm. -- So it would be with
America -- Could we find out the cause, and throw the Jonah overboard, the
nation would be in a perfect calm, and GOD will certainly be for us, and on our
side.

Which brings us to the

III. And last thing proposed; that is, to show How blessed we shall be if the
blessed GOD be for us.

AND now, What shall we say to these things? -- If God be for us, who can be
against us? -- He will be a wall of fire round about us, and the glory in the
midst of us: -- He will defend us from all the insults of men or devils. -- All
those wise and good men, who are at the helm of affairs, and are appointed
guardians for the colonies, if they are instrumental of a thorough and
universal reformation, will shine as lights in the world; their memories will
be dear and precious to the latest posterity; and they will not only shine in
this world, but in the world to come, in the kingdom of glory, as stars of the
first magnitude -- Those churches in this land will be favored with the divine
presence and glory of GOD -- We shall be blessed in our basket and store, in
our goings out and comings in -- We shall no longer hear the sound of the
trumpet, or alarm of war, nor see garments rolled in blood -- those instruments
of cruelty shall be turned into the harmless utensils of husbandry -- We shall
be blessed with both peace and plenty -- a foundation will be laid to enjoy
them to the latest posterity -- our root shall be spread by the waters, and the
dew shall lie on our branches -- We shall enjoy all those privileges that
CHRIST has purchased for us, and which we have in consequence of that eternal
covenant that was made between God the Father and God the Son; which covenant
was ratified in the counsel of his eternal peace and was fulfilled when he shed
his precious blood on the cross; through which channel flows every mercy and
every favor that ever any of the human race ever did or ever will enjoy; for
all was lost by the fall and apostasy of our first head and representative, and
all was purchased by our second; and in this sense, and this only, he is said
to be the Savior of all men. -- Now, if GOD be for us, all those mercies will
as naturally flow to us, as the rivers flow into the sea. -- Now, What shall we
say to these things? -- If GOD be for us, who can be against us? -- Surely, if
GOD be for us, we need not apply to France, Spain, or Prussia, for protection;
for the blessed GOD will protect us.

THUS we have considered the importance of having GOD for us -- We considered
what must absolutely be done, that GOD may be for us -- And likewise, how
blessed it will be to have GOD for us.

AND now, my dear friends and countrymen, (...) we are all concerned in this
most solemn affair, how highly does it become us, to endeavor to remove every
impediment that hinders GOD's being for us, and on our side!

A HEARTY FRIEND TO ALL THE COLONIES.
Norwich

