MR. CLARK'S SERMON* DELIVERED APRIL NINETEENTH, M,DCC,LXXVI.

The Fate of Blood-thirsty Oppressors, and GOD's tender Care of his distressed
People.

A SERMON, PREACHED AT LEXINGTON, APRIL 19, 1776.

To commemorate the MURDER, BLOODSHED and Commencement of Hostilities, between
Great Britain and America, in that Town, by a Brigade of Troops of GEORGE III,
under Command of Lieutenant Colonel SMITH, on the Nineteenth of APRIL, 1775.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A BRIEF NARRATIVE of the principal Transactions of that Day.

BY JONAS CLARK, A. M. PASTOR of the CHURCH in LEXINGTON.

Those Things does the LORD hate: -- A proud Look, a lying Tongue, and Hands
that shed innocent Blood. PRO. VI. 16, 17. -- Qud non (...) ^^c^ora ^^gis,
(...) ^ames* --
Quis talia ^ando,
^ymid^num, D^l^pumve, aut auri (...) Ulyss^^,
Temperet a lachrymis? --
VIR. AENEID. MASSACHUSETTS-STATE: BOSTON* PRINTD BY POWARS AND WILLIS.

M,DCC,LXXVI.

The fate of blood-thirsty oppressors, and GOD's care of his distressed people.
JOEL, III. 19, 20 and 21. EGYPT shall be a desolation, and EDOM shall be a
desolate wilderness, for the violence against the children of Judah, because
they have shed INNOCENT BLOOD in their land. But Judah shall dwell for ever,
and Jerusalem from generation to generation. For I will cleanse their blood
that I have not cleansed; for the LORD dwells in Zion.
NEXT to the acknowledgement of the existence of a Deity, there is no one
principle of greater importance in religion, than a realizing belief of the
divine government and providence, as superintending the affairs of the
universe, and intimately concerned in whatever happens to mankind, both as
nations and kingdoms, and as individuals.

Deeply to be impressed with a sense of the divine providence, to realize that
GOD is Govornor among the nations, that his government is wise and just, and
that all our times and changes are in his hands, and at his disposal, will have
the happiest tendency to excite the most grateful acknowledgements of his
goodness in prosperity, the most cordial resignation to his paternal discipline
in adversity, and the most placid composure and equanimity of mind in all the
changing scenes of life. Inspired with this divine principle, we shall
contemplate, with grateful wonder and delight, the goodness of God in
prosperous events, and devoutly acknowledge and adore his sovereign hand in
days of darkness and perplexity, and when the greatest difficulties press. This
will be a source of comfort and support under private afflictions and trials,
and this shall encourage our hope in God and trust in his name, under public
calamities and judgments. -- Yea, however dark and mysterious the ways of
providence may appear; yet nothing shall overwhelm the mind, or destroy the
trust and hope of those, that realize the government of heaven, -- that
realize, that an alwise God is seated on the throne, and that all things are
well appointed for his chosen people, -- for them that fear him.

This principle and these sentiments therefore, being of so great use and
importance in religion, under the various dispensations of providence, one
great design of the present discourse, is to rouse and excite us to a religious
acknowledgment of the hand of God, in those distressing scenes of MURDER,
BLOODSHED and WAR, we are met to commemorate, upon this solemn occasion.

The passage before us, it is humbly conceived, is well suited to confirm our
faith, to excite our trust, and encourage our hope, under such awful
dispensations, as it points out the method of God's government and the course
of his providence toward the enemies and oppressors of his people, and the
fate of those that shed innocent blood; and at the same time, represents his
peculiar care of his church and chosen, and the assurance they have, when under
oppression, of restoration and establishment, -- and that God himself will
plead their cause and both cleanse and avenge their innocent blood. "Egypt
shall be a desolation, and Edom shall be a desolate wilderness, for the
violence against the children of Judah, because they have shed INNOCENT BLOOD
in their land. But Judah shall dwell forever, and Jerusalem from generation to
generation. For I will cleanse their blood, that I have not cleansed; for the
LORD dwells in Zion."

It is not necessary to enquire as to the immediate occasion, or literal
fulfillment of the prephecy before us, with respect to the particular nations,
or kingdoms here mentioned. It is sufficient to our present purpose to observe,
that Egypt was early noted, in scripture history, for oppressing God's people,
and causing them to serve with cruel bondage. Edom also is mentioned as guilty
of violence toward them, and expressing a most imbittered hatred and revenge
against them; and from the expressions in the text, it is natural to suppose,
that there had been some, if not many instances of their shedding innocent
blood in their land. Vid. Psalm. cxxxvii. 7.
Israel, God's chosen people, had often suffered violence, from both these
states: So that we have good reason to suppose, that both Egypt and Edom, in
the language of scripture prophecy, in the text and other passages, may intend
not Egypt or Edom only, but (proverbially) in a more general sense, enemies,
persecutors or oppressors of God's people, who violated their rights and
liberties, religious and civil, and by the sword of persecution or oppression,
shed innocent blood in their land.

Prophecies, especially those that are, or may be, of general use to the people
of God, are but seldom literal, either in prediction or fulfillment. They are
rather of use to foreshew great and interesting events, as taking place in the
world, in such time and manner, and upon such persons, societies, nations, or
kingdoms, as shall display the justice and equity of divine government, and the
peculiar care which Heaven takes of the church and people of God, for their
correction, instruction, preservation or establishment. Agreeably St. Peter
speaks strongly for this method of explaining and improving scripture
prophecies, where he says expressly, that "no prophecy of the scripture is of
any private interpretation." 2 Pet. i. 20.
It is, therefore, rational to suppose, that though prophecies may have special
or immediate reference to particular persons, societies, nations or kingdoms,
and to events in which they may be immediately interested; yet they may be
fitly considered as having a further and more important interpretation, which
may be of general use for the direction and edification of God's church and
people, in all ages, to the end. In this general sense, therefore, you will
permit me to consider the prophecy in the passage before us: and thus
understood, it is easy to see several things suggested in it, worthy our most
serious attention and religious improvement, upon such an occasion as this.

In the first place, it is admitted, that for wise purposes, a just God may
permit powerful enemies, or oppressors, to injure, do violence unto and
distress his people, and to carry their measures of violence and oppression to
such lengths among them, as to strike at their life and "shed innocent blood in
their land."

As God is the Sovereign of the world, and exercises his government for the
glory of his name, in the good of the whole, so he has a paternal concern for
the special benefit and improvement of his church and people. All creatures are
his servants: and God accomplisheth his designs and carries his counsels to
effect, by what means and instruments he pleases. It is with him alone, 'who is
wonderful in counsel and excellent in working," to bring good out of evil. When
God designs the reproof and correction of hi^ people, he can exercise this holy
discipline in various ways and by various means, as shall best answer the
purposes of his government. This holy discipline is accordingly exercised,
sometimes by the immediate hand of providence: as in wasting sickness, parching
drought, awful and desolating earthquakes, or other judgments, which are
immediately from God himself. Or this may be done more immediately, by the
instrumentality of his creatures; and even the wicked, and those that love the
wages of unrighteousness, that delight in oppression, waste and spoil, or
thirst for innocent blood, may be improved ^s the rod in his hand to correct,
or punish the sins of his people. With this view the oppressor is permitted to
injure, insult, oppress and lay waste in a land; and to carry his measures to
the shedding of innocent blood. With the same design does a sovereign God give
the enemy a commission, in war, with fire and sword, to distress and destroy.

In such public calamities, it is true, it often comes to pass, that as
individuals, the innocent are involved and suffer with the guilty; and
sometimes the innocent alone. But however unjust, or cruel the oppressor, and
those that thirst for blood may be, in contriving and carrying into execution
their wicked, opprssieve, or bloody designs, they are no other than instruments
in providence and the rod in the hand of the great Governor of the world, for
the reproof and correction of his people. These things happen not by accident,
or chance, but by the direction, or permission of that God, who is righteous in
all his ways and holy in all his works. When Israel sinned and did evil in the
sight of the LORD, it is said, "the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel,
and he delivered them into the hands of spoilers that spoiled them, and he sold
them into the hands of their enemies round about and they were greatly
distressed." Judge. ii. 14, 15.
Hence also the Assyrian King is expressly called " the rod of GOD'S anger,"
for the correction of his people Isai. x. 5.
And thus Egyp^ and Edom, in the prophecy before us, in committing violence
upon the children of Judah and in shedding innocent blood in their land, are
held up to view as the rod in GOD'S hand, for the correction, reproof and
instruction of his people. Agreeably this is the language of a just and
faithful GOD, in such dispensations, " hear ye the rod, and who has appointed
it. Mic. vi. 9.


It matters not, therefore, who are the immediate instruments of violence and
oppression, or by whose hands the blood of innocent persons is shed, or their
substance wasted and habitations destroyed; nor yet from what motives, or views
such acts of oppression and cruelty are perpetrated, with respect to the
religious improvement, that GOD expects us, or any people, to make of such
heavy dispensations. it is GOD, and his hand -- it is GOD and his providence,
which we are first of all concerned to notice, acknowledge and improve. However
unjust our sufferings may be from man; yet, when we realize the hand of GOD,
the great and wise Governor of the world, as concerned herein, silence and
submission is our indispensible duty, and no murmer, or complaint ought ever to
be heard, but with reverence and humility it becomes us to bow before the LORD,
and adoring his sovereignty, ascribe righteousness to our GOD. Neither the
insults of oppressors, nor the flames of our once delightful habitations, nor
even the innocent blood of our brethren slain, should move to a murmuring word
or an angry thought, against GOD, his government, or providence. -- "Shall we
receive good at the hand of GOD, and shall we not receive evil?" Job ii. 10.
-- And "shall not the Judge of all the earth do right!" Genesis xviii. 25.
The more grievously we are smitten, the more deeply we are affected, the more
carefully should we endeavor to realize our dependence upon GOD, the more
religiously acknowledge his hand, and the more earnestly return to him that
smites. This is the lesson of instruction, which GOD expects we should learnt
by such bitter dispensations, and this the improvement he looks for, in us and
his people, in order to the restoration of his favor and our redemption from
enemies and oppressors, who threaten to lay waste and destroy. May these
things, th^n, be deeply impressed on each of our hearts. -- But I pass

Secondly, To observe the fate of oppressors, and the sentence of heaven
against those, that do violence to GOD'S people and shed innocent blood in
their land. Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom shall be a desolate
wilderness, for the violence against the children of Judah, because they have
shed innocent blood in their land.

However just it may be in GOD to correct his people and whatever right is
ascribed to him of improving the wicked, as the rod in his hand to correct, or
the sword to punish them; yet this alters not the nature of their oppressive
designs, neither does it abate their guilt, or alleviate their crime, in these
measures of injustice, violence or cruelty, by which the people of GOD are
distressed.

Thus GOD speaks of the Assyrian king, a prince noted in history for his
avarice and ambition, cruelty and oppression, (and in him, of the Assyrian
state, whose character was included in that of its king) saying -- "O Assyrian,
the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is mine indignation. I will
send him to an hypocritical nation; and against the people of my wrath will I
give him a charge to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them
down like the mire of the streets. Howbeit, he means not so, neither does his
heart think so, but it is in his heart to destroy. Wherefore it shall come to
pass, that when the LORD has performed his whole work upon mount Zion, and on
Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of Assyria,
and the glory of his high looks." Isai. x. 5. -- 12.
And so it came to pass: For this power, that with such a mighty hand, and for
so long a time, oppressed GOD'S people and other nations, in GOD'S due time,
felt the ^eight of the iron yoke, and received double for all the injustice,
oppression and cruelty it had exercised toward others.

In this, and many other circumstances, with which history abounds, it is easy
to see the fate of the enemies of GOD'S people and oppressors of mankind. --
But we need not go from the text, for satisfaction in this matter. In the words
of the prophecy before us, we have the sentence of heaven against the
oppressors of GOD'S people and the doom of those common enemies of mankind,
pronounced, and the reason thereof assigned, in the clearest terms. Egypt shall
be a desolation. Edom shall be a desolate wilderness, for the violence against
the children of Juda^, because they have shed innocent blood in their land.

The LORD is a GOD, that loves righteousness and hates iniquity, in whatever
shape, or character it appears. Injustice, oppression and violence (much less
the shedding of innocent blood) shall not pass unnoticed, by the just Governor
of the world. Sooner, or later, a just recompense will be made upon such
workers of iniquity. -- Yea, though hand join in hand, in measures of
oppression and violence, against GOD'S people; and though their avarice,
ambition, and lawless thirst for power and domination, may carry them on, 'till
their steps shall be marked with innocent blood; yet, certain it is, they shall
not, finally, go unpunished. For a time, indeed, and but for a time, such
workers of unrighteousness, such destroyers of mankind may practice and
prosper; but 'vengeance slow, is vengeance sure.' Their ways are marked before
GOD. Their punishment and destruction are sealed in his presence: And the time
is hastening, when destruction, without remedy, shall be their portion.

The truth of these sentiments has often been verified in providence, and the
proud princes and the most powerful states have been taught, by severe, by
fatal experience, that desolation from the LORD awaits the impiety of those,
that do violence to his people and 'shed innocent blood in their land.'

Here then we may see the light in which that people, or nation, are to be
considered, that walk in the ways of oppression, and that thirst for and shed
innocent blood. Here we may also see the ruin to which they are hastening, the
awful judgments that await them, and the great reason they have to fear the
sentence of heaven, denounced against them, in the prophecy before us, and its
literal fulfillment upon them. Which naturally leads in the last place.

Thirdly, To observe, in the prophecy before us, the peculiar care GOD takes of
his church and people, and the assurance they have, even when actually
suffering violence and under the cruel hand of oppression, of redemption,
restoration and establishment; and that GOD himself will plead their cause, and
both cleanse and avenge their innocent blood. Nothing can be more directly
expressive of this sentiment, or a firmer ground of assurance, for the
confirmation of the faith and hope of God's chosen people in the belief of it,
than the promise and prephecy, concerning Judah and Jerusalem in the text.
While Egypt and Edom, while the enemies and oppressiors of God's people, are
doomed to that desolation, they so justly deserve, the strongest assurances are
given, "that Judah shall dwell forever, and Jerusalem from generation to
generation For I, says God, will cleanse their blood, that I have not
cleansed: For the Lord dwells in Zion." The words are plain, and need no
comment. They speak the language of scripture, fact and experience, for the
confirmation of the faith and hope of God's church and chosen in days of
perplexity and darkness and when actually under the injustice, violence and
cruelty of inveterate enemies, or blood thirsty oppressors.

Here are two things, for the inducement and confirmation of the faith and hope
of God's church and people, in such times of darkness and distress, which are
well worthy serious notice and attention.

First, God's word and promise, in which he assures his people, that
notwithstanding the violence of their enemy against them, and the distress and
sorrow their oppressors may have caused them, by sheddin innocent blood among
them; yet they shall never avail to overthrow, or destroy them; but they shall
assuredly be redeemed and delivered out of their hands, and restored and
established, as his church and people, in a flourishing state.

And then, secondly, To leave no doubt upon their minds, as to the fulfillment
of this blessed promise, a gracious God condescends to explain himself in the
clearest terms possible, and to satisfy them, that nothing should fail of all
that he had promised, he assures them that he would take the work into his own
hands, and see to the accomplishment of it himself; that thus it might appear
to them and to the world of mankind, that the Lord was with them and dwelt ^n
the midst of them. "Judah shall dwell forever, and Jerusalem from generation to
generation: For I will cleanse their blood, that I have not cleansed; for the
Lord dwells in Zion." -- Words well suited to cheer and comfort the sinking
spirits of God's afflicted, oppressed people: and words which might rouse the
faith, and give a spring to the hope of the most feeble and faint-hearted,
among God's people, in the depths of distress. For 'God is not a man that he
should lie, nor the son of man that he should repent. Vid. 1. Sam. 15. 29.
-- 'Hath he promised, and shall he not perform? -- Has he spoken, and shall
he not bring it to pass?' --

Blood is said to be cleansed, or avenged, when justice has taken place, and
the murderer is punished. God may be said to cleanse the innocent blood, which
may have been shed among his people, by the sword of oppressors, or enemies,
when in providence he undertakes for them, avenges their blood upon them that
slew them, and reduces them to reason or ruin.

The sword is an appeal to heaven, -- when therefore, the arms of a people are
eventually successful, or by the immedate interposition of providence, their
enemies and oppressors are subdued or destroyed -- When a people are reinstated
in peace, upon equitable terms, and established in the enjoyment of all their
just rights and liberties, both civil and sacred: then may ^t be said, that the
Lord has cleansed their innocent blood, and then will it be manifestly
evident, that their God is with them and dwells in the midst of them.

Now of this God has given his people the strongest assurances, in the
prophecy before us: and these assurances are conformed by the word of God, to
his people, throughout the sacred scriptures. So that, though for their sins
and the multitude of their transgressions, a righteous God may justly afflict
and correct his people, by the hand of oppressors, and permit their most
important rights to be violated, their substance destroyed, their habitations
to be laid waste, or even the innocent blood of their brethren to be wantonly
shed in their land; yet still he is their God, in the midst of them, and will
readily appear for their help, when they return from their evil ways,
acknowledge his hand and implore his mercy and assistance. This holy disciple
is no more than what God has given his people to expect, as a reproof of their
declensions, and as a means of bringing them to a sense of their dependence
upon him. Such dispensations, are so far from being an evidence, that God has
forsaken his people, given them up, or forgotten to be gracious, that they are
rather to be considered as demonstrations of his paternal care and faithfulness
toward them. Agreeably, in his covenant with his servant David and his house,
this method of conduct is expressly stipulated, as a token of his special care
and faithfulness, and of the remembrance of the covenant he had made. "If his
children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments: -- Then will I visit
their transgression with the rod and their iniquity with stripes. Nevertheless,
my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness
to fail. My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of
my lips." Psalm. lxxxix. 30. 31. 32. and 33.


In such visitations, God evidently intends the best go^d of his people; not
their destruction, but their reformation: and if they see his hand, humble
themselves under it and seek him aright, God will not fail to remember his
covenant and his promises for them, and in his due time appear, in his power
and glory, for their relief. -- Yea the bowels of his mercy will be moved at
their distresses, and his language will be the same as unto his people of old,
when under the Egyptian yoke, they were caused to serve with cruel bondage --
'I have seen, I have seen the affliction of my people which is in Egypt, and
have heard their groaning, and am come down to deliver them." Acts vii. 34.
And to encourage his saints and people, to trust on his name and hope in his
mercy, a gracious God has most explicitly promised them his presence,
direction and assistance, in all their distresses, be they ever so numerous,
ever so great. His language is merciful, condescending and endearing --
especially when by the prophet Isaiah, he says to his afflicted people -- "When
thou passest through the waters. I will be with thee; and through the rivers,
they shall not overflow thee: When thou walk through the fire, thou shall
not be burnt; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. For I am the Lord thy
God, the holy One of Israel, thy Savior." Isai. xliii 2, 3.
From these passages of sacred writ, it appears, that as God in infinite
wisdom, sees fit to exercise his people with trials and afflictions; and
sometimes to call them to pass through the depths of adversity: so he has
provided for their support, and given them the greatest reason to hope for his
presence and assistance, and the strongest assurances, that they shall be
carried through all, and in the end rejoice in God, as the holy One of Israel,
their SAVIOR -- In short, nothing can be more expressive of God's care of his
people in distress, and of the solid ground they have to hope for redemption
and salvation, in his way and time, which are always the best.

We may add, that further to confirm our faith and encourage our hope, in those
blessed assurances of God's presence with his people, even in their heaviest
trials and greatest perplexities, we might safely appeal to the experience of
his chosen, in every age, from the beginning to the present time. This will
show how easy it is, with an infinitely wise God, to bring good out of evil,
and by the overruling hand of Providence, to cause the councils and measures
of persecutors and oppressors, to hasten the redemption and establishment of
the injured and oppressed, as well as to bring upon themselves, that confusion
and desolation they so justly deserve. -- And this will also prove, how truly
applicable the words of the prophet are, to God's chosen people in their
distresses, in every age, when speaking of the large experience Israel had had,
of the tender love and faithful care of a merciful God exercised toward them,
he says, that, "In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his
presence saved them: In his love and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare
them, and carried them all the days of old. Isai. vi. 3. 9.
"

Nothing is more evident from history and experience, than God's care of his
people, and the wisdom of his providence, in causing the violence and
oppression of their enemies, to operate for their advantage, and promote their
more speedy deliverance. This appears too plain, from various instances, to
admit of dispute.

The children of Israel would not have been, so early, persuaded to have left
the gardens of Egypt or the fertile fields of the land of Goshen, and in the
face of every danger, attempted to free themselves from the Egyptian yoke, had
not their burdens been increased to an unreasonable degree, by the violence and
cruelty of those that oppressed them, in that house of bondage. And Pharaoh and
his armies would never have met with that disgraceful defeat, and awful
destruction, which overtook them in the red sea, had they not been infatuated
to pursue their measures of oppression and violence, when after it was evident
that their cause was desperate, and that God was against them.

Christendom would never have been roused, from that state of ignorance, and
darkness, and slavery it was in -- the protestant league would never been
entered into with such firmness and resol^tion, to shake off the papal yoke,
and redeem both church and state from the hierarchy of Rome, had not the
enormities and violence of that power, by which they had been so long
oppressed, rose to an intolerable height, and put them upon the expedient. The
event of this bold attempt was happy. A just and faithful God crowned the
measures, of the confederate states, with success, beyond their most sanguine
expectations. The church was rescued from the darkness and error, in which it
had been involved for several hundred years before. A glorious reformation took
place, which in a good measure, restored the christian religion to its ancient
purity and native simplicitly, in many principal states and kingdoms in Europe.
And a foundation was laid for rescuing the civil liberties of individuals,
societies, states and kingdoms, as well as the common rights of mankind, from
the iron hand of tyranny, the good effects of which was felt, by the protestant
states and kingdoms, for several ages succeeding, and are not totally lost as
to some, even at the present day, though more than two centuries since. By this
important confederacy of the protestant powers, in Europe, it is evident, that,
under providence, the power of the beast and the false prophet received a shock
which it has never recovered, -- the papal power, both in church and state,
having been upon the decline, from that time to this.


The united states of Holland would not have been very easily induced, to have
opposed the power of Spain, when at the meridian of its strength and glory,
much less to have attempted independence of that kingdom, had they not been
effectually convinced, by a long series of injuries and oppression, and
numberless violations of their most sacred rights, that there was no other
remedy. It is worthy of remark, that when the Spanish court undertook the
subjugation of the Dutch provinces in the Netherlands, Spain was in the most
respectable state, it had been for a long time; having just concluded a
victorious war, and being then at peace with all the world. At the same time,
Spain had the best regulated army in Europe, commanded by the renowned Duke of
Alva, the most experienced General then upon the stage. This wise, experienced
and victorious General, with his veteran, victorious troops, was sent by the
Monarch and court of Spain (like Gage to Britain) upon the wholesome and
pacific business of supporting government in the Dutch provinces, and enforcing
obedience to what were called the laws of the kingdom, or the mandates of their
sovereign. Accordingly, after renewed injuries and repeated insults and
cruelties, which rather invigorated than disheartened the free and truly noble
spirits of the Dutch, at last, it came to blood! -- The contest was, as might
be expected, long and bitter! -- But, under every disadvantage, but the
righteousness of their cause, they rose superior to their mighty and numerous
oppressors; and heaven, at length, decided in their favor, crowned their
endeavors with desired success, and gave and established unto them that
freedom and independence, for which they had so bravely sought and so freely
bled. This freedom and independence, so dearly purchased, they well knew how to
prize and preserve; and by the smiles of heaven, upon the wisdom and policy of
their government, they have now enjoyed the blessings thereof, with but little
interruption from enemies abroad, or factions at home, for near two hundred
years: And, in proportion to the extent of their territories and the number of
inhabitants, they are, at this very time, justly esteemed one of the richest
and most flourishing states in Europe. Thus has a righteous God been pleased
to plead their cause, and cleanse and avenge their innocent blood; and set them
free from the oppressors hand. Is not the cause of Americans equally just? --
Is not their God the same?


Britons would never have resisted their kings, and flown to arms, in defenee
of their invaluable rights and liberties, had they not felt the weight of the
iron rod of oppression and tyranny, and seen their danger and the absolute
necessity of such resistance, to prevent the total deprivation, of all they
held dear and sacred, as Freemen, Christians and a free People. -- Charles
would not have lost his kingdom, and finally his life upon the Scaffold, by the
hand of the executioner; nor James been obliged, in disgrace, to quit his
throne and abdicate the government of the kingdom, had it not been for their
own violent counsels and measures, to oppress and enslave the people, whom they
were called to govern and protect.

Our fathers would never have forsook their native land, delightsome
habitations and fair possessions, and in the face of almost every danger and
distress, sought a safe retreat, for the enjoyment of religious and civil
liberty, among savage beasts and more savage men in the inhospitable wilds of
America; had they not been drove from thence, by the violence and cruelty of
persecutors and oppressors, in church and state. The hierarchy of the church,
by which they looked upon the rights of conscience infringed, and the arbitrary
measures of the state, by which they esteemed their civil liberties abridged,
if not grossly violated, rather than any views of worldly gain (as has been
enviously hinted by some) were the principal causes of their emigration, and
the hope and expectation of deliverance therefrom, gave the spring to the
hazzardous undertaking.

And when heaven so far smiled upon their enterprise, as to give them footing
in the land; and when, after numerous hardships and dangers, toils and
distresses, they had secured a possession for themselves and posterity, and
obtained a confirmation of those civil and religious liberties they had sought;
still retaining a filial affection toward their native country, they seemed to
have nothing more at heart than that Americans might be happy, in the enjoyment
of their just rights and liberties, as men and christians, under the protection
of Britain; and that Britain might be flourishing and glorious, in receiving
the profits of the labor, trade and industry of Americans: And that the
connection of America with Britain, and her dependence, in this way, upon the
Parent State, might have been preserved inviolate to the end of time. -- And it
may be added, that there is no just ground to suppose, that it would have ever
entered the heart of Americans, to have desired a dissolution of so happy a
connection with the Mother Country, or to have sought independence of Britain,
had they not been urged, and even forced upon such an expedient, by measures of
oppression and violence, and the shedding of innocent blood.

But, alas! -- Ill-judged counsels! -- Ill-fated measures of Britain, and the
British administration, with respect to America, have broken in upon the
pleasing scene, and fatally destroyed the happy prospects of both Britain and
America!

At the close of the last war, we arrived at that happy period, to which our
ancestors looked with earnest expectation as the utmost of their wishes, as the
answer of their prayers, and the reward of all their toils and sufferings. The
savages were subdued, those restless neighbors, the Frenc^ were subjected, and
this wide extended continent seemed to be given us for a possession: And we
were ready to say, 'there was none to make us afraid.' -- But how uncertain the
most blooming prospects? -- How vain -- how disappointing the most rational, as
well as raised expectations, in this imperfect state? -- Scarcely emerged from
the dangers and fatigues of a long and distressing war, we are unexpectedly
involved in perplexities and anxieties of different kind, which by degrees have
increased, 'till they are become more serious, dangerous and distressing, than
any ever yet felt, by God's people, in this once happy land.

Through the crafty insinuations, false representations and diabolical
counsels, of the enemies of God's people and the common rights of mankind, in
America and Britain, acts of oppression are made by the Parliament of England,
in which we are not represented, which deeply affect our most valuable
privileges. In open violation of our chartered rights, these acts of
unrighteousness and oppression, are attempted to be carried into execution, in
these colonies. After various threats of coercive measures, a military force is
sent to enforce them. An innocent, loyal people are distressed, and every art,
which wit or malice could invent, is used to flatter or fright, to divide or
dishearten, and finally subject us to the will ^f a power, not known in our
charters, or even in the British constitution itself. And as one of the natural
consequences of standing armies being stationed in populous cities, for such
execrable purposes, many of the inhabitants of Boston are insulted. At length,
under pretense of ill-treatment, the streets of that once flourishing city, are
stained with the innocent blood of a number of our brethren, wantonly or
cruelly slain, by those sons of oppression and violence! This refers to the
horrid massacre, in Boston, on the evening of the 5th of March, 1770, when the
guards, under the command of Capt. Preston, fired upon the inhabitants, in King
street, killed 5 persons upon the spot, and wounded a number of others, several
of whom afterward died of their wounds!


Upon the high resentments of the people, in consequence of this horrid outrage
and violence, there was, for a short time, a pause in their measures. -- For a
moment the oppressors themselves seemed to be struck with the horrid effects of
their own iniquitous proceedings, and stand aghast at the sight of the innocent
blood they had shed! Perhaps they were not, at that time, so thoroughly
hardened in sin, as they have proved themselves since! -- But this pause seemed
to be, not to repent of their evil deeds, but rather to collect themselves, and
devise some measures more effectual: For so far from giving over the execrable
design, the plan of oppression is renewed. New acts are passed to distress and
inslave us. The lust of domination appears no longer in disguise, but with open
face. -- The starving Port-Bill comes forth -- Gage arrives with his forces by
sea and land, to carry it into execution, with vigor and severity. -- And to
complete the scene, and at once, to make thorough work of oppression and
tyranny, immediately follow the Bills, that subvert the constitution, vacate
our charter, abridge us of the right of trial by juries of the vicinity, in
diverse specified capital cases, and expose us to be seized, contrary to the
laws of the land, and carried to England to be tried for our lives! -- As also
the Bill for establishing the popish religion in Canada, contrary to the faith
of the crown and the statutes of the kingdom.

Add to these things, the people are treated, in various instances, with
indignity, severity and even cruelty And, notwithstanding every possible
expression of a peaceful disposition, in this people, consistent with a
determined resolution and christian firmness, in defense of their rights and
liberties, which they held dearer than life, their property is frequently and
violently seized, and even their persons and lives are threatened. The
inhabitants of Salem are threatened with the sword, A detachment from the
troops, then at Danvers, actually marched, by Gage's order, into the town of
Salem, with ordern (as it was said) to fire upon the inhabitants, if they
refused to disperse. -- But, as it happened, they had accomplished the affairs
upon which they met, before the troops arrived, and even before they knew of
their approach. This happily prevented the troops the opportunity of executing
their orders, and of shedding of blood, for that time.
for peacefully meeting to consult upon matters of importance to themselves and
the public, as they had an undoubted right to do, by the standing laws of the
colony. A number of the most respectable inhabitants of that town, were
arrested and threatened with imprisonment, by General Gage's order, for calling
the inhabitants together, at the meeting aforesaid. The province stores of
powder, which were deposited at Medford, were also clandestinely seized, by a
large detachment of the troops, and conveyed with all possible dispatch, to
Boston; as were, at the same time, also, some fieldpieces at Cambridge This
seizure of the stores, etc. roused the people more than any thing, that had
happened before. Accordingly, the next day, viz. Sept. 2. 1774. several
thousands, not of the rubble, as ministerial hirelings have been disposed to
speak; but of the respectable freeholders and free men of the adjacent towns,
collected a Cambridge; and to show their resentment at such hostile measures,
and their determined resolution never to submit to the oppressive acts, without
tumult or outrage, called Lieut. Governor Oliver, and a number more of the
mandamus counselors before them, and invited them to resign their seats at the
board, and to declare, in a very solemn manner, that they never would hold any
office or post, by virtue of said acts. The gentlemen applied to, complied with
their proposals, to general satisfaction.

Whether this step, of the people, was prudent and justifiable, or not; it
served to discover their sentiments of the acts, of which they complained, and
their determined resolution to oppose them: And this was the main thing aimed
at, by the steps they took, upon this occasion.


Intrenchments are throwing up, by Gage's army, and the town of Boston becomes
a garrison, and the inhabitants become prisoners, at the pleasure of the troops
And notwithstanding Gage's repeated professions, of having no design against
the lives, or liberties, of the people, every thing has the appearance of
hostile intentions, and of the near approach of blood shed and war. Genesis Gage
repeatedly declared, in his answers to the remonstrances of the town of Boston,
the county of Worcester and the Provincial Congress, that he had no hostile
intentions, in any of these measures. With what truth and sincerity, the
General made such declarations, his after conduct fully determined.


Many inhabitants both of the town and country, are daily abused and insulted,
by the troops. The devotion of God's people, in their worshipping assemblies,
is frequently interrupted, and marks of the utmost contempt are cast upon
religion itself. Bodies of troops from time to time march into the country,
with a view (as was supposed) to alarm, terrify, or awe the inhabitants to a
submission. On the Sabbath, a day held sacred to God and religion, by
christians, while God's people were in his house, engaged in devotion and the
instituted service of religion, a detachment of these instruments of tyranny
and oppression, clandestinely landed at Marblehead, and making a quick march to
Salem, attempt to seize upon some cannon and other military stores deposited
there to be ready for use, if wanted upon any important emergency: -- But,
happily, they are disappointed in their designs, by the spirit and resolution
of the inhabitants, who speedily collected upon that alarming occasion This
unsuccessful expedition was made on LORD'S day, Feb. 26, 1775. The party
consisted of about 200 or 300 men; it was commanded by Lieut. Col. Leslie. The
vessels which brought them to Marblehead, arrived in the harbor, on the
morning of the sabbath; and the better to conceal their intentions, lay
quietly, at anchor, near to the wharves, with but very few hands upon deck (the
troops being kept close) 'till the people of the town were assembled for the
services of religion. -- While the inhabitants were thus engaged in their
devotions to GOD, the party landed and made a speedy march to Salem. But all
their precaution did not avail them for the accomplishment of their enterprise.
The eagle-eyes of a watchful and wary people, justly (...) of every measure of
their oppressors, are not easily evaded. Their motions were observed, and (...)
timely notice given, that such numbers were collected and such measures taken,
before they arrived, as effectually frustrated their design and obliged them to
return defeated and chagrined.


At length on the night of the eighteenth of April, 1775, the alarm is given of
the hostile designs of the troops. The militia of this town are called
together, to consult and prepare for whatever might be necessary, or in their
power, for their own, and the common safety; though without the least design of
commencing hostilties, upon these avowed enemies and oppressors of their
country. In the mean time, under cover of the darkness, a brigade of these
instruments of violence and tyranny, make their approach, and with a quick and
silent march, on the morning of the nineteenth, they enter this town. And this
is the place where the fatal scene begins! -- They approach with the morning's
light; and more like murderers and cutthroats, than the troops of a christian
king, without provocation, without warning, when no war was proclaimed, they
draw the sword of violence, upon the inhabitants of this town, and with a
cruelty and barbarity, which would have made the most hardened savage blush,
they shed INNOCENT BLOOD! -- But, O my GOD! --! How shall I speak! -- or how
describe the distress, the horror of that awful morn, that gloomy day! --
Yonder The field (not of battle but of murder and bloodshed, where our men were
fired upon by the troops.
field can witness the innocent blood of our brethren slain! -- And from thence
does their blood cry unto God for vengeance from the ground! -- There the
tender father bled, and there the beloved son! -- There the hoary head, and
there the blooming youth! -- And there the man in his full strength, with the
man of years! -- They bleed -- they die, not by the sword of an open enemy
(with whom war is proclaimed) in the field of battle; but by the hand of those
that delight in spoil, and lurk privily that they may shed innocent blood! --
But they bleed, they die, not in their own cause only; but in the cause of this
whole people -- in the cause of God, their country and posterity. -- And they
have not bled, they shall not bleed in vain. -- Surely there is one that
avengeth, and that will plead the cause of the injured and oppressed; and in
his own way and time, will both cleanse and avenge their innocent blood. -- And
the names of Munroe, Parker, and others, that fell victims to the rage of
blood-thirsty oppressors, on that gloomy morning, shall be had in grateful
remembrance, by the people of this land, and transmitted to posterity, with
honor and respect, throughout all generations. The persons killed, in the
morning, when hostilities were first commenced, were, Messieurs Robert Munro,
Jonas Parker, Samuel Hadley, Jonathan Harrington, jun. Isaac Muzzy, Caleb
Harrington and John Brown, of Lexington; and one -- Porter, of Woburn. Wounded,
Jedediah Munro, Thomas Winship, Nathaniel Farmer, John Robbins, Solomon Pierce,
John Tidd, Joseph Comee, E^enezer Munro, jun. and Prince, a Negro, of
Lexington, and Jacob Bacon, of Woburn. Afternoon, Killed, Jedediah Munro, John
Raymonds and Nathaniel Wyman. Wounded in pursuit of the enemy, when retreating,
Francis Brown, all of Lexing^on.


-- But who shall comfort the distressed relatives, -- the mourning widows, the
fatherless children, the weeping parents, or the afflicted friends? -- May the
consolations of that God, who has hitherto supported them, be still their
support! -- Upon him may they still depend, and from him and his grace may they
still derive all needed supplies, in things spiritual and temporal; and yet
more and more experience the faithfulness and truth, the mercy and goodness, of
the God of all comfort.

May those that were wounded, and have since experienced the tender mercy of
that God, "who wounds, and heals, and binds up," be deeply impressed with
a sense of his distinguishing goodness, that their lives were spared, while
others were taken; and be persuaded, more entirely than ever, to devote them to
God, his service and glory

May all in this place, still carefully remember, notice and improve this awful
dispensation. -- Particularly, it concerns, not only those whose substance has
been plundered, and whose habitations have been burnt, by these lawless
invaders; but also all in general, diligently and seriously to enquire,
wherefore it is, that a righteous God is contending with us, by the fire and
sword of the oppressor: -- And wherefore it is that this awful scene, of
bloodshed and war, was opened in this place. May we still humble ourselves
before God, under a sense of the terrible things, which in righteousness he
has done in the midst of us. May we also be deeply impressed, with a most
grateful sense of the goodness of God, in that so much mercy was remembered in
judgment; that so few were found among the wounded and slain, and so few
habitations were consumed by the fire of the enemy, when so many were spared,
that were equally exposed. And may this day be remembered, to the glory of God,
and our own instruction and improvement, so long as we live.

But it is not by us alone, that this day is to be noticed. -- This ever
memorable day is full of importance to all around -- to this whole land and
nation; and big with the fate of Great Britain and America. -- From this
remarkable day will an important era begin for both America and Britain. And
from the nineteenth of April, 1775, we may venture to predict, will be dated,
in future history, THE LIBERTY or SLAVERY of the AMERICAN WORLD, according as a
sovereign God shall see fit to smile, or frown upon the interesting cause, in
which we are engaged.

How far the prophecy before us, may be applicable, upon this solemn occasion,
and with what degree of truth, or probability, it may be predicted, in
consequence of the present unjust and unnatural war, "that Great Britain shall
be a desolation, and England be a desolate wilderness, for the violence against
the children of America, because they have shed INNOCENT BLOOD in their land:
But America shall dwell forever, and this people from generation to generation.
And the LORD himself will cleanse their blood, that he has not already
cleansed." -- How far (I say) this prophecy may be applicable, in the present
interesting contest, and how far it may be accomplished in the issue thereof,
God only knows, and time only can discover -- But of this we are certain, if we
"humble ourselves under the mighty hand of God upon us, we shall be exalted, in
his due time;" and if we rightly improve his dealings, "accept the punishment
of our sins" and righteously trust in his name, we shall see his salvation.

From what has already happened in the rise and progress and even unto the
present state of this most intere^^ing conflict, we have the greatest reason to
hope for an happy issue, in the end. Though with fire and sword, our enemies
and oppressors have endeavored to lay w^ste and destroy, and though they have
begun and ca^^ed on the war, so far as their power could enable them, with more
than savage cruelty and barbarity; yet, through the puculiar favor of heaven,
they have not been able to carry their designs to effect; yea, in most of their
enterprises, they have been greatly disappointed. -- Not to say defeated and
disgraced. -- Instead of awing the people into submission, by those measures of
violence and cruelty, with which they commenced hostilities against us, as they
undoubtedly expected, their spirits have been roused and awakened thereby,
beyond what any other means could have ever affected: and with a union and
firmness, exceeding the most sanguine expectations, they have armed to defend
themselves and their country, and to revenge the injuries received and the
innocent blood of their brethren slain. And a merciful God, in various
instances, has crowned our arms with success and victory. Not only the
acquisitions at the westward, and the progress of our army in Canada, but the
preservation and defense of this colony; and above all, the unexpected
evacuation of the town of Boston, which, at such immense cost, they had
fortified, and had so long in their possession -- and their destroying the
works of their own hands, which with so much labor and expense, they had
erected; bespeak the special favor of heaven, to this injured and oppressed
people; and appear to be happy omens of those further successes, which are
necessary to complete our deliverance, and render this land a quiet habitation.

May that God, who is a God of righteousness and salvation, still appear for
us, go forth with our armies, tread down our enemies, and cleanse and avenge
our innocent blood. And may we be prepared, by a general repentance and
thorough reformation, for his gracious and powerful interposition in our
behalf; and then may we see the displays of his power and glory for our
salvation Which God of his infinite mercy grant, for his mercy's sake in Christ
Jes^^*

AMEN.
A NARRATIVE, etc.
As it was not consistent with the limits of a single discourse, to give a full
account of the particulars of this most savage and murderous affair; the
following plain and faithful narrative of facts, as they appeared to us in this
place, may be matter of satisfaction.

ON the evening of the eighteenth of April, 1775, we received two messages; the
first verbal, the other by express, in writing, from the committee of safety,
who were then sitting in the westerly part of Cambridge, directed to the
Honorable JOHN HANCOCK, Esquire; (who, with the Honorable SAMUEL ADAMS, Esquire; was
then providentially with us) informing, "that eight or nine officers of the
king's troops were seen, just before night, passing the road toward Lexington,
in a musing contemplative posture; and it was suspected they were out upon some
evil design."

As both these gentlemen had been frequently and even publicly, threatened, by
the enemies of this people, both in England and America, with the vengeance of
the British administration: -- And as Mr. Hancock in particular had been, more
than once, personally insulted, by some officers of the troops, in Boston; it
was not without some just grounds supposed that under cover of the darkness,
sudden arrest, if not assassination might be attempted, by these instruments of
tyranny!

To prevent any thing of this kind, ten or twelve men were immediately
collected, in arms, to guard my house, through the night.

In the mean time, said officers passed through this town, on the road toward
Concord: It was therefore thought expedient to watch their motions, and if
possible make some discovery of their intentions. Accordingly, about 10 o'clock
in the evening, three men, on horses, were dispatched for this purpose. As they
were peaceably passing the road toward Concord, in the borders of Lincoln,
they were suddenly stopped by said officers, who rode up to them, and putting
pistols to their breasts and seizing their horses bridles, swore, if they
stirred another s^ep, they should be all dead men! -- The officers detained
them several hours, as prisoners, examined, searched, abused and insulted them;
and in their hasty return (supposing themselves discovered) they left them in
Lexington. -- Said officers also took into custody, abused and threatened with
their lives several other persons; some of whom they met peaceably passing on
the road, others even at the doors of their dwellings, without the least
provocation, on the part of the inhabitants, or so much as a question asked by
them.

Between the hours of twelve and one, on the morning of the NINETEENTH OF
APRIL, we received intelligence, by express, from the Honorable JOSEPH WARREN,
Esquire; at Boston, "that a large body of the king's troops (supposed to be a
brigade of about 12, or 1500) were embarked in boats from Boston, and gone over
to land on Lechmere's-Point (so called) in Cambridge: And that it was shrewdly
suspected, that they were ordered to seize and destroy the stores, belonging to
the colony, then deposited at Concord," in consequence of General Gage's
unjustifiable seizure of the provincial magazine of powder at Medford, and
other colony stores in several other places.

Upon this intelligence, as also upon information of the conduct of the
officers as abovementioned, the militia of this town were alarmed, and ordered
to meet on the usual place of parade; not with any design of commencing
hostilities upon the king's troops, but to consult what might be done for our
own and the people's safety: And also to be ready for whatever service
providence might call us out to, upon this alarming occasion, in case overt
acts of violence, or open hostilities should be committed by this mercenary
band of armed and blood-thirsty oppressors.

About the same time, two persons were sent express to Cambridge, if possible,
to gain intelligence of the motions of the troops, and what rout they took.

The militia met according to order; and waited the return of the messengers,
that they might order their measures as occasion should require. Between 3 and
4 o'clock, one of the expresses returned, informing, that there was no
appearance of the troops, on the roads, either from Cambridge or Charlestown;
and that it was supposed that the movements in the army the evening before,
were only a feint to alarm the people. Upon this, therefore, the militia
company were dismissed for the present, but with orders to be within call of
the drum, -- waiting the return of the other messenger, who was expected in
about an hour, or sooner, if any discovery should be made of the motions of the
troops. -- But he was prevented by their silent and sudden arrival at the place
where he was, waiting for intelligence. So that, after all this precaution, we
had no notice of their approach, 'till the brigade was actually in the town,
and upon a quick march within about a mile and a quarter of the meeting house
and place of parade.

However, the commanding officer thought best to call the company together, --
not with any design of opposing so superior a force, much less of commencing
hostilities; but only with a view to determine what to do, when and where to
meet, and to dismiss and disperse.

Accordingly, about half an hour after four o'clock, alarm guns were fired, and
the drums beat to arms; and the militia were collecting together. -- Some, to
the number of about 50, or 60, or possibly more, were on the parade, others
were coming toward it. -- In the mean time, the troops, having thus stolen a
march upon us, and to prevent any intelligence of their approach, having seized
and held prisoners several persons whom they met unarmed upon the road, seemed
to come determined for MURDER and BLOODSHED; and that whether provoked to it,
or not! -- When within about half a quarter of a mile of the meeting house,
they halted, and the command was given to prime and load; which being done,
they marched on 'till they came up to the east end of said meeting house, in
sight of our militia (collecting as aforesaid) who were about 12, or 13 rods
distant -- Immediately upon their appearing so suddenly, and so nigh, Capt.
Parker, who commanded the militia company, ordered the men to disperse, and
take care of themselves; and not to fire. -- Upon this, our men dispersed; --
but, many of them, not so speedily as they might have done, not having the most
distant idea of such brutal barbarity and more than savage CRUELTY, from the
troops of a British KING, as they immediately experienced! --! -- For, no
sooner did they come in fight of our company, but one of them, supposed to be
an officer of rank, was heard to say to the troops, " Damn them; we will have
them!" -- Upon which the troops shouted aloud, huzza'd, and rushed furiously
toward our men. -- About the same time, three officers (supposed to be Col.
Smith, Major Pitcairn and another officer) advanced, on horse back, to the
front of the body, and coming within 5 or 6 rods of the militia, one of them
cried out, " ye villains, ye Rebels, disperse; Damn you, disperse!" -- or words
to this effect. One of them (whether the same, or not, is not easily
determined) said, " Lay down your arms; Damn you, why don't you lay down your
arms!" -- The second of these officers, about this time, fired a pistol toward
the militia, as they were dispersing -- The foremost, who was within a few
yards of our men, brandishing his sword, and then pointing toward them, with a
loud voice said, to the troops, "Fire! -- By God, fire!" -- which was instantly
followed by a discharge of arms from the said troops, succeeded by a very heavy
and close fire upon our party, dispersing, so long as any of them were within
reach -- Eight were left dead upon the ground! For the names of the killed and
wounded, see Ser. page 28, note.
Ten were wounded. -- The rest of the company, through divine goodness, were
(to a miracle) preserved unhurt in this murderous action! --

As to the question, 'Who fired first?' -- if it can be a question with any; we
may observe, that though General Gage has been pleased to tell the world, in
his account of this savage transaction, "that the troops were fired upon by the
rebels out of the meeting house, and the neighboring houses, as well as by
those that were were in the field; and that the troops only returned the fire,
and passed on their way to Concord;" -- yet nothing can be more certain than
the contrary, and nothing more false, weak, or wicked, than such a
representation.

To say nothing of the absurdity of the supposition, 'that 50, 60, or even 70
men, should, in the open field commence hostilities with 12, or 1500, of the
best troops of Britain, 1200, or 1500, was the number we then supposed the
brigade to consist of: though afterward, by the best accounts, it appeared,
that there were but about ^00.
nor of the known determination of this small party of Americans, upon no
consideration whatever, to begin the scene of blood From a most intimate
acquaintance with the sentiments of the inhabitants at this town, then
collected in arms, I think I may boldly assert, that it was their know a
determination not to commence hostilities, upon the king's troops, though they
were equally determined to stand by their rights to the last.
A cloud of witnesses, whose veracity cannot be justly disputed, upon oath have
declared, in the most express and positive terms, ' that the British troops
fired first: See narrative and depositions, published by authority.
And I think, we may safely add, without the least reason or provocation. --
Nor was there opportunity given, for our men to have saved themselves, either
by laying down their arms, or dispersing, as directed, had they been disposed
to; as the command to fire upon them was given almost at the same instant, that
they were ordered, by the British officers, to disperse, (...) lay down their
arms, etc.

In short, so far from firing first upon the king's troops; upon the most
careful enquiry, it appears, that but very few of our people fired at all; and
even they did not fire till after being fired upon by the troops, they were
wounded themselves, or saw others killed, or wounded by them, and looked upon
it next to impossible for them to escape.

As to any firing from the meeting house, as Gage represents; it is certain,
that there were but four men in the meeting house, when the troops came up: and
they were then getting some ammunition, from the town stock, and had not so
much as loaded their guns (except one, who never discharged it) when the troops
fired upon the militia. And as to the neighboring houses, it is equally
certain, that there was no firing from them, unless, after the dispersion of
our men, some, who had fled to them for shelter, might fire from them upon the
troops.

One circumstance more, before the brigade quitted Lexington, I beg leave to
mention, as what may give a further specimen of the spirit and character, of
the officers and men, of this body of troops. -- After the militia company were
dispersed and the firing ceased, the troops drew up and formed, in a body on
the common, fired a volley and gave three huzzas, by way of triumph, and as
expressive of the joy of VICTORY and glory of CONQUEST! --! -- Of this
transaction, I was a witness, having, at that time, a fair view of their
motions, and being at the distance of not more than 70 or 80 rods from them.

Whether this step was honorary to the detachment, or agreeable to the rules of
war -- or how far it was expressive of bravery, heroism and true military
glory, for 800 disciplined troops of Great-Briain, without notice or
provocation, to fall upon 60, or 70, undisciplined Americans, who neither
opposes nor molested them, and murder some and disperse the rest, and then to
give the shout and make the triumph of victory, is not for me to determine; but
must be submitted to the impartial world to judge. -- That "there is a God with
whom is the power, and the glory, and the victory," is certain: but whether he
will set his seal to the triumph, made upon this most peculiar occasion, by
following it with further successes, and finally giving up this people into the
hands of those, that have thus cruelly commenced hostilities against them, must
be left to time to discover. -- But to return from this digression, if it may
be called a disgression.

Having thus vanquished the party in Lexington, the troops marched on for
Concord, to execute their orders, in destroying the stores belonging to the
colony, deposited there -- They met with no interruption in their march to
Concord. -- But by some means or other, the people of Concord had notice of
their approach and designs, and were alarmed about break of day; and collecting
as soon, and as many as possible, improved the time they had before the troops
came upon them, to the best advantage, both for concealing and se u^ing as many
of the public stores as they could, and in preparing for defense. -- By the
stop of the troops at Lexington, many thousands were saved to the colony, and
they were, in a great measure, frustrated in their design.

When the troops made their approach to the easterly part of the town, the
provincials of Concord and some neighboring towns, were collected and
collecting in an advantageous post, on a hill, a little distance from the
meeting house, north of the road, to the number of about 150, or 200: but
finding the troops to be more than three times as many, they wisely retreated,
first to a hill about 80 rods further north, and then over the northbridge (so
called) about a mile from the town: and there they waited the coming of the
militia of the towns adjacent, to their assistance.

In the mean time, the British detachment marched into the center of the town.
A party of about 200, was ordered to take possession of said bridge, other
parties were dispatched to various parts of the town, in search of public
stores, while the remainder were employed in seizing and destroying, whatever
they could find in the townhouse, and other places, where stores had been
lodged. -- But before they had accomplished their design, they were interrupted
by a discharge of arms, at said bridge.

It seems, that of the party abovementioned, as ordered to take possession of
the bridge, one half were marched on about two miles, in search of stores, at
Col. Barret's and that part of the town: while the other half, consisting of
toward 100 men, under Capt. Lawrie, were left to guard the bridge. The
provincials, who were in sight of the bridge, observing the troops attempting
to take up the planks of said bridge, thought it necessary to dislodge them,
and gain possession of the bridge. -- They accordingly marched, but with
express orders not to fire, unless first fired upon by the king's troops. Upon
their approach toward the bridge, Capt. Lawrie's party fired upon them, killed
Capt. Davis and another man dead upon the spot, and wounded several others.
Upon this our militia rushed on, with a spirit becoming freeborn Americans,
returned the fire upon the enemy, killed 2, wounded several and drove them from
the bridge, and pursued them toward the town, 'till they were covered by a
reinforcement from the main body. The provincials then took post on a hill, at
some distance, north of the town: and as their numbers were continually
increasing, they were preparing to give the troops a proper discharge, on their
departure from the town.

In the mean time, the king's troops collected; and having dressed their
wounded, destroyed what stores they could find, and insulted and plundered a
number of the inhabitants, prepared for a retreat.

"While at Concord, the troops disabled two 24 pounders; destroyed their 2
carriages, and seven wheels for the same, with their limbers. Sixteen wheels
for brass 3 pounders, and 2 carriages with limber and wheels for two 4
pounders. They threw into the river, wells, etc. about 500 weight of ball: and
stove about 60 barrels of flour; but not having time to perfect their work, one
half of the flour was afterward saved." See Rev. Mr. Gordon's account.


The troops began a hasty retreat about the middle of the day: and were no
sooner out of the town, but they began to meet the effects of the just
resentments of this injured people. The provincials fired upon them from
various quarters, and pursued them (though without any military order) with a
firmness and intrepidity, beyond what could have been expected, on the first on
set, and in such a day of confusion and distress! -- The fire was returned, for
a time, with great fury, by the troops as they retreated, though (through
divine goodness) with but little execution -- This scene continued, with but
little intermission, till they returned to Lexington; when it was evident,
that, having l^^t numbers in killed, wounded, and prisoners that fell into our
hands, they began to be, not only fatigued, but greatly disheartened. And it is
supposed they must have soon surrendered at discretion, had they not been
reinforced. -- But Lord Percy's arrival with another brigade, of about 1000
men, and 2 field pieces, about half a mile from Lexington meeting house,
toward Cambridge, gave them a seasonable respite.

The coming of the reinforcement, with the cannon, (which our people were not
so well acquainted with then, as they have been since) put the provincials also
to a pause, for a time. -- But no sooner were the king's troops in motion, but
our men renewed the pursuit with equal, and even greater ardor and intrepidity
than before, and the firing on both sides continued, with but little
intermission, to the close of the day, when the troops entered Charlestown,
where the provincials could not follow them, without exposing the worthy
inhabitants of that truly patriotic town, to their rage and revenge. -- That
night and the next day, they were conveyed in boats, over Charles-River to
B^ston, glad to secure themselves, under the cover of the shipping, and by
strengthening and perfecting the fortifications, at every part, against the
further attacks of a justly incensed people, who, upon intelligence of the
murderous transactions of this fatal day, were collecting in arms, round the
town, in great numbers, and from every quarter.

In the retreat of the king's troops from Concord to Lexington, they ravaged
and plundered, as they had opportunity, more or less, in most of the houses
that were upon the road. -- But after they were joined by Piercy's brigade, in
Lexington, it seemed as if all the little remains of humanity had left them;
and rage and revenge had taken the reins, and knew no bounds! -- Clothing,
furniture, provisions, goods, plundered, broken, carried off, or destroyed! --
Buildings (especially dwelling houses) abused, defaced, battered, shattered and
almost ruined! -- And as if this had not been enough, numbers of them doomed to
the flames! -- Three dwelling houses, two shops and a burn, were laid in ashes,
in Lexington Deacon Lo^ing's house and (...), Mrs. Lydia Mulliken's house, and
her son's shop, and Mr. Joshua Bund's house and shop.
! -- Many others were set on fire, in this town, in Cambridge, etc. and must
have shared the same fate, had not the close pursuit of the provincials
prevented, and the flames been (...) quenched! -- Add to all this; the unarmed,
the aged and infirm, who were unable to flee, are inhumanly stabbed and
murdered ^n their habitations! -- Yea, even women in childbed, with their
helpless babes in their arms, do not escape the horrid alternative, of being
either cruelly murdered in their beds, burnt in their habitations, or turned
into the streets to perish with cold, nakedness and distress See dep. published
by authority.
! -- But I forbear -- words are too insignificant to express, the horrid
barbarities of that distressing day! --! --! "Quorum parts magna fui!" VIR.


Our loss, in the several actions of that day, was 49 killed, 34 wounded and 5
missing, who were taken prisoners, and have since been exchanged. The enemy's
loss, according to the best accounts, in killed, wounded and missing, about 300.

As the war was thus began with savage cruelty, in the aggressors; so it has
been carried on with the same temper and spirit, by the enemy in but too many
instances. Witness the wanton cruelty, discovered in burning Charlestown,
Norfolk, Falmouth, etc. But as events which have taken place since the ever
memorable nineteenth of April, 1775, do not properly come within the compass of
this narrative, they must be left for some abler pen to relate.

ERRATA.
SERMON, page 9, line 10, dele im. Page 13, line 15, read proudest. Page 16,
line 1, read confirmed. ibid, line 15, read discipline. Page 19, line 6, read
even. Page 20, line 7, read defense. ib. Note, line 10, read Boston. Page 23,
line 1, read of a different. ib. line 14, read coercive. Page 25, line 13, read
thrown. Page 30, line 24, read religiously. ib. line 34, read peculiar. Page
31, line 7, read effected.

FINIS.

