A VALEDICTORY ADDRESS TO THE YOUNG GENTLEMEN, WHO COMMENCED BACHELORS OF ARTS,
AT YALE-COLLEGE, JULY 25th, 1776.

NEW HAVEN Printed by (...)

IN the trifle, here presented to the Public, the reader will doubtless
observe, that there are scarce any allusions to those great and important
events, which have rendered the present year so distinguished an Era in the
history of mankind. To prevent the censure of criticism upon this circumstance,
it may be necessary to inform him, that it was written at the commencement of
the last summer. The reason why those alterations are not made, which the
present situation of American affairs might justly require, and which, the
writer is sensible, would be a principal ornament to the piece, is solely an
extreme weakness of sight. This also must be accepted as an excuse for the want
of that correctness and elegance, which are due to the opinion of mankind, and
to the politeness of those young Gentlemen, whose request is the only cause of
its publication. As no more copies of it will be printed, than are subscribed
for, if any of the purchasers are disappointed, the author begs leave to
observe, that the blame is wholly chargeable to their solicitations; as, by
hearing it pronounced, they had a fair opportunity of judging for themselves.

AN ADDRESS.
DEAR YOUNG GENTLEMEN,
HOWEVER happy I might be in enumerating your many good qualities, and dwelling
upon your excellent conduct, especially that which respected myself; however
strongly inclined to the pleasing, though melancholy task of taking a tender, and
affectionate farewell of you, a regard to your interest forbids me to indulge
the inclination. Actuated by that regard, after having, in the name of all the
Overseers and Instructors of this College, confessed the very sensible pleasure
you have given us by this grateful acknowledgement of our kind offices, and the
greater pleasure, we have received from your manly, regular and amiable
conduct, through your whole academical existence, I cannot hesitate to spend this
last opportunity, as I have already consumed a considerable period of my life,
in attempting your improvement. -- But that I may promote this important
purpose in the fullest and best manner, give the leave to describe to you the
nature and circumstances of the country, which will probably be the scene of
your future actions. This I will attempt with as much conciseness as possible.
If I should enlarge beyond the expectations of my audience, I flatter myself
the extensive, and interesting nature of the subject will be my excuse.

THAT part of this vast continent, called North America, extends from the 8th
degree of north latitude to the Pole; and, according to the latest discoveries,
from the 50th degree of west longitude, almost to the eastern shore of Asia.
The lands within the Artic circle, are useless and uninhabitable. Between that
circle and the 50th degree of latitude, although the country is incapable of
agricultural improvement, yet, considered in a commercial light, it is highly
valuable. From thence, to the isthmus of Darien, the southern limit, extends
the finest tract on the globe. It Is length is between two and three thousand
miles, and it is breadth, in some places, at least as great.

IN such an extensive region, which stretches through so many climates, the air,
being of a very various temperature, is, as we might reasonably expect, in some
parts of a greater, in others of a less degree of salubrity. Except the kingdom
of Mexico, which feels the usual inconveniences of the torrid zone, we may in
general observe, that it is as healthy, serene, and delightful, as any country
of the same magnitude on the earth.

NOR are it is advantages of soil less conspicuous, than those of the climate.
Whatever may conduce to health, plenty and happiness is almost the spontaneous
product of it is fields. Our corn is of every kind, of the best quality, and of
a quantity which cannot be (...). Our cattle and fruits of every kind are
without number. Our plants and flowers, for health and pleasure, appear to have
been scattered by the same benevolent hand, which called forth the luxuriance
of Eden. All that the wish of an epicure, the pride of a beauty, or the curious
mind of a naturalist can ask to variegate the table of luxury, to increase the
shine of splendour, or delight the endless thirst of knowledge, is showered in
profusion on this, the favorite land of heaven.

NOR are these bounties bestowed only on the earth. The ocean, the lakes and
the rivers pour forth an unlimited abundance of wealth and pleasure. Commonly
the munificence of the DEITY is equally distributed. Where the soil is barren,
the sea is fruitful, and supplies the defect. Where the land is fertile, the
sea is empty and unfurnished. Here the ocean and the continent were evidently
formed for each other by the same open hand, and stored with blessings by the
same unlimited indulgence of bounty. That this is the unstrained voice of
truth, and not the extravagant declamation of panegyric, might, with the utmost
ease, be demonstrated by a bare enumeration of the articles, which constitute
the furniture of this mighty structure; -- but as the time will not suffer such
an enumeration, and especially, as none of my audience can be supposed ignorant
of them, I shall pass them without further notice.

WERE all these blessings bestowed on a country, which, like many in the world,
was incapable of enjoying them generally, by reason of a destitution of
conveniences for navigation and commerce, a principal part of their value would
be lost. But heaven, resolving that all the circumstances of this continent
should be of a piece, has blessed it with naval and commercial advantages,
superior to those of any state on earth. It Is seacoasts reach on both sides
many thousands of miles. It Is harbors are safe, spacious, and innumerable.
From these an easy, advantageous and unlimited intercourse may be extended to
every corner of the globe. Whilst our rivers and lakes are not to be paralleled
in number or size. Perhaps the Mississipi alone furnishes as extensive an
inland navigation, as half the rivers in Europe united. Whilst innumerable
other spacious streams waft plenty and happiness through the wide regions where
they flow.

BUT all this is insufficient to complete the felicity of a country. If even
these blessings; great as they are, were insecure; if they were naturally
exposed to the ravages of enemies, and the desolations of war, the inhabitants
would be miserable, amid all the indulgence of heaven. But to finish the
superiority of North America over every other country, the MOST HIGH has
replenished it with every source of strength and greatness. It Is present
circumstances, which arise from events altogether political and accidental, are
no objection to this account. For a war like this cannot with any probability
be a second time expected. I proceed therefore to observe that, beside the
inconceivable wealth and power, which must necessarily roll in upon this infant
empire, from an unbounded commerce, our internal supplies are of every kind;
and inexhaustible. Our forests are filled with the finest timber, and exsude in
the greatest abundance, tar, pitch and turpentine. Our fields may, with the
utmost facility be covered with hemp and flax. Our provisions can never fail.
Our mountains are every where enriched with sulphur, iron and lead. Our
improvements in the art of manufacturing of saltpeter and gunpowder, are
astonishing even to ourselves. Our uncorrupted manners, and our happy climate,
nourish innumerable multitudes of brave, generous and hardy soldiers, to
improve these advantages, to strike terror into their enemies, and brighten the
glory of their country.

BUT were we destitute of these advantages, it is a most important interest of
every nation on earth, to cultivate our friendship, and open their ports to our
ships. That this is the case might be easily demonstrated, by a description of
the political and commercial interests of the various kingdoms of the world;
but this would be the subject of a volume; however, I cannot but observe, that,
if any kingdom should unwisely become our enemy, the immense distance between
us and them, the consequential difficulty of transporting troops hither, and of
furnishing them with provisions when they arrive, (if we are faithful to
ourselves) must blast their brightest prospects, and whelm them in ignominy and
ruin.

BUT the fairest part of the scene is yet to be unfolded. Not all the articles
I have mentioned, could spread happiness through the continent, if the manners
of the inhabitants were corrupted and luxurious, or their civil government
arbitrary and slavish. But a few observations will convince us that political,
as well as natural advantages promise in this western world, the existence of
the greatest empire the hand of time ever raised up to view.

THE southern and western parts of North America, subject to the dominion of
Spain, if we may believe their own historians, are peopled with as vicious,
luxurious, mean-spirited and contemptible a race of beings, as any that ever
blackened the pages of infamy. Generally descended from the refuse of mankind,
situated in a hot, wealthy and plentiful country, and educated from their
infancy under the most shocking of all governments, the tyranny of servants
invested with unlimited power, and sent to make their own fortunes, by
squeezing their subjects; a tyranny rendered ten times more horrible by the
infernal domination of an abandoned priesthood; can we wonder that they have
lost every trace of that generous pride, which prompts to brave, disinterested
actions the European Spaniard, and are tainted with all the vices and blots of
their parent nation, increased and deepened by an endless multitude of their
own? This concise, but very just account of them must necessarily convince us
that, the moment our interest demands it, these extensive regions will be our
own; that the present race of inhabitants will either be entirely exterminated,
or revive to the native human dignity, by the generous and beneficent influence
of just laws, and rational freedom. A distinction therefore between them and
ourselves, in the present consideration of the necessary, future greatness of
the Western World, will be useless and impertinent.

I PROCEED then to observe, that this continent is inhabited by a people, who
have the same religion, the same manners, the same interests, the same
language, and the same essential forms and principles of civil government. This
is an event, which, since the building of Babel, 'till the present time, the
sun never saw. That a vast continent, containing near three thousand millions
of acres of valuable land, should be inhabited by a people, in all respects
one, is indeed a novelty on earth. Differences in religion always produce
persecutions and bloodshed. Difference of manners, as we are naturally and
fondly attached to our own, cannot but occasion coldness, contempt and
ill will. Contending interests ever exist with disputes and end in war. Without
sameness of language, it would be impossible to preserve that easiness of
communication, that facility and dispatch in the management of business, which
the extensive concerns of a great empire indispensably require. Essentially
various forms, and unlike principles of government create all the differences I
have mentioned, and are consequently the parents of endless contests, slaughter
and desolation. A sameness in these important particulars, cannot fail to
produce the happiest effects. It wrought miracles in the minute, microscopic
states of Greece. What may we not expect from it is benign influence on the vast
regions of America. All the great empires of the world, though much inferior to
this in extent of valuable territory, and every other natural advantage, were
infinitely less our inferiors in these respects, than in the interesting
circumstances above mentioned. They consisted of various nations, not so widely
separated by mountains, deserts and seas, as by a discordance of manners
interests, and principles both of religion and civil government. Their grandeur
was created by bloodshed, and preserved by despotism. The glory of this New
World will necessarily result from the natural increase of inhabitants, and
will be widely enlarged, and durably established by untainted principles of
policy and religion. The glory and greatness of these states however have been
the admiration of the whole earth. But when we reflect on the disadvantages
which attended them from their infancy, the seeds of decay and ruin which were
planted even at their birth; we must necessarily see that their splendour,
compared with that of America, was but the twinklings of the day star, to the
full beauty and effulgence of the rising sun.

IN the next place, I beg leave to remark, that this empire is commencing, at a
period, when every species of knowledge, natural and moral, is arrived to a
state of perfection, which the world never before saw. Other kingdoms have had
their foundations laid in ignorance, superstition and barbarity. Their
constitutions were the offspring of necessity, prejudice and folly: Even the
boasted British-constitution is but an uncouth Gothic pile, covered and adorned
by the elegance of modern architecture. The entailment of estates, the
multitude of their sanguinary laws, the inequality of their elections, with
many other articles, are gross traces of ancient folly and savageness. American
empire is designed for more illustrious scenes, and it is birth attended with
more favorable circumstances. Mankind have in a great degree learned to despise
the shackles of custom, and the chains of authority, and claim the privilege of
thinking for themselves. Every science is handled with a candor, fairness and
manliness of reasoning, of which no other age could ever boast. At this period
our existence begins; and from these advantages what improvements may not be
expected? Our Ancestors, inspired with the fame generous attachment to science
as to freedom, have, by that wisest of all political establishments, the
institution of schools, diffused light and knowledge through every part of their
settlements. And shall not their sons emulate their glory, in this respect, as
well as in a heroic defense of their liberty? They will, they do. The
encouragements, universally given to genius and learning, at the present time,
are worthy of the sons of such parents. They are worthy of the glorious name of
an American. They are worthy of the founders of the last and brightest empire
of time. Indeed this is no more than we might reasonably expect. The generous
mind is ever of a piece. The same extensive views, the same exalted
disposition, which inspires that sublime enthusiasm, that heroic firmness, that
divine patriotism, which, like the electric flame, runs from state to state
with an instantaneous rapidity, ever have, and ever will reach out a parental
arm, a fostering hand to every rising genius, and to every plant of valuable
knowledge.

IT is a very common and just remark that the progress of Liberty, of Science
and of Empire has been with that of the sun, from east to west, since the
beginning of time. It may as justly be observed that the glory of empire has
been progressive, the last constantly outshining those which were before it.
The Assyrian empire was excelled by the Persian, that by the Gretian, and all
were lost in the splendour of the Roman greatness. This has been equally
exceeded by the learning, the power, and the magnificence of Britain. From the
first of these remarks, it is evident that the Empire of North America will be
the last on earth; from the second, that it will be the most glorious. Here the
progress of temporal things toward perfection will undoubtedly be finished.
Here human greatness will find a period. Here will be accomplished, that
remarkable Jewish tradition -- that the last thousand years of the reign of
time would in imitation of the conclusion of the first week, become a glorious
Sabbath of peace, purity and felicity. This World, not with so much propriety
called New, from the date of it is discovery, as from the unprecedented union,
it exhibits of all those articles which are the basis of commerce, power,
grandeur and happiness; this favorite region, by the hand of heaven sequestered
from the knowledge of mankind, 'till that period when European greatness began
to totter, and destined to be the last retreat of science, of freedom and of
glory, beholds a rapid progress toward the consummation of excellence already
commenced. Never were the rights of men so generally, so thoroughly understood,
or more bravely defended. No country ever saw learning so largely diffused
through every class of people, or could boast of so sensible, so discerning a
Commonalty. What gratitude ought this unheard of assemblage of blessings to
rouse in the breast of every person, whose lot is cast in this pleasant land,
and who is entitled to this goodly heritage.

ALLOW me to proceed one step further, and I have done. From every deduction of
reason, as well as from innumerable declarations of inspired truth, we have the
best foundation to believe that this continent will be the principal seat of
that new, that peculiar kingdom, which shall be given to the Saints of the MOST
HIGH. That also was to be the last, the greatest, the happiest of all
dominions. To these characters no other country wears the least appearance of
agreement. This answers the description in every particular. This is
emphatically that uttermost part of the earth, whose songs and happiness so
often inspired Isaiah with raptures. This with peculiar propriety is that
wilderness, which shall rejoice, and blossom as a rose; and to which shall be
given the glory of Lebanon, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon. Here shall a
King reign in righteousness, whose kingdom shall be an everlasting kingdom, and
whose dominion shall not be destroyed.

IT will doubtless be remarked that in this description of America, I have
mentioned several things as present, whose existence is future. The reason is,
that with respect to the end, which I propose in this description, the
distinction is immaterial. For our actions ought all to be inspired, and
directed by a comprehensive regard to this scene of glory, which is hastening
to a completion, with a rapidity suited to it is importance.

THIS, young Gentlemen, is the field in which you are to act. It is here
described to you, that you may not be ignorant or regardless of that great
whole, of which each of you is a part, and perhaps an important one. The
period, in which your lot is cast, is possibly the happiest in the roll of
time. It is true, you will scarcely live to enjoy the summit of American glory;
but you now see the foundations of that glory laid. A scene like this is not
unfolded in an instant. Innumerable are the events in the great system of
Providence, which must advance the mighty design before it can be completed.
Innumerable must be the Actors in so vast a plot, and infinitely various the
parts they act. Every event is necessary in the great system, and every
character on the extended stage. Some part or other must belong to each of you,
perhaps a capital one. You should by no means consider yourselves as members of
a small neighborhood, town or colony only, but as being concerned in laying
the foundations of American greatness. Your wishes, your designs, your labors
are not to be confined by the narrow bounds of the present age, but are to
comprehend succeeding generations, and be pointed to immortality. You are to
act, not like inhabitants of a village, nor like beings of an hour, but like
citizens of a world, and like candidates for a name that shall survive the
conflagration. These views will enlarge your minds, expand the grasp of your
benevolence, ennoble all your conduct, and crown you with wreaths which cannot
fade.

INFLUENCED by these great, these elevated motives, you will spare no labor to
furnish yourselves with the requisite accomplishments for the business you
choose, nor, when you have chosen it, will you fail of attempting at least to
discharge it with honor. In the still, but important scenes of private life,
scenes in which all of you must be concerned, your ceaseless endeavors will be
exerted to show yourselves examples of the best conduct, and in that way to
improve, and refine the morals of mankind. Your ceaseless endeavors will be
exerted to diffuse happiness all around you, to blunt the stings of pain, to
sooth the languor of sickness, to charm the pangs of grief, to double the
ecstasy of joy, and to light up a smile in the clouded face of melancholy. You
cannot fail to reverence the hoary head, to bridle the excursions of youth, to
dry the tears of the orphan, to spare the blushes of needy merit, and to open
your ears and seal your bosoms upon the secret concerns of a friend. That
impious profaneness which scoffs at the institutions of Heaven; that swinish
grossness which delights to wound the ear of delicacy; that ingratitude which
forgets the benefactor, while it is rioting on the benefit; that slander, which
like the scythe of death mows down every thing in its way, and with a satanic
smile exults over the characters it has ruined; you will fly, sooner than the
envenomed path of the adder, or the drawn knife of the midnight ruffian.

INSPIRED by these glorious views, in the medical character you will apply
yourselves with unremitted ardor to anatomical and philosophical knowledge, to
extend the science of healing, to contract the dominion of disease, to
annihilate the power of pain, to restore and to preserve the health and
happiness of mankind. You will shudder to imbrue your hands in the blood of
your countrymen, whether the work is to be done by the naked knife, or through
the surer, as well as safer medium of Empiricism. We shall not have the pain of
seeing you, after six months consumed in study or idleness with a physician,
rush forth into the world, and under the thick covering of long unintelligible
terms, a frozen hypocritical phiz, a blustering advertisement of cures you
never performed, and a front like the shield of Ajax with -- Seven thick folds
o'er-cast,
Of tough bull-hide, of solid brass the last --
delude the ignorance, empty the purses, and end the lives of your
fellow creatures. Your minds will not be narrow enough to form nostrums of your
own, nor weak enough to venture hastily upon the hidden poison of those, which
have been formed by others. If accident, your ingenuity, or the course of your
practice, shall have given you the knowledge of any method, by which the
ravages of sickness may be prevented, the return of health expedited, and the
crimson glow more speedily restored to the pallid face; love to mankind, duty
to your MAKER, and a generous scorn of that narrowness which limits blessings
to one's self, will prompt you to an immediate communication of it to mankind;
and the same spirit in your countrymen will as readily retribute the merited
reward. To promote this interesting design, no valuable treatise will be
unturned by you, no rational expedient neglected. The science of Botany will
engage a particular share of your attention. Need I remind you that it is a
peculiar mark of the millennian period, that human life shall be lengthened,
and that the child shall die an hundred years old? As all events are effected
by secondary causes, it is in a high degree probable, that this length of days
will be the consequence of an increase of botanical knowledge. The innumerable
multitude of plants, for which we know no use, and which nevertheless were not
created in vain, add great strength to this conjecture. How happy might you
justly esteem youselves, if by your industry, you could contribute to the
accomplishment of this glorious event!

WITH the same views, in the legal profession you will exert all your abilities
to punish guilt, to exculpate innocence, and enlarge the dominion of justice.
That meanness, that infernal knavery, which multiplies needless litigations,
which retards the operation of justice, which from court to court, upon the
most trifling pretenses, postpones trial to glean the last emptyings of a
client's pocket, for unjust fees of everlasting attendance, which artfully
twists the meaning of Law to the side we espouse, which seizes unwarrantable
advantages from the prepossessions, ignorance, interests and prejudices of a
jury, you will shun rather than death or infamy. Your reasonings will be ever
fair and open; your constructions of law candid, your endeavors to procure
equitable decisions unremitted. The practice of law in this, and the other
American States, within the last twenty years has been greatly amended; but
those eminent characters to whom we are indebted for this amendment, have met
with almost insurmountable obstructions to the generous design. They have been
obliged to combat interest and prejudice, powerfully exerted to retard the
reformation: especially that immovable biass, a fondness for the customs of
our fathers. Much therefore remains to be done, before the system can be
completed. This is a copious field for the employment of your faculties. May
your honest, and disinterested labors, for the promotion of so great and
valuable a purpose, meet with the success, the reward, and the glory, due to
the benefactors of mankind.

BUT there is no scene in which these extensive views will be more necessary,
or in which their influence will produce nobler effects, than in the kindred
science of Legislation and Civil Government. Should the voice of your
countrymen call you to this employment, let it not be said, let it not be
thought, that you received an office, for which you were unqualified. It is
indispensably necessary that the person, who acts in this character, should be
thoroughly master of the laws, manners, customs and state of his own, and other
countries, of the history of every civilized nation, and in a word, of every
branch of human knowledge. You will not therefore forget, that it is not the
multitude of it is members, which makes a wise legislature, and that innumerable
ciphers stand but for nothing. Do not console yourselves with the reflection,
that if you are ignorant of the interests of your country, others are not; and
despise the thought of having no other consequence, than barely to be a
numerical addition to the legislative body. Inform yourselves with every
species of useful knowledge. Remember that you are to act for the empire of
America, and for a long succession of ages. Let it be your unceasing care, as
well as wish, to improve the arts of husbandry and manufacturing, to enlarge
our inland and foreign commerce, and to secure to these States the diffusive
benefits of the American Fishery. With unwearied attention, endeavor to
facilitate the execution of justice, to establish universal good order, to
repress licentiousness, to avert the poison of luxury, to stamp infamy on
political corruption, to refine our manners, to improve our morals, to increase
our naval and military strength, and to fix on an immovable basis, civil and
religious Liberty. Upon every occasion, let it be your glory, and the end of
all your designs, to shine as the patrons of science, the friends of merit, and
the (...) examples of religion and virtue. With (...) these, we may laugh at
the impotent malice of other nations, and look forward with rapture to the
superlative grandeur and happiness of our own.

ALL these are the arts of peace. But you may, especially at the present
period, be called into the active scenes of a military life. Should this be
your honorable lot, I can say nothing, which ought more to influence you, than
that you fight for the property, the freedom, the life, the glory, the religion
of the inhabitants of this mighty empire; for the cause, for the honor, of
mankind and your MAKER.

IN the best of all professions, that of an Ambassador of peace, these views
will add one to those innumerable great and generous motives, which may engage
you to exert your faculties for the endless happiness of the human race. When
you remember that your lot is cast in that land, which, in such a multitude of
circumstances, is evidently the favorite of heaven; when you remember, that you
live amongst the most free, enlightened and virtuous people on earth; when you
remember that your labors may contribute to the hastening of that glorious
period when nations shall be spiritually born in a day; with what zeal, with
what diligence, with what transport must you be inspired! What pains will you
spare to clear yourselves from ridiculous and disagreeable defects, and to
accomplish yourselves in learning and eloquence! With what fervor will you
check the career of iniquity, break the dreams of sloth, pour balm into the
wounded spirit, and increase the angelic raptures of piety! Be these your
views, these your motives, this the scope of all your wishes. Proceed with
alacrity to execute the exalted design. Spare no labor, no prayer, to furnish
yourselves with every human, every divine accomplishment. Leave nothing undone,
which ought to be done; do nothing which ought to be omitted. Let the
transitory vanities, the visionary enjoyments of time fleet by you, unnoticed.
Point all your views to the elevated scenes of an immortal existence, and
remember that this life is but the dawn of your being. Encounter troubles with
magnanimity; enjoy prosperity with moderation. Exert every faculty, employ
every moment, to advance the glory of your MAKER, and the sum of human
happiness. With such Citizens, with such a Clergy, with such a Laity as is
above described, in prospect, we can scarce forbear to address the enraptured
hymn of Isaiah to our country, and sing, Arise, shine, for thy light is come,
and the glory of the LORD is risen upon thee! Nations shall come to thy light,
and kings to the brightness of thy rising.


