MR. CUMINGS's THANKSGIVING SERMON*

A SERMON, Preached in BILLERICA, On the 23d of NOVEMBER, 1775.

Being the DAY appointed by CIVIL AUTHORITY, FOR A PUBLIC THANKSGIVING
Throughout the Province of MASSACHUSETTS BAY.

By HENRY CUMINGS, A. M. Pastor of the Church there.

MASSACHUSETTS BAY: WORCESTER, Printed by I. THOMAS, near the COURTHOUSE.

A THANKSGIVING SERMON.
PSALM LXXVII.vii, viii, ix, x, xi, xii. Will the Lord cast off forever? and
will he be favorable no more?
Is his mercy clean gone forever? Does his promise fail forevermore?
Has God forgotten to be gracious? Has he in anger shut up his tender
mercies? Selah.
And I said, this is my infirmity: But I will remember the years of the right
hand of the Most High.
I will remember the works of the Lord: Surely I will remember thy wonders of
old.
I will meditate also of all thy work, and talk of thy doings.

'THE theater is not yet opened, wherein solid happiness can be found by man.'
God never designed we should enjoy complete felicity in this state of
discipline. Every scene that opens upon us, in the present drama of human life,
has in it an intermixture of good and evil. The most prosperous and happy
condition is attended with many unavoidable sorrows and troubles. There is also
a certain proportion of good to be found in the most adverse and distressing
circumstances. In prosperity we find enough of evil to wean us from this world,
and teach us to seek for happiness in that better country, which christianity
opens to our view. And in adversity we experience so much of the undeserved
goodness of God, as affords abundant matter for thanksgiving, and lays a
foundation for hope and trust.

But such is the perverseness of our nature, that prosperity is apt to make us
forgetful of God and our future interests; and adversity, to fill our minds
with murmuring and despondency, and to turn off our attention from the many
mercies that are intermixed with our troubles, and which demand our grateful
acknowledgments.

In times of calamity, men are apt to confine their views too much to the dark
side of things, and, looking through the gloomy mediums of doubt and distrust,
to wrap their minds in clouds of ominous darkness, and fill them with anxious
anticipations of future evils, which may never happen. From hence arise
unworthy thoughts of God and his providential government, inconsistent with
that grateful and resigned frame of mind, which it becomes us as reasonable
creatures, and as christians, to cultivate and preserve "through all the
changing scenes of life." Did we but frequently turn our eyes off from the
dark, and fix them upon the fair and bright side of things, we should find
ourselves surrounded with so many mercies, even in the most unfavourable
concurrence of events, as would, at the same time, serve to mitigate our
sorrows, to excite our gratitude to God, and encourage a religious and cheerful
dependence on his providence.

Though the dispensations of divine providence are sometimes overcast with
clouds and darkness, yet even at such times, we are not left wholly destitute
and forlorn; but have many experimental evidences of the paternal care of our
heavenly father. Some rays of divine goodness shine through the darkest scenes.
And if, religiously resigned to the will of God, we behave well, in times of
trouble, we have reason to hope, that in the issue of things, good will come to
us out of evil. For that God consults the good of his creatures, not only in
the mercies he bestows, but in the evils he brings upon them, during their
state of probation, is a truth, which no one can doubt of, who entertains just
apprehensions of the perfections of his nature. Justice and righteousness are
the pillars of his throne; and his dominion is founded in infinite wisdom,
equity and benevolence.

But, besides an attention to the many blessings, that are mingled with the
troubles and afflictions of this life, it would be well for us, in all times of
adversity, distress and danger; and whenever the aspects of providence are
dark, and our minds are agitated with anxious sollicitudes about the event of
things; to turn our thoughts back upon past favors, and reflect on the
manifold mercies we have already received. This would tend to banish all
murmuring, distrust and ill-boding apprehensions from our minds; to awaken
those grateful sentiments for favors past, that are requisite to prepare us
for the reception of future needed mercies; and to dispose us to exercise such
an humble and cheerful dependence on the goodness of God for all necessary
succor and relief, as would be a mighty support to our spirits, under the most
grievous outward trials and calamities. This, as appears from the passage at
the head of this discourse, was the method which the Psalmist took, to raise
himself from despondency, and encourage his hope in God, in a time of distress
and affliction.

What the particular calamities were, that the psalmist here refers to, or
whether they were of a public or private nature, we cannot perhaps certainly
determine; but it is plain they were such as lay very heavy on his mind, and
caused him almost to doubt of the goodness of divine providence. "His
complaints, as one observes, seem to be of personal grievances, but the
encouragements relate to the public concerns of the church: If they were
private troubles that he was groaning under, we are therefore taught that what
God has wrought for his church in general, may be improved for the comfort of
particular believers: If it was some public calamity, that he is here
lamenting, his speaking of it so feelingly, as if it was some particular
trouble of his own, shows us how much we should lay to heart the interests of
the church of God, and make them our own."

The Psalmist under melancholy fears and presages respecting the issue of his
troubles, and almost ready to renounce his hope in God, expresses himself in
the language of a disconsolate, deserted soul, walking in darkness, with
scarcely one reviving ray of light, to comfort and cheer it. Will the Lord cast
off forever? And will he be favorable no more? Is his mercy clean gone
forever? Does his promise fail for evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious?
Has be in anger shut up his tender mercies? But as he is going on in this
melancholy strain, he suddenly checks himself, with that word, Selah. He
pauses, and, on a moment's reflection, finds that his thoughts had taken a
wrong turn. This is my infirmity, says he; that is, these distrustful thoughts
of providence; these gloomy fears and apprehensions, are owing to my weakness
and wrong views of things. And in order to recover himself from this state of
dejection, and encourage his trust in God for deliverance, he calls to mind his
past favors and loving-kindnesses. I will remember, says he, the years of the
right hand of the Most High. I will remember the works of the Lord; surely I
will remember thy wonders of old, etc.

The text does therefore, naturally suggest the following observation, viz.
That in times of trouble, difficulty and danger, a grateful commemoration of
former instances of divine mercy and goodness, would be of excellent service,
to keep us from despondency, and to encourage a cheerful hope in God, and
dependence on his providence for all needed salvation.

I presume, my hearers, you all believe that the providence of God presides
over the world, and interposes in all human affairs; that all second causes and
subordinate agents are subject to his government; that no events happen
contrary to, or beside his will, positive or permissive; that riches, and
honor, and prosperity, come from him; and that all adversities and calamities,
whether public or private, are ordered by him. Without such a faith as this, we
cannot take a single step toward a religious improvement, either of mercies or
afflictions. Such a faith is necessary to lay a foundation for gratitude in
prosperity, and for resignation and trust in God in adversity. This faith is
the support of good men, amidst the confusions and disorders, the wars, tumults
and revolutions of this world, and in all times of hazard and danger. Such men,
believing that all things are subject to the superintending providence of God,
infinitely wise and infinitely gracious, cheerfully refer themselves to his
mercy, in confidence that he will so dispose events, as shall be for their
interest and advantage, on the whole. Upon the wisdom, power, and goodness of
God, they depend; and are ready to say with the Psalmist, God is our refuge and
strength, a very present help in trouble: therefore will we not fear, though
the earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the
sea; though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, and the mountains shake
with the swelling thereof.

God is an immutable being. He is the same yesterday, today, and forever;
without any variableness, or shadow of turning. Unchangeable in his nature and
perfections, his power, wisdom and goodness endure forever. And therefore, as
in his past dealings with us, he has given a full demonstration of his
infinite benevolence, and the brightest evidences of his merciful disposition
toward us, it becomes us, while with gratitude we recollect the same, from
thence to encourage ourselves still to hope and trust in him, whatever
difficulties and troubles, we may be involved in.

We short-sighted mortals can see but little way into the vast scheme of divine
providence. There are no certain principles upon which we can proceed in
calculating the revolutions of the secret wheels thereof. We are unable to
trace things into their various connections, or to look forward into all their
remote and distant consequences The most perplexed and calamitous
circumstances, and gloomiest appearances of things, are no sure indications of
God's having forsaken us finally. In the hidden, and to us uncertain connection
of events, the most afflictive dispensations of providence, may be best adapted
to promote our well-being. As God treats us as beings in a state of trial and
discipline, so it cannot be reasonably doubted, but he will order all events
respecting us, in such a manner, as his infinite wisdom shall see best
calculated to promote our happiness, taking our present and future existence
into one connected view. In this view, the troubles and calamities, which we
meet with in this world, may be considered as disciplinary corrections,
proceeding from the mercy of God, who has assured us, that, although for the
present, they are not joyous but grievous, yet, if we improve them aright, they
will finally work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.
Nor have those things which are grievous to us, for the present, a beneficial
tendency in reference to our future state only; but they may also be meant for
our good even in this world, and be designed in providence to prepare the way
for our greater prosperity and outward felicity. The good patriarch, Jacob,
when he cried out, All these things are against me, little thought how
wonderfully providence was working for the salvation of himself and his family.

Whatever unfavourable conclusions, any persons, in the despondency and
dejection of their spirits, may draw from the public troubles we are now
involved in, the supreme. Governor of all things may have intended them for the
opening a way for the exaltation of the American colonies to the highest pitch
of glory, honor, opulence, and renown. He, we know, is able to defeat the
designs of aspiring ambition, and to overruled the oppressive and arbitrary
schemes that are now formed against America, for rendering her more honorable
and important among the nations, than she would otherwise be. The present
unconstitutional and violent ministerial politics, for aught we know, may have
been permitted by him, with a view to roll the ball of empire over to this
Western world; and to make this land, (maugre the utmost efforts of powerful
ambition and tyranny) the happy seat of peace, liberty, learning, arts, virtue
and religion; where, if any miserable people, in other quarters of the globe,
after being stripped of the blessings of freedom, and having their necks galled,
beyond human patience, with the cruel yoke of bondage, should be driven in
their extremity, to seek a safe retreat, they may find a secure asylum from
slavery and oppression, and quietly enjoy the fundamental rights of human
nature. Should this be the effect of the vigorous exertions of the noble
patriots and sons of freedom, who, at the risk of their lives and estates, are
now engaged in the defense of their country, against the violent assaults of
arbitrary power, unborn millions will rise up and call them blessed; and their
memories will be dear to all posterity, and will more deservedly receive the
honors and praises of future generations, than the memories of many renowned
heroes of antiquity, who are justly infamous in the view of every lover of
human kind, for being celebrated chiefly for the successful havoc and
devastation they committed among their fellow creatures, and the misery and
wretchedness which they spread through the world.

But whatever favorable or unfavourable conjectures any one may make, we know
that the event of things is in the hands of God. We are unable to unfold the
volumes of futurity; and therefore we cannot with infallible certainty
determine, what will be the issue of the present civil commotions and hostile
contests. However, let us, this day, in imitation of the Psalmist, by a
grateful recollection of past favors, cheer and encourage our hearts, and
endeavor to raise our confidence in Almighty God, the supreme disposer of all
events, who can easily break in pieces that yoke of bondage, which is prepared
for our necks. The wonderful interpositions of his providence in favor of our
worthy ancestors, who, in order to remove themselves out of the reach of civil
and ecclesiastical tyranny, and to enjoy unmolested the blessings of liberty,
voluntarily exchanged the fair fields of Britain for the inhospitable wilds of
America, may encourage us, their posterity, in the present day of difficulty
and danger, to put our trust in him, and to refer our cause to him, in hopes
that he will prosper our exertions for the defense of those invaluable
privileges, that were so dearly purchased by them.

When we consider that the grand motive, which induced our forefathers to leave
their native country, and to transplant themselves into the uncultivated
deserts of America, where they were sure of meeting with the greatest hardships
and difficulties in acquiring a comfortable subsistence, was a love of liberty,
the blessings whereof they were not permitted to enjoy on cheaper terms: When
we consider also the many indubitable proofs, which the American colonies have
given, from the beginning* of their loyalty and firm allegiance to the British
sovereigns, and their warm affection for the parent-state; and likewise that
Great Britain has been amply repaid for all the expense she has ever been at in
protecting them, by regulating and restricting their commerce in such a manner,
as to secure the principal advantages and profits thereof to herself: -- When
we consider these things, how unjust and cruel must it appear in her, to
attempt to deprive us of our dearly bought and unforfeited liberty, and reduce
us to servitude and bondage? Will she never let us rest in peace, until we come
to that place where all the weary are at rest? Is it not enough that she drove
out our progenitors by the iron rod of tyranny and oppression, and forced them
to flee for refuge into the howling wilderness of America? Will she also pursue
us, their posterity, into these remote regions, to chastise us with the same
iron rod, for no other fault than that of being a free people, and being
resolved to continue so? One can hardly think of being thus pursued from
Britain into the deserts of America, without recollecting that passage in the
Revelations, And to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she
might fly into the wilderness, into her place; where she is nourished -- from
the face of the serpent: And the serpent cast out of his mouth water, as a
flood, after the woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood.

Depotism has for some time been advancing with alarming strides against
American liberty. For several years past, we have been involved in a
controversy of a most interesting nature with Great Britain; a controversy,
which strikes at the root of our civil, and greatly endangers our religious We
can have no security of enjoying long our religious privileges, should that
ministerial system of oppression, which has been lately planned against us, be
once established among us. For civil and ecclesiastical tyranny are nearly
allied; and the latter follows close at the heels of the former. From the
Canada bill, and some other things favorable to popery, we have grounds to
fear, that should the present schemes of arbitrary power succeed, the Scarlet
Whore would soon get mounted on her Horned Beast in America, and, with the CUP
OF ABOMINATIONS in her hand, ride triumphant over the heads of true
Protestants, making multitudes DRUNK WITH THE WINE OF HER FORNICATIONS.
liberties and privileges. The British parliament, in which we are, in no
sense, represented "Among all the rights and privileges appertaining unto us,
(to Englishmen) that of having a share in Legislation, and being to be governed
by such laws as we ourselves shall choose, is the most fundamental and
essential." Lord SUMMERS.
, have in pursuance of an assumed right to make laws binding on the colonies,
in all cases whatsoever, passed many grievous acts, tending to tear up our
constitution by the roots, to rob us of freedom, and subject us to a state of
inglorious servitude. Alarmed at these proceedings, the colonies have reasoned,
have remonstrated, have petitioned, but all in vain; they who control the
councils of Great Britain, being determined, as it seems, it all hazards, by
force and violence, to carry their oppressive schemes into execution. Since the
last anniversary of this sort, things have been driven to extremity, and
America has been reduced to the disagreable necessity of resisting to blood.
British troops have stained their honor, by drawing the sword and commencing
hostilities against their brethren and fellow subjects, for the base purpose of
enslaving them. They have wantonly ravaged and destroyed some of our maritime
towns. Our capital, once the seat of peace, prosperity and opulence, wrested
from its proper owners, they have made the seat of violence and all the rigours
of military despotism. Many of our brethren, driven from thence and from other
seaports, have been obliged to seek an asylum in the country, from the
unprovoked insults and outrages of these instruments of ministerial vengeance
and ambition. Some of our brave sons have been slain in battle, whose memories
are dear to us, for having fallen in defense of their country. Unwearied pains
have been taken to rouse the Canadians and the savages of the wilderness
against us, and excite them to fall on our frontiers. In short, every
iniquitous method has been attempted, for bringing slavery and misery upon us.

But God has not forsaken us in these times of difficulty and danger. He has
shown mercy to us in a variety of instances. Many beams of his goodness have
shone upon us through these dark scenes. The Canadians and savage Indians has
he inspired with friendly dispositions, and defeated all attempts to provoke
them to draw the sword against us. Our Western expedition has he remarkably
prospered, giving into our hands many important forts and garrisons of our
enemies, and enabling us to penetrate into the heart of Canada. He has also
smiled on our military operations in this province, and given such efficacy to
our arms, as has enabled us to confine the main body of ministerial forces
within narrow limits, and, in spite of all their pretended skill and power, to
prevent their breaking forth, and making those hostile excursions into the
country, which they intended, and by which the dishonorable designs, upon
which they were sent here, were to be forced into execution. And though they
may boast of victory in the never to be forgotten battle of Charlestown, yet it
was bought at the expense of so many lives on their side, that a few more such
victories would prove their total defeat.

It also demands our grateful notice, that the supreme disposer of all things,
who has access to all minds, and influences them as he pleases, has inspired
the colonies with one heart and one soul; and by inkindling within them that
ardent love of liberty, which glowed in the breasts of the first settlers of
this country, and which has all along been a distinguishing characteristic of
New-Englad, has disposed them to unite as a band of brethren, for the defense
of their common liberties and privileges, against the hostile invasions of
arbitrary power.

It becomes us also, with thankful hearts, to acknowledge the goodness of God
to us, in bestowing on us a great variety of private personal blessings, amidst
the public calamities which have fallen upon us. Amidst the dark aspects of
providence, in reference to our public affairs, we have enjoyed competent
supplies of food and raiment, and been favored, not only with the necessaries,
but with many of the delights and pleasant enjoyments of life. And although in
addition to our other troubles, God has been pleased this year to send the
pestilence into many of our towns, whereby we have been bereaved of many of our
dear friends and relatives, and to visit us with a severe drought, which
prevailed for a while, threatening us with famine; yet through his good
providence the voice of health is again restored, and the earth has yielded her
increase in sufficient plenty for the comfortable supply of all our wants.

It likewise deserves our most grateful acknowledgments, that God has not yet
permitted our religious privileges to be formally invaded; and that we have
hitherto quietly enjoyed his word and ordinances, and been allowed to worship
him agreeable to our consciences.

These, with many other instances of divine goodness, which every grateful soul
will naturally recollect, are plain evidences, that God has not forgotten to
be gracious; and they call for our devout and thankful acknowlegdments this day.

But though in the midst of our troubles, we have had happy experience of many
instances of divine goodness, yet still a dark and dreary cloud hangs lowering
over our land. May God almighty disperse it, and restore a serene sky. To be
compelled to wage war for the defense of our just rights against the
encroachments of brethren, with whom we wish to live in peace, cannot but be
looked upon, by every considerate person, as one of the mo^^ distressing
calamities, that God ever brings upon a sinful people. Every one who has a
spark of true patriotism in his breast, cannot but feel the most sensible
concern for his country, under the present perplexed and alarming situation of
affairs. The appeal is now made to Heaven, to the sovereign arbiter of right
and wrong, for the decision of the controversy between Britain and America. The
sword is drawn, and it seems, the sword, under God, must decide it. If God be
for us, we need not be afraid of the power or policy of those who have forced
us to take up arms in our defense. All the boasted omnipotence of Britain,
which has been thundered in our ears, in order to intimidate us into a tame
surrender of our privileges, we know, is as nothing in comparison with the
power of the Lord God of Hosts, who can accomplish his purposes, in spite of
the utmost opposition of earth and hell. But should he turn against us, we must
fall before our enemies, although we were tenfold more powerful than they. It
concerns us the efore to give all diligence to secure his friendship and
patronage, by repentence and a cheerful submission to his laws and authority.
Our present troubles are indications of his displeasure toward us, as a
people, for our sins. By them he is now calling upon us to forsake our sins and
amend our lives, that iniquity may not prove our ruin. If we hearken to his
monitory warning voice, and reform, we may hope that he will soon cause his
face to shine upon us, and scatter the present gloomy shades of night by the
return of a bright and joyful day. For this is his language; At what instant I
shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to
pull down, and to destroy it: If that nation against whom I have pronounced,
turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them.

When we look above instruments to the supreme disposer of all events, we must
acknowledge that we are justly dealt with, in the troubles that have been
brought upon us. For, shall not the judge of all the earth do right? We know
that it is impossible for him to do otherwise. The most intricate footsteps of
his providence are agreeable to the everlasting rules of righteousness, and
would appear so to us, had we a thorough comprehension of the whole scheme of
his moral government.

But though we must acknowledge our troubles to be just considered as ordered
by God, yet have we reason to accuse the instruments thereof of great injustice
and cruelty. I trust we can safely appeal to that Being, who searches all
hearts, to witness for our sincerity, when we declare, that we have desired no
more than the peaceable enjoyment of our just rights and liberties. The
invasion of these, in violation of the sacred security of charters founded on
royal faith, is the sole ground of the present resistance of America. The
charges of disloyalty and rebellious dispositions, that have been brought
against us, have had no foundation, but in the calumnies of enemies. Though I
will not vouch for the effects of the desparation into which the colonies are
now driven, yet I will venture to affirm that their resistance to the measures
of administration, did not originate from a desire of independancy. They had it
not even in contemplation to break their connection with Great Britain. On the
contrary, it has been their warmest wish, to live in friendly union with her,
might they be permitted to do so, without a resignation of their invaluable
rights. Had she adhered to that true art of government, which, as the Bishop of
St. Asaph observes, lies in not governing too much, they would never have made
any resistance. But when she had pushed things to such an extremity, that there
was no other alternative, but either such concessions and submissions as they
plainly perceived would be fatal to their liberties, or resistance; impressed
with a sense of the importance of freedom, they choose the latter.

However bad we may be in a moral view, yet we are persuaded our cause is good.
Happy would it be for us, if we had the satisfaction of a good conscience
toward God, as we have of a good cause. The cause in which we are engaged, is
the same, for which our worthy ancestors sacrificed every thing else that was
dear to them. For the sake of Liberty they quitted their tenderest connections
and the dearest delights of life, and voluntarily exposed themselves to all
hazards, and encountered all perils and difficulties. And the Almighty
manifested his approbation of their cause, by remarkably supporting and
prospering their noble exertions. From hence we have reason to hope that he
will also graciously appear for us, and espouse our cause, if we put our trust
in him, and pay him due acknowledgments and respects.

Time would fail me to recount the wonders, which God has wrought for his
American Israel in times past; how he shielded them against the rage of the
Savages of the wilderness; and caused them, when few in number, to triumph over
their numerous enemies; how often he relieved them in distresses, and protected
them in dangers, and interposed to defeat the crafty policies and mischievous
machinations of those that rose up against them; how wonderfully he provided
for them in all their straits, and strengthened them to overcome difficulties,
to human appearance unsurmountable: But there are two remarkable instances of
the goodness of providence toward this land, which, at such a day as this, it
may be profitable for us to call to remembrance, in order to encourage our hope
and trust in God; I mean, the overthrow of the arbitrary schemes of that
tyrannical despot, James the second, under the administration of Sir Edmond
Andros, about ninety years ago; and the defeat of the French fleet and army, at
Chebuctah, about thirty years since.

The first charter of the Massachusetts Bay, with other charters of the
New England provinces, having been unrighteously After a Quo-Warranto was
issued against their charter, the Massachusetts province were cited by a writ
of Scire Facias to appear at Westminster to make their defense; but the time
allowed them was so short, that before they received the Scire Facias, the case
was decided against them. Though it was strongly urged in the Court of
Chancery, that in the time given it was impossible to have a return from
New England, and that as they had not given time long enough, it was, in
effect, giving no time at all, yet the court, being predetermined, decreed the
Charter surfeited ON DEFAULT OF APPEARANCE. Vid. Hut. Hist. Vol. I. How unfair,
and contrary to all rules of equity, was this!
taken away, the lives, liberties and properties of the inhabitants, became
subject to the absolute disposal of the government at home, which was
sufficiently inclined to tyranny. Soon after this, James the second, an avowed
papist, a^ceded to the throne, whose reign was distinguished, by his resolute
endeavors to banish liberty from his dominions, and enslave all his subjects.
In 1686 he sent Sir Edmond Andros to execute his tyrannical schemes in
New England. No sooner had Sir Edmond arrived in Boston, and entered on his
government, but, (as it is no unusual thing for the greatest tyrants to do) he
made high professions of regard for the public good and the welfare of the
people. But " Nero concealed his tyrannical disposition more years, than Sir
Edmond did months. It was not long before the case of some, who apprehended
themselves to be oppressed, came under consideration, and one of the council
told them that they must not think the privileges of Englishmen would follow
them to the end of the world. -- Men's titles to their estates were declared of
no value, and they were called upon to purchase new patents. -- The people were
menaced that their meeting houses should be taken from them, and the public
worship, in the congregational way, should not be tolerated. -- The Governor
threatened to punish any man who gave twopence toward the support of a
nonconformist minister." "Some churches who had agreed to set apart days of
thanksgiving on a particular occasion, were told, that they should meet at
their peril, and that soldiers should be sent to guard their meeting houses
These things are related on the authority of one of our own Historians, who, it
may be presumed, would not exaggerate the methods take on the side of
government to infringe the liberties of the people, since in a letter to a
member of parliament, relative to the present disputes, he gives it as his
opinion, that THERE MUST BE AN ABRIDGMENT OF WHAT ARE CALLED ENGLISH LIBERTIES.
."

The insults and oppressions of Sir Edmond's administration at length became
intolerable. The people, exasperated beyond all patience, flew to arms, seized
the Governor with many others who had been aiding to his arbitrary measures,
being resolved, at all hazards, if possible, to tear from their necks that
grievous yoke of bondage, that was put upon them. What would have been the
effect of the people's rising and taking arms on this occasion, had James
accomplished his arbitrary designs in Great Britain, we cannot tell. The
vengeance of that haughty despot would, no doubt, have attempted some severe
punishment. But Heaven prevented. For providence ordering a Revolution The
people of England, provoked at the arbitrary measures of James the second,
carried their opposition to such an height, that he, through fear, left the
kingdom; upon which, declaring the throne vacant, and excluding James and his
family, they put the scepter into the hands of William, Prince of Orange, and
changed the line of succession.

And it may be observed in justification of America, that the principles upon
which this memorable revolution was conducted and brought about, and the
principles upon which she resists and opposes the unlimited claims of the
British legislature, are much the same. For as it matters not whether slavery
comes from the hands of one or of many, so the same reason that will justify a
people in opposing arbitrary power in a single man, will equally hold to
justify them in opposing the same kind of power in a number of men. No one, I
believe, is possessed of such an acute discernment, as to be able to perceive
any material difference between being subject to unlimited despotism in a
single person, under the title of absolute monarch, and being subject to the
like despotic power claimed by a far distant legislature, in which we are not
represented. A right in the British parliament to legislate for us 'in all
cases whatsoever,' as a sensible writer observes, "Would place us in the same
situation the people of England would have been reduced to, had James the first
and his family succeeded in their schemes of arbitrary power. Changing the word
STUARTS for PARLIAMENT, and BRITONS for AMERICANS, the arguments of the
illustrious patriots of those times, apply with an expressible force and
appositeness, in maintenance of our cause, and in refutation of the
pretensions set up by then too forgetful posterity over their unhappy
colonists." And when we consider, that on the principles of the revolution,
which are evidently in favor of America, his present Majesty's right to the
throne depends; is there not reason to suspect, that the movers and abettors of
the present oppressive and violent measures prosecuted against the colonies,
(however free they are to charge us with disloyalty) are themselves Jacobites
in heart; and have had it in view, first to produce a rupture between Britain
and America, and then to take the advantage thereof, to introduce the
Pretender, and advance the Stuart family to its ancient dignity!


in England about the same time, the power of oppression was broken, and this
people were happily delivered from the sad effects of enraged tyranny, which
they might otherwise have feared, and restored to the peaceable enjoyment of
the blessings of liberty Though the people of this province had reason to
rejoice with others, in the happy revelation, that was brought about in
England, whereby they were delivered from the tyranny of the Stuart family, yet
they never recovered their first charter, which ought in equity to have been
restored, since it was unjustly wrested from them, in arbitrary times, when
many other charters, which were afterward restored, fell a sacrifice to
lawless power and ambition. However, they obtained another charter, which,
though it abridged some of their former privileges, was yet so favorable to
their liberties as Englishmen, that they cheerfully accepted the security it
promised them against all future encroachments on their rights. But (...)
posterity have found, to their sorrow, that the most solemn (...) and
stipulations are no fence against arbitrary power.
which they were in the utmost danger of loosing forever.

This deliverance ought ever to be remembered by us with gratitude to the Most
High, who rules in the kingdoms of men, and gives them to whomsoever he
pleases. And it should encourage us to put our trust in the Almighty, who is
able to defeat the unrighteous schemes of those, who without cause have risen
up against us, and to return their oppressions on their own heads.

The other remarkable instance of God's merciful interposition for the
salvation of New England, which deserves our grateful commemoration, is the
defeat of the French fleet and army at Chebuctah, about thirty years ago. This
armament was the most powerful that ever before was sent to America. It
consisted, says a credible writer, of "twenty men of war, an hundred
transports, about eight thousand disciplined troops with veteran officers, and
vast quantities of provision, powder, shot, arms, cannon, bombs and mortars,
sufficient to take the strongest places; and all under one commander of figure,
Duke D'Anville, a nobleman of ability, skill and courage." And New England was
then in a weak and defenseless state, unable to withstand such a mighty force.
But the Lord God omnipotent interposed, and marvellously defeated this
formidable armada. He caused the stars in their courses to fight against them,
as they did against Sisera of old. The winds and seas were mustered against
them; the pestilence was commissioned to invade their host; innumerable blocks
and unforeseen cross accidents were thrown in their way; by all which, they
were baffled, confounded, defeated, and obliged to return ashamed, with a
wretched remnant, to their own country. Thus salvation was wrought for us in a
most miraculous manner, without the instrumentality of human means. This was
the Lord's doing, and it ought always to be marvelous in our eyes. And this may
teach us that the events of war, are not always agreeable to human conjectures
and probabilities, but at God's disposal, who can easily, by ways and means
little thought of by men, disconcert the best concerted human schemes, and
crush into abortion the unrighteous enterprises of his people's enemies.

Now, when we recollect these and suchlike signal interpositions of divine
providence in favor of New England and America, what abundant reason have we
to hope and trust in God, in the present dark and difficult day? However great
the power or policy of our enemies may be, still we have this to comfort us,
that the Lord reigns, who is able to confound the deepest policies of men, to
turn their wisest counsels into foolishness, to overthrow all their mischievous
devices, and entangle them in the snares, which they have prepared for others.
The wrath of man is under his control; he sets bounds thereto, and says,
thus far shall thou come, but no further. Whatever men may design, or attempt,
the counsel of the Lord, that shall stand. And from what he has done for his
American heritage in times past, we have reason to hope that he will never
suffer it to be given up to reproach and ruin, but will still protect and
defend it, and frustrate all the evil designs of its enemies, if prevailing sin
does not obstruct the course of his mercy.

The cause of Liberty, is the cause of learning, arts, virtue and religion,
"For which the patriot, and the sage,
"Have planned, and bled through every age."


Slavery tends directly to increase the degeneracy of human nature, and to
extinguish every spark of genius: It is the prolific source of ignorance, gross
superstition, and savage barbarism: It is the bane of all social virtues, a
mortal enemy to the liberal arts and sciences, and to pure and undefiled
religion. The cause of liberty is therefore the cause of God. And if we do not
exclude ourselves from his favor by incorrigible wickedness, we may reasonably
hope that he will eventually succeed our exertions in this noble cause, either
by inspiring the minds of our unnatural enemies with such peaceable
dispositions, as may lay a foundation for a just and amicable accommodation; or
by throwing such insuperable obstacles in their way, as shall compel them to
lay aside their ambitious schemes, and permit us again, in tranquillity, to
enjoy that freedom, to which we have an unalienable right, founded in the great
charter of our being. If we order our conversation aright, and humbly seek to
God for help and deliverance, we cannot hope for too much from his providence.
If we will but amend our ways, and imitate the piety of our worthy ancestors,
we shall have grounds to hope, as our cause is good, that God will appear for
us, as he often did for them, and cause us to see his salvation.

Were our noble ancestors, who came over to this country for the sake of
liberty, to rise from their graves, and make their appearance on the stage, at
this day; with what inflamed indignation would they behold that system of
oppression and slavery, which has been lately formed against New England and
America, and which has forced people, though with reluctant hearts, to take
arms for their defense? How would their generous souls be fired with honest
resentment at the arbitrary schemes, and sanguinary violent measures of the
British ministry, designed to rob their posterity of that inestimable patrimony
of liberty, which at the dearest rate they obtained for them, and transmitted
down to them, to be by them inviolably preserved, and handed from one
generation to another, to the end of time! With what peculiar satisfaction and
smiling approbation, would they behold their sons, warmed with the same sacred
flame of liberty, which once animated their breasts, zealously exerting
themselves in freedom's noble cause, and earnestly contending for the defense
and support of their invaded rights! And while with pity they beheld those
servile timid spirits, who, rather than engage in any noble exertion or tempt
any hazard for the sake of freedom, would Issachar-like, basely bow their
shoulders to bear, and become servants unto tribute; with what sovereign
contempt would they look down on those venal sordid few, who, in hopes of
aggrandizing themselves, and rioting in the spoils of injured and oppressed
innocence, have been inculcating the long exploded and treasonable If the
doctrine of unlimited submission and passive obedience to the POWERS IN BEING,
be once admitted as just and reasonable, it will follow by inevitable
consequence, that the last revolution in England was a grand rebellion; and
that all who had an hand in it, were rebels and traitors; and that all the
Kings who have reigned since that time in Great Britain, deserve the title of
usurpors.
doctrine of passive obedience and non-resistance, and aiding, to the utmost of
their power, the unconstitutional measures of administration, for the
enslaving, and ruining their native country? And with what ardor and
earnestness, would they warn us against submitting to any yoke of bondage, and
enjoin it upon us to stand fast in our liberties, and to persevere in our
laudible struggles for the defense and preservation of them! -- Methinks I hear
these brave and venerable personages, bespeaking us in the following strain;
"We fled from our native land for the sake of liberty, which we esteemed the
sovereign boon of Heaven, and dearest of all outward enjoyments: For the sake
of this inestimable blessing, we crossed the dangerous seas, and took up our
residence in this then uncultivated wilderness: For the sake of this invaluable
enjoyment, we expended our treasure, endured all fatigues and hardships, and
often jeoparded our lives in bloody wars with the savage natives: We have
suffered every thing in the cause of freedom -- for this we have fought -- for
this we have bled. You have entered into our labors, and without being exposed
to any great hardships and dangers, have enjoyed, till lately, the benign
smiles of liberty, which cost us so much toil and blood. But now the day of
trial is come. That infernal monster, Slavery, from which we fled, not
discouraged by former unsuccessful attempts, has again in great wrath, crossed
the Atlantic, determined, if possible, to erect his throne on these western
shores. Be not daunted at his hedious form, nor affrighted at his menaces.
Oppose him as a fiend of hell. Collect all your zeal and resolution into one
united and vigorous effort, to expel him from hence. Quit yourselves like men;
be brave; be courageous; be determined, would you be free. Liberty is the
legacy, the rich legacy, which we have bequeathed to you, under a sacred
entail, to be by you conveyed inviolate to your posterity. Let it never be said
of our sons that they have basely given up this legacy, and pusillanimously
submitted their necks to the iron yoke of bondage. Let it never be said of our
sons, that they consented to live in thraldom themselves, and to leave a race
of slaves behind them. Disgrace not your noble parentage; bring not everlasting
infamy upon yourselves, and perpetual misery upon your descendants, by any
submissions pernicious to liberty. Be not dismayed at the appearance of dangers
and difficulties, but with fortitude and heroism becoming the importance of the
cause, continue your zealous endeavors, to save yourselves, your country and
posterity from impending servitude. And for your encouragement, remember the
years of the right hand of the Most High, and call to mind the many wonders
which he has wrought in times past, in favor of his church and people in this
land; and consider that his arm is not shortened that he cannot save, but that
he is as able to help and deliver you, as he was your forefathers. Make him
your friend and ally, and apply to him for aid, and doubt not, but he will
interpose, to divert the evils that are levelled against you, to banish
servitude far from you, and to succeed and prosper your laudible contests for
the maintaining and securing the blessings of freedom. May the Lord of Hosts be
with you, and the God of Jacob be your refuge."

In imitation of our pious progenitors, let us, while we are in the use of all
natural and lawful means of defense and safety, put our trust in God, the only
hope and savior of his people in times of trouble. And while we refer our
cause to him, let us take care to approve ourselves to him, by a conscientious
obedience to his holy will, as we desire that he should espouse our cause, and
secure to us those outward liberties and privileges, for which we are now
earnestly contending. Let us be thankful to him for such mercies as we have
received and still enjoy, and express our gratitude by a pious and holy
conversation. Whatever blessings he is pleased to bestow upon us, let us
improve to his honor, with sobriety and thanksgiving. Let us beware of pride,
and cautiously abslain from intemperance, prodigality and extravagance, vices,
which, as they are contrary to the spirit of religion, and highly provoking to
Heaven, so they also, in the natural course of things, tend to bring poverty
and ruin upon a people; and which, we have reason to think, have had a great
hand in pulling down the present calamities upon us. Let us, in our manner of
living, confine ourselves to the strictest rules of frugality and prudential
economy, as being highly ornamental to christians; greatly conducive to the
prosperity of society, at all times; and peculiarly necessary at such a day as
this. And to frugality and economy let us add industry, and then, while we are
blessed with the common smiles of providence, we need not fear being starved
into slavery, in such a land of plenty as this. The simplicity of living which
obtained among our forefathers in the early age of this country, much
resembling the simplicity of the patriarchal ages, was much better adapted to
promote temporal felicity, than the luxury, which, with the increase of wealth,
has since taken place and prevailed. Nature is content with little. It is
comparatively easy to supply the necessities of nature; but to satisfy pride is
impossible. Pride introduces luxury and expensive ways of living; and custom
gives such a currency to superfluities, that frugality can scarcely escape the
odious epithets of meanness and avarice. But by whatever hard names it may be
called, frugality is a virtue of high importance to a people's prosperity; and
therefore, as we wish well to our country, in the present troublesome times, it
behooves us to retrench our extravagancies and superfluous expenses; to drop
foreign luxuries; and confine ourselves, as much as possible, to our own
manufactures, and the productions of our own land. This is what providence is
now inculcating upon us, by the obstructions thrown in the way of foreign
commerce. And happy shall we be, and abundant reason shall we have to give
thanks to God, if we can enjoy our liberty, though we should be deprived of
those foreign superfluities, which have been generally too shamefully abused as
occasions of pride and vanity.

But let us, my hearers, more especially take care to make a wise improvement
of our religious advantages and privileges, which, through the goodness of God,
have been hitherto preserved to us entire. Let us live up to our obligations as
christians, and by a diligent improvement of the means of grace, endeavor to
make seasonable preparation for a blessed immortality in the world to come.
This world, at best, is a vale of tears. Many are the unavoidable sorrows and
infelicities, that flow from the frailties of our frame, and the precarious
unstable nature of all earthly enjoyments; much greater and more numerous are
the troubles, vexations and woes, that flow from the ungoverned lusts of men,
which are an unhappy source of perpetual discord, variance, strife, rapine,
violence and war. But we are assured that there is a better world, prepared
beyond the grave, for all good men, where they shall be exempt from all evil,
and enjoy complete and endless felicity. Thither let us soar in our affections;
thither let us bend our course; and to prepare therefore let us make the main
business of our lives. If we will do thus, the prospect of future blessedness
and glory, which, with increasing brightness will open to our view, will
greatly alleviate and assuage the sorrows of this life, and afford us
consolation amidst all the afflictions and tribulations of this troublesome
transitory world.

Religion, my friends, the religion of Jesus imbibed into the heart, and
reduced to practice, is the channel through which the greatest comforts that
can be enjoyed on earth, are conveyed unto men. This will give us hope in God,
and quiet repose under the wings of his mercy, in times of the greatest trouble
and danger. This will give us liberty of a far more noble and happifying
nature, than that outward civil liberty for which we are contending, this day.
This will free us from the tyrannical dominion of our lusts and passions, and
advance us to the glorious liberty of the children of God, wherein the
perfection and happiness of human nature consist, and without which, we shall
be slaves, how much soever we may hate the name. This, in fine, will afford us
great joys, in the views of divine favor, here; and prepare the way for our
admission to joys unspeakable and full of glory, to joys uninterrupted,
everlasting, and adequate to our capacities, in the beatific presence of God,
hereafter. AMEN.


