MR. CHAMPION's ELECTION SERMON, MAY 9th, 1776.

CHRISTIAN AND CIVIL LIBERTY AND FREEDOM CONSIDERED AND RECOMMENDED: A SERMON,
DELIVERED BEFORE THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE COLONY OF CONNECTICUT, AT
HARTFORD, ON THE DAY OF THEIR ANNIVERSARY ELECTION, MAY 9th, 1776. By JUDAH
CHAMPION, A. M. Pastor of the first Church of CHRIST in Litchfield.

If the SON make you FREE, ye shall be free indeed. JESUS CHRIST. -- Manus haec
inimica Tyrannis. ALGER. SID. HARTFORD: Printed by E. WATSON, near the Great
Bridge. 1776.

At a General Assembly of the Governor and Company of the English Colony of
Connecticut, in New England, in America, holden at Hartford, on the second
Thursday of May, 1776.
ORDERED, That ELISHA SHELDON, Esquire and Mr. JEDIDIAH STRONG, return the Thanks
of this Assembly, to the Reverend JUDAH CHAMPION, for his Sermon, preached
before them on the ninth Day of May Instant, and desire a Copy of the same,
that it may be printed.

A true Copy of Record, Examined by GEORGE WYLLYS, Sec'ry.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
GALATIANS vth Chap. 1st Verse. Stand fast, therefore, in the LIBERTY wherewith
CHRIST has made us free.
HOME-FELT joys, this day, possess our breasts, on account of the
distinguishing blessings of LIBERTY and FREEDOM, which illustriously exert
themselves, animating the members of this community.

LIBERTY! the darling of generous and noble souls, extends her hand once more,
without control, to give in her suffrages for men to rule us in the fear of
GOD.

WITH gratitude to the Almighty Preserver of our privileges, we see the returns
of this joyful anniversary; and the leaders of this people assembled, to
implore wisdom and influence from heaven, to conduct our public affairs at this
difficult and trying day.

GLOOMY and threatening indeed, is the cloud impending our land and nation. Our
privileges, civil and sacred, are imminently endangered. Under these alarming
circumstances, the admonitory language of divine providence and revelation is
this, Stand fast in the liberty wherewith CHRIST has made us free.

BY an allegory borrowed from what is written concerning Sarah and Hagar, and
their respective offspring, the apostle had been illustrating their
distinguishing privileges: Immediately upon which, our text is introduced -- of
a noble import, considered only as respecting christian liberty. But it is
proposed, upon this occasion, to apply in a more general view, what might be
suggested with a particular reference.

WE have glorious privileges asserted -- liberty and freedom belonging to us,
not merely as men, originally created in GOD'S image, holding a distinguished
rank in his creation, but also as christians, redeemed by the blood of CHRIST.
The divine author, purchaser and bestower of all these mercies and blessings,
expressly mentioned CHRIST JESUS, who, by his perfect obedience and the
sacrifice of himself made complete atonement for sin -- purchased
reconciliation with GOD -- temporal favors and blessings for a ruined world,
and eternal glory for all that truly believe in him.

HERE is also a very important duty, enjoined by the highest authority, to
exert ourselves in maintaining and defending our liberties and privileges.
Stand fast, etc.

AS our privileges, civil and sacred, are nearly related, each one being a part
of the grand whole; so we shall consider briefly, OUR LIBERTY and FREEDOM,
CIVIL and RELIGIOUS. BY whom these were PURCHASED for and BESTOWED upon us.
WHAT is IMPLIED in the DUTY ENJOINED, to STAND FAST THEREIN.


FIRST. As to our liberty and freedom, civil and religious. These may be
considered as general terms, including our inestimable rights and privileges of
a civil and sacred nature.

MAN was originally formed such a creature, and placed in those circumstances
that infinite wisdom determined it was not good for him to live alone. The
glorious CREATOR put him under strong and endearing obligations of convenience,
inclination and necessity to induce him into society, furnishing him with
reason and language to continue and enjoy it. For perpetual solitude the human
mind was not adapted, nor the strength of an individual proportionate to his
necessities. From hence society appears convenient and necessary.

THE state of nature is a state of freedom and equality. No one can therein
challenge a superiority over others. Every man was amenable to GOD alone. Nor
could he invade his neighbor's property, or abridge his natural liberty,
without violating one of nature's most sacred laws. In this apostate world, the
inability of moral virtue renders government absolutely necessary.

THE motives upon which individuals made a particular surrender of that
plenitude of power which they possess in a state of nature, are abundantly
obvious. For, though in that state, no one was subject to the control of
another; but in this respect was absolute lord of his own person and
possessions; yet every one being his equal, and the greater part no strict
observers of justice and equity; the enjoyment of property, in this situation
must be very precarious. Therefore he voluntarily relinquishes that condition
which must necessarily be attended with unceasing fears and dangers, to unite
with others for the mutual preservation of their lives, liberties and
properties. But then -- freedom from absolute, despotic power is so necessary
unto, and closely connected with a man's preservation that he cannot part with
it, but by what forfeits his preservation and life together. Vide Lock on Gov.
Blackst. Comment, etc.


WHEN mankind form into society and submit to the necessary restrictions and
subordinations of government, it lies with the people, under GOD, to determine
who shall make and execute the laws by which they shall be governed. Man's
liberty in society is to be under no legislative power, but that established in
the common wealth; and to be subject to no human laws but those enacted by that
legislature. These are conceived to be first principles, coeval with time, and
sanctified by use -- of importance in the disputes of the present day.

As to the rights and immunities of a free state, we have been most highly
favored of the LORD. When new states were founded upon the ruins of the Roman
empire, a free form of government, obtained in Great Britain and various other
parts of Europe. Under the Saxon heptarchy and after the union of those
kingdoms, liberty prevailed in England, as history informs us.

UPON the Norman conquest, despotic power was established by King William the
first. His son, to secure his crown, solemnly engaged to restore it is ancient
laws and government. Similar promises were made by some succeeding Princes, who
neglected the due performance and involved the nation in a bloody war. The
Barons and people nobly exerted themselves to recover their liberties, 'till
the charter of British privileges, the Magna Charta, was solemnly confirmed by
King John. Sordid attempts have since been made, to deprive the people of their
inestimable rights; which have ever involved their authors in wretched
misfortunes; terminating in the loss of their lives or crowns. The lawless
endeavors of Charles the first, to establish arbitrary government, introduced
a civil war, which raged until his blood quenched the flame. His son, King
James the second, enterprized absolute rule, and had almost subverted the civil
and religious liberties of his country. At this critical time GOD raised up,
and the people, vigilant of their rights, invited over the Prince of Orange;
upon which James abdicated the throne and kingdom. Thus has GOD preserved our
nation, in times past.

THE American colonies in general, and Connecticut in special, have enjoyed
most distinguishing privileges. If a perfect civil constitution cannot be found
existing; yet our own we esteem, by far, the most eligible; the advantages of
which are illustriously demonstrated at the present day. Our legislature
consists of two houses, annually elected by the freemen of the corporation,
under the sacred solemnity of an oath, to give in their suffrages so as they
verily believe in their consciences may be most conducive to the best good of
the government. Beyond all dispute, frequent elections are a noble preservative
from the execrable sin of venality in rulers. Our General Assembly, thus
composed, enact our laws, appoint our judges, erect our courts, prescribe their
powers, and adjust the method of procedure. Our rulers are not foreigners
obtruded upon us, from whence, interference of interest and disaffection would
naturally arise. While the people retain their elective power, rulers must
necessarily share very largely in the choicest affections of a free people.
Such has been the public virtue of this people, that those in highest seats of
honor, dignity and authority, in this colony, have been revered for their
superior wisdom and integrity, virtue, magnanimity and piety. The public have
been served, from time to time, by men of probity and a public spirit. Instead
of the bramble in Jotham's parable, to distress us, we have sat under the
shadow of a pleasant and fruitful vine -- Our air healthful -- our soil
fertile, liberally rewarding the diligent husbandmen -- yielding different
crops for our sustenance. If one fail, a famine may not ensue, as it does in
many countries. Every town is a corporation invested with singular power to
suppress immoralities which are provoking to GOD, and destructive to civil
society. Every family is entitled to the strength of the community for its
defense. We have enjoyed all the sweets and felt very little of the burdens of
government.

WHILE our government is so popular; yet where are civil rulers and executive
courts so truly revered as in this colony? Where is so little of riotous and
factious behavior?

AS our civil liberties and privileges are nearly connected with, and greatly
promotive of our religious (on which account they are chiefly to be esteemed)
so our religious privileges are not inferior to our civil. Every one has GOD'S
word, may read and judge for himself -- may worship GOD in the way he verily
believes Heaven will approve. Every ecclesiastical society may choose its own
minister, and provide for his support. Happily delivered from Romish
superstition, unappointed rites and ceremonies, and that ecclesiastical
hierarchy, which neither we, nor our fathers were able to bear -- we may serve
God without fear. Difference of sentiment respecting the non-essentials of
religion, seems one of the unavoidable consequences of man's dreadful apostasy.
None may impose for doctrine, the commandments of men; or force others to
believe with them. Surely the sacred rights of conscience, are ever to be
treated with utmost delicacy. But if any under pretense of conscience, sap the
foundation of civil society, or materially injure it, they are to be restrained
by the civil arm. Civil rulers are GOD'S ministers for good to mankind -- a
terror to evil works, and to punish evil doers, by salutary laws, faithfully
executed. In favor of virtue, to suppress immorality, and support religion, we
have a system of excellent laws enacted, while different persuasions enjoy the
most generous liberty and freedom. What greater civil or christian liberty can
be enjoyed, or even wished for, than the inhabitants of this colony are
indulged?

THAT no external advantage may be wanting, to render us happy, if we are not
wanting to ourselves; we have a flourishing seminary of learning in the colony,
for the instruction of our youth; from whence many streams have issued,
rejoicing the church and city of our GOD.

A PEOPLE thus exalted to heaven, should be all gratitude to GOD for
discriminating favors -- emulous to excel in obedience and subjection, by
leading most quiet and peaceable lives, in all godliness and honesty.

SECONDLY, To consider by whom these privileges were purchased for, and
bestowed upon us?

ALL things were originally created by CHRIST. Adam was placed at the head of
this lower creation, with dominion over all creatures therein -- crowned with
glory and honor, but little inferior to the angels in heaven. -- Soon did man
dreadfully apostatize from a state of primeval integrity. This was an act of
the most horrid treason against the KING of KINGS. Thereby the whole patrimony
of temporal and spiritual blessings was confiscated. CHRIST JESUS interposed,
redeemed the alienated inheritance, being appointed heir of all things, visible
and invisible. By purchase and by power, he delivers from the bondage of
corruption, and vindicates into the glorious liberty of the children of God.

HAVE sinners a reprieve from hopeless torment? -- The means of grace afforded?
-- The schools of CHRIST opened? -- His gospel preached, and ordinances
administered, to train us up for heaven? -- Have we free access to GOD, and
hopes of glory? All flow from CHRIST as their foundation. Are temporal favors
conferred upon sinful creatures? They come from CHRIST who is heir of all
things, and by whom all things consist. Every blessing is therefore to be
considered as flowing to us through the blood of JESUS. Civil government is his
institution. The powers that be, are ordained of God. By him, princes rule, and
nobles, even all the judges of the earth. In scripture, we have the character
of civil rulers decypher'd -- the design of government pointed out -- the duty
of subjects enforced. In carrying into execution the glorious purposes of
divine providence and grace, GOD has chosen, in numberless instances, to use
the mediation of others. Agreeably, civil rulers are his ministers for good to
mankind; while CHRIST is the original from whence flow all our blessings.

THIRDLY, What is implied in the duty enjoined, Stand fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free.

THAT others may endeavor by fraud or violence to deprive us of our
inestimable privileges, is here supposed; yet we must assert them; highly
esteem, and conscientiously improve them; zealously, and with utmost vigor,
exert ourselves to maintain and defend them.

THE duty enjoined in our text supposes that others may endeavor, by fraud or
violence to deprive us of our inestimable rights and privileges. We need'nt
revert to the history of past ages, to find this exemplified. Not long since,
the British parliament made solemn declaration, " That it has a right to make
laws binding upon the colonies, in all cases whatsoever. In consequence of
which, taxes have been imposed upon us without our consent -- chartered
privileges vacated -- various cruel edicts passed. The time would fail us to
enumerate and particularly consider those which violate our essential rights.
To enfore which edicts, fleets and armies have been sent over, compelling us
either to disobey the divine precept in our text, or engage in a civil war.
These colonies have nobly chosen the latter. Whoever will impartially consider
the tragical scenes of the past year, and the causes of them (me thinks) cannot
help but see that our precious privileges have been invaded; and that heaven
has arrested the hand of violence in its ravages. At Lexington, our countrymen
were attacked, fired upon, and some of them impiously slain. From thence the
inhuman murderers of their fellow subjects, proceeded to Concord; upon which an
action ensued " inglorious to the British arms." The horrors of a civil war
then commenced.

NOTWITHSTANDING the violence used to deprive us of our inestimable rights and
privileges, we are under indispensible obligations to assert them. As rational
creatures, and professing christians, a competent knowledge of, and
acquaintance with them is to be obtained. What is sacred by the laws of GOD,
nature and compact, may not be buried in oblivion, or sunk under the carnal
rubbish of luxury and stupidity. The rights belonging to us, as men and
christians, we are to understand and assert.

AGAIN. We must highly esteem, and conscientiously improve them. They demand
our highest attention. GOD'S glory, our own and other's best good, with
heaven's special command, lay us under the most sacred obligations thus to
value them. Were they of trifling importance, or our necks galled with the yoke
of despotic power and oppression (those engines of accumulated misery and
destruction to mankind) our case had been far different. But (blessed be GOD)
from those dreadful curses we are hitherto delivered. We are called to LIBERTY,
one of heaven's choicest blessings to mankind. Amidst the various calamities of
life, LIBERTY administers consolation -- redoubles the pleasures of our highest
gratifications -- inspires the human breast with noblest sentiments -- dilates
the heart -- expands the soul, and is the source of almost every thing
excellent and desirable on earth. This animates industry and economy --
promotes commerce -- procures wealth -- cherishes the liberal arts and
sciences, and wears a most friendly aspect upon all the most important
interests of mankind, while it encourages and promotes the profession and
practice of religion.

LIBERTY is the glory of a community, and ensures its felicity so long as it is
retained. SLAVERY, on the other hand, debases the mind -- clogs the finest
movements of the soul; discourages industry, frugality, and every thing
praiseworthy; introduces ignorance and poverty, with the most fordid vices,
and universal misery. How striking the contrast! If this cannot convey any
tolerable idea of the blessings of FREEDOM, let the history of mankind inform
us, and the abject condition of those people where slavery clanks her chains,
contrasted with those that are free born. In Turkey, every house, at the death
of it is master, is at the disposal of the Grand Segnior.

LIBERTY, (says a celebrated author) is the natural birthright of mankind; and
yet, to take a comprehensive view of the world, how few enjoy it! What a
melancholy reflection is it to think, that more than nine tenths of the species
should be miserable slaves to despotic tyrants! The largest part of the world,
viz. Asia, is despotic throughout. Anarchy may rule the wandering Tartars and
Arabs, but their numbers are very small. Here we fall at once on the most
numerous body of people in the world, in a state of slavery. Africa comes next;
and what misery involves that vast country! Liberty only exists at one Cape, an
exotic plant of European growth, unless we exhibit the Hottentots as the only
specimen of African freedom! In Europe itself, what a disproportion between
liberty and slavery! Russia, Poland, the chief of Germany, Hungary, Turkey, the
greatest part of Italy, Spain, Portugal, France, Denmark and Norway. The
following bear no proportion to them, viz. the British isles (observe, this
writer is an Englishman) Sweeden, Holland, Switzerland, and the Germanic and
Italian states. And in America, Spain, Portugal and France, have planted
despotism; only Britain, Liberty.

ON the whole, what a trifling part of the globe's inhabitants, enjoy what all
have, by nature, a right to! How insignificant is the number of those who
possess the greatest of blessings, compared with the unhappy tribes who are
cruelly deprived of it! The inhabitants of the world are supposed to amount to
about 775,300,000 souls; of these, the arbitrary governments command
741,800,000, and the free ones only 33,500,000; and of these few, so large a
portion as 12,500,000, are, (or have been) subjects of the British empire.
Polit. Essays on the present state of the British Empire.
Perhaps we may further deduct almost all the inhabitants of Great Britain from
the number of those free.

BY the price paid for them, especially by the blood of the great REDEEMER, and
as they are transmitted to us through the blood of our illustrious ancestors,
let our privileges be estimated. Shall not those so gloriously purchased, and
nobly transmitted, be highly esteemed, and conscientiously improved?

OUR ever memorable ancestors, left their native country, in times unfriendly
to liberty, civil and religious; and gave illustrious proofs of rising superior
to the most discouraging obstacles; leaving their houses, lands, and tenderest
connections, with every thing dear and estimable among men, for the undisturbed
fruition of those rights, sacred by the laws of GOD and nature. For this they
braved the dangers of the sea, surmounting perils, want, toil, famine, and even
the sword of the wilderness; among the asperities of nature, seeking an asylum
for liberty, which they sought in vain from the justice and policy of a
powerful empire. GOD sent them into the world to plead the cause of liberty,
and prepare western mansions against arbitrary power, for the persecuted lovers
of freedom. Having by purchase or conquest, obtained an indisputable title to
their lands; they cou'd'nt but think the produce, by the divine blessing on
their labors, to be their property, with an exclusive right of disposal.
Property without this, is but an insignificant name. To them was ratified a
legislative power, respecting their internal policy. They quitted the mortal
stage with joyful hopes that this fair inheritance, purchased at a vast expense
of treasure and blood, would be transmitted, unimpaired, to their posterity.
Our privileges are a most noble legacy, bequeathed to us; a sacred deposit,
committed to our care. Blood infinitely precious, was the original purchase,
and rather than despotic power should prevail, let us seal the surrender with
the last drop of our own. What are the lives of this numerous assembly, with
myriads added thereto, if our blood may be honored as the channel of conveyance
for our precious privileges, to countless multitudes yet unborn!

METHINKS we may this day, well nigh see the ghosts of our departed
progenitors, and hear those blessed worthies, in solemn accents, through the
vast of Heaven, addressing us, saying, Stand fast in the liberty wherewith
CHRIST has made you free. At the inestimable price of his blood, the glorious
REDEEMER purchased these blessings for his people. Through rivers of blood, and
great tribulation we have been made the instruments of handing these down to
you. Let your hearts glow with most ardent gratitude to the fountain of all
grace and mercy, and your lives be entirely devoted to GOD'S glory. Wisely
estimate, improve and maintain your inestimable privileges civil and sacred.
Nor can you wantonly throw them away, without incurring JEHOVAH'S most
tremendous indignation and curse. GOD, Angels and Saints in glory are looking
on. When you have such a glorious cause, and such spectators, consider, what
should be your behavior. Trust in GOD, and firmly defy every danger. Let the
blood of CHRIST animate you. Your heaven daring impieties, profaneness,
intemperance, and other abounding iniquities, contempt of gospel grace, and
abuse of the most blessed privileges, have procured your present calamities.
Remember from whence ye are fallen, repent and do the first works; and Zion's
GOD will support his cause in America. Heaven demands your most vigorous
exertions.

OUGHT we not then to be zealously engaged? Are not our sacred as well as civil
privileges greatly threatened? Is not the King of Great Britain, by the Quebec
bill, set at the head of the Romish church in Canada? A colony of far greater
extent than the islands of Great Britain and Ireland. Let us be zealous in a
good cause, defending the truths of the gospel with the armor of light;
without the least shuddering at the impotent thunders of papal mandates. What
awful tragedies has usurped authority acted, in church and state! It has shed
rivers of blood -- introduced purgatory, transubstantiation, with all the other
absurdities of the church of Rome. Men's souls, no less than their bodies are
thereby enslaved.

THOSE servile doctrines of indefeasible right, passive obedience, and
non-resistance, are not the doctrines of reason, good policy or revelation. An
attempt to vindicate them from scripture is highly criminal. Obedience to
lawful authority, acting agreeable to this institution, Heaven strictly
enjoins; and by this argument enforces they are ministers of GOD for good. But,
when they become the reverse, and counteract every kind design of Heaven in
their ordination -- rob mankind of their rights -- plunder and destroy them --
form conspiracies against freedom and the state -- commence rebels to the laws
of their country, of nature, of reason and of GOD -- that the Apostle's
argument for entire subjection, retains its force or that resistance is then a
damnable sin, wants proof. The history of all ages will evince that the public
interest has succeeded best, when the people have retained, in a good measure,
the power in their own hands.

IF our privileges are abridged, our country suffers, in whose welfare, every
thing dear to us on earth is involved. If it flourishes, all our interests are
better secured. We must share our country's fate. From sordid views, despicable
hopes or fears, possibly some few, may be so vile as to abandon their GOD and
country. Human language wants a name, to paint out those. -- We have the means
of perpetuating our privileges, by the divine blessing on our endeavors. Our
present distresses loudly admonish us to stir up ourselves in the fear of GOD.
Nor may the moral causes thereof be forgotten. The judgments of GOD are
executed in token of his anger, and to wake up the guilty, secure sinner, that
he may learn righteousness and flee from the wrath to come

WITH deepest penitence, we should reflect upon our stupidity and carelessness,
so provoking to GOD, under his solemn, remarkable goings. Wonderful have been
the dispensations of divine providence toward us and our fathers in this land.
GOD sent the wasting pestilence before them to make way for the ransomed of the
LORD to come in. By a series of remarkable providence GOD has defended and
established the protestant cause in America. How often did our predecessors
experience glorious salvation while their numerous enemies were vanquished!
Sometimes, GOD with his own hand has immediately destroyed those that sought
our ruin. Thus he did to that powerful French armament, which was sent against
us, soon after the reduction of Cape-Briton, the last war but one. To go no
further back than the last year; GOD has been merciful to us (in many
instances) not only beyond our deserts, but beyond our expectations. The battle
at Lexington and Concord (hinted at above) in which a thousand disciplined
Britons, having by night marched out, suddenly fell upon and inhumanly
massacred a few of our countrymen; but were obliged precipitantly to retreat
the same day; leaving many dead, having more wounded, and before night the rest
almost harrassed to death.

SOON after this, Ticonderoga was taken by our men without the effusion of any
blood. A martial spirit animated the united colonies. The people willingly
offered themselves to come up to the help of the LORD against the mighty.
Several regiments in this colony, as soon as enlisting orders were received,
almost instantaneously enlisted; and more than were wanted were so engaged to
go, they could hardly be restrained.

VARIOUS artifices had been used to engage several tribes of Indians to fight
against us; but were remarkably unsuccessful. Those who in all former wars
thirsted for our blood, would now be at peace with us, notwithstanding the
unjustifiable methods taken to induce them to distress our frontiers.

AT the battle on Bunker's-Hill, in which so few of our men were killed, when
almost surrounded with unequal numbers and a multitude of cannon, and many,
(perhaps more than a thousand) of the enemy were slain, the hand of GOD is to
be devoutly acknowledged, in covering the heads of our men in the day of
battle. This action was remarkably calculated to teach our men circumspection
in their advances, and inure them to the thunder of cannon. How suprisingly
were they spirited, longing for another battle!

WHEN our northern army had invested the fort of St. John's and almost expended
their ammunition; that Chamblee should then be taken, with plenty of warlike
stores, whereby our army was supplied, was owing to a most gracious providence.
Presently upon which St. John's surrendered. General Carleton left Montreal, of
which our troops took possession and several vessels in the river. Repeated
successes are apt to have a far different effect upon mankind, in this fallen
state, from what they ought. Instead of endearing the author of all good to
them, and making them more firmly trust in the LORD, they may be, and
oftentimes are guilty of sacrificing to their own nets, indulging carnal
confidence, "To forsake the alliance of Heaven -- trust in means and fetch all
our hope and spirit from such feeble things as ourselves, is such an horrid
affront to almighty GOD, that his honor calls for the highest resentment." He
sends such offenders to the Gods they have chosen and served, saying, let these
deliver you in the time of your tribulation. Cursed be the man that believes
in man. Whether we have not been guilty in these respects, should seriously be
considered. The strong city of Quebec, defended ('it is said) by 1500 men, was
invested and afterward attempted to be stormed, by about one thousand of our
men. In this vigorous attack, the gallant General Montgomery, with a number
more was slain; some were captivated and the rest repulsed. But these, about
600 in number, maintained the blockade of Quebec, till assistance arrived. This
repulse, Heaven might see necessary to rouse the attention of these colonies to
that place, of utmost importance to the securing of Canada, and the Indians in
our interest, so that our frontiers may remain unmolested.

"THE relief of BOSTON from the cruel and oppressive invasion of those, who
were sent to erect the standard of lawless domination and to trample on the
rights of humanity, must give pleasure to every virtuous and sympathetic heart
-- and being effected without the effusion of the blood of our soilders and
fellow citizens must be ascribed to the interposition of that kind providence,
which has manifestly appeared in our behalf, through this important struggle:"
That General How and his men should so precipitantly and in an apparent panic
evacuate Boston is truly astonishing. In like manner the enemies of GOD'S
people were terrified and fled of of old, according to the word of the LORD.

THE success of the continental fleet at New-Providence, where they took
considerable warlike stores, and in their return some vessels of force, demands
our sincerest gratitude to the LORD of HOSTS.

WE need not enlarge on these particulars, which are fresh in every one's
memory now, and in the history of America, will astonish posterity.

WONDERFUL is the union subsisting in the American States: Yet in
North Carolina, by some lately settled there, and others deluded and
infatuated, a sordid insurrection was not long since formed. This was speedily
and remarkably crushed; their General, ( M' Donald) captivated; their commander
in the engagement ( M'Cloud) killed; of the rest, some were killed, some taken,
and others dispersed: Some of their ringleaders are confined, and it is
apprehended, all the rest are disarmed. In this affray, only two men on our
side were wounded, one of them mortally, though the conspirators who attacked
our men, were almost double their number, if not more. But yet our enemies are
practicing every artifice to seduce and destroy us. Are not all our rights and
liberties, civil and sacred, and therein the rights of the constitution,
invaded and threatened? British troops are sent to subjugate us -- fleets to
annoy and ruin us, lining our seacoasts -- plundering the inhabitants --
butchering our friends -- endeavoring with fire and sword, to make our
pleasant places desolate. With what impotent rage, do the tools of tyranny pant
for our blood! With what amazing ardour do they level the arrows of their
vengeance against every thing dear and sacred to us, even those very privileges
CHRIST purchased for us and commands us to defend! Can Britons, who have been a
terror to tyrants, fight successfully under the banners of tyranny, against the
of Heaven! Can their swords retain their edge or their arms their accustomed
vigor! It is very remarkable, that so small a number of our men have been
slain in the various skirmishes hitherto: In some of which our men have been
imminently exposed, to all human appearance, and not one killed. This is the
LORD'S doing, and mavelous in our eyes! It is apprehended, Heaven has not
suffered one ball in a thousand, which they have levelled against us, to do any
execution.

WE must be greatly wanting to ourselves, to posterity, to our country and to
our GOD, if we do not exert ourselves to maintain our rights. The public
welfare, demand the attention of all, in their respective departments, to
inspire and invigorate their best efforts for its advancement; and especially
those in public trust; that with inextinguishable ardour, they pursue the
public good. In any member of society a selfish, narrow, contracted temper is
criminal: But in those of public character it is odious, and under our present
circumstances, unsufferable.

A LATE writer in England observes, The nation in general look on the struggle,
between the colonies, in defense of their rights and freedom, and the arbitrary
power which would enslave them, in a very interesting point of view. They
consider American freedom as the palladium of their own. Many therefore wish
for your firmness, perseverance and success. America is considered as an asylum
from oppression. If you preserve your constitutional rights and liberties, you
may depend upon it, that people, arts and manufactures will flock to you from
all parts of the globe. Riches and power will follow of course. Take care that
you do not fall into the vices, luxury and oppression, which have brought
destruction to all former great states and kingdoms, and now threaten the like
to Great Britain. Consider the importance of the parts you are now to act. The
freedom and happiness of yourselves, your posterity, of the whole British
empire, and the oppressed of all nations seems to depend upon you. Think! O
think what should be your conduct where a charge of such consequence devolves
upon you! Providence has placed you in a most important station, see that you
discharge the duties of it, with faithfulness and dignity.

THE Bishop of ST. ASAPH, in his sermon before the society, etc. holds up to
view the future greatness and glory of America, instead of representing us as
savages and barbarians, which had been too common upon that occasion. In his
Lordship's patriotic speech in favor of BOSTON's charter, he observes,
arbitrary taxation is plunder authorized by law. It is the support and essence
of tyranny, and has done more mischief to mankind, than those other three
scourges from Heaven, sword, pestilence and famine. In whatever hands the power
of taxation is lodged, it includes and implies all other power. He adds, my
Lords, I have ventured to lay my thoughts before you, on the greatest national
concern that ever came under your deliberation, with as much honesty as you
will find from others, and with a melancholy assurance that not a word of it
will be regarded. And yet, my Lords, by your permission, I will waste one short
argument more on the same cause. My Lords, I look on America as the only great
nursery of freemen now left upon the face of the earth. The most precious
remains of civil liberty the world can now boast of, are now lodged in our
hands; and GOD forbid that we should violate so sacred a deposit. By enslaving
the colonies, you not only ruin the peace, the commerce and fortunes of both
countries, but you extinguish the fairest hopes, shut up the last asylum of
mankind. I think, my Lords, without being weakly superstituous, a good man may
hope that heaven will take part against the execution of a plan which seems
big, not only with mischief, but impiety. In which hope we all most cordially
unite. Has not Heaven as yet, answered the pious wish?

IN addition to what is before mentioned, we may here add, that in the
encounters at Noddles and Hog-Islands, and in one more lately at Georgia, we
lost not a man, though imminently exposed.

DID not Heaven also most apparently take part against them when it consumed
some of their vessels by lightning: and when a terrible storm destroyed much of
their shipping on the banks of Newfoundland, with the treasures they had taken
out of the seas, where we had been prohibited fishing -- many men lost their
lives, (some say above three thousand) who, it is confidently affirmed were to
have come against us, when the season for fishing was over. GOD immediately
interposed, and prevented them. Besides, the colonies are surprizingly united,
considering the methods that have been used to divide and destroy. What Union
and resolution have our provincial assemblies and conventions manifested! How
wonderfully has the spirit of wisdom, love, peace, goodness, unanimity, and
fortitude inspired the grand American Congress! To their resolves, the people
have yielded remarkable obedience. In all which GOD is to be acknowledged; and
while the propect brightens before us, our obligations to support our rights
are inreased. Under the Jewish Theocracy, GOD destroyed those who were
intimidated, and discouraged their brethren. Numb. 13 and 14 chap.
We may be sorely chastised, but the righteous cause, so dearly purchased, will
prevail. The LORD of HOSTS will arm the whole creation -- level the artillery
of Heaven -- send all his angels, and martial all the elements in battle array,
against his enemies, before his cause shall suffer.

MANY remarks that might be made, must be suppressed, and the subject closed
with some addresses.

FIRST. To the legislature of this colony now convened.

MAY it please your HONOR, the honorable COUNCIL, and REPRESENTATIVES, in
General Court assembled:

IN this dark and difficult day, you will consider yourselves as the guardians
of our excellent constitution, which has true English liberty for its basis.
Nor can it fail of giving you singular consolation, that (under GOD) you hold
these places of public trust and honor, by the spontaneous suffrages of a free
people. You will ever bear in mind, that wisdom, prudence, courage and
fortitude, a public and patriotic spirit (which on this occasion have so often
been recommended) with the true fear of GOD in your hearts, are essential
qualifications for civil rulers -- Religion inspires the mind with fortitude --
makes it truly great, and in scripture, always forms a principal part of the
good ruler's character. The fear of the LORD is the beginning and perfection of
wisdom. It would be most absurd for the ministers of GOD not to revere the
Almighty. Therefore, you will consider yourselves as under peculiar obligations
to exemplify religion. To promote virtue, example is more efficacious than
human laws. While you show yourselves the noble patrons of christian liberty,
you will patronize learning by all due encouragements.

HONORED SENATORS,

MATTERS of last importance are upon the very point of decision. The appeal is
made to Heaven. When you are called to deliberations and determinations of most
universal concern, may GOD grant you all that wisdom, grace, firmness and
magnanimity you need. When the fate of millions now existing, and innumerable
multitudes yet unborn is depending, this counsel of heaven cannot be
unseasonable, Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. The
distinguishing favor of Heaven to this colony, in giving us a Governor firmly
attached to, and with unremitted zeal, integrity and magnanimity, promoting of
the public interest, is most gratefully acknowledged, whom GOD has mercifully
supported, under the greatest burden of cares, and most urgent multiplicity of
the most important business, that ever any Governor was called unto in this
colony.

THIS is the only provincial, General Assembly upon this continent which has
not been harrassed and perplexed by being adjourned, prorogued or dissolved by
its Governor, except one, which was necessitated to appoint a new one.
Rhode Island colony was reduced to this necessity last year.


GENTLEMEN,

WAS it ever of equal necessity and importance that our civil and military
officers be known friends to their country. Your eyes will be upon the faithful
of the land to sustain every office you are entrusted to bestow. You will never
suffer our precious privileges, so dearly purchased and transmitted, to be lost
by your neglect. Should you sink with the weight of the community upon your
shoulders, O! how dreadful.

WE look to you to consult measures necessary to perpetuate our liberty.
Trusting in GOD, you will exert yourselves to suppress iniquity, and be strong
-- show yourselves men; not tarnishing the dignity of your characters, but
standing fast in the cause of GOD and your country. This will embalm your
memories. Future generations, as well as the present, will call you blessed.
But a little while and the place which now knows you, will know you no more.
You will be animated to duty from the consideration of your approaching
dissolution. Several of those who, not long since were seated at the council
board, are now consigned to the gloomy recesses of the dead. The honorable
EBENEZER SILLIMAN, Esquire the honorable SHUBAEL CONANT, Esquire the honorable
JAMES-ABRAHAM HILLHOUSE, Esquire who deceased the year past.
Honorable counselors and judges must die as well as others. Those who
(through grace) act their parts well, while living, shall be revered and
admired by men, and when they die, be applauded by Heaven. Then may you
exchange your seats in this senate for mansions of glory.

SECONDLY. To our honorable GENERALS, COLONELS, and other OFFICERS in our
armies.

HONORED GENTLEMEN,

THE LORD of HOSTS has raised you up and called you to most important
services. Your country reposes the highest confidence (under GOD) in your
wisdom, prudence, martial skill, intrepid courage and heroic valor. GOD has
styled himself a man of war. CHRIST, the Captain of GOD'S host. Under his
banner the people that do know their GOD, shall do exploits. You will therefore
endeavor to promote the knowledge of, love and obedience unto, and entire
trust in GOD. As you are engaged, not only in a most just but glorious cause;
be strong and very courageous. Play the men for the church and city of our God;
and the LORD do what seems him good. The battle is not yours, but the
LORD'S. Should any of you die, fighting in defense of your country's rights,
you will expire in a full blaze of glory.

IN testimony of our great regard for such illustrious worthies, we this day,
with deepest lamentations, pour forth our tears over the urns of the brave, the
gallant and heroic WARREN and MONTGOMERY. America laments their fall.

GENTLEMEN, we wish you a blessing from the house of the LORD. GOD ALMIGHTY
crown your military enterprises with success; and after you have been the happy
instruments, in GOD'S hand, of saving your country, may you, in some late
period, receive distinguished honors in the celestial state of uninterrupted
peace.

THIRDLY, To my FATHERS and BRETHREN in the GOSPEL MINISTRY.

REVEREND AND BELOVED,

NOT only as men, but as ministers, we are peculiarly interested in the event
of the present controversy. You will allow me to stir up your pure minds, by
putting you in remembrance. We must watch for souls, as those that must give
account; and woe to us if they are lost by our neglect. As we are to carry into
execution the glorious designs of sinner's salvation, what blessed, animating
prospects are disclosed, when all the glories and dreadfuls of the eternal
worlds rise up to view! Faith, repentance, and universal reformation, are to be
inculcated; the whole counsel of GOD must be delivered, and all be enforced by
a Christlike example, which adds greatest weight to council, edge to reproof,
and efficacy to admonitions. While we openly bear testimony against oppression,
how solicitous should we be, that no disposition lurk within us, to lord it
over God's heritage. Warning against those vices which have subjugated mighty
nations, we must carefully avoid them ourselves; otherwise our warnings will
rebound with amazing confusion, into our own faces. Who knows what scenes may
be approaching* we may be called to the fiery trial. Let us now sound the
alarm, that saints may be quickened, and sinners, having the sentence of death
in themselves, be excited to fly to the living GOD.

VERY soon must we give an account of our stewardship to our eternal JUDGE. Of
this, Heaven loudly premonishes us, by the late frequent deaths of our
venerable fathers and brethren in the ministry, The Rev. Messieurs WILLIAMS, D.
D. MILLS, HALL, BARTHOLOMEW, ROBERTS, BROWN, CLARK, HEART, and HOW: all who
deceased since the last election.
whose praise is in the churches. With what incessant importunity should we
address the GOD of grace, for ourselves, our people and our country, at the
present day. May we obtain grace to be faithful, and mercy to be successful
laborers in GOD'S vineyard. And when CHRIST, the Chief Shepherd, shall appear,
may we and our respective flocks appear with him in glory.

THIS discourse closes, with an address to this numerous assembly.

RESPECTABLE AUDIENCE:

THE time is short -- eternity near, and your work great to prepare therefore.
We are ambassadors for CHRIST, as though GOD did beseech you by us: We pray
you, in CHRIST'S stead, be ye reconciled to GOD. For conscience sake, yield all
due obedience to civil magistracy, which is perfectly consistent with standing
fast in our liberty. Improve the best of privileges to the noblest purposes.
Think nothing too dear to be parted with in support of them. If a people, under
all our peculiar advantages, and constraining motives, to holiness can find in
their hearts to indulge all manner of iniquities, their destruction is
hastening. Is not destruction to the wicked, and a strange punishment to the
workers of iniquity? GOD will rain upon them fire and brimstone and an horrible
tempest. The times call for deepest humiliation, frequent fasting, and most
ardent prayer. Our land is sacrilegiously polluted with the blood of our fellow
citizens, impiously shed by worse than savage hands. We are involved in the
horrors of a civil war. Let your heads, hands, fortunes and lives be devoted
and consecrated to your country's good. When our host goes forth, against the
most unnatural enemy, let us keep ourselves from every wicked thing, as we
would not pull down Heaven's vengeance upon the land, and those who defend the
common cause. Let us cry mightily to GOD, and be careful to engage JESUS to be
our Captain General.

FOR Heaven's sake and for our own, let us arouse, my countrymen, and act up to
the dignity of our character as freeborn Americans. Let us be steady, prudent,
firm and united, trusting in the LORD. Now, by the love of GOD to perishing
sinners -- by all that CHRIST has done and suffered to purchase our privileges
and eternal salvation -- by the worth of your own precious and immortal souls
-- by all that is dear and sacred -- by all your regard to the sacred Trinity,
to yourselves, to posterity, and to your country, we beseech and adjure you to
Stand fast in the liberty wherewith CHRIST has made us free.

AMEN.

