True Fortitude delineated. A SERMON, PREACHED AT FAGS MANOR, TO CAPTAIN
TAYLOR'S COMPANY OF RECRUITS, ON THE LORD'S DAY, FEBRUARY 18th, 1776, (And now
published by Request)

BY THE REV. WILLIAM FOSTER, A. M.

Thou therefore endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. 2 Timothy 2. 3.
PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOHN DUNLAP, IN MARKET-STREET. M,DCC,LXXVI.

TO COLONEL WAYNE, THE GENTLEMEN OFFICERS AND PRIVATES OF HIS BATTALION, THE
FOLLOWING SERMON, IS MOST HUMBLY AND AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED, BY THE AUTHOR.

A SERMON, etc.
2 CHRONICLES. xxxii. 7. 8. Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for
the King of Assyria, nor for all the multitude that is with him. With him is an
arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God to help us and to fight our
battles.
THERE is nothing can afford such solid and rational comfort in any
undertaking, as a firm and unshaken confidence that the Lord Jehovah is on our
side, and the cause we engage in, is the cause of God. As it lays the
foundation of true, christian courage, so it ought to be the rule by which to
walk and conduct ourselves. If we are zealously affected, it should always be
in a good cause, and such as the God of Heaven will approve of. Unless we set
out with this view, we have reason to expect nothing but disappointment in the
issue. It must be acknowledged by all, who profess to believe the being and
perfections of a God, that there is not only a general, but particular
providence, ordering and directing the affairs of our world, so as to subserve
the wise ends of the divine government. This being the state of the case, it
must be a matter of the last importance to us, whether in a single or social
capacity, that we have God our almighty friend and protector. This belief is
undoubtedly implied in the particular application that has been made, to have a
sermon preached, suited to the present times and adapted in a peculiar manner
to the circumstance of such present, as are ready to march into the field,
gallantly to expose their lives in defense of our most invaluable rights and
privileges. Now if God be for us, who may or can be against us? But if God be
against us, what power can successfully engage in our defense?

IN our context we have an account of Sennacherib's descent upon Hezekiah's
kingdom, together with the special care Hezekiah took to put himself in the
best possible posture of defense. The means is ours, the success depends upon
God. Sennacherib was then the scourge of that part of the world, as
Nebuchadnezzar was afterward. God often raises up such instruments for the
purpose of executing his will, and bringing about some important revolutions.
They are used as the rods of his anger, and when his work is done he casts them
into the fire. Every step is taken by Hezekiah to check Sennacherib's march
through his dominions. If we trust God with our safety it must be in the use of
proper means, otherwise we tempt, not trust him.

IN the 6th verse the good King gathers the people together and speaks
comfortably unto them. This was infinitely better calculated to inspire both
officers and soldiers with fresh courage to go into the field, than horrid
oaths and imprecations. It is most certainly a matter of supreme consequence
that such as have the principal direction of an army be men of God, that they
may inspire their soldiery with true christian courage.

BE strong, etc. q. d. Do not basely shrink back in an hour of danger, but
resolve to hold it out to the last man. Let the soldiers quit themselves like
men, make good their parts, stand to their arms, and display their valor equal
to the goodness of the cause. Like a General who displays his banners under the
Lord of Hosts, he encourages them with the most animating considerations, that
however numerous and formidable the army was that came against them, yet theirs
exceeded. God, says he, is with us, and that is more than all the combined
forces of the enemy. At best the arm of flesh is all that they can boast of,
but with us is an irresistible and omnipotent arm. We have a God in covenant,
not only to help us, but to go before and fight our battles.

OBSERVATION. There is nothing tends so effectually to inspire with true
courage as a lively impression of the presence and interposition of God.

IN the farther prosecution of the subject, I design, through divine aid, the
following method.

1st. TO show wherein true Fortitude consists.

2d. BY what method we are to judge of God's being on our side, to fight our
battles.

3d. THE grounds of confidence arising therefrom.

I. I am to show you wherein true Fortitude consists. -- In general it consists
in a temper of mind disposing persons to perform brave and noble actions,
without being daunted at the appearance of dangers or difficulties in the way.
With much propriety therefore is this temper recommended to such as are engaged
in the military life, as they must endure hardness, and lay their accounts to
meet with many hardships in the discharge of their important trust. True
Fortitude is indispensibly necessary to complete a good soldier. A poor
pusillanimous soul is unfit for real service, and shrinks back in an hour of
danger, when duty urges to action. The Heathen Moralists reckoned courage in
war to be the highest display thereof, and that the soldier had the best
opportunity to display his courage, as life, the dearest thing in the world,
was risqued in war. There is natural Fortitude or Stoutness, a large share of
which the ancient Romans possessed, which, however serviceable for the soldier,
yet is essentially different from, and vastly inferior to, the Fortitude I am
explaining. Many mistake its true nature, and at best give us but a very feeble
and imperfect notion thereof. There is no more illustrious display of real
Fortitude than to encounter the vicious prejudices of the age we live in; to
row against the current of corrupt customs, to be singly sober amidst those who
mock at all goodness, virtue and piety; to reject the enticements of kind but
wicked companions; and especially to put to the torture and resolutely crucify
one's own carnal inclinations: This requires a face of flint and an heart of
steel, the spirit and courage of an hero, and the strength of a giant.
especially by such as from the nature of their calling, plunge into a sea of
temptation, and are perpetually dunned with the allurements of ensnaring
companions. This, Gentlemen, as it is at the foundation of true Fortitude, so
it is the best armor you can carry with you into the field. "Therefore quit
yourselves like men, be strong, take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye
may be able to stand against all the wiles of the Devil." Many whilst they have
laid the world in blood and ashes, have had Victory chained to their chariot
wheels wherever they turned, have been mean and base cowards, submitted to the
tyranny of every unruly lust and appetite. The victory over carnal self, is
more than to set flames to whole rowns, and level the proudest walls.

BUT to be particular --

1st. TRUE courage does not consist in insensibility of danger, but nobly
rising above it in our minds. There can be no display of courage, however great
the danger, if persons are entirely insensible thereof. In vain may the person
asleep upon a topmast in time of a storm, allege that it was an instance of
courage; or the drunkard standing upon the brink of an awful precipice. Neither
will it be characteristic of true courage for persons to plunge into thickest
dangers, without a proper sense thereof, and a mind ready prepared to meet
every event. The more quick our sense of danger, the more true heroism in
engaging therein, as it manifests a clear sense of duty and our fixed
resolution to persevere.

2d. NEITHER does true Fortitude consist in banishing all fear. The fear of God
is not only consistent with, but at the very foundation of true courage. There
is no such hero as the christian hero, nor is any thing of equal efficacy to
encourage us to meet death, as the fear of God upon our hearts. I fear many of
our gentlemen officers and soldiers are accustomed to esteem it an instance of
cowardice to fear and serve God, and therefore cast off all fear and restrain
prayer before him. This is not courage but temerity or rashness. "What, not
fear him who can kill both soul and body and cast them into hell for ever?" Not
to fear God is to be a servant of sin and slave to every unruly lust. Thus we
often see that sober and discreet youths, as soon as they enter the army grow
debauched, learn to profane God's holy name, as though cursing and swearing
were vices licensed by the God of Heaven. I hope better things of you,
Gentlemen, yet as a faithful friend I must warn you.

3. NEITHER does it consist in exposing ourselves to unnecessary danger. Our
courage ought to be exercised in conjunction with christian prudence, so as not
to rush into danger unless a sense of duty calls. To plunge ourselves into the
most imminent danger where the object to be obtained is very inconsiderable,
and the prospect of obtaining even that little, doubtful, would be injudicious
and rash. Persons may throw away their lives under the mistaken notion of
fortitude, to perpetuate their names, and gain immortal renown. When the call
is clear, and the object to be obtained, glorious, no danger should be avoided
-- the greatest difficulties submitted to.

4. TRUE courage then consists in a free and cheerful disposition to encounter
the greatest dangers, when there is an evident call in the providence of God.
This ought to be the grand object of our attention, and at the foundation of
every hazardous undertaking. A consciousness of this animates the soul, and
makes it rise above undue fear in the discharge of the most arduous duties.
There is nothing will make persons more determined to encounter danger and play
the man, than a firm persuasion that we are on the Lord's side, and that the
cause we espouse is the cause of heaven. In such circumstances ten men will
drive an hundred, and an hundred put a thousand to flight. An army so
principled goes into the field resolved upon death or victory.

WITH what a divine enthusiasm were Israel led to engage all their enemies,
under the animating addresses of their Generals, Moses and Joshua? Deuteronomy. xxxi.
6. "Be strong and of a good courage, fear not nor be afraid of them: For the
Lord thy God, he it is that does go with thee; he will not fail thee, nor
forsake thee." To the same purpose, Josh. i. 9. "Have not I commanded thee? Be
strong and of a good courage, be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed; for the
Lord thy God is with thee whither soever thou go." With such views,
Gentlemen, ought you to go into the field as the most signal proof of your true
courage!

5. TRUE courage manifests itself in suppressing anxious and distracting fears
about what is future. It is enough that he is engaged in the path of duty, and
therefore leaves what is future in the hand of God. It is the part of a coward
to shrink from present duty for fear of future ills. The coward often fears
where there is no real danger, and cries. There is a lion in the street. He
perplexes himself with imaginary evils, and represents real ones much more
frightful than they are in themselves. But the brave soldier does not flinch at
the prospect of future hardships; he has laid his accounts to endure hardness
as a good soldier, and so stands ready prepared to meet them.

6. TRUE Fortitude will discover itself in a vigorous application to our work,
notwithstanding the stated and constant difficulties and oppositions that stand
in the way. There is a perseverance absolutely necessary, and that when we may
be foiled once and again. It does not dispirit the truly magnanimous soldier
notwithstanding he may meet with a variety of discouragements and repulses; he
persists so long as the object appears attainable, and does not sink under a
temporary check. He resolves not to quit the field until, under God, he puts
the armies of the aliens to flight and comes off a complete conqueror. He is
encouraged to pursue the cause from a clear conviction that he fights under
Jehovah's banner and that he will be crowned with success at last.

7. TRUE Fortitude consists in an uniform stedfastness of conduct amidst all
the trials and dangers we meet with. There can be no display of courage when
danger is not near; many talk big when dangers are at a distance, but let them
be called forth to meet them, they will slink into a corner and basely betray
the cause, when the greatest need to stand forth. But cool courage and real
fortitude increases and that in proportion to the danger. He quits not his
post, flinches not his ground, nor turns his back upon the opposing enemy.
Though he might have had his fears before the scene of action; though he might
not have had so much false confidence as many others; though he might meet
danger with a trembling hand, yet if he stands his ground in the heat of
battle, he gives the most unequivocal proof of his real Fortitude. It has often
been remarked of some of the bravest soldiers, that they have come into the
field with a trembling hand, and yet have performed wonders. No punishment can
be too great for the base coward who either deserts or meanly turns his back in
the hour of battle. Upon that moment may hang the fate of an empire; upon that
single engagement the liberties, both civil and religious, of an whole
continent. This, my dear Gentlemen, will be your indispensible duty if called
to action. Remember that the liberties of unborn millions may hang suspended on
the fate of a single hour -- To desert the cause or basely betray the important
trust, would leave an indelible blot upon your names and your posterity to the
latest ages. Thus I have attempted to open up the nature of true Fortitude, and
trust that God will inspire your souls with that noble spirit, who are singling
yourselves out in defense of our invaded rights.

BUT I proceed in the

II HEAD, To show you by what method we are to judge of God's being on our
side, to fight our battles.

AS a rational conviction of this is at the foundation of true courage, so it
becomes all those who embark in the present interesting dispute, narrowly to
examine and impartially to weigh matters, left they might be found to fight
against God. As nothing can animate equal to the consciousness of a good cause,
so on the other hand no thought can be more sinking, no reflection more
chilling, than an apprehension that we have all the armed hosts of Heaven to
engage with. We are embarking in a most important affair, a matter that will
draw after it the most interesting consequences both to Great Britain and the
Colonies, in uniting to oppose the British arms. It highly concerns us then
seriously to consider the matter, so as to proceed upon just principles. Would
to God that each enlisting in the American service, was first enlisted under
the Lord Jesus Christ, so that whether life or death, eternal glory, as the
reward, might be their portion? I fear many embarking in the present
interesting dispute, do not sufficiently weigh the matter, whether it be a
righteous or an unrighteous cause -- A good cause may be very improperly
engaged in; there is a curse pronounced upon those who do the work of the Lord
deceitfully, as well as upon such who keep back their swords from blood. In
order then to assist you in this important point, let me just premise, that we
are not to expect any extraordinary revelation from Heaven or miraculous
interposition in order to determine whether God be on our side; notwithstanding
the great Jehovah was wont in former times to reveal to his servants the
Prophets, the issue of certain engagements, and that Israel would assuredly
prevail; yet as the canon of sacred writ is now closed, and the spirit of
prophecy ceased, it would be unwarrantable presumption to expect such a
revelation to mark out the line of our conduct. We are carefully to look into
God's word, and mark the steps of divine conduct in order to form a judgment
and determine whether we have sufficient reason to believe that God will go
forth and fight our battles. But to proceed --

1st THE cause must be good. Without this we have no reason to expect that God
will interest himself in our favor, that he will go forth with our armies and
fight our battles. True, God may suffer an unrighteous cause to prosper for a
while, to subserve the wise ends of his government. The rod of the wicked may
lay upon the lot of the righteous for a time, but it will most assuredly be
removed. There is a very material difference between God's permitting an
unrighteous cause for a season to prosper, and his protecting and defending a
good one. A bad cause will fail at last, and God will take glory to himself in
bringing good out of evil. Now, brethren, may we not appeal to God in the
present struggle, that our cause is good? We are not carried through an haughty
and wanton spirit to seek for larger dominions, or invade the property of
others. We only desire in a quiet and peaceable manner to enjoy the fruits of
our own industry and labor, and have some little peculium, or stock, we can
call our own, without being taxed by a corrupt Parliament, in which we have no
representation, nor from our local distance ever can have. We asked for no
additional privileges, but content with the Charter Rights under which we
claimed, felt no disposition to break off our connection with Britain, if it
could with safety be preserved. We only insisted upon, as being our
indisputable right, the privilege we had time immemorial enjoyed "of eating
every man of his own vine, and every one of his fig tree, and to drink every
one of his own cistern." Is it not the simple voice of nature that this
privilege we should still enjoy? And is it not agreeable to all our Charters
and the very genius of the British Constitution, that no money should be
filched from us without our own consent? This is a birthright inheritance, and
we are loudly called upon by God and Nature to hand it down to posterity. Hence
then it appears that the attack is unjustly made upon our property, and we
stand acquitted before God and the World to defend it at the expense of blood.
As to the antiquated doctrine of passive-obedience and non-resistance, it has
been sufficiently exploded by many eminent writers, both ancient and modern --
it is such a wilful attack upon the natural rights of mankind, that it is
scarcely entitled to a serious refutation. We neither deserve the blessings of
civil nor religious Liberty, if we can see them wrested from us without a
struggle.

BUT perhaps some might object and say, it is only a dispute about civil
property; the object is not or sufficient importance to run the risque of loss
of blood. To this I reply, that time would fail me to enumerate the long and
black catalogue of ills that will unavoidably ensue if we tamely give up this
one privilege, of being taxed by our own Representatives. Our estates, our all
that we have for the support of our wives and children, must be laid at the
feet of a bloody Ministry and packed Parliament, for the very purpose of
enslaving us more and more, by supporting porting over ourselves swarms of
court sycophants and hungry leeches, who would never be contented until they
had drained the last penny from our purses. Add to all this what the Reverend
Synod of New York and Philadelphia justly observed in their last pastoral
letter, "that civil and religious Rights are so intimately connected together,
that where one is given up the other falls of course." Let us for a moment look
into the reigns of the Charles's and James's, and we will find that when
religious liberties were attacked, the source of dispute at that time, civil
property was rendered precarious and insecure. Nothing more common than
sequestrations, confiscations, imprisonments, banishments, and death itself, in
all its hideous forms of terror. Thus it will hold vice versa -- I am clearly
convinced, that if we submit in the present dispute, liberty of conscience will
be next invaded by that lordly Court and corrupt Parliament. There is a strong
propensity in human nature for such as are in authority to lord it over those
beneath them, and to have not only the civil but religious privileges of others
solely at their disposal.

THIS renders our dispute with Great Britain of the utmost importance to all of
every denomination; a dispute worth expending millions upon, and hazarding the
lives of thousands, to transmit fair to our posterity the blessings of civil
and religious liberty. Is it not agreeable to the divine mind that we should be
free, and enjoy the inestimable blessing of worshipping God according to the
dictates of conscience, without the fear of man, which causes a snare?
certainly it is. If so, then the cause is God's, and embarking in the present
dispute, we fight the Lord's battles. Will he not then go before and succeed
our arms?

2. IT also supposes that we engage in a good cause from just motives and right
principles. Without this we have not sufficient ground to expect that God will
succeed our attempts and crown our arms with success, at least for the present.
This appears agreeable to the general series of the divine conduct in former
ages. How often did victory decide on the part of Israel's enemies,
notwithstanding they were heathens? There is an actual curse pronounced upon
such as do the work of the Lord deceitfully. Would to God that in this
particular we had still clearer evidence of God's being on our side, and that
persons in suing for office did not so much study their own things! Undoubtedly
the prevalence of vice and neglect of God and religion, both in our armies and
elsewhere, is matter of deep lamentation, and is a reason why we may expect
that God will suffer us to meet with several repulses in the present dispute,
in order that the glory of his power and rich grace may appear the more
illustrious in finally crowning us with success. Yet I cannot but apprehend
that the fears of some are too much awakened upon this consideration, and are
ready to conclude that from the present decay of religion and growth of
impiety, God designs to give us entirely up and render us a prey to the enemy.
I am not of that sentiment, as God in his adorable providence suffers a state,
or nation, to arrive at a certain pitch both of greatness and impiety, before
he gives them up to their foes. Now I think it must appear evident to every
attentive observer, that the Colonies are arrived to neither that pitch of
greatness nor yet impiety that length of time may bring about. Wealth is
usually a forerunner of vice, and those cities which have been the marts of
trade, have generally imported foreign fashions and sinful customs. I trust
that the present struggle will serve to humble the pride of our Colonies, and
that whoever lives will see glorious days in America consequent upon this black
cloud that now hangs over us. Besides, there are still some favorable symptoms
that God is with us and that he will fight our battles, if we consider that we
have engaged in this war, not with an entire dependence upon the arm of flesh,
but have been called upon frequently to humble ourselves before God, with
fasting and with prayer, to repent of all our sins and turn unto the Lord our
God. I trust there are thousands and tens of thousands embarking in the present
war with the best and purest of motives, although I doubt not interest and
honor are the (...) motives with many. I sincerely believe that the praying
part both in Great Britain and America are interested on the side of American
liberty. I doubt not many prayers are this day ascending up to the throne of
grace, which I trust will enter into the ears of the Lord God of Sabbath, in
our behalf.

3d. WHEN God interests himself on any one side, the schemes and machinations
of those in the opposition are turned into foolishness. Thus, Job v. 12. 13. He
disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform
their enterprise. He takes the wise in their own craftiness: And the counsel
of the froward is carried headlong. I think it must appear plain to the most
superficial observer that many of the counsels of the British senate have been
foolishness, and by no means calculated to answer the purpose they had in view.
This confession is extorted from the Ministry themselves in their last debates.
The very measures taken to divide the Colonies have been over ruled to complete
their union. Thus it was in the case of the stamp act, under the specious name
of raising a revenue for our own protection. The varnish was soon rubbed off;
the horrid enslaving scheme was soon detected, and the Colonies from
New Hampshire to Georgia took the alarm. Here was a chain to bind the whole
Colonies, a plan laid to sweep away the liberties of more than three millions
of American subjects at once, whereas had they begun with a single Colony the
measure might have ensured them of an easy conquest. -- The rigorous steps
taken against the colony of Massachusetts, and town of Boston, laying it under
the most intolerable and unrighteous proscriptions, destroying its trade and
blocking up its harbor, enkindled the indignation of every son or liberty on
the Continent. Had the vindictive statutes been less cruel, they would have
better answered the purpose of enslaving the Colonies. In short, it would
greatly exceed the limits of a sermon to enter into a minute detail of the
several steps taken by the Ministry and Parliament of Great Britain, which have
proved entirely subversive of their favorite scheme. Now does not this show
very clearly that God is against them, and consequently on our side? This
argument receives additional weight, if we also consider the many illustrious
characters God has raised up in defense of American liberty both in
Great Britain and the Colonies, together with the remarkable wisdom and
prodigious extent of knowledge manifested in all the productions of our
Honorable Continental Congress. Let the encomium of Earl Chatham, that master
of politics, eloquence and found reasoning, serve to immortalize their names
and transmit the memory of that illustrious body with a grateful remembrance to
latest posterity. Speaking of their arduous task, he says, "When your Lordships
look at the papers transmitted us from America, when you consider their
decency, firmness and wisdom, you cannot but respect their cause, and wish to
make it your own -- For myself I must declare and avow, that in all my reading
and observation, and it has been my favorite study; -- I have read Thucidides,
and have studied and admired the master states of the world, that for solidity
of reasoning, force of sagacity and wisdom of conclusion, under such a
complication of different circumstances, no nation or body of men can stand in
preference to the General Continental Congress in Philadelphia." -- May they
long continue to honor the important trust, to gain the applause of the wise
and the good, and be the constant care of an indulgent heaven!

THUS then it appears from those particulars, as well as the signal success we
have been blessed with, that God is on our side to fight our battles.

4th. IT is usual for the great Jehovah to interest himself for the enlargement
of young and growing states. Thus we find that he has fought their battles and
made them victorious over ancient and powerful nations. To this purpose let us
observe the conduct of God toward Israel of old, in fighting their battles and
securing them in the quiet possession of the promised land. Thus, Psalm. cvi.
43. Many times did he deliver them, but they provoked him with their counsel,
and were brought low for their iniquity. -- So it was with the Protestant
States in Germany in Charles the Fifth's time, Emperor of Germany and King of
Spain -- The States of Holland and the Independent Cantons of Switzerland
demonstrate the same, that God takes care of a young and forming people.

IT has been remarkably the case with the Isle of Britain, until it arose to
its late glory and opulence. The scale seems now to be turned, and God says of
that nation as of Israel, Thee only have I known of all the Families of the
earth, therefore will I punish thee for all thine iniquities. -- Now it is very
evident that the Colonies are but in their infant state, and are very far from
having arrived at all the firmness and manhood God designs. If we look down
through time but for half a century, to what a prodigious pitch of wealth and
greatness will the Continent of North America have arrived! I am firmly of the
sentiment that its future growth will be much more rapid than the past; many
reasons might be offered which I must omit here. What countless millions of
land yet uncultivated! What a boundless extent of country traversed only by
savages and wild beasts! Now surely God did not make such a large share of our
globe for naught, or only to be the haunts of wild beasts, and possessed by the
naked untutored Indians. The Gospel of Jesus Christ has only glanced upon the
shores of this vast Continent, and we may believe that God designs the
settlement of its remotest boundaries for the enlargement of his son's kingdom;
that notable passage in Psalm. lxxx. 8. 9. 10. Verses, has been and will be
still more eminently fulfilled in North America: Thou have brought a vine out
of Egypt: Thou have cast out the Heathen, and planted it. Thou preparedst room
before it. and did cause it to take deep root, and it filled the land. The
hills were covered with the shadow of it, and the boughs thereof were like the
goodly cedars. -- She sent out her boughs unto the sea, and her branches unto
the river.

I BELIEVE our American Continent, as it has not yet been stained with the
blood of martyrs, will be an asylum for the persecuted over all Europe to fly
to. America corresponds to the account we have of the wilderness to which the
Church was driven to seek protection from the fury of the Dragon, Rev. xii. 13.
14. And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the
woman which brought forth the man child. And to the woman were given two wings
of a great eagle, that she might flee into the wilderness, into her place,
where she is nourished for a time and times and half a time, from the face of
the serpent. It is more than probable that this scripture had an eminent
fulfillment when our ancestors fled, not from the embraces of the mother, but
from the cruelty of the monster, and took sanctuary in the wilderness of
America. Thus it was when a number of precious souls landed on the bleak shore
of Plymouth in the rigid month of December, without provisions -- without
houses; but God, as he designed them for a feed to this new world, procured
them favor with the natives, who, as I have been told, cheerfully resigned
their huts to entertain the newly arrived emigrants. It appears, therefore,
that the Church is not yet arrived to its perfection in America, but will
extend wider and wider, until it has reached to the Pacific ocean -- Pleasing
prospect! to survey churches rising and the gospel preached, where nothing is
now heard but the yells of wild beasts and nightly orgies of savages! Who would
not then stand forth in defense of our liberties, so essentially necessary for
the progress of religion and rapid settlement of the Colonies? Who would not
run the risk of spilling some blood for the enlargement of Christ's mystical
body the Church, which he purchased with his own most precious blood? Glorious
cause, my dear brethren, we are embarked in, worthy of a struggle! Yea, we
ought to rejoice that God is likely to honor us in making a noble stand for
the defense and enlargement of Christ's kingdom. -- Thus, then, it appears that
it is the cause of God we are engaged in, so need not be dispirited, as he will
go before and sight our battles. But this leads me to the III THING proposed,
namely, to offer some grounds of security arising from God's being on our side.

1st. HIS most perfect knowledge of all possible events, lays a foundation of
encouragement. There is not an hair of our heads but is numbered; his infinite
knowledge puts him beyond the possibility of a mistake in the whole of his
conduct. He at one clear and intuitive view sees all things, with all that
infinite variety of their connections; there is not a single danger to which we
are exposed, but he foresees and can counteract. Human wisdom is not able to
guard against every occurrence that may turn up to disconcert their schemes;
hence we find confusion and disappointment frequently attending the wisest
human counsels. But Jehovah is unerring, and therefore claims counsel and sound
judgment as his own. This, therefore, must afford the most solid satisfaction,
that we have one on our side of infinite knowledge to discern all future events
and to direct matters so as to turn the counsels of our enemies into
foolishness.

2d. GOD has not only the most perfect knowledge of all persons and things, but
has the secret management of all in his own hand. His kingdom rules over all,
and the hearts of Kings and Princes are in his hand; he rules by a secret and
irresistible sway in the armies of heaven and amongst the inhabitants of the
earth. The reins of universal government are in his hand. The wheels of nature,
however intricate, are under his direction; storms and thunder obey him; the
elements are all subservient to his pleasure; for those who are fighting for
him, he can even suspend the laws of nature, arrest the sun in his rapid
course, until his victories are gained. All creatures are at his nod, so that
they that are with us, God being on our side, are more than those that are
against us. He can employ all the hosts of heaven, can give commission to a
single destroying angel to cut off in one night an hundred and fourscore
thousand, as in Sennacherib's army. Who then would be afraid to embark in the
cause of such an illustrious leader, who has all power in heaven and on earth
in his hand? Nay, who would not rush into thickest dangers, when they are
assured that the cause is the cause of God, and that there is not a bullet, as
King William used to say, but has its billet?

3. HE is bound by his faithfulness to stand by and support a righteous cause.
-- The righteous Lord loves righteousness. Although he may suffer a good cause
to meet with opposition, and the designs of wicked men for a while to prosper,
yet he that sits in the heavens shall laugh; the Lord shall have them in
derision; then shall he speak to them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure. Thus God promises to Joshua, One man of you shall chase a
thousand; for the Lord your God, he it is that fights for you, as he has
promised. So shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight for Mount Zion, and for
the hill thereof.

LASTLY, Omnipotence is engaged on our side. God is not only unerring in his
counsels, but omnipotent to put them into execution. He can cast the wicked
down to hell, and all the nations that forget God. He is, in short, a strong
rock for defense; he teaches our hands to war, and our fingers to fight. In one
word, he is the Lord strong in battle.

IMPROVEMENT. -- 1st. This subject shows us the great necessity of personal
covenanting with God and enlisting under the Lord Jesus Christ, as the glorious
Captain of our salvation. It would be an affecting thought, that however
glorious the cause in which we are engaged, and however ready to embark therein
from certain considerations, as being the cause of Liberty, yet we ourselves
should be servants to sin and slaves to lust. This is a matter in which every
soul present is concerned; we have, my dear brethren, all of us enemies to
conflict with which we cannot avoid, and which by no power or skill of our own
we can defeat. We have to wrestle not only with flesh and blood, but with
principalities and powers, and spiritual wickedness in high places. There is a
spiritual armor we must put on to come off conquerors; there is a glorious
General we must enlist under, to ensure us of victory. No leader inferior to
the Lord Jesus Christ, who has himself spoiled principalities and powers can
put Satan under our feet. Here is the greatest victory we ever can gain; a
victory over the world, our own lusts and all the internal hosts of hell. As
the victory is great, so the prize to every overcomer is also great. To him
that overcomes, says the Captain of our salvation, Will I grant to sit with me
in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am sit down with my Father in his
throne. Rev. iii. 21. He that overcomes shall inherit all things. Shall heroes
and generals contend for honors of a day; for the laurel that must sooner or
later decay, and shall not we fight and strive for an inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled and that fades not away?

2d. THIS subject shows us of what infinite moment it is in the present
struggle to have God on our side to go before us and to fight our battles. The
race is not always to the swift nor the battle to the strong. If God be for us
we need not be dismayed at all the armed legions that are coming against us. At
most it is but an arm of flesh; and cursed is the man that trusts in man, and
makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord. Jer. xvii 5. See
how Pharaoh's chariots and his hosts were cast into the sea, Exodus xv. 10. Thou
did blow with thy wind, the sea covered them: they sank as lead in the mighty
waters. The Lord is a man of war, the Lord is his name. What a signal display
of his power in our behalf at the Newfoundland fishery, and also in the river
Thames, when his winds blew and they sank like lead in the great waters!

3d. IS it the cause of God, as you have heard, that we are engaged in? Hence
learn how ready we ought to be to embark therein. Cursed be he that keeps
back his sword from blood in such a cause. There can, strictly speaking, be no
neutrality in the present case -- he that is not with us must be against us. I
fear many will shrink back, and under some pretext desert the cause, when their
assistance will be most needed. Be not dismayed, my dear brethren; if it is the
cause of God, as you have heard, success is certain. What though we should meet
with many repulses? The struggle is of such vast importance to us and unborn
millions, that every lover of God, religion and posterity, should vie one with
another who should be foremost in action. If we fall in the field, we die as
secure as if on our knees to God in prayer. If we are prepared to die on our
beds, so are we in the field. It will be an easy translation to go from
fighting to wearing an unfullied crown of glory. Every true christian, having
embarked in the present cause as the cause of God and religion, if he dies in
the field, will die a martyr for Christ and will receive a martyr's crown.
Route then, my dear brethren; quit yourselves like men; stand ready to march
into the field when God and your country call.

4th. BUT I must address myself in a particular manner to you, Gentlemen
Officers and Privates, who appear before us to day, engaged in your country's
cause.

FIRST, as to the Officers --

PERMIT me to tell you, Gentlemen, that, under God, much will depend upon your
prudent, wise and manly behavior. You have not only to direct your own
conduct, but the conduct and behavior of those under your care. You are to
consider that the cause you are engaged in is the cause of God, and that you
are to conduct yourselves worthy of such a glorious undertaking. Remember that
you are not called out to fight the Devil's battles, but the battles of the
Lord of hosts. See to it, then, that you do honor to the cause, and not let it
suffer through your default. As to your private conduct, see that it be sober,
decent and respectable. Never look upon it as a qualification for officers
fighting the Lord's battles, to curse and swear, and take God's name in vain.
Authority will be better secured by your manly and religious behavior, than by
all the imprecations you can use to your fellow men. Suffer not yourselves to
be governed by appetite, fancy or humor, but by reason and conscience; attend
to the dispositions and characters of those under your care, that you may be
the better fitted to regulate their conduct; carefully attend to the mode of
conduct best adapted to the variety of circumstances you may be in; consider
what is decorous and what indecorous, and what is usually approved of by the
most wise and judicious in such circumstances.

BE grave and sedate in opposition to a light and frothy temper; let a graceful
composedness appear even in your gayest seasons, and make it evident that your
minds are under a firm impression of the divine presence. Be not slothful, but
diligent in your calling; be resolute, quit yourselves like men, and above all
be resolute in religion and determined that for your part, let others do as
they will, you will serve the Lord. Let it appear that you dare be religious
even in a camp. Not that I would have you always gloomy or melancholy; no, the
gravity I recommend is consistent with cheerfulness, and even supposes it.
Serve the Lord with gladness; thou meetest him that rejoiceth and works
righteousness. I would not be understood as though I meant to cut off innocent
and natural mirth, but only to direct it into a proper channel; this, as an
inspired writer observes, may do good, but is to be used as a medicine. Avoid
excess either in eating or drinking; deny yourselves of all irregular and
sensual gratifications. Seek not the vain applause of mortals, but study to
have the testimony of a good conscience. Be valiant and courageous in the hour
of battle, if called to it; never flinch from a dangerous post, when duty urges
you on; play the man for your God and Country; be prepared to meet every event,
and try to have God your God and everlasting portion. -- It may be the last
address I ever shall make you; I would that it might be remembered. Let me sum
up all in a few words -- Endure hardness as good soldiers of Jesus Christ; put
ye on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against all the
wiles of the Devil; be faithful unto the death, and ye have the promise of
Christ that ye shall receive a crown of life.

BUT I must speak a word to the Soldiers -- Happy consideration if ye were all
enlisted under the Lord Jesus Christ! Let me entreat you seriously to consider
the importance of the cause you have engaged in; remember as you have heard,
that it is the cause of God. Be regular in your conduct and submissive to those
under whose immediate care you are put; assume no undue airs of importance, nor
affect to be noticed by those about you; be not arrogant, but let your
behavior manifest a proper deference to your superiors; never affect to appear
above your rank, nor be ashamed of it; take heed, as you are to mingle with
persons of every character, not to be tempted by profane fops, to treat the
great concerns of religion with contempt. Carry a favor of religion with you
wherever you are; take heed of fleshly lusts that war against the soul; love
not ease and sloth, but endure hardness; be not nice or delicate in eating or
drinking; guard against immodest and unchaste conversation; let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouth; fornication and all uncleaness, let it
not be named amongst you as becomes Christians; avoid foolish talking and
filthy jesting; be valiant for the cause you are engaged in; never shrink in an
hour of battle. And now, my dear Gentlemen Officers and Soldiers, may the
divine protection be your shield in an hour of danger; may you have success
equal to the goodness of your cause; may you have the pleasing reflection of
being improved by the God of heaven for securing liberty both civil and
religious to this new world; may the Lord go before you, direct you in all your
ways, animate you in every important enterprise, guard your heads from the
winged messengers of death, and bring you at last to his heavenly kingdom. I
must take my leave, and collect my whole soul in bidding you an hearty farewell.

BUT I must have done with a word to the assembly at large. Numbers of you, my
dear brethren, are not like to be called into the field of action; But is there
nothing incumbent upon you to do? Are not such as are hazarding their lives in
our common defense entitled to your esteem, prayers and assistance? Prayer has
done much in such cases; the fervent prayer of the righteous man avails much:
Thus it was in the case or Moses, when Aaron and Her held up his hands,
doubtless in a praying posture Israel prevailed. Every one present who has
liberty or property to defend, is deeply concerned in the present struggle.
Liberty or Slavery is to be transmitted to our numerous offspring. This
Continent will either be the glory of the earth, or a place of more than
Egyptian bondage. It is worth while to exert ourselves, and not suffer our land
to be overrun with Slavery and Tyranny. Let not posterity have reason to curse
us, when we shall be lying in the silent grave. Let us imitate the conduct of
good Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. xx. 12. O our God will thou not judge them? For we
have no might against this great company that comes against us, neither know
we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. May the Lord direct our eyes to
himself; may he go before and fight our battles; may he once more restore peace
in our land, through Jesus. AMEN.

FINIS.

