AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, THE INTEREST AND GLORY OF GREAT BRITAIN; In a SERIES of
LETTERS to the LEGISLATURE.

[PRICE HALF A DOLLAR.]

AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE THE INTEREST AND GLORY OF GREAT BRITAIN; CONTAINING
ARGUMENTS which prove, that not only in TAXATION, but in TRADE, MANUFACTURES,
and GOVERNMENT, the Colonies are entitled to an entire Independency on the
BRITISH LEGISLATURE; and that it can only be by a formal DECLARATION of these
Rights, and forming thereupon a friendly LEAGUE with them, that the true and
lasting Welfare of both Countries can be promoted. In a SERIES of LETTERS to
the LEGISLATURE.

It is not to be hoped, in the corrupt State of Human Nature, that any Nation
will be subject to another, any longer than it finds its own Account in it, and
cannot help itself.

No Creatures suck the Teats of their Dams longer than they can draw Milk from
thence, or can provide themselves with better Food; nor will any Country
continue their subjection to another, only because their great Grand-Mothers
were acquainted. This is the course of human affairs, and all wise States will
always have it before their eyes.

Trenchard on Plantations and Colonies, in Cato's Letters, No. 106.
PHILADELPHIA, Printed and Sold by ROBERT BELL, in Third-Street. MDCCLXXVI.

EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
To Sir GEORGE SAVILLE, Baronet,
IT is not only as the brightest ornament to the following essays, in the cause
of independence, that the writer uses the liberty of prefixing to them your
name, but being of opinion, that your actions will also best illustrate the
principles he wishes to inculcate, he hopes to derive from it all the
advantages of a well-selected motto. Feeling only for the public, you will
suffer even your own merits to be made the theme of praise, so long as the
public interests shall be thereby promoted. It is thus that your example will
have its due effect; it is thus that your patriotism will be reflected from a
thousand mirrors; and that, instead of exerting a single voice in the senate,
you will harangue from a thousand rostrums at once; inciting in all the
nations, to whom are known the English laws and language, a love of virtue, and
a resolution to be free. It is this appeal to distinguished worth in real life,
that gives the surest efficacy to the precepts of the moralist; it is this
which induces the lips of the orator with the powers of persuasion, and is the
kindling incentive to a virtuous emulation. How glorious the privileges of
patriotic virtue! Not limited by the scanty measure of personal labors, not
confined to one age or empire, they extend to unborn times and nations, and the
patriot is the common blessing of human kind. As an Aristides, a Brutus, or a
Cato, has often given birth to British patriotism; so shall Britons, in some
distant period, and future Americans, catch the same generous flame from the
great example of the Saville of these days.

Such indeed is the present low estate of public spirit amongst us, that a man
has need of some fortitude, who, amongst the generality, would so much as
contend for the reality of its existence. Nay, it has not been discarded by
the bulk of the gross-minded vulgar only, but our very philophers too, so deep
is the taint, have told us, that wisdom is not the portion of that man, who can
sacrifice his time and his peace, by taking an active part in public affairs;
and yet, notwithstanding the doctrines of these epicurean sages, and as little
regarding the united ridicule of the thousands, and the ten thousands of their
implicit disciples, I am not ashamed to acknowledge myself one of those weak
mortals, who can believe, that the ease and luxury of life are contemptible in
the eyes of a good man, when his country demands his labors, his counsel, or
his sword. Being of of opinion then, that patriotism is a real, an exalted
virtue, I must necessarily think, that to decline its duties, is a meanness
unworthy the manly character, and that its wilful violation, is the most
atrocious of crimes. I believe too, that this virtue burns with no small ardour
in many a British bosom; nay, I am credulous enough to think, that besides the
instance I have particularly singled out, it is to be found even in the House
of Commons: there, I confess, its growth is not very abundant; for, it is not
of a nature to thrive in the same soil, which the occasional occupier must
needs sow with the noxious seeds of prostitution and bribery ere he can secure
possession. Happy, could we say of this seed, that it is sown in corruption, it
is raised in incorruption; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory: but
we are assured, by unerring wisdom, that men do not gather grapes of thorns,
nor figs of thistles; and our own experience has invariably taught us, that in
the House of Commons, a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit alone. And until
there shall be opened clean doors into that House, by which the members may
enter undefiled, by the base arts practiced in elections, must we not know,
that the real patriot, he who is incapable of debauching or invading the rights
of his fellow-citizens, is to be looked for without those walls, and not within
them? And except these unpolluted doors shall be opened without much farther
delay, will not that House, already the sink of corruption, inevitably become
the putrid grave of the constitution? -- though not, I trust, its annihilation.
How severe, or how lasting might be this convulsion, this dissolution of the
state, it is difficult to imagine, but that, as heretofore, it would only
perish for a season, like a grain of seed-corn, and, like that, be restored
again, with a reduplication of the principles of life and vigor; I am happy in
having an assured confidence.

Since I am now addressing myself to the public, Sir George, no less than to
yourself, it is fit I should remind them, that your parliamentary integrity, is
only a natural consequence of those means by which you became a member. In one,
as in the other, neither corrupting nor corrupted, you stand a noble exception
to a general rule; in which, we clearly see, how valuable would be an
independent, an upright parliament. Let but the whole of the representative
body be elected by the unbribed, and unbiassed suffrages of the freeholders,
and we should once more behold the House of Commons an assembly of patriots,
the terror, not the tool of bad ministers; the bulwark, not the abusers of the
people.

Perhaps too, the public may be more indebted to you than they seem to
consider, for having, by an uniform conduct, through a series of years,
effectually overturned the darling, but infamous maxim of modern politicians
that every man has his price, a sentiment which could only arise in the basest
and most degenerate heart. Notwithstanding the contrary is a truth, far better
established than any the most notorious historical fact whatever, all history
being enriched with numerous instances of it; and that it might be corroborated
in the humble and unrecorded scenes of private life, by every man, whose
friends are selected from the wise and good; and notwithstanding every human
heart ought to revolt at so shocking a proposition, yet, it is certain, such is
the prevalence of any opinion, how ridiculous soever, which falls in with our
sordid devotion to avarice, that master-vice of the times! that we continually
find this degrading maxim in the mouths, even of those whose characters in the
world are yet respectable. This strange language is very often to be imputed to
a weak intellect, or extreme ignorance, and very often to an absence of
thought, or that wretched supineness of soul, which, for the sake of ease,
always adopts the mode of thinking and speaking which is most in fashion.

But when men of understanding, of reflection, and learning, become the
controversial champions of this tenet; when they enter the lists in form, make
a display of their armor, and their arms, and boldly challenge all opponents,
what are we to think? Little do they seem to reflect, that they have no way of
coming off with honor, but by retiring from the field, and wholly abandoning a
bad cause; for so long as they maintain it, do they not, in the very act,
proclaim themselves villains in grain, or at best, only negatively honest, for
want of temptation to be otherwise, and tacitly acknowledge, it would be a
madness in you to entrust them with any secret or deposit, by means of which
they could advance their fortune, without hazard from your resentment or a
gibbet?

These unhappy men, do not only forfeit by this conduct, all title to trust and
confidence in society, but what is still worse, they expressly exclude
themselves from the benefits of religion, saying, in effect, that our Savior's
mission, for the purposes of teaching morality, and bestowing salvation on
mankind, so far from being an instance of divine wisdom and goodness, was
executed like the vague schemes of purblind mortals, to no manner of purpose;
for, so long as it is their assertion, that every man has his price; so long
do they assert, that it is impossible to obey the laws of Christ even in a
tolerable degree; and to deny, that christianity is capable of inspiring her
followers with an incorruptible integrity, is not only to betray a total
ignorance of its doctrines, but to make war upon fact, and the common consent
of mankind. Thus is this hackneyed proposition, examined either by the rules of
reason or religion, evidently involved in palpable absurdity, and in rank
impiety.

For the most part, they who propagate this wretched opinion, know not what
they do; and would be exceedingly shocked, did they perceive, how they were at
once subverting their own moral principles, and sapping the very foundations of
all integrity in society both public and private. So dangerous, is it,
unthinkingly, to swim with the stream of popular opinion! especially since it
is become the great master-stroke of the arch-enemies of religion and virtue,
to turn the course of this current in their favor, and to make it the vehicle
of that poison they are for ever pouring in at the fountain head, in order to
taint a thoughtless world, They use all the arts of a subtle and ingenious
address, to withdraw our attention and respect from authors of sterling merit,
and to insinuate themselves upon us as our only infallible guides. Under the
mask of candor, they are most decisive and dogmatical, infecting with
arrogance those ductile minds, which before were adorned with humility.

In a style of Attic elegance, they inculcate a frivolous and vitiated taste;
teachers of intellectual abstraction and refinement, they promote sensuality;
with an ostentation of humanity, they loosen the bands of society; professors
of morality, they demonstrate that it has no foundation; deep in all
philosophy, they assure us that truth is the only thing we ought to pursue;
that it is most difficult to attain, except with their assistance; and when
attained, they show us as clearly, that it is not worth our pains; and, like
superior intelligences, so very refined and spiritual, (as they would have you
believe) as to look down upon human nature as upon a lower order of beings, and
to contemplate, with an unmoved indifference and composure, the blindness and
prejudices, the little passions and anxieties of a fretful and miserable world,
they inform us that wisdom consists in this sublime apathetic insensibility,
while they, all the while are, in reality, sacrificing their own tranquillity,
in carrying on perpetual hostilities against the invincible powers of truth,
religion, and common sense, and yielding up the guidance of their restless and
indefatigable pens to pride, spleen, vanity, caprice, and sordid avarice.

By prostituting to the worst of purposes a flashy wit and specious eloquence,
they captivate the shallow, the luxurious and the gay; while, for the relish of
those who have understandings somewhat superior, but more gloom and
malevolence in their hearts, they season their pernicious compositions with a
poignant irony and ridicule, which is usually heightened in proportion as the
object is sacred or divine.

When referring to the Deity, and to the incomprehensible things of heaven and
eternity, one might expect, even of a philosopher, some diffidence, some
sobriety and decency; but this were too great a condescension from the mad
genius of Geneva, the scribbling buffoon of Ferney, or that "fattest hog of
Epicurus's stye," the "see-saw skeptic from the remotest North Heroic Epistle
to Sir W. Chambers.
." With these "men of renown," as leaders of the van, and the Walpolian
state-prostitute to conduct the rear-guard; even the disorderly, the coward
clans of vice and seduction, are an over-match for the feeble guards of virtue
in most fashionable minds.

By strengthening the party of the dissolute, and encouraging the unmanly,
unprincipled, impious, and dissipated spirit, which marks the character of the
times, and by making a jest of every thing serious and noble; they insinuate
themselves into the unguarded bosoms of that class of triflers, and become
their oracles. The business is now done, for the fashionable world is the mint,
where common opinion first obtains its stamp and currency; circulating thence
throughout the community like current coin, and, like that too, giving
consequence to its possessor in proportion to his store of this fictitious,
this imaginary wealth.

Hence it is, that in almost every fashionable circle, from the peer to the
'prentice, from the profound writer of stuff, called Essays on the Origin of
Evil, to the novel reading miss in her teens, we are for ever pestered with
trash, that is the bane of morality, and the disgrace of rational beings. And
while the polite praters vainly imagine they are displaying their own talents
and erudition, their knowledge and liberal way of thinking; they are only the
mere echoes of those teachers of falsehood; the simple and obedient tools, by
whose agency those cunning engineers are undermining all the defenses of
religion, of public spirit, and of private virtue.

It is matter of no small astonishment and concern, to observe how much an
indifference to moral rectitude, a habit of evading the toil of thinking and
this passive resignation to the sentiments and principles of others, debilitate
the human mind, though naturally active and vigorous, and subject it to the
reproach of yielding to the grossest credulity, and even of assenting to
manifest contradictions. Nothing is more common, than for those, who have the
Walpolian maxim we have been speaking of always at their tongue's end, to form
to themselves, I know not how, an ideal distinction between public integrity
and private honesty. While they lay it down, as a fixed principle, that the
senator may be corrupted by a court bribe, to injure or oppress his country
they will yet allow, that he is rigidly just in all his private dealings; that
he is the kindest landlord, the gentlest master, the tenderest relation, the
truest friend; so very moderate in self-gratification, and of so humane a
nature, as to bound his expenses very far within his income, and to distribute
large sums in secret charities, with a minute attention to the measures of
distress amongst the objects of his beneficence. And, is it to be believed,
that such a man -- that a Saville is to be made a traitor? -- Ye echoes of
absurdity, think and blush!

But whatever hopes may be entertained of the ingenuous majority of mistaken
persons, I know there is yet a party, whose incapacity for a generous thought,
or whose malignity is such, that when, by the mention of his name as a sincere
patriot, they have been struck dumb with uneludible conviction, and obliged, in
their own despite, to confess his virtue, have yet sought to tarnish its
luster, by base insinuations, to the prejudice of his understanding. These
insidious creatures are not sparing of cold panegyrics on his general
character; but, with much pity for the weakness of a well-meaning man, they
lament that he should be so deluded; they are amazed, forsooth, that he can
fancy he is serving the public, by opposing and embarrassing the necessary and
wise measures of government; they are sorry, that such a man should keep in
countenance others, who only act the patriot, in order to obtain their own
foolish ends; and they must needs say, they think him somewhat too much
attentive to popular clamours and popular praise, and too much guided by a
blind popular zeal.

But what they are most anxious to inform you of, with some parade they affect
to suppress. In tenderness to him, they do not choose to speak freely on that
head -- there is no necessity to explain themselves -- they are convinced he is
ignorant how much he is imposed on -- but they take care, however, before they
have done, by certain circumlocutions, by broken sentences, and unambiguous
givings-out; to inform you, in pretty plain terms, that he is no better than
the dupe of a dangerous party, a mere puppet, played off by the crafty leader
of a faction, attached to his interest by flattery alone, and courted, not for
his own intrinsic importance, but merely to grace the cause with a name, upon
which the silly multitude have thought fit to bestow an unmerited popularity.
What a return for the labors of a life, devoted to the service of that
community, of which these wretches compose a part! But no benefits can touch
the viprous heart of ingratitude! Nor shall malice and envy ever sleep, while a
spark of virtue remains to bless mankind! Merit, however raised to such an
elevation, is a mark placed far above the idle efforts of their fever-shaken
distempered nerves. Exposing their own hideous desormity, they aggrandize by
the contrast, that virtue they mean to depreciate, and madden with
self-inflicted torment, their peculiar curse. These ingrates to their
benefactor, stupid as they are, ought to know, that though his character, like
things most sacred, may be profaned, yet that the broad aegis of wisdom and
virtue renders it invulnerable.

Forgive me, Sir George, that I say these things in an address to yourself! As
humility itself, in a private station, cannot decline to make those honest
boasts which bespeak its merit, when that is basely traduced, or ungratefully
forgotten; so the public labourer, will not be offended, that his honest fame
is held up to his countrymen, for the purposes of exalting truth, and subduing
falsehood, as an incitement to a steady and high spirited patriotism, and an
encouragement to the timid in the public cause: while to those foul harpies,
who wallow in the filth of corruption, and batten at the ever-bleeding wounds
of their country; and to those minor miscreants, doomed by their dullness, and
their abject meanness, to remain the drudges of wickedness, without its wages;
it shall serve as an adamantine mirror, before whose brightness, if they have
the power to open their fascinated eyes, they shall then shrink at the
withering blast, like adders in a consuming fire; praying, but praying in vain,
to lose the bitter consciousness of their own infamy,

I shall likewise hope for your pardon, on this occasion, because you
understand the world well enough, to know the endless shifts and evasions of
the disingenuous and perverse, who persist, with unparalleled effrontery, to
deny the most undoubted truths, until they are borne down by the weight of
demonstration and the force of facts. They will deny, in turn, the existence of
every command in the decalogue; and you will dispute with them in vain, until
you open the bible, and reduce them to the necessity, of either giving up their
argument or their senses. So, when any one shall undertake to reply to these
maligners of mankind, if he content himself with proving ever so clearly from
nature, from reason, or religion, that a real patriot may be found, he had as
well argue with the stones under his feet, unless he produce the man, and put
it upon his adversaries to disprove the fact.

If by those, who are themselves incapable of a generous sentiment, and cannot
believe a disinterested affection can warm the human breast, I should be
accused of an unworthy design to flatter you in this epistle; I shall be ready
to acknowledge the charge, whenever they prove that I have, in any particular,
exceeded the truth or endeavored to mislead you into a deviation from the
paths of honor. And I would observe, that he, who is the professed friend to
every virtue, and the declared enemy of every vice, may indeed, and ought to be
applauded; and puts it out of the power of even a Decius (Shakespeare's Julius
Caesar.) to flatter him -- except to acts of goodness. Not having any favorite
vice to be soothed, he is only assailable on the side of virtue; and the
exquisite satisfaction, arising from the just praise of virtue, being one of
the rewards designed it by Providence, and intended also to animate it, and
urge it onward to its final goal with unremitting ardour, to bestow it where it
is due, is therefore as much the duty of every good man, as it is to render
unto Caesar the things that be Caesar's.

SIR, I am, Your grateful Countryman, The AUTHOR.

THE PREFACE.
THE same motives, which first prompted me to publish the following letters
separately, have, upon farther consideration, determined me to do it in a
collective form. To the generality, it may not, perhaps, be a recommendation of
them, when I assure my readers, they wholly proceed from a strong conviction of
mind, and a zeal for the cause of liberty, and not from a view of serving, or
of distressing any party or particular person whatsoever, except the arguments
they contain shall make converts to my political creed concerning America; I
fear they are not very likely to please any party, for Britons of all parties
and of almost all denominations, seem far too unanimous in wishing to tyrannize
over their brethren on the other side of the Atlantic.

Happy, most happy, should the writer esteem himself, could he entertain any
flattering hopes, that his plain and humble pen might inspire his countrymen
with more generous sentiments! But are not his countrymen the brave sons of
freedom? lovers of justice, and by nature generous? He will then -- he must
entertain these pleasing hopes. To know, that he had thus influenced a single
individual, would afford him reflections, that would more than counter-balance
the ordinary evils of life.

If, however, he had no other satisfaction on this occasion, it would yet be
sufficient, that his American kindred should say, There was ONE Englishman an
advocate for our freedom; but I trust there are, in the private and independent
walks of life, many of the same sentiment; and that their numbers will daily
increase, as a free discussion of the parliamentary pretensions to the
sovereignty of America, shall more and more discover their total want of
foundation; and, I am very far from despairing, that this truth shall, ere long
be acknowledged even by the minister and the legislature.

We may naturally expect, however, that they will be the last amongst the
intelligent to receive this doctrine; for long and established habits form,
even in liberal minds, very inveterate prejudices. Accustomed so long to
govern, and habituated to the regular exercise of authority, they will find it
very difficult to believe, that it ought to be lodged in any other hands; and
they must be above the common weaknesses of our nature, could they part with it
without an internal struggle, since a love of power is, perhaps, the most
(...)-rooted of all the human passions.

But, for the honor of human nature, and the glory of this free nation, I must
believe, that our legislators will, in the end, gain this noble victory
themselves. Could I suppose a British minister of State to have a few leisure
moments, from the drudgery of his office, and the worse drudgery of sopping the
hungry hounds that are forever ready to devour him; from directing the endless
schemes and maneuvers of the ministerial campaign, and from superintending
their operation.

Could I suppose a minister, I say, to have so much leisure from all these
avocations, for seriously contemplating the present alarming situation of his
country, and for bestowing a little forethought upon what will probably be its
sat, in a very short period of time, unless some great reformations take
place; and, could I farther suppose this minister, turning his eyes within
himself, to meditate upon what it is from which he can hope to derive any real
satisfaction; to examine thoroughly the cobwebs of all mysterious and arbitrary
policy, and the rotten pillars of his state and power; and, when sufficiently
disgusted with their loathsomeness and folly, could I then imagine him to
revolve in his mind, how pleasant it would be to carry on the public business
on a liberal and simple plan, pure from corruption, and uniformly friendly to
freedom; I have not a doubt but he would most ardently wish to embrace such a
plan.

How gladly, if a man of sense, and a lover of integrity, would he exchange for
it, his toils and perplexities, his provocations, his anxieties, and
distracting cares; but above all, that consciousness of criminality, which no
state-necessity can effectually craze from the mind of a minister, who, wanting
the fortitude to forsake the wretched system of the base-minded Walpole,
continues to work the wheels of government by the streams of corruption, and
who, by being involved in the labyrinths, unavoidable in all systems but the
right one, and, in order to avoid the most fatal of all imputations to a
minister, that of doing nothing, finds himself obliged to commit frequent
violations on the most sacred rights of his fellow subjects, so that he may get
forward at any rate with the work of the day, and keep the people amused, by
letting them see he is doing something.

Until fair experiment shall have convinced me of the contrary, I shall never,
I believe, think otherwise, than that the most practicable system of government
is, at the same time the most simple, upright, coercive and immovable. Founded
in freedom, and the common good of the people, it will cherish the spirit of
liberty as its vital principle; having no dangerous or selfish designs, it will
affect no mystery: knowing the necessity of virtue, and the advantages of
integrity, it will discountenance vice, suppress corruption of every kind, and
be inflexible to justice; and thus, by affording general protection, it will
find unanimous support.

But, it being our more immediate business at present, to confine our ideas of
reformation to what regards the North-American colonies, which make, at this
unhappy time, no small addition to that burden which galls the ministerial
shoulder. I have only to add, that I must firmly hold my confidence, that our
present minister would, in the following letters, meet with the necessary hints
and rudiments, from which, without the smallest difficulty, he might plan the
means for easing himself of it; to the infinite advantage and glory of his
country, to his own honor and satisfaction, and to the inexpressible happiness
of the whole people of America.

As I am certain, that no party principles will betray me, to have written from
any other motives than those I profess; so when I assure the reader, that the
style and manner in which I have done it are my very best, I hope he will be
convinced, that I have not folly enough to aspire at literary fame; and that
his candor will overlook the very many imperfections of this little work.

N. B. In this Work are included copious Notes; containing Reflections of the
BOSTON and QUEBEC ACTS; and a full Justification of the People of Boston, for
destroying the British-taxed Tea; submitted to the Judgment, not of those who
have none but borrowed Party-opinions, but of the Candid and Honest.

AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE. To the LEGISLATURE.
LETTER I.
March 20, 1774.
EVEN the most ignorant perceive this to be a crisis of the utmost importance
to Great Britain, and to North America: but it does not appear that the most
sage have yet formed a plan of proceedings that is likely to give content to
both parties. With deference to the sentiments of others, and with a sincere
desire of rendering a service to my country, permit me to offer a few thoughts
on the subject, and to throw some hints in your way, which I do not perceive to
have been as yet started by any political writer. It is most deeply to be
lamented, that passion and prejudice, pride and self-interest, have evidently
too much influence over the minds of most men, to suffer them to decide
impartially and equitably in such delicate conjunctures as the present. We want
now to discover, and to establish a principle of lasting union between our
colonies and the mother country; while the measures of administration, the
deliberations in parliament, the sentiments of political writers, and the
language of the people at large, all tend to prove, that the most probable
event will be mutual jealousy, animosity, and strife.

It is the misfortune of this country, surely without necessity, that schemes
of reformation, and plans of a great and comprehensive nature, for the general
benefit of the people, are rarely or never formed before hand in the peaceful
closet of a provident minister; and, it is as unusual for them to attain their
completion by dispassionate contemplation, and the calm determinations of
wisdom. On the contrary, we suffer every trivial error and irregularity to
ripen into mischief before we think of reformation; when we undertake it at
last with minds heated to fermentation, and we perform it with rashness and
violence. Let not, however, on this great occasion, any thing so intemperate
and faulty mark your deliberations, nor leave a stain upon your measures.
Reflect, that the fate of empires is now in suspense, and that the balance is
in your hands. No patriots of any age or country ever had a nobler opportunity
of immortalizing their same; nor, what is infinitely more to be desired, of
obtaining the inward reward of self-approbation for having given happiness to
millions. Remember your duty to mankind; remember your duty to God. Let not the
breath of anger or resentment sully your councils; let not jealousy or ambition
poison your breasts, nor hang upon your tongues. Be calm, contemplative,
candid, prudent, wise; let justice and benevolence rule your hearts; in one
word, be Christians! embracing with love and charity your American brethren;
and consulting their happiness equally with your own.

The two grand questions now to be decided are; 1. Whether or not the British
parliament or legislature, has the right of sovereignty over North America?
And, 2. Whether or not a British parliament has a right to tax the North
Americans (1)?

Although the latter question be properly involved in the former (2), since
taxation is a part of legislation, yet being extremely simple and well
understood, I shall consider it first, in order to get rid of it; so as it may
not embarrass our discussion of the other, which it will be necessary for us to
treat with all possible perspicuity. As for those who, with great warmth,
maintain the right of parliament to tax the North Americans, surely they are
rather to be pitied than argued with! Must they not be totally ignorant of the
principles of that inestimable constitution, under which they have the
happiness to live? How then shall we expect them to be acquainted with the
principles of the law of nature, from whence they flow? When I meet a man
inclined toward this opinion, I do not contradict him; and I beseech him to
avoid disputation above all things. I beg of him also to divest himself totally
of every previous inclination for seeing the point in this or in that light; to
consult immediately the great Mr. Lock, and other authors of note, and after a
careful examination of the arguments for and against the question, to decide
upon it himself impartially and honestly. I remind him likewise, that it is his
interest, as well as for the advantage of his country, that he should discover
the truth: but a matter of total indifferency on which side it lies. If this
fail to set him right, I do not dispute with him myself, nor do I assume the
countenance or manner of an opponent; but I intimate to him, that, were he of
my opinion, it would afford him great satisfaction of mind; since it gives me a
consistency of sentiment, by which I see every right of legislation perfectly
consonant with the freedom and the happiness of mankind; and I then simply
state my reasons for holding it. I have ever found this appeal to a man's own
heart and understanding, the most successful way of enlightening the one, and
improving the other. Very few indeed of those with whom I have thus reasoned,
on the present subject of American taxation, have gone away unsatisfied, or
found a necessity of reading, in order to be convinced: but ignorance and
obstinacy, heated by former debate, have sometimes rendered my endeavors
ineffectual; and such as were notorious for a vicious ambition, or servility to
the ruling powers, have generally remained immovable, though without producing
one just or wise argument in support of their sentiments, or rather their
assertions. Such men are not aware how much they lay open to the light that
part of their characters they always mean to hide; and that there is as much
dishonesty in that disposition which denies an evident truth, as in that which
gives a false evidence, or takes a purse. It would have required no learning,
but only common sense and common honesty, to have known that a man has no
property, in that which another 'can by right take from him without his
consent,' had not the world been pestered with writers of corrupt hearts, who,
for wicked ends, have brought this clear proposition into dispute, and involved
it in a casuistical jargon, which persons of plain sense, and too busy or too
indolent for reflection, are apt to mistake for learning and superior skill;
and to compliment it, first with doubting, and then denying upon trust, what
they once understood and believed. But I trust, that characters so weak as
these, so profligate as those, will have no influence with the British
legislature; that its deliberations will be carried on with too much wisdom and
too much dignity to give a hearing to the drivelings of shallow and impudent
praters; or to suffer the unseemly violence of surious and tyrannical spirits,
to discompose that serenity and divestment from passion, which ought ever to be
observed in the presence of his Majesty, and in the awful councils of the
nation. Here I must express my concern, that it should seem to be thought by
very sensible men, that it is necessary to appeal to ancient times, in order to
ascertain the right of a free subject not to be taxed without his consent,
either in person or by representation. With as much reason might we go about to
prove, that no ancient King had a right to take from every subject at his good
pleasure, an eye or an ear. It is sufficient that we know any maxim in our law,
to be at the same time a maxim of the law of nature, or demonstrably deducible
from its fundamental principles. What is it to the purpose, whether such a
maxim was received and acquiesced in only yesterday, or a thousand years ago?
Truth is not the less truth, though mankind were in ignorance of it until
lately. No mathematician, in demonstrating an astronomical problem, thinks it
necessary to prove the properties of a triangle, a circle, or an ellipsis; why
then should the politician waste his time and embarrass his argument, with
proving principles and axioms universally assented to by all just reasoners?
not but that a maxim carries more weight and authority with it, as this of the
necessary connection between taxation and representation, when we find it has
been the uniform sentiment of all ages; and references to ancient times, and to
various histories, serve very properly to illustrate political arguments;
sometimes facilitating their reception among the timid and suspicious, who are
apt to shrink at bold and honest truths, to which they have not been
familiarized.

NOTES, etc. to LETTER I.
(1) Let me recommend to the readers perusal, an excellent pamphlet, under the
title of Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania, to the inhabitants of the
British Colonies. It is printed for Almon.

(2) I think a noble Lord has lately asserted the contrary; but we shall
probably be of the same sentiment, when we come to an explanation of our words.
I here mean that just legislation only which is founded on liberty, and in
which the people, either personally, or by their representatives, have a share.
Every other species of legislation, being clearly an infringement on the
inherent rights of mankind, is totally excluded from my ideas of government; so
that consining myself to a (...) government, where the people have a share, it
still appears to me, that taxation is a part, and included in the general idea
of legislation. If it be the sole province and exclusive right of that branch,
which consists of the people or their repesentatives, to grant money for the
support of government; yet taxation is not completed, nor can it be carried
into execution, until the other branches of the constitution have given their
concurrence. A mere free gift of the Commons, without an act of legislation,
would not be a tax; and we must remember, that though it be wisely provided,
that in all taxations, the Commons alone shall give and grant, yet, that the
Lords are not exempt from paying. May we not therefore say, with propriety,
that taxation is a part of legislation.

LETTER II.
March 22, 1774.
TO every man of candor, I apprehend it must be evident, that 'Parliament has
not the rights of sovereignty over his Majesty's American subjects.' Every
species, indeed of declamation and sophistry, have been made use of in order to
show that it has, because it gratifies the pride of Englishmen in general, to
think that, that legislature, in which they feel themselves to have a share,
should govern half the world: but there are not wanting an honest few who think
more justly and more generously. Amongst this number, a writer who subscribes
himself A. B. in the Public Advertiser of the 2^d, deserves the thanks of every
friend to freedom. Except in his idea of the country of America, having been by
the prerogative the property of the crown, which, in the sense of the passage,
signifies the King exclusively, I entirely agree with him in sentiment. He has
clearly and elegantly refuted the notion of parliamentary sovereignty; he has,
with a generous warmth becoming an Englishman, appealed to the manly sense and
to the virtue of his countrymen (1). It would be an endless, as well as an
useless work, to follow the many daily writers along all the mazes they wander
through, in order to assert the sovereignty of parliament, and to justify
administration in the harsh measures they are now carrying into execution.
Notwithstanding their labored and fine-spun performances, there is in reality
no difficulty in the case. We have no need of profound learning, nor an
intimate acquaintance with antiquity, nor even of the history of the respective
provinces and their different origins; neither do we want copies of grants,
charters, or acts of parliament, in order to judge of the question before us.
If we comprehend but the most well known principles of the English
constitution; if we comprehend but a few of the plain maxims of the law of
nature, and the clearest doctrines of Christianity, all which are so simple and
plain, as to be understood by hundreds, nay thousands, of plain men who know
not that they are possessed of so useful a treasure, we have knowledge enough
on this occasion. The only requisite wanting beyond this, is a heart strictly
devoted to truth and virtue, without which we shall never understand any
doctrine that does not soothe our passions.

The gospel of civil as well as religious salvation is hid from the wise and
prudent, and revealed unto babes; that is, unto those who are not puffed up
with vanity and false learning, nor blinded by pride, ambition, and
self-interest, but whose minds are in a state of humility and innocence. But we
have our political Popes, who would fain have us distrust our common sense and
our feelings, and believe implicitly in their infallibility; nor do I doubt,
but they would prove as faithful guardians of civil, as the Roman Pope is of
religious, liberty, was it once put into their hands.

It is a capital error in the reasonings of several writers on this subject,
that they consider the liberty of mankind in the same light as an estate or
chattel, and go about to prove or disprove their right to it by the letter of
grants and charters, by custom and usage, and by municipal statutes. Hence too
we are told, that these men have a right to more, those to less, and some to
none at all. But a title to the liberty of mankind is not established on such
rotten foundations: it is not among moldy parchments, nor in the cobwebs of a
casuist's brain we are to look for it; it is the immediate, the universal gift
of God, and the seal of it is that free will which he has made the noblest
constituent of man's nature. It is not derived from any one, but original in
every one; it is inherent and unalienable. The most ancient inheritance cannot
strengthen this right; the want of inheritance cannot impair it. The child of a
slave is as freeborn, according to the law of nature, as he who could trace a
free ancestry up to the creation. Slavery in all its forms, in all its degrees,
is an outrageous violation of the rights of mankind; an odious degradation of
human nature. It is utterly impossible that any human being can be without a
title to liberty, except he himself has forfeited it by crimes which make him
dangerous to society.

Let us then (...) no more of a right in our present-constituted parliament to
govern the Americans, as being derived from any former exercise of this
sovereignty, from the original dependence and protection of the emigrants and
infant colonies, or from the tenor of grants and charters! The respective
governments in America are no longer dependent colonies; they are independent
nations. -- Not that I allow they ever were otherways than free (although
dependent) in the most absolute sense: All their original constitutions either
were, or ought to have been on the true principles of freedom. They are not to
be deprived of it as a man would lose an estate, by a flaw in their title; for
I have already proved, that their title can have no flaw. Those who are so fond
of placing them metaphorically in the relation of children to a parent state,
and thence are childish enough to argue for a blind filial obedience, should
recollect, that the power of a parent, even during childhood, does not extend
to any act of tyranny or injustice; and totally ceases when the child arrives
at years of maturity. Then, as to the property of a child, a parent cannot take
it from him even with his consent; and as soon as his independency puts it in
his power to give it to his parent, he has also the power of withholding it
if he think proper. In short, during infancy, he must be protected agreeable to
the laws of equity; when arrived at manhood, he is free, and becomes his own
protector. But analogy not being the safe road of reason, we resign it again,
after this short excursion, to those who carelessly range the fields of
politics for amusement; but are not solicitous, as we are, of reaching the
abodes of truth and freedom.

The Americans, in common with the whole race of man, have indisputably an
inherent right to liberty; and to be governed by such laws as shall best
provide for the continuance of that liberty, and for securing their property.
These are the hinges on which turn the welfare and happiness of society; these
are the true, the only ends of civil government. But how are they to be
obtained under the sovereignty of a British Parliament? Are not the legislators
of every free state to be bound themselves by the laws they make? And, must
they not tax their own purses, together with those of their constituents? Is
there any safety for the people without these ties upon their legislators? Will
a member of the British parliament be bound by any law enacted for, and
confined to, America? Must the purses of the Americans be at his mercy, while
his own shall be exempt from every taxation he may vote? What English
schoolboy, so ignorant of the constitution, as to admit these absurdities! He
must first go out into the world, and, by the help of a little political
sophistry, unlearn his common-sense, and even his A B C.

The secure enjoyment of liberty and property, in which consist the welfare and
happiness of a people, being the true ends of all civil government; this is the
foundation alone on which we must argue concerning who have a right to govern.
The answer is obvious and short. The rights of sovereignty reside in the people
themselves; that is, they have a right to choose their own governors. Minds that
do not feel the force of self-evidences may deny the truth of this simple
proposition: but they may be assured, that if they set themselves about
controverting it, they will only bewilder themselves in their own subtleties
without telling us any thing that will benefit mankind. Don't we all
acknowledge, that the Americans are a free people? But how are they free, if
they cannot choose their own governors; if their laws be not enacted by their
own representatives? In what does our freedom consist if not in these very
rights as the essence of it? In these rights which we have so often asserted,
for which we have so often bled! That people cannot be free who are not
governed by their own consent. Those who are governed by their own consent,
choose their own governors. This is indispensably requisite toward the welfare
and happiness of every people; it is an unalterable law of nature; that is, it
is the law of God.

NOTES, etc. to LETTER II.
(1) The letter alluded to, is so well worth preserving, and so much to our
present purpose, that I shall take the liberty of transcribing it for the use
of my reader.

"The daily papers abound so much in idle declamation against the northern
colonies, that it is not surprising, such admirable reasons are advanced in
most companies, where the conversation turns upon this important topic, why
force should be used to bring them to obedience. Neither is it much to be
wondered at, that the people of England are so unanimous in their opinions. The
same motives, which induce their rulers to abridge their privileges, make the
people of England willing to abridge the liberties of America. The subjects of
the King of Great Britain consider themselves as the sovereigns of his
Majesty's American subjects; for, if the House of Commons have a legislative
power over the colonies, the people of England must have the same right
ultimately, as the House derive all their power from the people by election.
But it would be worth an enquiry how the people of England obtained this
sovereignty. Was it by the free confessions of the American provinces? By no
means; or, did it result from the spirit of the English laws or government upon
the migration of oppressed religionists and their settlement in those regions,
which, by the prerogative, were the property of the crown, (2) and which the
King, by the same prerogative, had the power of alienating without the consent
of the people of England, particularly when such alienation was made to a part
of his own subjects? It would be difficult to show that this was the case, and
I believe it has never been attempted. That the King should have the
sovereignty of the colonies is but reasonable, is consistent with the spirit of
the English laws. If English subjects settle upon the lands of the crown out of
this realm, with the King's permission and consent, they do not thereby become
a state independent of the kingly power; as they were subjects in England, so
are they subjects in their new country; but they do not become subjects of
subjects; despicable indeed would be their situation were such the case. On the
contrary, they have the same rights which they had before, and the same
sovereign executive power. The rights of Englishmen are not confined to this
little spot of land; but they follow the person as a shadow follows the
substance; however, it may vary its situation, whether it goes North, West,
East, or South. The House of Commons can claim no power of imposing laws on the
colonists, for they derive no such power by election. The power of the Commons
of Great Britain is circumscribed; from the spirit of the laws, they have only
a legislative power, and that power, bears relation to the purpose for which it
was given; which was to impose laws upon the people of Great Britain, but by no
means the people of America, because the power of the electors extended only to
themselves. The three orders united, i. e. the parliament have a most extensive
power over the subjects of Great Britain, because every power in the state
meets in that body: but considered with respect to the Colonies, their
pretension to such a power there clashes with the legislatures of those
Colonies, they can never subsist together in the same place. As to the relation
of parent and child, in which Great Britain and the colonies are said to stand
by some ingenious men, I confess it would be a tolerable good figure in a
rhetorical flourish, or would sound very prettily in meter; but with
submission, when the rights of many opulent and populous provinces are in
question, something more than a simile or allusion ought to decide it. Let
Englishmen, who have been admired for ages, for their regard to liberty, blush,
when it is now said, that, by superior force, they would deprive three or four
millions of their fellow subjects of those rights and privileges to which they
are so attached themselves. How depraved a mind would that individual be said
to possess, who would defend his property at the risk of his life, exclaim
against the aggressor as a lawless invader, and yet, at the same time, or a
moment afterward, behave in the same unjustifiable manner to his neighbor. Is
this the people, will foreigners cry, who are so fond of liberty? No; we have
always mistaken them: they are selfish, arbitrary, and tyrannical, fond of the
privileges they enjoy; but they would exclude the rest of the world, nay, their
fellow subjects, from the same advantages -- advantages which they have
hitherto enjoyed* in common with Englishmen. Is this the people so celebrated
for humanity? No; they are most inhuman: they invade the most precious rights a
human being can enjoy, and would render the rest of mankind miserable servile
wretches. -- It Is really strange, the national character of Englishmen should
have been so much mistaken!"

A. B.
Tuesday, March 22, 1774.
NOTE to LETTER II.
(2) Although the King, by his prerogative, be vested with the power of making
grants, it is only officially; and, I am of opinion, that ever since a
legislative authority has been established in any colony, his Majesty's
prerogative of making grants within the same, ought in strictness, to have been
in his official capacity, as first magistrate of that colony* and not as first
magistrate of England or Great Britain. As the people of Great Britain have no
power beyond themselves. nor a shadow of a right in the soil of North America,
so it is inconsistent with reason to admit, that the King can derive from them
a power of granting away those lands; more especially o^ any conditions, which
should give them a title to sovereignty over their American kindred, who have
as good a right to freedom and independency as themselves.

LETTER III.
March 24, 1774.
AT the same Time that I hold that "Parliament has not the Rights of
Sovereignty over his Majesty's American Subjects," and that "these rights
reside in themselves," I do not mean to promote an ungrateful forsaking of the
mother country by her children, to sever and estrange the sons from the
fathers; but where filial duty and obedience ceases, to substitute in its stead
a brotherly affection, a manly and independent friendship, which naturally
takes place where the parent has truly loved and exercised his authority for
the sole end of promoting the welfare of the child, without a view to self
interest, or the gratification of pride, ambition, or other vicious passion. I
would consider the American governments, like that of Ireland, as sister
kingdoms; and I would cement a lasting union with them as between the separate
branches of one great family. (1) We know that it is impossible to effect such
a family union, if the arrogance of the elder branch expect to govern the
others, or even demand their homage; and how much more so, if it demand the use
of their purses at its own discretion, as a return for former assistance, or
under pretense of maintaining the honor and interest of the whole combined
family. But while every one is left independent, and no other influence is made
use of but that of sincere brotherly affection, a reciprocation of good
offices, and a fair representation of the general advantage of the whole, there
is little doubt but that all will be ready to contribute their respective
shares, and that due respect and deference will ever be paid to the elder
house. Family pride, no less than those advantages which result from unions of
such a nature, will produce this effect, except we be ashamed of our family. I
hope a selfish and tyrannical spirit in the English, will not make the
Americans ashamed of their descent: but illustration is misleading us again
into the tempting, but unsure, path of analogy. Let us quit it once more before
we lose fight of the direct road.

Every one of those writers, who endeavor to support the pretensions of
parliament to the sovereignty of America by any show of abstract reasoning,
have, so far as they have fallen under my observation, either sat out upon
defective premises, or from good ones, have drawn salse conclusions; as needs
must be in this case, until truth become a changeling. Plain (...) and an
ingenuous mind, are sufficient to guard any one against their sophistry: but we
have need of a little more penetration, and to be somewhat conversant in
affairs, when we would dispute with a different sort, who plunge headlong into
the depths of politics, and hurry us unprepared into all the intricacies of
commerce; placing at once before our eyes, in an indirect point of view, that
multiplicity of wheels within wheels, pulleys upon pulleys, and springs upon
springs, which belong to the complicated machines of government and trade,
instead of directing our attention to the first principles of motion, and the
few master springs on whose movements all the rest depend in a regular order
and subordination. By these means they endeavor to confound, when they cannot
convince us. But these are dishonest arts, the common tricks of designing men
in every sphere. They are too stale and hackneyed, however, to impose upon men
of sound and cultivated understandings. These know, that government and trade,
as well as every science whatever, are established on a very small number of
sundamental principles of the utmost simplicity, since they must be
self-evident, or they are no principles at all; and they know also, that those
who mean honestly, do always ultimately refer every maxim, by clear inferences,
to some one or other of these simple, self-evident principles. All the
subtleties and refinements, all the arguments that the wit of men can invent,
will never be sufficient to justify and species of arbitrary dominion, while we
retain a knowledge of this short and simple proposition -- "the good of society
is the end of civil government." nor will they ever justify a discretionary
taxation by a prince or government, the people being unrepresented, so long as
we know, that "a man has no property in that which another can by right take
from him without his consent."

One of the most specious arguments made use of in support of a sovereign power
in parliament over the Americans, is that drawn from a supposed necessity of
equipping a powerful armament at a short notice, for the protection of the
whole empire, as these gentlemen will have it: hereupon we are asked, if his
Majesty is to have imposed upon him the arduous task of first obtaining a
majority in two Houses of Commons in Europe, and about thirty provincial
assemblies in America, before he can raise the necessary supplies? and the
interrogators seem to plume themselves much upon the impossibility of carrying
on the executive part of government under such restraints. Let me in return ask
how we draw supplies from Ireland? Are they voted in the British House of
Commons? Then, in the first place, I answer that if an empire be too large, and
its parts too widely separated by immense oceans, or other impediments, to
admit of being governed on the principles essentially belonging to all free
governments, it is an overgrown empire, and ought to be divided before it fall
to pieces. The welfare and happiness of mankind supercede every other possible
claim or pretension to govern. When we find ourselves subject to a distant
power, which cannot possibly govern us on any other principles than those of
tyranny, we have an inherent right, by the law of nature, and it is an
indispensible duty to ourselves and to our posterity, to shake off such an
unjust yoke, and to erect a free government amongst ourselves. Those degenerate
Englishmen, who are now seeking to enslave the Americans, would ill brook the
government of the Emperor of Germany, if by any means he should lawfully
inherit the crown of these kingdoms, and make Vienna the seat of government.
Would they suffer themselves to be taxed by German ministers or German diets?
Would they not say to their sovereign, either come and reside amongst us, or
delegate to your Viceroy all the prerogatives of the crown, and leave us, in
conjunction with him alone, to tax and to govern ourselves according to our own
just laws, and the rights of a free people? Can any language be plainer? Can
any doctrine be more intelligible or more equitable? But, in answer to the
above interrogatory, I have another answer as intelligible as this.

Establish the mode of governing which these persons contend for, and there
will still be the same inevitable delay, with regard to the American supplies,
as they would have us believe is peculiar to the mode which the people there
claim a right to exercise. For though a British Parliament might vote them with
their usual alacrity, yet we must send to America to collect them. And if our
armament cannot go on without first sending so far for this collection, its
operations might as well be suspended a few days or a few weeks longer, in
order to obtain it on British, rather than on Prussian, principles. But the
truth is, we should not defer the equipment of any necessary armament one
moment on this account (2). Do we at present wait for the assembling of
Parliament, and a vote of supplies, before we arm in any just cause in which
the safety, the interest or honor of the state is concerned? Does not the
executive branch of government, by virtue of its own powers and in discharge of
its duty, put the state in a posture of defense upon every alarm without loss
of time, and then apply to parliament for its approbation and support? Is it
ever withheld in a just cause? has the government no resources, no ways and
means of its own, for discharging or contracting for the future discharge of,
these prompt expenses of the state? If the uncertainty of meeting with like
support from America, as they find in Great Britain, should be a clog upon our
ministers in their warlike projects, might it not be fortunate for the people
of both countries? Would it not make them extremely cautious and prudent how
they involved us in continental politics and in German wars? No ingenuous man
will, however, entertain a serious doubt of the readiness of the Americans to
contribute their share to every necessary expense of government, so long as
they shall find themselves in possession of their freedom (3).

They must contribute their share; that is to say, they must preserve their own
existence as a people, and defend their own property, under any form of
government whatever. When men tell us, that an enlightened and free people are
refractory; that they will not contribute their proportion of taxes; that at
the hazard of their lives by the sword or the halter, they oppose and seek to
subvert the government, and this for a succession of years; they tell us, with
a moral certainly, though perhaps without meaning it, that they feel some real
oppressions, some real invasions made on their rights or liberties; for no
other causes ever did, or ever will, produce a general and permanent opposition
in the whole body of a people toward their governors. When we remark likewise,
that, in the present contest, there is no religious zeal of persecution; no
national antipathy or rancour, but quite the reverse; no introduction of a new
code of laws by a foreign conqueror; no imaginary pretender to weaken the
allegiance of the people toward their sovereign; nor indeed any one cause of
dissatisfaction, but the avowed one; and that, on the part of the people,
clearly justified on the obvious principles of the English constitution, can we
hesitate a moment to pronounce what ought to be done? We ought to allow the
Americans to tax themselves as an inseparable adjunct to freedom.

NOTES, etc. to LETTER III.
(1) It is not my meaning, that the American colonies should feel the effects
of that narrow, and, may I not call it, barbarous policy, by which this country
has conducted herself toward her sister Ireland. Besides the liberty of
raising her own taxes, and that share of legislation which she enjoys in her
own parliament. I must confess, I see no reason why her trade should not be as
free as that of Great Britain. Nature seems to have formed her for an union
with the greater island. This once effected, on a liberal plan of equality in
trade and freedom, any future jealousy would be an instance of that folly which
is exposed in the fable of the belly and members. Humanity, wisdom, and virtue
dictate an union. Should Ireland then rival us in trade, (which I fear it would
never be in a condition to do) I know of no consequences but good ones. It
might possibly tend to abate our luxury and extravagance, by a more equal
division of wealth, and of circulating money in the two kingdoms; at the same
time, that it would excite an industrious emulation in commerce, to the mutual
benefit of both countries; and, consequently, augment the numbers of useful
people, the riches and strength of the united state.

(2) If the British parliament will not relinquish its arbitrary sovereignty,
let it not, however, double the injury by such oppressions, needless even to
its own unjust policy.

(3) I make use of the word freedom in this place, although I am arguing on a
supposition of the British parliament continuing to exercise a sovereign power
over the Americans, which I hold to be tyrannical in its principle; because the
Americans themselves are as yet not averse to it, and universally breathe
toward it none but sentiments of respect and submission, so long as it shall
not be exercised to tax or to oppress them. Perhaps I may be asked, why do I,
while the Americans are thus submissively inclined toward parliamentary
sovereignty, officiously endeavor to withdraw their respect and obedience;
therefore, as a general answer on this head, let me say once for all, that it
is the dictate of my conscience; the same as it would be to warn any individual
against ignorantly or heedlessly acquiescing in any selfish, crafty, or unjust
pretensions of another person, which, in its natural and unavoidable
consequences, must end in his own distress, and the ruin of his children, and
all this without even benefiting his oppressor; but, on the contrary, rendering
him criminal and unhappy, and preparing the way for his hasty downfall. If an
ordinary regard to justice, and the duties of humanity, would have required
this at our hands, in a case where only a few individuals were concerned, how
much more is it the duty of a good citizen to sound the alarm, when he sees
millions, and successions of millions through future ages, in danger of sinking
into slavery, with all it is attendant curses! and I moreover think it my duty,
to seize this occasion, of advancing my opinions against the supposed and
pretended right of sovereignty in the British parliament over America, because
too many writers, through misjudgment, disingenuousness, or a base prostitution
to the lust of tyrannic power, have taken advantage of this acquiescence on the
part of the colonists, and of this principle with regard to the sovereignty
being so generally acknowledged, as a good political axiom; to deduce from it a
right in parliament even to tax the colonies. Thus, by preving too much, they
raised a suspicion, that their first principles were unsound, and their leading
proposition a mere sophism; and, upon examination, the reader, I flatter
myself, finds them to be so. Leave our adversaries but possessed of this
entrenched ground of parliamentary sovereignty, and the event of the contest,
concerning the right of taxation will be doubtful; at least, they will so long
be enabled to make a show of maintaining the dispute; but when truth and fair
argument have forced this feeble intrenchment, as I cannot but think they have
now done, they will soon be driven out of the field; and the standard of
freedom, supported by the hand of justice, be fixed there for ever.

LETTER IV.
March 25, 1774.
SOME theorists make a proposal to allow the Americans a representation in the
British Parliament, in order to justify our taxation of them; but from the
small number of such representatives, which I have understood to be proposed,
and their being restricted from voting as some would have them, in any but
American questions, I should fear that this proposal proceeded from a sense of
shame, as not appearing to preserve even the common forms of justice, rather
than from a strict and sacred regard to justice itself; or on a supposition,
that this representation should be an adequate one, how would it be possible
for the American representatives to serve their constituents in a proper
manner. Could they, during every recess of Parliament, visit their respective
counties, as the members can in Great Britain? Could they, by a post letter, in
a day or two, communicate to, or receive from, their constituents all necessary
intelligence? or, could they meet and consult with them on all emergencies at a
short notice? Must they reside a thousand or fifteen hundred leagues from their
estates and compting-houses, in order to serve their country in parliament?
Surely so weak a system of government must have been the visionary suggestion
of a dream! But we may rest assured, that while the Americans are themselves
awake, they will never consent to it. Will they trust their property, their
freedom, their dearest rights, their every thing, in the hands of exiles, sent
half way to the Antipodes, in order to sit in council for their government!
Sent to reside in a luxurious, extravagant country, immersed in dissipation and
corruption, and exposed to every temptation to betray them! Believe me, they
are not so senseless. In the imaginations of these visionaries, the vast
Atlantic is no more, I presume, than a mere ferry.

Those who have thought proper to indulge themselves in the way of declamation,
tell us of the mighty things done for the Americans by the mother country, and
make a great cry of their rebellion and ingratitude. Nay, they are silly enough
to urge these obligations as so many irre^^^gable reasons why the Americans are
bound to obey the British parliament: on this foundation they build our right
of sovereignty. But who ever heard of a suit prosecuted in any English court of
justice for ingratitude? Is a frugal son, out of his little competency, and to
the prejudice of his own children, obliged, by any law of England, or of
nature, to minister to the extravagancies of a proud, luxurious parent, and in
what degree that parent shall direct? Do the obligations of friendship deprive
the person obliged of his future freedom and independency? Does not an attempt
to enslave, cancel, in a moment, every former obligation? These declaimers
should keep in mind, that voluntary good offices are moral and religious, not
civil or political, obligations. We may safely admit the whole catalogue of
them in their full force, without thereby affording parliament the most shadowy
pretension to the rights of sovereignty over the Americans: but, in justice to
the character of that people, we must positively deny their existence; for they
have been amply repaid in a profitable commerce to this country. Men must
surely be lost to a sense of common decency, who would impose upon us as truth,
that the part which government has ever taken, in settling and assisting the
American colonies, was solely or primarily to benefit the settlers; whereby
they have been laid under this vast load of obligation to the mother country,
which nothing less than a surrender of their liberty can cancel. Every honest,
unprejudiced man, who will reason, and not wrangle, must acknowledge, that
government's first object was, as indeed it always ought to be, to extend the
commerce of this kingdom. This was the end: the countenance and assistance
given to American settlers, was only the means, and therefore could be no more
than a secondary consideration. When the colonies were in danger of falling a
prey to France, was it pure affection and generosity toward them, or jealousy
of that ambitious power, which caused Great Britain to take up arms (...) Did
not her own existence depend on the preservation of her American colonies? so
that, though we do not mean to say affection, for her kindred had no share in
moving her to draw her sword, yet, we presume, it will be admitted, that her
own safety, her own interest, her own honor, were the only motives that could
have engaged her to proceed such lengths, at that juncture; and this will the
more evidently appear, when we consider, that according to her notions of her
right to the sovereignty, she saw the protection of her colonies, literally in
the light of self-defence, and the more heartily undertook it accordingly.
Surely, it must be a very bad title to dominion, which is built upon an error
of her judgment, and a political selfishness. Had the Hanoverians or Dutch, the
Prussians, Portuguese, or Hungarians; Had even the very French, with whom she
fought, at that time stood in the place of her American colonies, she would, on
the same principles, have been as lavish of her blood and treasure in their
support, as every one of them has heretofore experienced; and yet our
opponents in argument, would not have maintained, that services of this kind,
done to any such state, would have entitled this kingdom to the same right of
ruling and of taxing it, as they contend for upon the same principle in the
case of America. America, therefore, is not ungrateful; but is not rather
Great Britain unwise, ambitious, and tyrannical? The obligations, in fact, were
mutual, and as equivalent as the nature of things would admit; so that it would
be a very nice, perhaps an impossible, but certainly an useless speculation, to
decide which party has been most benefited. The attempt is insidious, and he
who makes it, is no friend either to America or Great Britain.

Many definitions of government have been given us, and a multitude of
arguments employed, in order to show the well known necessity of one central
supreme power being somewhere lodged in every empire, which shall be all
sufficient of itself to perform the whole of legislation, and consequently
taxation, as an essential part of it. But this will make nothing for the claims
of parliament to the sovereignty of America. On the reverse, it only points out
more strongly the error which most people have fallen into in their notion of
the British empire. They will have it, that the British empire comprehends
within it all his Majesty's dominions in America; whereas the American
governments, except that of Newfoundland, are independent nations, having
within themselves the rights and the actual powers of legislation, which cannot
be taken from them, and lodged in the hands of British legislators, without a
manifest wrong, and the subverting of so many free governments. Here we shall
be told, that our Kings, in granting them their original charters and
privileges, only exercised a prerogative which they derived from the
constitution; wherefore the Americans are still dependent upon, and owe
allegiance, not to the King alone, but to the state of Great Britain. But still
I maintain, that the inherent rights of mankind, above all, their freedom, are
not to depend on casuistical niceties and logical distinctions, (which, by the
way, must be false, when they would disprove these rights) but are theirs
independently of all the Kings, all the governments in the universe. Kings and
constitutions of government are the creatures, not the creators, of these
rights. They are held immediately of God himself, who gave them. Had the
original charters to the American settlers been granted on the express and sole
condition of acknowledging the sovereignty of parliament, even all that would
not have bettered our present title one jot; for freedom, notwithstanding all
that sophistry may say to the contrary, cannot be alienated by any human
creature; much less can he enslave his posterity; and, therefore, such a
contract could only be binding, so far and so long as freedom should not be
infringed by it; but, with regard to a virtue in it, of depriving a future
people, many nations, of their freedom, it would be null and void in its own
nature to all intents and purposes; and it is a mockery to our common-sense, to
plead it as an authority to this end.

It is a mistaken notion, that planting of colonies, and extending of empire,
are necessarily one and the same thing. Even the intention of the planters will
not make it so, where the rights of mankind, and the nature of things are not
adapted to it; where growing colonies are so situated and so circumstanced,
that, in the nature of things, they cannot be governed by the parent state on
the principles of justice and freedom; it is surely paying little respect to
our understandings, and shocks every feeling of a free mind, to assert, that
they must nevertheless submit to its oppressive rule, Having denied that
America, when we drop the popular language, and speak correctly, is a part of
the British empire, it will naturally be expected I should say what are, and
where are its limits, The British empire, then, I hold to be confined to the
British Isles (I), and to the various settlements and factories of our trade in
the different parts of the world, including the government of Newfoundland;
together with the garrisons of Gibralter and Minorea. As to the West india
islands, they, as well as the continental colonies, certainly have a right to
their independency, whenever they shall think proper to demand it, as they
contain within themselves every necessary of legislation; but, if it be their
choice, to acknowledge the sovereignty of the British Parliament, as I
apprehend it may, because, I believe, it will be their interest, I see no
objection in that case to its being exercised. If it be true, as I believe all
writers agree, that they would be depopulated, was it not for annual supplies
of white men as well as blacks, this, and some other arguments, drawn from
West-Indian manners and sentiments, seem to indicate, that it is not in their
nature, nor perhaps in their wish, to support an independency; nor ought we to
forget, that their soil itself points out to them dependency, supplying only
the means of effeminacy, luxury, and intoxication, while for bread, and the
necessaries of life, its inhabitants must depend upon other countries. It
matters not how much, in the nature of trading settlements, our first colonies
might have been, (though were not in fact) nor at what period they might be
said to become independent nations: it matters not that they were orginally
planted and protected by the government of this country, (I admit this
planting; I make no reservation of those who fled from persecution and want)
nor what were the intentions of government in so doing; for, having in them
(the people of those colonies) the inherent and unalienable rights of freemen,
they had therein the rights of independency, whenever they should think proper
to assert them. Does a man, who furnishes a young indigent relation with every
necessary, who settles him in a trading accompting-house, who supplies him with
money, and supports him with every species of protection whereby he prospers in
the world, and raises a fortune; does the man, I say, to whom he owes all this,
obtain thereby a right, a legal title, to take from him, without his consent, a
single shilling of this fortune? men of slavish principles would have us
believe, that the rights of private persons, of subjects, being mean and
insignificant considerations, are level with the capacities of, and may be
conprehended by the people; but that the sublime and mysterious rights of
empire are only to be judged of, and determined upon, by those who govern, and
by those to whom these mysteries are confidentially revealed, in order to be
treated of with due profundity and unintelligibility, not to enlighten the
people, but to impress them with a proper respect for things so awful and
sacred. True enough it is, that what has too frequently been written
concerning them, has not been level with the capacities of the people, nor
with any other capacities; for no man can understand what has no sense or
meaning, what is palpable nonsense.

NOTE, etc. to LETTER IV.
(1) I say British Isles, since I consider Ireland as naturally a dependent
upon Great Britain, until an union shall take place, and make her an equal. In
barbarous times, she might have remained separate and independent; but such a
state would now be inconsistent with the self preservation of the larger
kingdom, and therefore the law of nature dictates an union, or a curb

LETTER V.
March 26, 1774.
IT is demanded, with an air of confidence and imaginary triumph, Were not the
first settlers in America British subjects? Did they not settle under the
sanction of grants and charters? Has not the kingdom, at all times, put itself
to great expenses in their support, and favored them with many peculiar
advantages in trade? Was not the last most expensive war undertaken solely on
their account? Can any one be so absurd, as to imagine the kingdom intended to
nurse and erect so many independent nations instead of enlarging her own
dominion? Ought not the Americans to repay us part of the expenses of the war
in particular, in order to enable us to discharge some part of that enormous
debt it occasioned? and contribute their proportion toward the general
expenses of the whole empire? To most of these questions, my arguments have
already answered. Now, let me ask, in my turn, -- Have any of the nations of
the earth, especially the free one^, become what they are, in consequence of
the intentions, and by a regular plan for that purpose, of the governments of
those countries from which they are respectively descended? When we speak of
the Greeks as an Egyptian colony, or of the Carthaginians as a colony of
Phoenicians, do we the less consider them as free nations? or imagine that the
mother countries had a right to govern or to tax them, because the first
settlers had once stood in the relation of subjects to those states? Let the
intention of government, in planting a colony, be what it may, it is impossible
it should take away an inherent unalienable right; such, for instance, as
freedom. But what Britain principally intended, she has certainly obtained --
^n extension of commerce. Again, let me ask, has not Providence usually
carried on its gracious designs of making great nations, and peopling new
regions, contrary to the councils of the wise ones of this world? While we are
plotting and contriving, toiling and sweating, treating and waging war, in
order to gratify our own self-interest and pride, by extending our commerce,
and enlarging our empire beyond all bounds, Providence takes care to frustrate
our foolish and wicked projects, and often brings about the reverse of what we
think to insure by the depth of our policy, and the strength of our arm. Let us
take care that we do not provoke it to make us a scorn and a reproach to
America, instead of its arrogant ruler. By adhering strictly to the principles
of justice, and the rights of mankind, we may firmly unite and cement together
our own interests with those of our sister nations in America, and remain
ourselves to the end of time, a powerful and independent state: but let us
dread, by a violation of these sacred duties, to pull down upon our devoted
heads the mighty ruins of an overgrown empire. Let it be the peculiar glory of
this free, this enlightened. this christian kingdom, to extend the influence of
her religion and laws, not the limits of her empire! Nor let her entertain one
anxious thought concerning the hackneyed notion of the progress of empire
westward. Who are these presumptuous unfolders of the decrees of fate, these
revealers of the hidden councils of God, that doom Great Britain to a speedy
fall, when empire shall have fixed it is seat in America? Are the dispensations
of Divine Providence so uniform and regular, as to become the object of science
and proud philosophy? -- to be foretold by man, or calculated like the movement
and appearance of a comet? Our philosophical prophets pretend to judge from
similar causes producing similar effects: but they ought to know, that in all
essentials, there is yet very little or no similitude between the state of
Great Britain and any ancient empire whatever: and I am not without faith, that
there will always be wisdom and virtue enough in this happy island, to prevent
its ever coming within that predicament. It behooves her, however, for
instruction, to have a constant retrospect to them and their fate. Let her
maturely reflect on the infatiable avarice and ambition, the enormous, the
gigantic wickedness of bloody Rome. Let her consider also the Grecian, the
Persian, and Assyrian empires, and carefully mark the grand causes of their
overthrow. They were all erected on the rotten foundations of Idolatry and
tyranny, (the very seed-plots of hell) they all fell the victims of their own
mad ambition, and a lust of rule, that nothing could satiate less than the
dominion of the whole earth. Where is the similitude! Our religion, being a
divine revelation, is confessedly perfect; and the law of nature, no less
divine, being the immovable basis of our political fabric, the very soul of
our constitution, this also is perfect. I say perfect, absolutely perfect; for,
whenever it has the appearance of being otherwise, it is only from the want of
a right interpretation, or a close adherence to its true principles. It is this
immutable, this divine standard, we have to refer to in all our deviations,
that has preserved our constitution through all ages, and improved it till it
is become the admiration and envy of all nations (1). This is a principle of
renovation and recovery from all corruption and decays; this is a principle of
immortality! No other constitution ever had the same, or at least never
preserved it until it was sufficiently understood, and properly valued by the
people. This has, under a most singular Providence, been our peculiar blessing.
I trust it will be the blessing of our posterity to the latest generations; and
that, when we shall have given birth, and the birthrights of freemen, to as
many independent states as can find habitations on the vast American continent,
that Britain still will be great and free; the respected mother, the model, the
glory of them all! and I will, I must indulge the fond hope, that the pure
religion, and the perfect constitution of Britain, will gradually spread
themselves over all America; and in every other part of the globe (2) so
enlighten and operate upon the minds of men, as to become the chief instruments
in the Hands of Almighty God of bringing about, in his due time, that
universality of christianity, that harmony and happiness among the nations of
the earth, which are intimated in the prophetic writings. Those prophetic
intimations themselves, the peculiar fitness of the causes to the effects,
together with a great variety of circumstances, that seem evidently tending
toward this point, convince me, that it may be rationally hoped for; while all
the arguments brought to show the probability of America becoming the seat of a
mighty conquering empire, to which Britain shall, in length of time, be a
province, appear to my apprehension, to be destitute of any foundation of the
smallest degree of probability.

We are told, that empire has been observed to make its progress westward;
that every empire has had its infancy, its youth, its vigor, its declension,
its death; and that they necessarily follow each other with the same certainty
as in the frail life of man; and lastly, we are reminded, that Great Britain
has past her meridian, and empire is now rising fast in America. To the first,
I answer, that empire must needs have traveled westward from its source,
except Europe had remained a desert; that it also traveled East, South, and
North, as well as West, witness China, Indostan, Abyssinia, Russia; and that it
has already been in America, witness Peru and Mexico; and that it has also
taken retrograde courses, witness Turkey and the Persian empire under Nadir
Shah; and with regard to modern Europe, I can see no probability why it may not
remain to the end of time, divided in proportions, not much differing from the
present. To the second argument, I have only to say, that analogical reasoning
is always very fallacious, and that there is no analogy between things mortal
and immortal. To the third, I must repeat, that Great Britain, having in her
constitution the principles of renovation and recovery, from corruption and
decay, and the seeds of immortality (which no other state ever had) is in no
great danger of a declension, so long as this World is likely to last; and that
the British North American states having, all of them, christianity void of
persecution, as a light from Heaven; British freedom as a soul, and a spirit of
commerce as the breath of life; it must be thought next to an impossibility
that any one of them should ever swallow up all the rest, and then extend its
conquests beyond the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. The times for "heroes and
demigods" are past; and the phrenzy for universal empire is somewhat out of
date and out of countenance. They prevailed, and only could prevail, when the
minds of men were in a proper tone for such extravagances; when the advantages
of commerce, the true principles and ends of government, and the religion of
peace and pure virtue, were either wholly or very imperfectly known: besides,
no searcher into prophecy has yet discovered in the womb of time, an empire
that is to be so formidable to the liberties of the world; and, if it be true,
that the species, as well as the individuals of mankind, obtains knowledge,
wisdom, and virtue progressively, its latter days will, according to the nature
of things, and by means of the divine assistance that has been vouchsafed it,
to all appearance, be more wise, peaceable, and pious, than the earlier periods
of its existence. To this end let every one labor; and his own happiness at
least, if not the general happiness of mankind, will most assuredly be his
reward.

NOTES, etc. to LETTER V.
(1) "I wish," says Lord Camden, the maxim of Machiavel was followed, that of
examining a constitution, at certain periods, according to its first
principles, this would correct abuses, and supply defects. In this wish, every
man, who has a just sense of our inestimable constitution, will most devoutly
join his Lordship. It is true, however, as intimated above, that our wise
ancestors did, from time to time, avail themselves of such an examination, as
occasion offered, and circumstances would admit. If the effects have been so
great and so happy, ought we not to improve upon their example, and instead of
suffering abuses to run on uncorrected, until they threaten a general ruin,
would it be more than common sense, and common prudence, to adopt a regular and
periodical inquest, for this most salutary purpose? Who so learned in the law
and the constitution; who more the friend of both; who therefore so fit as his
Lordship, for the generous task of framing a proper bill on this occasion? As
it is his Lordship's proposal, where else shall we look for a volunteer;
knowing his eloquence and senatorial abilities, on whom else could we rely,
with so much confidence and hope, for obtaining so great a blessing?

(2) We are now sending a code of British laws to our settlements in India, and
establishing courts to administer them.

LETTER VI.
March 27, 1774.
WHEN we talk of asserting our sovereignty over the Americans, do we foresee to
what fatal lengths it will carry us? Are not those nations increasing with
astonishing rapidity? Must they not, in the nature of things, cover in a few
ages that immense continent like a swarm of bees? Do we vainly imagine, that we
can then hold the reins of government, and hurl our thunders on the heads of
the disobedient? Where are we to stop? or, shall we pretend to circumscribe
America populations? To say, 'thus far shall ye go, and no farther?' No!
Swollen indeed must we be with the pride of dominion, and drunk with the fumes,
if we can foolishly imagine these things (1). It is high time that we opened
our eyes to the unintentional encroachments we have been making upon the
liberties of mankind, and to the necessity of setting bounds to our dominion.
Without the American continent, the British empire will be large enough in all
reason. But if government persist in maintaining our sovereignty there, it may
possibly occasion our own destruction, but can be productive of no good to us,
either present, or future. After all that has been done to alarm the Americans
for their rights as free men, and calling up their attention to a thorough
investigation of them; after the flame of opposition has been kindled in every
breast, and now annimates them as one man, it will be in vain to steer any
middle course; to adopt measures for light oppressions, and compelling
obedience to laws moderately tyrannical. We must either relinquish at once our
claim to sovereignty, or fix on their neck with strong hand the galling yoke of
slavery. We must either conquer ourselves or them. Justice, wisdom, humanity,
and religion leave us without a doubt which to prefer; and, should the latter
be determined on, woe be to Great Britain! We may, indeed, by means of fleets
and armies, maintain a precarious tyranny over the Americans for a while; but
the most shallow politicians must foresee what this would end in (2). It would
expose us to the certain attacks of all our European rivals; and, when we found
the necessity of courting the assistance of the Americans, we should deservedly
find them the bitterest of our enemies. With the nations of Europe we contend
for commerce, for glory, and some imaginary objects; with those of America, the
contest would be for the dearest rights, the very dignity of humanity. After
the struggles of interest and prowess, a tolerable reconciliation may take
place, but eternal enmity and hate always succeed those between a free people
and their tyrants. From the spirit of freedom, which has in all ages glowed in
the bosoms of true Englishmen, and which has brought to its present perfection
our glorious constitution in defiance of every attempt to crush it; we ought to
know, that until we can extinguish this spirit in the breasts of the Americans,
and eradicate from their very nature its first and noblest principles,
self-preservation and free will, that all our efforts to bow them down in
subjection to our authority must finally be ineffectual, and will recoil sooner
or later perhaps with tenfold retribution upon ourselves. There are some
politicians who think, that present expediency is a sufficient justification of
any measures; and who, from the ideas of re-imbursing ourselves for the charges
of the last war, of supplying the present exigencies of the state, and securing
our power over the American commerce, make no scruple to bid us draw the
accursed sword, and enslave our children and our brethren. But, be it known to
them, that though our very existence as a nation, depended on violating the
express laws of God, it must not be done. And if their ignorance, which may be
implied from the folly of their proposal, has not yet made the discovery, let
them be told that policy, national as well as individual, must have justice and
the laws of God for its basis, or, it is the policy of villains, the policy of
sots and fools. Can the legislature of Great Britain, I once more ask, govern
the Americans on the true principles of freedom? For the reasons I have already
given, I believe it to be impossible (3). As to their reimbursing us the sums
of money spent on their account in the last war, they will do it, if we act
wisely and justly, in the only way it is possible they should, and in the only
way we expected of them when we undertook the war; that is, by a commerce
beneficial to this kingdom. And by leaving them to their own independency, the
charges of government may be greatly retrenched.

Thus far had I written, when the political tracts of a reverend Dean fell into
my hands. They amply supply all the examples and explanations necessary to
illustrate my principles, and and show to a demonstration the absolute
necessity, in a political light, of relinquishing our claims to the sovereignty
of America; to which the whole tenor of my letters point, and with which they
are to conclude. But I am far from subscribing to this gentleman's doctrine as
to the rights of sovereignty. If I could acknowledge the truth of that, I
should very much doubt of the propriety of his proposed separation of America
from Great Britain; for giving up one's right, cannot be thought a good rule
for promoting his interest. But in this case, as is very frequent, his
common-sense has been obliged to subdue his learning before he arrived at
truth. While metaphysical refinements teach him to think, that Britain has a
right to govern America, the invincible force of truth extorts from him an
acknowledgment that she must, if governed by true policy, relinquish it. It Is a
pity so able a writer had not discovered that the Americans have a right to
choose their own governors, and thence enforced the necessity of his proposed
separation as a religious duty, no less than a measure of national policy. In
so doing, he would have been consistent; there would then have been no
obscurity nor would his sentiments of right and expediency have been at
variance; but his conclusion would naturally and evidently have flowed from his
premises, supported by that trite, but true and most excellent maxim, that
honesty is the best policy. But, perhaps, some may be of opinion, that the
propriety of a separation is more strongly enforced, by its appearing to be the
only result he could possibly arrive at through the medium of opinions that
pointed the direct contrary way, The same opinions have, in all other writers,
led them only to consider, by what means the unity of the whole British empire
(taking in America) might be best preserved; how the supreme legislative power
might be best supported, and enforce obedience to the utmost bounds of this
vast dominion. Every project for this purpose (without a single exception)
being embarrassed with a sundamental incompatibility, a radical error in
suppossing a right, where, in truth, there is none, has been visionary,
oppressive, sanguinary, and totally impracticable; so difficult it is to strive
against the stream of nature and truth.

The Dean, with more good sense, with an extensive insight into the human heart
and the springs of commerce, and with the temper of a philosophic, uninterested
looker-on, has nobly abandoned the full persuasion of his own mind on the
point of right; and, while he thinks we are entitled to govern, foresees and
demonstrates the fatal consequences of attempting it. He accordingly advises us
to separate in good humor, and trusts to our mutual interests for its
producing, in fact, a real and sincere union, and this, he says, is "the only
means of living in peace and harmony with them."

In the whole course of his work, wherever the dispute of right is not
immediately in view, his reasonings flow spontaneously, and in spite of
himself, from the feelings of right in his own heart. In page 12, he says, For
I am not for charging our colonies in particular with being sinners above
others, because, I believe, (and if I am wrong, let the histories of all
colonies, whether ancient or modern, from the days of Thucydides down to the
present time, confute me if it can; I say, 'till that is done, I believe) that
it is the nature of them all to aspire after independence, and to set up for
themselves as soon as ever they find that they are able to subsist without
being beholding to the mother country. And if our Americans have expressed
themselves sooner on this head than others have done, or in a more direct and
daring manner, this ought not to be imputed to any greater malignity, or
ingratitude in them than in others, but to that bold, free constitution, which
is the prerogative and boast of us all. We ourselves derive our origin from
those very Saxons who inhabited the lower parts of Germany, etc. What can more
fully prove the right of independence in colonies, too far removed to be
governed on the principles of freedom by the mother country, than this
universal, this uniform, invariable feeling of all mankind, in all ages, than
that it is the nature of them all to aspire after it. Shall we reject the
unvarying testimony of nature speaking home to our hearts, and pin our faith
upon the fine-spun, cobweb subtleties of our learned casuists and
court-lawyers? or shall we, with more safety, rely upon the letter of an old
musty charter, penned before this question was so much as thought of? Has
nature left herself so much without a witness to the truth in the human breast,
that we must give ourselves wholly up to the direction of such blind guides as
these? Fie! fie! If much learning has not made us mad, it has at least in
this, and many similar cases, made us ignorant. It is to be lamented, that such
a blaze of truth, as there is in the above observation, did not discover to the
writer the fallaciousness of his original position of parliamentary right to
govern the colonies; when all the while, it is the express, the sole purport of
this work to prove, that parliament in continuing to assert this right, cannot
promote either the welfare of Great Britain or America.

NOTES, etc. to LETTER VI.
(1) I find it is one of the avowed principles of the Quebec Act, by the
accounts of its ablest advocates, to check as much as possible, all population
in the upper and interior country, at the back of the colonies. (See a pamphlet
entitled, The justice and Policy of the late Act of Parliament, for making more
effectual provision for the government of the Province of Quebec, asserted and
proved, page 43; and an Appeal to the Public, stating and considering the
objections to the Quebec Bill, page 46) At the same time that I honor all the
real humanity, shown in this act to the Canadians; I most heartily condemn the
general policy of it, with regard to the other Colonies. The evils complained
of in the abovementioned uns^^^^d country, and made the same pretense for
enlarging so extravagantly the province of Quebec, by the annexation of the
whole of it, are evils wholly occasioned by the inactivity and omissions of
government for twelve years past; if it be true, that it is the want of laws,
which introduces disorder into any society; and they are, with great injustice
charged upon the bordering Colonies, as legislative states; (in which light, I
find, they are to be considered by their enemies, whenever it may serve a turn
to their disadvantage. See the appeal above mentioned, page 50.) and as an
artful pretense for denying them leave of settlement, and that share in the
peltry trade which they are most advantageously situated for enjoying. Provided
Great Britain had no people to spare, for sending out colonies to occupy that
desolate country, I can see no right she had to hinder the American states from
so doing, except by voluntary agreement between her and them, unless she claim
a power of counteracting God's first benediction to mankind. -- Be fruitful and
multiply, and replenish the earth and subdue it. But notwithstanding it is the
language of this act, that immense tracts of the earth shall remain desert and
unpeopled, in order that the British parliament may maintain an usurped
sovereignty over a multitude of populous nations, beyond one of the grand
watery divisions of the Globe; yet in the end, it will prove to to have no more
virtue in it, toward stemming the overflowings of the Colonies, than had the
royal mandate of the wife Canutus, when in order to confound his evil
counselors, he magisterially forbid the swelling tide of the ocean to approach
his feet. A chain of feeble forts in a wilderness, or the pronouncing this
wilderness to be part of the province of Quebec, will form a mighty barrier
truly, against the swarms that will one day pour westward, from the too
populous states upon the sea coast! I do not, however, deny, that even this
mode of preventing anarchy, bloodshed, and cruelty for the present, is not
better than none; but I think this is not the right way. To have consented,
under our own guaranty, to a partition of this country amongst the bordering
colonies, according to their respective situations, and as far as the just
claims of the Indians would admit, would have been at once an act of justice
and wise policy; or, if the enlargement of these respective colonies would be
impolitic, on account of the future balance of power of that continent, and the
general arbitration of Great Britain hereafter spoken of, then it might have
been stipulated with them, that their several emigrants into this desert
country, should be independent of them, and left to form a new state or new
states, under laws to be given them for a free government on their first
settlement, and suitable limitations of country, for the sake of preserving the
future equilibrium and general peace. There cannot be a worse, or more narrow
policy, than to give any check to American population; for, by those means,
Britain will lose so many customers for her manufactures, and the colonies, by
having their emigrations restrained, will be under a necessity of employing her
hands in manufactures instead of agriculture. We know the consequences.

(2) The ^^fatuated people of this country, are not sparing of their ridicule
and illiberal jests on the Bostonians, now the iron hand of power has got them
in it is grasp. No man of sense ever doubted the present power of Great Britain,
to crush any one opposing colony, or, possibly, to trample on the united necks
of them all; but this arrogance and injustice she will assuredly repent. I wish
it may not be in sackcloth and ashes -- I wish it may not be very soon.

(3) In framing the Quebec Act, it were much to have been desired, that none of
the other Colonies had been so much as thought of, it might then, perhaps, have
breathed pure wisdom and benevolence; but, having interwoven in it that fatal
policy. which is daily sowing the seeds of discord between Great Britain and
America, I am inclined to think, it is justly censurable in a high degree; and
that it is far less beneficial to the Canadians than it ought to be, although
it may be very true, that they are at present incapable of receiving all the
rights and privileges, and the full liberty of British subjects, yet that will
be no justification of us, for intailing on their posterity so much servitude
to an arbitrary power, as by this act is vested in the governor and council;
all at the appointment of the crown during pleasure. To have had an assembly,
wherein the people should have been represented, they had an undoubted right;
to deny it them is tyrannical, and a mere evasion, to insinuate the
impracticability of such a plan. Surely that power, which now totally deprives
them of this essential to freedom, had been exerted more agreeable to the
principles of justice and humanity; had it granted them but the rudest model of
an assembly, containing within it the seeds of freedom, to have germinated and
expanded with their prosperity, and their advancement in arts and knowledge!
Those who assert the contrary, must be little acquainted with the origin and
rise of almost all the free states that have flourished in the world, and must
conceive the Canadians to be more stupid and barbarous than the Hottentots or
Samoiedes. As to any intention of our ministers to promote in this act the
interests of Popery, I think they may stand freely acquitted of them; and
though I am of opinion, the religious part of it might be amended, yet I cannot
but smile at the terrors that have been expressed on this occasion, as if his
Holiness was at the very door of St. Paul's. No; the error of the legislature
has been in not seeing, that the most perfect freedom in America, is not only
compatible with, but is now become necessary to, the prosperity of
Great Britain; and its crime, if a crime has been committed, in seeking to
support a tottering tyranny over the ancient colonies, by erecting an arbitrary
government in Quebec. For the sake of Britons on both sides of the Atlantic
equally; for the sake of the Canadians, and for the sake of freedom's holy
cause universally, I sincerely hope a little reflection on an end so
abominable, and the still more abominable means, will dispose our legislators
to retrieve, e're it be too late, such an unconstitutional and alarming step.
The act of parliament of which we have been speaking, as well as two other
memorable ones, passed since the writer first began to publish these letters
separately in a news-paper, are thought by sober and reflecting men, to be
melancholy records of human passions and infirmity; affording us most striking
admonitions, that in national conduct, as well as in that of individuals, a
mistaken principle of action, if not forsaken, or one false step, if
unretrieved in time, may easily hurry us on to lengths of folly and wickedness,
at which we should once have shuddered with horror, but can afterward persist
in to our utter destruction, regardless of all the miseries we at the same time
bring upon others. Will rational and moral beings never learn, that without
justice, it is impossible there should ever be wisdom in the councils of a
nation? or can statesmen believe it will obtain their acquittal at the last
tribunal, to plead, that in their private capacity, "they did justice and
remembered mercy," though in their public stations, they violated these sacred
regards; and through a false notion of serving and aggrandizing their country,
they endeavored to establish tyranny, and to intail on millions and millions,
the deadliest curse that can imbitter life? In what light must a truly good and
wise man behold a law, which is at once a yoke of bondage to one colony, and a
scourge to the rest! Although greater miseries, previously endured, together
with an ignorance in the value of, and the requisites to, freedom, may cause
the poor Canadians, in their present circumstances, to receive it with joy and
thankfulness; will that justify toward them, so ungenerous, so mean a policy?

LETTER VII.
March 28, 1774.
SINCE, my last letter was sent to the Printer, I have a second time looked
into the publication therein referred to; and finding it likely to make a
strong impression on its readers, as well as that there is the most striking
inconsistency between its foundation and superstructure* I perceive that I
cannot well pass it over without a regular though concise examination of its
third and fourth tract. These alone being immediately to the point, I shall
confine my observations to them, without taking notice of the rest of the book.

In the beginning of the third tract, entitled, A Letter from a Merchant in
London to his Nephew in America, I am sorry to observe an appeal to the spirit
of our constitution treated with ridicule, and an attempt made to substitute in
place of this only genuine authority, the letter of the slatutes, or even of
Magna Charta itself; for these may all be imperfect, though as I have proved in
a former letter the spirit of the constitution cannot. A proceeding of this
kind in an anonymous writer, or one of no credit, would, I confess, have given
me an alarm of danger, and a suspicion of some deep design against the cause of
truth: it certainly is very far from being a recommendation of the present
work. May we not ask what is meant by removing the appeal from the spirit of
the constitution, to something which is called "the constitution itself," (page
93 94) and what that something is* It is not defined, nor can I understand what
it is, unless it be a something which has its sole existence in the varying
and unsteady letter of the statute law, and therefore may be one thing today,
and another tomorrow, as it was once tyranny and popery, and is at present
freedom and true religion. If the author will be candid, he must acknowledge*
that his distinction of "the constitution itself," from the spirit of the
constitution, is unlogical, and a palpable contradiction. How can any thing be
set in contradistinction to its essence? That Magna Charta is the great
foundation of English liberties* and the basis of the English constitution, I
must positively deny. It is indeed a glorious member of the superstructure, but
of itself would never have existed, had not the constitution already had a
basis, and a firm one too. And as to this charter being the "foundation of
English liberty," that was evidently otherwise; since it was an exertion of
this very liberty that produced the charter; extorting it from an encroaching
King, as a mere formal declaration of rights, already known to be the
constitutional inheritance of every Englishman. Besides I have elsewhere
observed, that the original and only real foundations of liberty were, by the
Almighty architect, laid together with the foundations of the world, when this
right was ingrafted into the nature of man at his creation; and therefore it
cannot be held, after the manner of an external property or possession, by
charters and titles of human fabric. We ought to be careful to preserve a
gospel purity in our civil as in our religious constitution; for they are both
founded on the word of God. If the religious be more express and clear, the
civil is more ancient, and no less divine, though only revealed to us by a
general and fainter impress on the mind and heart of man. If the Dean will not
admit the decrees of Popes and councils as of equal authority with the word of
God, he will not surely maintain, that a Magna Charta ought to come in
competition with the spirit of a constitution, whose basis is internal justice
and inherent liberty; a Magna Charta, notoriously known to have been extorted
by the sword, and formed and ratified in the heat of a hostile contention. Nor
will he, it is to be hoped, plead "the public statutes of the realm," (p. 4.)
when they militate against the spirit, or gospel purity of the constitution.

And here I must remark, that his quotations of them, in order to prove the
sovereignty of parliament, have not the weight of fair evidence in the trial
now before the tribunal of the public; since they stand in the place, and in
the nature of parties concerned. It is these very "public statutes of the
realm," arrogating a right to govern and to tax the Americans which are called
in question; therefore their testimony goes for nothing, If the cause be given
in their favor, then it will be time enough for them to operate; but if it
goes against them, they must all be condemned as usurpations. We are now
arguing what is just and right, and ought to be practiced, not what has been
practiced by those who had the power in their hands; not what they have been
pleased, in their declarations to call just and and right. Although Parliament
should enact, that reason and truth should no longer be reason and truth, yet
plain and honest people would be apt to call them reason and truth still, and
to rely upon them with the same assurance they do at present. Hence it is, and
ever will be, a truth as evident and as uncontrovertible as any law of nature
can be, that "an American," notwithstanding the ingenuity of this author, and
all that has been, or can be said to the contrary, has a right to insist, that
according to the spirit of the constitution, he ought not to be taxed without
his own consent, given either by himself or by a representative in parliament;
I will not add "chosen by himself;" because that, with regard to each
individual, were we disposed to cavil, would lead us into useless and puerile
disputations, (p. 93.) Every man of sense admits of the propriety of virtual
representation, so far as it answers the ends and purposes of a real one, but
no farther. I am sincerely sorry to observe a writer, so much entitled to
respect as the Dean of Gloucester, employ his talents in an endeavor to mislead
us into an opinion, that the Americans are virtually represented in the British
parliament. It were a suitable and an innocent exercise of parts in a young
disputant at college; but will it bear to be gravely debated upon by a
political writer! Well might a noble Lord exclaim, for as to the distinction of
a virtual representation, it is so absurd, as not to deserve an answer; I
therefore pass it over with contempt. And if authorities are to have their
weight, that, I presume of this noble Lord, who presided with so much dignity
and luster, in the noblest court of equity in the world, will be allowed to
preponderate against the Dean's, at least in the judgment of every one who
reads the tracts before us. If our author had duly weighed the a guments he has
quoted from Judge Foster, in his 4th tract, (p. 27.) he would have found, that
they made nothing for such a virtual representation as he contends for. The
Judge, it is plain, was not so irrational as to think of the welfare of two
separats nations (for so we may surely esteem Britain and America, think as we
will of empire) inhabiting, with respect one to the other, the ends of the
earth, as being a fit object of consultation to a single national assembly; and
that the deputies of one of these nations could be esteemed the representatives
of the other. As to the imagination of Great Britain and America being one
empire, these are only words that serve to blind, to amuse, and to confound
inconsiderate reasoners.

How often must it be repeated, that pride, ambition, and lust of dominion, are
not, on any pretense whatsoever, to be gratified at the expense of nations; and
that the sole end of civil government is to promote the good of the people? If
an empire become too wide and unwieldy for this purpose, I do assert, that by
the laws of nature, which are the laws of God, it is no empire, that is to say,
not a just empire. It therefore must be divided, unless we admit that tyranny
can be rightfully established, which God forbid! In our own case, I only want
it to be done in form, as it is already done in fact, in which the Dean agrees
with me; for says he, (p. 12) an undoubted fact it is, that from the moment in
which Canada came into the possession of the English, an end was put to the
sovereignty of the mother country over her colonies (1). I must now take notice
of one argument, in favor of virtual representation, that our author seems to
value himself upon, as of sufficient force to decide the general dispute with
the Americans, and, at the same time, the much litigated question of the
Middlesex election. -- We find it in a note, (p. 29) Surely the nation might
have expelled Mr. Wilkes, or have struck his name out of the list of committee,
had it been assembled, and had it thought proper so to do. What then should
hinder the deputies of the nation from doing the same thing? and which ought to
prevail in this case, the nation in general, or the county of Middlesex? Now,
this argument is evidently fallacious; for the House of Commons does not answer
to the imagined committee of Judge Fostter, to which it is here compared; for
that was a simple democratical council. Our national committee consists of King
and Lords, as well as Commons? and therefore, according to the Dean's premises,
that "the nation might have expelled Mr. Wilkes," it is the necessary
conclusion, that nothing less than the national committee, namely, our complete
legislature of King, Lords, and Commons, had a right to strike his name out of
the list. I entirely agree with this writer, that the member chosen and
returned by certain individuals, is the representative of the whole nation; so
that what is generally called a virtual, is, in fact, a real representation;
but, at the same time, I must say it does not appear to be very consistent with
the spirit of our constitution, (if that expression will not give offense) that
a Dunwich or an Old Sarum, containing half a dozen cottagers, should have the
choosing of as many of these national representatives as a Norwich or a Bristol;
nor that a Weymouth should return as great a number as the metropolis, whose
citizens, according to our author, (p. 99) form a body as respectable as the
greatest of our colonies with regard to property, and superior to many of them
with respect to numbers.

Is not this an abuse that calls aloud for reformtion? Can any thing be more
notorious, than that a great majority of the national representatives are
elected by a small number of indigent and corrupt men, who professedly make a
trade of voting, and who gratify, in the very act, a sordid self-interest, in
direct violation of the rights and interests of the nation collectively. These
electors being primarily the representatives of the nation, may be called the
elective representatives; and are answerable to the nation for the exercise of
that great trust. If they pervert it from the end for which it was given them,
and transfer it to bad men for their own selfish purposes, it is fit they
should be deprived of it, in order to the establishing a more just and safe
mode of electing the legislative representatives of the nation. But to return;
I am of opinion, the Dean might as well have spared his reproaches of "folly
and absurdity" upon the positions of the Americans, concerning their want of an
adequate representation, (p. 98) and have omitted his comparison of the state
of the city of London, although it has long enjoyed, before the colonies were
ever thought of, the threefold power of jurisdiction, legislation, and
taxation in certain cases; for, if no man in his senses ever yet supposed, that
the city of London either was or could be exempted, by her charters, from
parliamentary jurisdiction, or parliamentary taxes; it is full as evident that
no man in his senses can see any just similitude, with respect to parliamentary
jurisdiction and taxation between a metropolis, the very central point of a
nation, and an entire kindred nation, which has arisen in the new world, at
the distance of three thousand miles from the parent state, and beyond the vast
Atlantic Ocean. It is consistent with the security of the liberty and property
of the citizens of London, to be subject to parliamentary jurisdiction and
taxation! but this subjection would not be consistent with the security of the
American nations. May not a man in his senses believe, that a kindred nation,
or a colony, if you please, may be capable of managing its own concerns; and
that it is full as likely to do it faithfully as the legislators of its mother
country? May not a man in his senses believe, that such a state has a right to
appoint the guardians of its own liberties and properties, and to defend them
against all invaders, even the legislators of its mother country, without
involving himself in either "folly or absurdity?" Would the independency of any
colony or kindred nation in America, necessarily create any such confusion, any
such inconsistency in the government of Great Britain, as would follow from the
independency of, and a separate supreme legislation in, the capital city?

NOTE, etc. to LETTER VII.
(1) As justice says it ought to be so; good sense will inform us that it must
be so; notwithstanding the profound policy of the Quebec act.

LETTER VIII.
April 8, 1774.
WHEN our reverend author is not in a jeering humor, he will acknowledge that
it is, in reality, unreasonable, unjust and cruel, to tax an unrepresented
people (for I deny that America is represented at Westminster) against their
own consent. (P. 100.) But strange, exclaims the Dean, that you did not
discover these bad things before! Strange, that though the British parliament has
been, from the beginning, thus unreasonable, thus unjust and cruel toward you,
by levying taxes on many commodities, outward and inwards; nay, by laying an
internal tax, the post-tax, for example, on the whole British empire in
America; and, what is still worse, by making laws to affect your property, your
paper currency, and even to take away life itself if you offended against them:
strange and unaccountable, I say, that after you had suffered this so long, you
should not have been able to have discovered that you were without
representatives in the British parliament, of your own electing, till this
enlightening tax upon paper opened your eyes! And what a pity is it, that you
have been slaves for so many generations, and yet did not know that you were
slaves until now. Now, strange and unaccountable as this may appear to the
Dean, it has been by means of the very same kind precisely that our eyes have
been successively opened to see the just rights of the people, the due limits
of authority in their rulers, in every particular in which they are now legally
ascertained. A rude and infant nation of husbandmen, having no pressing
occasion, is not very logical or critically learned in the law, and all its
remote consequences. It must move progressively toward the acquisition of
knowledge as well as strength. This knowledge will always be first confined to
reflecting individuals, before it will spread at large amongst the people; and
many such individuals amongst the Americans, by the Dean's own account, (P. 4,
and 5,) have had "their eyes open" these hundred years and upwards. The bulk of
a nation must be made to ^eel, before they reason with tolerable accuracy, or
lay much stress upon their governors keeping strictly within the pale of just
and legal authority. Even self-evident truths are not discerned, until the
attention of mankind is called upon by necessity, or some other powerful cause,
to examine the subject in which they exist. The divine right of Kings, and
their absolute power too, might have remained in the creeds of all nations to
this day, had not too liberal an exercise of these powers taught them to reason
by making them feel. No man in any country, ever thought of scrupulously
defining the proper powers of taxation, while he possessed nothing worth
taxing; nor of limiting the exercise of such powers, so long as the
contributions required were trifling to him, the occasions of raising them
apparent to all men, and the application of them known to, and approved by,
every individual. It is, when a state begins to rise into some degree of
political consequence, and the operations of its government are become too
secret and complex to be penetrated by the vulgar eye, and at the same time
grow expensive to the people, that they, not knowing what is going forward, and
suspicious of some ill toward themselves, begin to investigate the legal
powers of taxing, and how far they ought to be exercised; nor shall we exceed
the truth, if we add, that all their jealousy and vigilance have been little
enough, in the happiest age and nation, for guarding against the king-craft and
tyranny of their rulers. While too insignificant to become the objects, or the
tools of ambition, they remain in ignorance; it is the alarm of chains, and the
dislike of burdens, that enlighten them and open their eyes. After what has
been said, I should hope it was quite unnecessary to refute the feeble
arguments we find in p. 101, 102, 103, drawn from the freedom which an American
now is permitted to enjoy, of voting for a member of the British parliament. We
must remember, however, that he cannot do this without being a British
freeholder, or holding some property which makes him at least a British
subject; and it is therefore as a Briton, not as an American, he is
represented. But to trace this rope of sand any farther, would really be to
mock my readers, and I have already sufficiently replied to all such sorry
subtleties. If the true and proper relation, in which this country stands with
regard to the colonies, has not, in all particulars, been accurately defined
by mutual agreement and declaratory laws; but there are to be found some little
inconsistencies, as there needs must be in such a connection so long as
Great Britain, through a love of rule, finds means to evade a fair discussion
of the question of right; which, I pray, is the course that a wise and good man
ought to pursue, in order to reconcile all contradictions, and to obtain a just
idea of what is fit to be done for the remedying these inconveniences? Ought
not the welfare of the whole people, without any partiality for countries, to
outweigh, in his mind, every other consideration? Must it not be his polar
star, whenever he ventures upon the dark and deceitful sea of casuistry? Will
he, for a moment, believe in the truth of any position or maxim, how ancient,
how specious soever, that is evidently incompatible with this object? Surely he
will not lose sight of the true, the only ends of government, and labor to
harden the heart and strengthen the hands of tyranny! Nor will he, surely,
disregard the plain and obvious dictates of reason and nature, and, in defense
of a bad cause, stoop and strain to catch at every little flaw and defect in
forms and precedents! But one false step in reasoning, frequently misleads a
good man into opinions and disputations prejudicial to truth. However, when the
good of the public shall ultimately appear to be the end he aims at, we must
make charitable allowances for his mistakes. Such allowances I am disposed to
make to the author of the tract; but yet as a well-wisher, and in perfect good
humor, I must needs say he has indulged too freely a spirit, I will not say a
talent, of ridicule; he is too supercilious even to his nephew, and is apt to
sneer somewhat out of season, and when a satirical opponent might very easily
retort it upon him with double force. Neither does he appear to me quite so
cool, dispassionate and impartial, as becomes a man who takes upon him to
elucidate a disputed question on which depends the welfare, perhaps the
existence of nations. He must have been a poor casuist, indeed, not to have
obtained a victory over an antagonist of his own making: but we need not
quarrel with him for beating him, since he showed him so much mercy and good
manners. But does it not rather savor of disingenuousness, to put the maimed
and mutilated arguments of the Americans into the mouth of a wrongheaded
ignorant boy? Had it not been more to the advantage of his knowledge and
eloquence, to have impressed conviction upon the mind of an experienced and
able man, one who was well acquainted with the history, the laws, and the
constitution of both Great Britain and the colonies? But in that case, decency
would have confined him to argument, instead of sneer and ridicule, and to a
carriage suited to an equal, instead of that supercilious superiority assumed
over the booby nephew; and this would have deprived his letter of its principal
force and spirit. But let that pass, and let us proceed to what is more to the
purpose.

Our author proves, very satisfactorily, that the cause of contention between
us and the colonies, is no recent affair -- not the factious contrivance of a
Lord Chatham, or a Lord Cambden, as the historians of the day would have it,
but existed in no small force so early in the last century as 1670, (p, 5,) and
in 1696, (p. 6,) gave occasion to a very remarkable act, for the very purpose
chiefly of asserting the sovereignty of parliament. Acts of Parliament do not
take place on such occasions until the mischief to be remedied is already at
some degree of ripeness; and accordingly it appears, that the colonies had for
a considerable time previous to 1696, shown a disposition to doubt, to dispute,
and in some sort to oppose the authority of the English Parliament. Their eyes
began to be open, and nature made them feel their inherent rights as men, long
before they could define them. On the other hand, false definitions of law and
right, have as long suppressed the feelings of equity in the minds of those
possessed of the power. Let us make true definitions, and consult our true
feelings, and we shall then no longer doubt of the right of independence in the
Americans; I say true feelings, because, without we are circumspect, we are
continually acquiring false ones, as well as false opinions; and the latter has
a wonderful power in generating the former. Witness the daily and perpetual
severities we see practiced toward children, to the injury both of body and
mind, by injudicious parents, who yet want neither humanity nor tenderness, and
who act upon principle. A false system begetting false feelings, while they are
injuring and punishing their children, they think they are serving them and
consulting their true happiness; and they consequently feel self-approbation
for a conduct that ought to inspire horror and self-reproof. Now, with regard
to our American children and kindred, let us divest ourselves of every
interest, of every passion, of every prejudice; let us pluck from our hearts
that deep-rooted love of rule, and for a moment put ourselves in their places;
and then, deliberately and solemnly laying our hand upon our heart, remembering
that we are christians, and answerable at the awful tribunal of the Deity for
our very thoughts; let us ask ourselves these plain questions: is not the end
of government to the Americans the same as to all other people, that is to say,
the welfare and happiness of the society? Can there be welfare and happiness
without freedom? Can freedom exist under a taxation, at the discretion of the
legislature of another, and that a distant, a luxurious, a necessitous country?
Is it agreeable to common-sense to imagine, that an American representation in
the British-Parliament could answer the true ends of representation to the
people of that country? or, is it possible, according to any plan which human
wisdom has yet conceived, that the Parliament of Great Britain should govern
the many and multiplying nations of America on the true principles of freedom,
or without a certainty of sinking herself under the weight of empire? And is it
fit that, on the authority of a few logical distinctions, (admitting they were
just, which, by the way, they are not) and for the sake of proudly maintaining
an absolute, a deceased claim to an empty sovereignty, (for so it is confessed
to be, by its advocate the Dean) that we should forget all these
considerations, all the ties of consanguinity and affection, all the feelngs of
humanity, and the divine lessons of our holy religion, and enforce the
obedience of the Americans to an odious tyranny by fire and sword?

It is matter of the greatest astonishment to me, that a writer, so learned and
so clear sighted as the Dean, should have so far over-looked all arguments of
this nature, as to have left himself without a just, a moral reason, as well as
a political one, for his proposed separation. As to the matter of fact,
concerning the possibility of keeping the sovereignty in our hands he and I are
well agreed, as I have already shown in my quotation from p. 12; nay, we both
agree, that we have it not to keep, that it is already gone, never to be
recovered but by conquest, never more to be held but with greater armies, and
at a greater expense than ever this country supported in any war. I have also,
in a former letter, q^^^ed, what he says in the same page, (12) in order to
show, that it has ever been the nature of all colonies, in all ages, to aspire
after independence, and made my reflections thereupon, so that we may now
hasten to the consideration of his five proposals, and to the conclusion of the
task we have assigned ourselves. If I have trespassed upon the reader, by a
repetition of the same arguments in different places, I would observe, that the
sew plain and clear arguments, on which this question depends, need to be
repeated again and again, and never to be lost sight of; for the enemies of
liberty, like the disingenuous foes of religion, are a sort of people, who,
conscious that they cannot convince, and determined to wrangle, do not scruple
to advance the same stale arguments that have been a thousand and a thousand
times refuted before, and if not refuted again, as often as they have the
shamelessness to revive them, they insult their adversaries with affected
shouts of victory and triumph.

But my manner of treating the subject may, nevertheless, need many apologies.
I shall, however, only plead, that these letters have been written as leisure
would permit, and sent away to the Printer, without reserved copies to refer
to: besides which it may be proper to add, that at the time I am writing this
eighth, no more than the two first have made their appearance in the paper. As
for the presumption of entering on a subject, without abilities equal to the
attempt, I shall only offer, in my defense, that I have been prompted to it
through a warm, a passionate love of liberty, and a sincere desire of promoting
its cause.

Whatever may be my success, I shall never want the pleasing reflection of
having done my duty conscientiously, as a member of society, although in a
subordinate degree to greater workmen: and, I hope, it is not uncharitable to
think, that if every writer would resign his pen to the same guidance, we
should all be agreed very soon, as nearly as would be requisite, and that
mankind would then reap such benefits from political disquisitions, as I fear
are not likely to take place, while controverly is carried upon other
principles.

LETTER IX.
April 9, 1774.
WE come now to the consideration of our author's final settlements, and in p.
14, we find him thus expressing himself: -- Enough surely has been said on this
subject, and the upshot of the whole matter is plainly this: -- that even the
arbitrary and despotic governments of France and Spain (arbitrary, I say, both
in temporals and spirituals) maintain their authority over their American
colonies but very imperfectly, in as-much as they cannot restrain them from
breaking through those rules and regulations of exclusive trade, for the sake
of which all colonies seemed to have been originally founded. What then shall
we say in regard to such colonies as are the offspring of a free constitution?
And after what manner, and according to what rule, are our own in particular to
be governed, without using any force or compulsion, or pursuing any measure
repugnant to their own ideas of civil or religious liberty? In short, and to
sum up all in one word, how shall we be able to render these colonies more
subservient to the interests, and more obedient to the laws and government of
the mother country, than they voluntarily choose to be? After having pondered
and revolved the affair over and over, I confess there seems to me to be but
the five following proposals which can possibly be made, viz.

First, To suffer things to go on for a while as they have lately done, in
hopes that some favorable opportunity may offer for recovering the
jurisdiction of the British legislature over her colonies, and for maintaining
the authority of the mother country; or, if these temporizing measures should
be found to strengthen and confirm the evil instead of removing it, then,

Secondly, To attempt to persuade the colonies to send over a certain number of
deputies, or representatives, to sit and vote in the British parliament, in
order to incorporate America and Great Britain into one common empire; or, if
this proposal should be found impracticable, whether on account of the
difficulties attending it on this side the Atlantic, or because that the
Americans themselves would not concur in such a measure; then,

Thirdly, to declare open war against them as rebels and revolters; and after
having made a perfect conquest of the country, then to govern it by military
force and despotic sway; or if this scheme should be judged (as it ought to be)
the most destructive, and they least eligible of any; then,

Fourthly, To propose to consent that America shall become the general seat of
empire, and that Great Britain and Ireland should be governed by viceroys sent
over from the court-residencies either at Philadelphia or New York, or at some
other American imperial city; or, if this plan of accommodation should be
illdigested by home-born Englishmen, who, I will venture to affirm, would never
submit to such an indignity; then,

Fifthly, to propose to separate entirely from the colonies, by declaring them
to be a free and independent people, over whom we lay no claim, and then by
offering to guarentee this freedom and independence against all foreign
invaders whomsoever.

Now, these being all the plans which, in the nature of things, seem capable of
being proposed, let us examine each of them in their order.

I shall not need myself to accompany the Dean throughout this examination, in
order to point out the fatal policy of attempting, and total impracticability
of executing, any one of the four first of these schemes, since he has done it
so effectually himself as to need no assistance. But though I agree with him in
the result, that they are all both impolitic and impracticable, yet I differ
widely from him in several arguments introduced in the discussion, and no less
in the fundamental principles he frequently argues from. When he talks of the
mother country governing 'in the manner she ought to do;' (p. 18) and according
to the original terms of the constitution, I presume we are to understand the
constitution to be some one individual contract between the mother country and
her race of colonies, some certain deed signed and sealed between them and her
in due form. Is this the same constitution he told us of in p. 94, of which
Magna Charta was the basis? But if terms or conditions be the marks of our
constitution, it may indeed be a colony charter, a marriage act, a stamp act,
or, in short, any act of Parliament, or of the crown either, so that it will be
a matter of very little consequence, whether it have Magna Charta for its
basis, or any basis at all, besides that of the statute in being. Since he lays
so much stress on those original terms, by which the colonies are bound to
suffer their respectable mother to govern as he thinks she ought to do, let us
warn him not to rely too much upon analogical reasoning, since it is apt to
prove too much. If he means that Great Britain ought to be obeyed by her
colonies, because she is their mother, because she produced them, and gave them
their law, and that her contracts with them, when in their infancy ought to
bind them forever, he would do well to remember, that no civil contract,
between a parent and an infant child, affecting the future property of that
child, can possibly have any validity, because of the child's being, at the
time, in the power of the parent; because it dares not object to it, it cannot
reject any terms she may please to dictate. I need not tell our author, that in
the eye of the law, and agreeable to the spirit of the constitution, such a
contract is esteemed no better than a fraud, or an act of the grossest tyranny.

Before I take my final leave of the four first of our author's proposals, I
must make two observations upon what appears on the face of them. In the first
place, let me request the reader to mark attentively the obvious sentiment, the
unambiguous language of the second proposal. When the Dean is off his guard,
and when the mistaken principles he adopted, respecting the sovereignty of
parliament over America, are for a moment out of sight, see how naturally, how
unavoidably he allows all I contend for! -- Here he admits, by direct and
unavoidable implication, that parliament has not the rights of sovereignty
over America; he admits, that America is not a part of the British empire, or
he could not possibly propose to atempt to persuade the colonies to send
representatives to sit in the British parliament, in order to incorporate
America and Great Britain into one common empire. In the next place, I want to
know, when, under the idea of an union, he has proposed to consent, that the
seat of empire be transferred from Great Britain to America, why every
home-born Englishman should consider it as such an indignity, -- The answer is
plain, because he would become a slave; and while America shall be governed at
Westminister, the Americans will be slaves. If our dignity consist in governing
other nations against their wills, it is a dignity we ought to be ashamed of;
but if it be the genuine offspring, and the associate of our liberty and
independence, in God's name let our American kindred enjoy it as well as
ourselves.

We now come to the consideration of the Dean's fifth and last proposal of an
amicable and friendly separation, concerning which he very justly demands p.
50, and, in fact, what is all this but natural, and even the necessary
corollary to be deduced from each of the former reasons and observations? For,
if we neither can govern the Americans, nor be governed by them; if we can
neither unite with them, nor ought to subdue them, what remains, but to part
with them on as friendly terms as we can? This proposal, and the invincible
arguments in its support, make ample amends for all the errors in the foregoing
parts of his work. He shows himself to be master of this part of his subject;
and it cannot be too much recommended to those whom I address in these letters,
and to the people in general, to make themselves well acquainted with what he
advances. His much superior knowledge of our American commerce, places the good
policy of a separation from America in a much stronger point of light than it
was in my power to have done: but I flatter myself, I have sufficiently proved,
that we could not have kept that country in subjection without being tyrants.
When justice and policy both point the same way, nothing but determined
wickedness, or a wilful blindness can occasion us to take a wrong course. With
the favor of the reader, I must here repeat one of the first observations I
made on the Dean's work, as it strikes me afresh with redoubled force every
time I consider it, and and that is, that the proposed declaration of the
independence of America, is a conclusion in direct opposition to his original
premises. In his abstract reasonings on government, and the relation of
colonies to the parent state, he falls -- the common fate of genius on flippery
abstract ground, into an error in fundamentals, laying it down as a principle,
that 'parliament has the rights of sovereignty over America;' and
consequently, that 'America is actually a part of the British empire.'

These are the principles he sets out upon; but behold the result of all his
subtle, all his labored reasonings! -- At the end of a second work upon the
subject, and after exhausting the chaotic treasuries of sophistry for arguments
in support of these principles, he concludes with a proposal to the
legislature, to declare that parliament does not claim these rights. Nay, but a
minute before, and, as I have observed when off his guard, he acknowledges that
parliament has not these rights, and even proposes 'to attempt to persuade the
colonies to agree to an union.' There is something too irreconcilable in the
idea as before remarked, of giving up one's rights, in order to promote one's
interest; but false principles will ever produce fallacious reasonings. How can
we possibly say more for an amicable separation from America, than that the
absolute necessity of it took, as it were by storm, a mind naturally strong and
vigorous, and fortified with all the powers of art against the attack! The
Dean, in journeying to the great, the imperial city of truth, whose eternal
foundations occupy a rock that overlooks the country around, unfortunately sets
off in a mist of prejudice.

Sometimes he takes a direct contrary course; sometimes intervals of a clearer
light keep him steady in the right road; but then again, as the density of the
mist either totally obstructs his view, or discovers truth in faint
glimmerings, he frequently deviates into bye paths and hollow ways, to the
danger of being lost, even when near his journey's end. At last, however the
sun of conviction bursts forth in meridian blaze, the mist is gone, and he
arrives at the eternal city. But after having thus proposed a separation, as
the the only means of living in peace and harmony with the colonies: and, after
having given reasons for it, in opposition to which, I must needs think no man
can remain an infidel, who is not at the same time an idiot; our author is, in
my opinion, far more faithless, far more hopeless, than at this time there
seems cause to be with regard to the execution of his plan. His plan I call it,
since he is for aught I know to the contrary, the first who has taken the
pains to propose it publicly, and to explain its advantages, although it has
been for some time past a common sentiment amongst discerning and liberalminded
men, and to propose it was the first motive to the writing, and the main drift
of these letters. It has been more particularly a common sentiment (for indeed
invention itself cannot hit on any other plausible expedient) ever since the
late noble and indignant conduct (1) of the Americans in defense of their
almost-undermined liberty, as this affords a sufficient demonstration to all
intelligent minds, in which the love of liberty and justice retained their
influence, that the time is come, that they are determined to be independent of
Great Britain, whether it be with her consent or not.

'I frankly acknowledge,' says our author, p. 63, I propose no present
convenience or ad-advantage to either administration or anti-administration;
nay, I firmly believe, that no minister, as things are now circumstanced, will
dare to do so much good to his country: whereas I, on my part, firmly believe,
that Lord North is the minister who dares to do this great good to his country.
He took the helm in a storm, when no other minister was to be found who could
guide it; and he has given us throughout his administration, very ample proofs
of his intrepidity? Are we not, at this moment under a general consternation at
what may be the consequences of his intrepidity? Shall he dare in a single act
that has no precedent, to shock this whole nation? Shall he dare to hurl a rash
and misguided vengeance on the town of Boston, and bid a bold defiance to all
America, and yet want courage to adopt a measure of the greatest wisdom and
goodness; a measure which, to execute, he may esteem the glory of his life? The
idea is too contradictory for a character so consistent as his.

There are conjunctures in the affairs of kingdoms when none but an intrepid
statesman can stem a headlong torrent of popular zeal, or avert a gathering
storm which threatens his authority. If the urgent necessity of the case shall
not admit of temperate measures, but shall demand a daring act of temporary
violence, such a statesman, if he be wise and virtuous also, will avail himself
of the short-lived calm that succeeds the conflict, and before the discontents
of the people can break forth afresh with redoubled and irresistible
impetuosity, he will effectually remove them, by removing their causes, and by
giving them a security against future alarms. I hope that the late bill (2)
will prove only a temporary violence, and that these moments, which are
generally thought to be a sullen calm, foreboding some dreadful political
convulsion, may be pregnant with more salutary measures and plans of peace (3)
The remembrance of it will, in a moment, be done away, when Great Britain shall
once have done justice to the Americans, by an open declaration of their
independence, and by offering them her friendship. Our mutual jealousies will
be buried in oblivion, and, as the Dean foretells, the Americans will then
consider us as their protectors, mediators, benefactors.

NOTES, etc. to LETTER IX.
(1) The Boston Port Bill.

(2) Notwithstanding the act for the better regulating the government of the
Massachusetts Bay, and notwithstanding the Quebec Act, I will not yet part with
my hope, that the eyes of the legislature will soon be opened; and that these
acts, as well as the other, will only prove temporary acts of violence. They
have all been passed before the minds of the ministers have had time to cool.

(3) I would not have the reader imagine, I mean to justify every tarring and
feathering rioter at Boston, and all disorderly proceedings in America
indiscriminately. Some of the people, I doubt not, may have been to blame; for
the commonalty of that country must have had a portion of wisdom and patience,
which has not at any time before been found in the world, had all their
expressions of resentment for ill usage, been confined within the bounds of
moderation. When governors become tyrants, shall we wonder, that an injured and
insulted people become riotous and unruly! Have ambitious and encroaching
rulers ever yet thought of rendering satisfaction, of making reparation, for
the cruellest injuries they have so constantly committed; and have they not
always thought themselves wonderfully gracious and condescending, when they
have merely ceased to oppress? but if a free people, finding their humble
petitions, and most dutiful remonstrances scattered to the winds with contempt,
being stung with a sense of accumulated wrongs, and feeling an indignation at
being treated like slaves and villains, do but assault the meanest miscreant in
the train of power; it is rebellion! felony! treason! Goals and gibbets, ball
and bayonet, must here be the correctives. Is this human polity! Are these the
proceedings of men, of fellow creatures, of fellow christians? When merely
ceasing to oppress, is all the reparation required for a long train of injuries
and insults; shall authority, with whom wisdom ought ever to reside, become
deaf to that voice which called her into being, and think it meritorious to
persist in doing wrong?

So universally have I heard the Bostonians condemned for destroying the tea,
and the action pronounced illegal and rebellious, that I have taken some pains
to examine all the particulars of that affair. Now, to my agreeable
disappointment, and to the best of my judgment, instead of an act of rebellion,
I find it one reflecting honor, and stamping the character of good subjects,
on those who performed it; instead of being illegal it appears to me to be
warranted by the law of nature, the great original of all human laws, when
just. Those who would wish to think justly, and to speak honestly of this
matter, will do well to examine for themselves. When they shall have so done,
with care and candor, and admitting on my part, for the sake of taking no
advantage in the argument, the Bostonian character to be as black as
malignantly represented, I should be glad to propose to them this plain
question: What was possible for the most wise and virtuous persons on earth, in
the place of the Bostonians, to have done, in order to have performed their
duty to the utmost toward God and their Country? -- To have shown a passive
obedience to an unjust act of parliament, in a case of such moment, and of so
critical a nature, would have been treason to their country, and therefore not
acceptable, I imagine, to God. I have introduced in various conversations, with
sensible men, the same question I here propose, but never yet, I can aver with
the strictest veracity, have I met with a solution of it, which did not confirm
me in an opinion, that as wise and virtuous men, as good citizens, and true
patriots, they could not possibly have acted otherwise than as they did.

They had only this one alternative; they were driven to this dilemma by their
magistrates, either to suffer an insidious attempt against their sacred rights
and liberties to take effect, or to destroy the hated instrument. Having had no
other choice, they must necessarily have either done this, or suffered that.
Which ought to be have been chosen by every brave and honest man, I leave the
reader to determine. It Is visionary, even to childishness, to say, they might
have permitted the tea to have been landed, and yet have defeated the tax, by
unanimously refusing to have purchased it. The conductors of that noble action
must have been patriots indeed, and most wonderfully wise, to have left their
country, by going this way to work, at the discretion and mercy of the most
ignorant and vicious of its inhabitants, to have relied upon the prudence and
self-denial of every tea-drinker in America! Besides that the wisdom of each
well-meaning individual was not to be depended on for foreseeing all the ill
consequences of purchasing a pound of tea, nor their resolution in preventing
them; I fear there might have been some traitors to the public cause, some
tools of government or the India Company, or some suspected persons at least,
in whom to have confided, for not setting the example, and using all their
cunning to seduce others, would not have argued any extraordinary degree of
prudence.

What teacher of morals or politics, ever was lunatic enough to build all his
hopes of serving his country, on an expectation of bringing every individual of
it to be of one mind, and as unanimously to act up to the same rigid principle
of virtue? and which of us would care to risk the safety of the city of London
from some dreadful calamity, on a confidence that every female, from the fine
lady to the washerwoman, every man, from the minister of state down to the
blackguard, might be prevailed upon totally to abstain from the use of tea,
porter, or gin, except the temptation was removed out of their way.

To all my readers, except those unhappy ones, who have learned the fatal art
of occasionally closing the mental eye, so as to admit just so much, and no
more of the light of truth as their passions and prejudices will bear; I must
needs think, it would be reflecting upon their understandings and their
ingenuousness, to attempt any farther proof of my proposition, that the
Bostonians did what was strictly consonant to right and justice in destroying
the tea; but, in order to open the self-closed, winking eyes of the prejudiced,
I will propose one more comparison, which, I apprehend, will be admitted as a
fair one, since it is agreed on all hands, except by the calm advancers of
direct falsehoods and lies, and the bold denyers of demonstration, that with
regard to taxation, the colonists, as legitimate shoots from a parent stock of
freedom, have at least an equal right to be their own tax-masters as the people
of Ireland, which was a conquered, and every one knows, a very rebellious
kingdom for many ages.

Let then the reader only substitute Ireland and Dublin, for Massachusett's-Bay
and Boston, and try the cause over again in his own mind. If he pleases, we
will suppose, that instead of a duty on tea, we should attempt to touch the
pockets of the Irish, by a duty on certain stamped papers, being publications
of gross immoralities and blasphemies, tending to debauch the minds of the
people, and fit them for slavery; and that an assocation of honest citizens of
Dublin, more mindful of their duty to God and their country, than of obedience
to an ordinance they held to be subversive of their liberties, should find this
precious cargo, precisely in a similar situation with the tea at Boston; that
the Lord Mayor, the magistrates, and revenue myrmidons, like the Boston
governor and officers of Customs, should all absolutely refuse their permission
and clearances for its departure from the port, and the ship should be well
imprisoned by surrounding batteries; then, what is to be done? what course is
to be pursued? Shall those, who ought to be the guides and guardians of the
city, admit these pernicious compositions within their walls; patiently behold
them displayed in the shops, hawked about the streets, and dispersed throughout
the country, with every art of invitation to those inclined to purchase?

Is the city to be deluged with these impieties, and it is manners, morals, and
liberties undermined, rather than an united company of merchants trading in
mischief should lose their property? a property not only detrimental in itself,
but in this case made a venture, with the direct intention of betraying a brave
and generous nation into obedience to a despotic ordinance, containing in it
the seeds of a more complete tyranny, and used as the most tempting bait to
lure the silly multitude into the political mousetrap; and therefore, on the
principles of self-preservation, and agreeable to the spirit of the law of
nature and nations, subject to be destroyed, if not removed upon fair warning.
Are the city guardians, I say, to observe all this, and content themselves all
the while with a patriotic resolve, not to buy or to read a single paper, and
with preaching to the unlistening people to follow their example? If this, in
the enlightened and virtuous city of Dublin, would be an experiment, that even
a driveller would hardly dream of making; how much less safe would it have been
for the American patriots to have hazarded their all, on the universal good
sense, on the piety and public spirit of the people, in the stupid, the
hypocritical, the impious, the ungrateful, and rebellious town of Boston!

What then, I once more ask, ought the patriots of Dublin or of Boston to have
done? What! but with indignation to have cast the hated instrument of tyranny
into the sea! whither its proprietors deserved also to have followed it
headlong. Is it for this wise, brave, and generous action, that not only the
actors of it, but the whole people of Boston, are now smarting under the
heaviest vengeance of Great Britain! of a people who have hitherto justly
prided themselves in being the undaunted resisters of tyrants! Fie, boasters,
fie! Britannia blushes for your degeneracy; she disowns ye for her sons. When a
pawnbroker knowingly puts arms into the hands of a highwayman or ruffian, does
any law insure to him payment for the same, at the hands of any one who being
assaulted, seized and destroyed them? Are not all deadly weapons, all snares,
traps, and poisons, made use of in violation to the laws of civil society, for
injuring any man in life, limb, or property, a lawful spoil to the injured
party? When the miscreant, pick-pocket Jew, in the service of iniquity, was
once driving a trade amongst the Westminster schoolboys, with a parcel of TEA,
out of the green cannister of the celebrated Mrs. Phillips, who, that had a
spark of virtuous indignation, but applauded the illegal proceedings of the
spirited master, when, disregarding the laws of property, he threw into the
fire all of this tea he could lay his hands on; and, as little confidering the
penalties for an assault, horsed the vile factor, and scourged him to the quick?

I must therefore repeat, that the destroyers of the tea at Boston were, in my
opinion, a band of virtuous patriots, whose names, when once made public, will
doubtless be held in eternal veneration by their countrymen; and that the
glorious illegality (if every statute, whether just or unjust, be properly
comprehended in the word law) they achieved, was an act of absolute moral and
political necessity, and therefore exempt from even good laws; of singular
wisdom, of strict justice, and remarkable temper and forbearance, considering
their provocations since it was done in self-defence, with the greatest good
order and decency, and unaccompanied with incivility to any one, or the
smallest damage to any thing in the ships besides the treacherous tea. I must
likewise repeat, that this tea, for the reasons I have given, and agreeable to
the spirit of the law of nature and nations, was justly forfeited to the
injured Americans; and that the East India Company are not entitled to any
satisfaction or payment for the same.

LETTER X.
April 14, 1774.
NOTHING now remains to be spoken of but the act of parliament necessary to
that separation, proposed by the reverend author of the tracts, and seconded in
these letters; and that General treaty between Great Britain and the states of
America, which will be the necessary, and doubtless the immediate consequence
of it. When Parliament shall have duly weighed this great, this important
matter, -- the greatest by far that ever came before any national council
whatever! -- with the attention it merits, and in the temper recommended in my
first letter, we may hope to see a nemine contradicente act, whose preamble
shall run in some such form as the following viz.

Whereas, at the time of the original planting and settling of colonies on the
continent of North America by the people and the crown of these kingdoms; and
afterward, during the infancy of the said colonies, the future ill
consequences of their submission to, and acquiescence under the authority of
parliament were not, by reason of their then infant and dependent state, and
the general inexperience in matters of that kind, either foreseen or duly
attended to; and whereas, through the growing of these once small and helpless
colonies to maturity, and their becoming populous, opulent and respectable
states, having each within itself the natural rights and proper powers of
legislation, the exercise of parliamentary authority has been found to clash
in the most essential points with their respective internal legislatures, and
has tended for a considerable time past, but more particularly of late years,
to create dissatisfactions between the said internal legislatures and
parliament, and between the people of the said colonies and the people of these
kingdoms; and whereas these matters having been taken into consideration, and
it appearing upon the principles of natural justice, and agreeable to the
established maxims of civil government, that it is inconsistent with the
welfare of the people of the said colonies or states, and prejudicial to their
natural inherent rights as men, to be governed by the parliament of
Great Britain, or any other power foreign to themselves respectively: be it
therefore enacted, etc. In the enumeration of their names, none of them
(fifteen, I think, lying between the Gulf of St. Lawrence and the mouth of the
Mississippi) will, I hope, be omitted, but those obtained partly by war and
treaty inserted as well as the rest; and that in the clause, it shall be fully
expressed, that they are all held and declared to be free and independent
states, each to be subject to such law and government only as now subsists, or
shall hereafter be enacted and constituted within itself by its own proper
legislature; and that of each and every of the said independent states, his
Majesty is, and shall be held to be the sovereign head, in like manner as he is
of the legislature of Great Britain. In another clause, I could wish it might
likewise be expressed, that the parliament of Great Britain does farther
declare itself to be the guardian and protector of the whole, and of every of
the said states or colonies, collectively and individually, against every
foreign power whatsoever, as well as the guarantee of the independence of the
said several colonies or states, one of another respectively and reciprocally,
as well also of the rights and independencies of the several tribes or nations
of Indians in amity with, or under the protection of the crown of these
kingdoms, until these points shall be more particularly adjusted by treaty.
Another clause would probably provide, that commissioners on the part of the
parliament of Great Britain, shall be empowered to enter into treaty with
deputies of the legislatures of each of the said colonies or states, in order
that a firm, brotherly, and perpetual league may be concluded between
Great Britain and them for their mutual commercial benefit, and their joint
security against all other kingdoms and states, as well as for the preservation
of that warm affection and harmony which ought ever to subsist between a mother
country and her offspring, or kindred states, equally acknowledging one perfect
constitution and one perfect religion, as their rule of life in temporals and
in spirituals. The commissioners will be nominated of course. Other
declarations and provisions may be contained in this act, as parliament shall
see good; but we should hope, as an indispensible requisite toward the
security of the general liberties, that it be enacted, that no part of the
revenue of any one of the said American states shall, by his Majesty, his
viceroy, or ministers, be removed out of, or received into, any other of the
said states, or into Great Britain for his Majesty's use; and that in like
manner, no part of the revenue of these kingdoms, shall be remitted to America
on that account; but that the revenue of Great Britain, and of each respective
state in America, shall be wholly and solely applied to defray the expenses of
government, and maintain the regal dignity in that country in which it shall be
raised, and no other.

Although, by those unhappy persons, who have no just ideas of right and wrong,
and who have not intellects for perceiving, that the original power of
Great Britain over her colonies, is on the point of expiring beyond all help
and remedy, parliament may be supposed to be a loser by the proposed
separation; yet all must confess that his Majesty will be a gainer, inasmuch as
he will thereby receive fifteen independent kingdoms in exchange for as many
dependent, and hardly dependent provinces, and become the father of three
millions of free and happy subjects, instead of reigning joint tyrant over so
many discontented slaves, or losing by revolt so many of his people. What a
divine glow of satisfaction must expand the royal bosom on an event so full of
bliss, so consonant to humanity and to virtue! -- an event more full of real
luster -- more aggrandizing by many degrees than ever before was experienced by
any earthly monarch -- How poor, how contemptible, how hateful the triumphs of
butchering conquerors compared to this solid glory! May such a transcendant
glory, be the glory of George the third.

We must not be surprised if shallow and designing men, some with real, some
with affected ignorance, should cry out, What! enter into treaty with fifteen
independent states, and expect them unanimously to join with you in one general
league for mutual advantage and security! How chimerical and visionary the
project! (1) And I do not doubt, but that the swarm of hireling and prostitute
scribblers, whose food is confusion, and whose very existence, like the vermin
in an ulcer, is supported by the diseases of the state, will pour forth all
their malignity, in order to discredit, and to damn if possible, a plan so wise
and salutary. But their baneful influence will not, I trust, extend itself
farther than to disturb, for a short time, the confused minds of our
coffee-house politicians.

It will still be obvious to all sensible men, especially to those who compose
the national council, that when Great Britain shall have done the noblest act
of justice toward the Americans, that the annals of mankind can produce, they
will, as one man, fly to her for protection, court her friendship, submit
themselves to her advice, and be ready to put into her hands a chart blanch;
and so long as she continues to act upon the same principles, she may
undoubtedly influence each separate state, and dictate the terms of general
accommodation without any fear of even future dissatisfactions. To deny these
conclusions, would be to deny that effects follow their causes.

The author of the tracts has already proved, that it is not our power, but the
superior advantage of our trade, which secures to us the commerce of the
Americans, or that can secure it to us. We shall still have the same power to
awe America into a faithful observance of her treaties, that we now have, to
enforce a disputed and odious sovereignty, and with this manifest advantage,
that treating with each state separately, we shall only have one at a time to
contend with; whereas we have experienced by our stamp and tea projects, that
while we pretend to govern the whole, the whole will unite to resist us.

That bond of union once dissolved, and the natural and necessary jealousy of
each other taking place, Great Britain, as the common umpire, will become in
effect the general sovereign, so long as she interposes her good offices for
maintaining the common independence; and this her own interest will always
dictate. Great Britain, will of course take care, in the first place, to
recover all her debts in America, which, instead of bad debts, as they are now
too justly esteemed to be, will, in the transports of their gratitude for a
declared and guaranteed independence, be punctually paid, though with their
last shilling. Not to mention that fear of offending, (for Great Britain will
then become truly formidable to each separate state) would effectually produce
this effect we shall, by the league secure on the most lasting foundation,
every advantage of trade with America we now enjoy, and by the separation
relieve ourselves from many heavy expenses it now costs us; for a proof of
which, I again refer to the Dean's work: we may then disband so much of our
expensive and unconstitutional standing army, as we now keep up on account of
America; and instead of being execrated, as we now are, for that fleet which
blocks up their ports, and is commissioned to humble Boston to the dust, and
through her sides, to gall every province on the continent, they will readily
consent to its presence for seeing to the exact fulfilling of their treaties,
and they will then look upon it with a friendly* an affectionate and respectful
eye, while they consider it as their sure protector against invasion, their
refuge in distress, and the avenger of their wrongs. -- Not being able to pay
Great Britain in subsidies of ready money for her protection and friendship,
they will grant her an equivalent in exclusive trade; and they will enter into
some general stipulation for the mode and the measure of payment for any such
extraordinary assistance of ships as they may at any time solicit, or we,
penetrating the designs of our common enemies, may send to their assistance.

As for troops, a country containing millions of inhabitants, never can want
any: let them rely upon the natural, the best resource -- a national militia;
but, for heaven's sake! never more let the face of a British soldier be seen in
North America.

A Flanders or a Germany, on the other side of the globe would be a grave wide
enough to swallow the whole strength and treasure of this kingdom. The
Americans are in no condition to set themselves up as a maritime power, or to
support a navy fit to guard their own coasts, but must rely upon Great Britain
for their safety by sea, as indeed it will ever be their interest so to do,
knowing by experience, that with regard to them, she is not a conquering, but a
commercial state; and having reason to conclude, that a confederacy of their
maritime states would probably terminate, like that of Greece, in wars upon one
another, and be perverted to answer the ends of ambition to some one, instead
of protection to all. After what has been said, I need not point out (but for
the sake of my timid and uninformed reader) that it will be totally
unnecessary, and unbecoming the dignity of parliament, to hesitate a moment in
passing the act of declaration, for fear the Americans should not afterward
consent to the league. It Is absurd to imagine they will act in contradiction to
the principles of self interest and self-preservation, merely because they
shall be free from control; nor is it more possible to conceive, how they
should object to a treaty with Great Britain, merely because she had just done
them an act of magnanimity and generosity unparallelled in history, and given
them an undeniable proof, that she was entitled to their unbounded confidence,
particularly in its not being possible she should have any design upon their
liberties. Besides Great Britain, until she have resigned her assumed
sovereignty as the mother country, cannot, on the principles of equity, as
before illustrated, give any validity to a contract with her children, while
held in subjection to her authority. No! the generous spirit that shall set
them free, will disdain the meanness of a proceeding so little and so
distrustful; and that wisdom which could form so comprehensive a plan, will
despise the crookedness and folly of such a narrow policy.

Thus have I given a faint sketch of the many and great benefits of an American
league -- the reader's imagination and judgment will finish the picture. If
then he can think, that they do not infinitely preponderate against the
advantages to be hoped for from persisting to assert our odious sovereignty,
and plundering the colonies by arbitrary tax-gathers, I have only to say, that
he and I can scarcely be made of the same common materials of humanity; but I
shall begin to listen to those profound sages, whose acute penetration,
assisted by a certain microscopic species of philosophy, has discovered, that
the Mosaic revelation is a fable, and that, instead of one, there are indeed
many different races of men. On the one hand, the most we can expect is a
forced and reluctant submission, with some advantages in trade; but these even
for a very, very short period. Mean while, discontent and detestation, brooding
in the bosoms of the colonists, will naturally generate a rancorous hate and
abhorrence; which, aided by our restless enemies the French, will shortly
terminate in defiance and revenge. On the other hand -- but repetition is
needless. In short, the multiplying millions of America, must either be our
deadly foes, or our steadfast friends. Great Britain, take thy choice!

What remains, but that we renew our appeal to the manly sense and magnanimity
of the great council of this kingdom; a kingdom, great and happy above all the
kingdoms of the earth; a council the most august in the whole world, as nursed
in the bosom of freedom, and trained in the true principles of just government
and pure religion, of which they are the guardians! If men, thus favored of
heaven, thus enlightened, thus elevated, shall not set examples of sterling
virtue, where, alas! shall we find it? Consult then your own hearts, ye
legislators of Great Britain! Be true to your own feelings, and let the moral
sense prevail. If ye are conscious of a love of power, know that it is the
genuine offspring of the love of liberty. This the root, that the branch. If
your hearts be held in the curling branch's close embrace, think how, in the
hearts of all men, the tenacious root strikes to the bottom, and twines it is
clasping sibres around the very springs of life, never to lose their hold!

Remember that ye are now to decide on the fate of nations -- perhaps your own.
Remember the great legislator beholds your doings. Be your doings like unto his
doings. Be tender to humanity; be firm to freedom; be inflexible to justice.
Emancipate in one god-like act, a long roll of nations, whose names it is
tedious to recount. In one act, lift up the well-pleasing name of Great Britain
to Heaven, and spread her matchless fame to the ends of the wondering earth.
The depth of her wisdom, the transcendency* of her virtue, shall be unexampled,
and this act remain a monument of her great felicity, an everlasting model of
justice, and a theme of praise to all nations, and to all ages. Potentates
have, unto dethroned Princes restored their ravished dominions; renowned
monarchs, sated with ambition, and the abuse of authority, have, in the
plenitude of their power, abdicated thrones; heroes and patriots have given
freedom to their native countries; but for the present legislators of
Great Britain was reserved the superior, the supreme glory of bestowing in a
foreign soil, liberty on millions!

NOTE, etc. to LETTER X.
(1) In order to obviate some objections, which, I foresee, both well meaning
and ill designing persons may be ready to offer to this part of my proposal,
let me observe to them, that this negotiation will not be attended with those
difficulties and embarrassments, which their imaginations or their artifice may
possibly suggest. We may presume, that our commissioners would have the
outlines of the proposed league ready sketched out, from the most approved
general regulations of the acts of trade and navigation, which now relate to
the colonies collectively, and taking in such other conditions as should be
evidently calculated for the mutual benefit of Great Britain and North America;
one as the planting, the other as the manufacturing country; one as the client,
the other as the patron. This general league might be very concise, compared
with national treaties in common; it might (...) extremely perspicuous, and so
clearly established on principles of equity and common advantage* as to leave
the American depaties without a pretense, or a desire to propose any but ^^^ght
alterations, and without a possibility of not acceding to it with the utmost
readiness and satisfaction; and it is still less likely, there should be any
insuperable difficulties started by them, when they should come to enter into
their respective separate treaties.

How the trade of a colony can be limited, and its manufactures restricted by
the mother country, on the principles of justice, except with its own free
consent, I confess I have not eyes to discover. If it can be made appear, that
the British Parliament has a right to say to an American, you shall not make a
hat to cover your head, nor a shoe to defend your foot; you shall not
manufacture a piece of cloth to keep out the cold, nor a knife wherewithal to
cut your victuals; why, I pray, may it not likewise say, give us the money out
of your pocket? To obtain a little money may be thought, and by Mr. Grenville
and his disciples was thought, as convenient to the state, as the employment of
our manufacturers.

Observing, that not only the unreasoning multitude, but the members in both
houses of Parliament, minority as well as majority, not even excepting the
honest opposers of American taxation, all seemed to agree, that Great Britain
has a right to bind the colonies by her regulations and restrictions in and
upon their trade, navigation and manufactures; I, for a long time, suffered my
own reason to be borne down, and my feelings suppressed by the weight of such
respectable, though not infallible authority; but, the self evident
fallaciousness of this proposition for ever recurring upon me, and striking my
mind with redoubled force every time I considered it, I was at last obliged to
yield to the force of an irresistible internal conviction, and to reject that
doctrine as erroneous, and as a national prejudice, arising from precedents,
established by the mother country, when her children were helpless new born
babes, and carefully instilled into their minds while growing up, as among the
sacred precepts of filial piety; from the self-flattering and self-interested
suggestions of British minds; and from the general acknowledgement of the
Americans themselves. One of their judicious and truly patriotic writers
(before referred to p. 30. in a note to the first letter) on this head,
expresses himself thus: -- Great Britain has prohibited the manufacturing iron
and steel in these colonies, without any objection to her right of doing it.
The like right she must have to prohibit any other manufacture among us. Thus
she is possessed of an undisputed preceaent on that point. This authority, she
will say, is founded on the original intention of settling these colonies; that
is, that she should manufacture for them, and that they should supply her with
materials. The equity of this policy, she will also say, has been universally
acknowledged by the colonies, who never have made the least objection to
statutes for that purpose; and will further appear, by the mutual benefits
slowing from this usage, ever since the settlement of these colonies.

Our great advocate, Mr, Pit, in his speeches on the debate, concerning the
repeal of the stamp act, acknowledged, that Great Britain could restrain our
manufactures. His words are these: -- This kingdom, as the supreme governing
and legislative power, [even this great man has not got over the little idea
of nations remaining in perpetual subjection to nations from which they sprang]
has ALWAYS bound the colonies by her regulations and RESTRICTIONS in trade, in
navigation, in MANUFACTURES, in every thing, except that of taking the money
out of their pockets, WITHOUT THEIR CONSENT. Again, he says, we may bind their
trade, CONFINE THEIR MANUFACTURES, and exercise every power whatever, except
that of taking their money out of their pockets, WITHOUT THEIR CONSENT. [These
are pretty large concessions to the pride and ambition of Great Britain, and
yet she is not satisfied with them.] Here then, my dear countrymen, ROUSE
youselves, and behold the ruin hanging over your heads. If you ONCE admit, that
Great Britain may lay duties upon her exportations to us, for the purpose of
levying money on us only, she will then have nothing to do, but to lay those
duties on the articles which she prohibits us to manufacture, -- and the
tragedy of American liberty is finished. We have been prohibited from procuring
manufactures, in all cases any where, but from Great Britain, (except linens,
which we are permitted to import directly from Ireland.) We have been
prohibited, in some cases, from manufacturing for ourselves, and may be
prohibited in others. We are, therefore, exactly in the situation of a city
besieged, which is surrounded by the works of the besiegers in every part but
one. If that is closed up, no step can be taken, but to surrender at
discretion, If Great Britain can order us to come to her for necessaries we
want, and can order us to pay what taxes she pleases before we take them away,
or when we land them here, we are as abject slaves as France or Poland can show
in wooden shoes and with uncombed hair.

Perhaps the nature of the necessities of dependent states, caused by the
policy of a governing one, for her own benefit, may be elucidated by a fact
mentioned in history. When the Carthaginians were possessed of the island of
Sardinia, they made a decree, that the Sardinians should not raise corn, nor
get it any other way than from the Carthaginians. Then, by imposing any taxes
they would upon it, they drained from the miserable Sardinians any sums they
pleased; and whenever that oppressed people made the least movement to assert
their liberty, their tyrants starved them to death, or submission.

But why, I want to know, are the colonies to be held for ever in the situation
of cities besieged? Why is the mother country to be the sole judge of such
restrictions as may be consistent with the original intention of settling
colonies; seeing that this original intention was not, in some cases, the
intention of the legislature, but the intention of the emigrants themselves,
when they fled from persecution, misery, and want, to take shelter in the more
friendly wilds of America? Why are the selfish and arbitrary terms prescribed
by one party, to be implicitly received by the other, in a commercial affair of
mutual concern, and professed by the dictating party, to be for their mutual
advantage? Voluntary consent and agreement, independent bargain and contract,
are in the very essence of all equitable dealings in trade. I presume the
Americans may be as good judges, as the people who ridiculously assume the
right of judging for them, what it is their advantage to restrict themselves to
in manufactures and trade; and will be ready to take care to confine themselves
to such branches, as will be most consistent with that first political maxim,
of securing at all events, the protection of Great Britain, and her valuable
trade, from which they have benefits to expect, that no other European market
can yield them. To acknowledge their independency, and to form with them a
friendly league, is therefore the only method, on the principles of equity, of
laying them under restrictions in trade and manufactures, for the exclusive
advantage of their protectors; but continuing to impose these restrictions by
our own authority and by force, as it deeply affects them in their property, by
preventing money coming into their pockets, (which is very nearly allied, when
done unjustly, to taking it out of their pockets without their consent) is
undoubtedly tyrannical.

When our legislators, and others, divesting themselves of every selfish and
arbitrary bias, (the characteristics of little and uncultivated minds) and
guarding against all suggestions, but those of truth, justice, and benevolence,
shall have duly reflected on this very important question, I flatter myself
they will perceive the wisdom of our anticipating the Americans in a candid
discussion of it, and will agree with me, in sentiment, that America cannot*
according to any ideas of justice or freedom, be laid under restrictions of any
kind, for the purpose of strengthening and aggrandizing the state or
legislature of Great Britain, except with her free will and consent,
independently and voluntarily given by express stipulation and contract; and
consequently, that they will see the moral as well as the political necessity,
for the proposed DECLARATION and LEAGUE; and that, in fact, it remains for
Great Britain to choose, whether by acting the deaf and haughty tyrant, she
shall sink herself into poverty and contempt, or, by a conduct worthy herself
and her boasted knowledge, and love of freedom, she shall render herself, not
only the all-powerful guarantee of the independence, and monopolizer of the
trade of America, but at the same time the dreaded, the dictatorial arbiter of
Europe.

FINIS.
The following Extract from the Monthly Review, being all that is at present
attainable, will perhaps gratify some Readers.
If any GENTLEMAN, possessed of the English second Edition of this Pamphlet,
will be so obliging, as to favor the Printer ROBERT BELL with it, for a few
days only, he will thereby render an essential service to the cause of LIBERTY
and LITERATURE in AMERICA.

AMERICAN Independence the interest and Glory of Great Britain. A New Edition,
To which is added a copious Appendix, containing two additional Letters to the
Legislature; a Letter to Edmund Burke, Esquire controverting his Principles of
American Government. And a Postscript, containing new Agruments on the Subject;
a Draught of a Bill proposed to be brought into Parliament for restoring Peace
and Harmony between Great Britain and British America, and for perpetuating the
same. Together with the essential Materials for a proposed grand British League
and Confederacy, to be entered into by Great Britain and all the States of
British America: The whole of which shows beyond Denial or Doubt, that by
granting the Colonists an unrestrained civil Freedom and legislative
Independence we may most effectually secure their future commercial Dependence
upon, and consequently shall best promote the Interest, and support the Glory,
of Great Britain. Octavo, price 2s. 6d. sterling 1775.

Of the former edition of this performance an account was given in our Review
for November last. Respecting the Appendix, it may be proper to observe, that
in the letter to Mr. Burke our Author's general opinions of the right of the
Colonists are applied in opposition to the arguments which had been alleged to
support the American Declaratory Act. The proposed Bill for rendering the
Colonies independent of the legislative authority of Parliament is founded on
those principles of which we before gave a general account; but the particular
application of them in the 'draught' before us well deserves consideration. The
latter part of the Postscript contains several important additional proposals,
respecting the future administration of government in the several states, as
parts of the proposed 'Grand British League and Confederacy,' among which we
shall extract the following:

"And for the more effectually preserving the future balance of power between
all the states of that immense continent, might it not be expedient that the
limits and boundaries of each, which they should never hereafter pass, should
be newly defined by the Grand British League and Confederacy; and some of their
nominal interior boundaries now lying very far within the wilderness, be
changed for others at a nearer distance? -- For the same good purpose and other
apparent good reasons, might not the remainder of the wilderness be partitioned
out into certain determinate and limited tracts, according to soil and
situation; each of which should be considered as the territory of some future
state which in process of time might be therein directed. And I would propose
that no interruption should be given to the growing of such new states (other
than every government has a right to give by wholesome laws within itself to
prevent as much as may be a spirit or practice of emigration;) but that until
the settlers within any such partitioned tract of the wilderness should be
increased and multiplied to the number of fifty thousand souls, they should be
considered as incapable of forming an independent political state* and be
subject for the intermediate time to the government of Great Britain. But as
soon as their numbers should amount to fifty thousand (...) as aforesaid, they
should be entitled and free to erect themselves into an independent political
state* and to constitute for their own government such a legislative power as
they should judge most proper; provided only that they acknowledged the King of
Great Britain as their lawful sovereign, that they made the protestant faith
the established religion of the country, and consented to become a party to the
Grand British League and Consederacy."

"During the short space of time indeed that remains of that winter's day, to
the evening of which we may hope to continue the despotic lords of
North America, those immense divisions of country we have affected to make by
our charters and by act of parliament on a late memorable occasion, may, like
all other arbitrary compendiums, be convenient to us, so long as we determine
to continue arbitrary rulers; or it might hereafter be favorable to the
ambition of some one American state hungering to swallow up its neighbors, to
have its territory like that of the ambitious Catherine reaching from the salt
ocean to the fresh water seas in midland, and thence to the salt ocean again
quite across the vast continent; but in neither case would it be desirable or
good for the people of those countries."

"Nations are most free and happy when their extremities are near enough to the
vital seat of government to feel its pervading principle in its full warmth and
activity, and by the spring of of their own re-action to pour into the heart
again full-flowing tides of health, life, and vigor. On these principles I
should wish to see the North American states arranged back to back like
habitations in a well built city, leaving those yet to rise into being to front
the lakes and great rivers St. Lawrence and Mississippi, as the present ones do
the Atlantic sea. We have already enumerated in the foregoing draught for an
act of parliament eighteen states already formed; and by such a division of the
remaining country by the grand confederacy as we have proposed, provision might
be made for the future gradual and quiet establishment of nineteen more at
least, all of ample extent, and every one having a very considerable frontier
accessible to shipping and upon waters which are at this time navigated by the
British navy."

"Thus each of these numerous states, by the same means that would enable it
through commerce to become a respectable member of the grand British
confederacy, would be effectually subject to the control and influence of
Great Britain, their common maritime protector and umpire, so necessary for
preserving the harmony of the whole. According to this system no state
adjoining to the two great rivers should possess the shores on both sides; as
navigations of such magnitude and importance should be always boundaries and
frontier."

END OF THE EXTRACT.
Character of the Work from the ENGLISH Monthly REVIEWERS.
THESE Letters were published (in London) a few months since. The Writer
considers the American Cololonies as distinct independent States. His arguments
are chiefly derived from the spirit of our Constitution, and the liberal
principles of reason and equity, on which he contends, that communities
governed by a power in which they have neither control or participation, are
in a state of slavery. -- That the freedom and happiness of a people supersede
every possible claim of government -- That mankind have a better right to
preserve their liberties than any power can have to abridge them -- That the
distance of the colonies renders it impossible to govern them by authority of
parliament, without subverting the principles of all free Governments.


