A DISCOURSE, The Substance of which was delivered at Hopkinton, on the
Lord's Day, March 24th, 1776, being the next Sabbath following the PRECIPITATE
FLIGHT Of the British Troops from BOSTON.

BY ELIJAH FITCH, A. M.

Published at the Request of the Hearers.

The wicked flee when no man pursues; but the righteous are bold as a lion.

SOLOMON. BOSTON: Printed by JOHN BOIL in Marlborough-Street. MDCCLXXVI.

PSALM xxxvii.12, 13. The Wicked plotteth against the Just, and gnasheth upon
him with his teeth: The Lord shall laugh at him; for he sees his day is coming.


MY HEARERS,
"TO day is the scripture fulfilled in our (...)" we have both heard of the
deep laid plots, the dark and cunning devices of those who once ruled over us,
to bring ruin and destruction upon this whole land; and have seen them
endeavoring to effect it; by tying our hands first with the cords of
oppression, that then, with the greater facility, they might fasten our feet in
the fetters of slavery. This is the plotting of the wicked against the just:
For although we have been a wicked people, and have deserved more than this
from the hands of a righteous God; yet from them we have deserved better
treatment: We never did them any wrong, as a people, but just and upright have
been our dealings.

WE have also seen them gnashing upon us with their teeth; as it were, wheting
their teeth, by preparing every instrument of cruelty and death possible to be
invented by them, to strike dread and terror into our hearts, to frighten, and
thereby bring us basely to submit to their unjust requisitions, which gnashing
of their teeth was accompanied with big threats, to spread destruction and
desolation over this whole land, if we refused to bow our necks, and would not
submissively take upon them the tyrant's yoke.

AND we have likewise seen them brought into derision; the Lord has laughed at
them, i. e. has hitherto tied their hands and greatly disappointed their
expectations; for, instead of driving all before them, and spreading desolation
and destruction far and wide, they have been confined within narrow bounds, the
small compass of a few miles has contained them for almost a year, sheltered
behind most strong fortifications and many large ships of war: But although
they were within fortresses, by nature and art rendered almost impregnable, yet
surprise has seized upon them in such a remarkable manner and to such a degree
as to cause them to leave their strong hold in the greatest hurry and
precipitation; and to flee for their lives, committing themselves to the sea
for safety. "This is the Lord's doing and is mavelous in our eyes." And it
becomes us now to consider of the hand of providence in this happy event, and
to make a suitable improvement of it; which is to rest and confide more in God,
thankfully acknowledging his kind interposition, and trust ourselves and our
all with him; who has hitherto dealt so favorably with us, by remembering
mercy in the midst of judgment.

THIS whole Psalm is a discourse upon providence; and the main design is to
bring the people of God to an entire and hearty acquiescence in it: Various
instances are mentioned, wherein the people of God seem for a while to be cast
down, and the wicked in some measure triumphing over them: But he shows that
the triumphing of the wicked is short, Ver. 2. and 10. "For they shall soon be
cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb: For yet a little while
and the wicked shall not be: yea, thou shall diligently consider his place, and
it shall not be." This is said to keep the righteous in a calm, sedate and
tranquil frame of mind, to prevent any uneasy disquietude from taking place in
their breasts, at the prevalency and success of the wicked, and to make them
commit their way unto the Lord, confide in, and wait patiently for him; nothing
doubting, but that he will make all things work together for their good, and
for the destruction of those that rise up against them. Ver. 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9.
of the context.

THE righteous and the wicked are here set in contrast; by which it appears
that the righteous have the advantage of the wicked much every way, both in
this world and the next: For if the righteous have but little of this world, it
is better, it is more than all the abundance of the wicked; for they possess
more by enjoying it better, with more satisfaction and greater comfort: "A
little that a righteous man has is better than great revenues without right!"
And if they have but little here, yet they are heirs to an inheritance, that is
infinitely better than the whole world, and will last them for ever, Ver. 18.
An inheritance incorruptible, undefiled and which fades not away. Or, if the
wicked have more honor, renown and glory in the world, the righteous have no
cause to envy them; for it is but short, fading and dying, and will soon turn
into shame, infamy and disgrace. Or, if they lay dark schemes, devise wicked
devices, and plot mischief against them; yet, referring all to God, in the use
of the means afforded them, they have no reason to be afraid: For he that
sits in the heavens, who regards, who loves the righteous, and whose ears
are open to their cry, will undertake for their protection, defense and
salvation; will laugh at the wicked, blow upon their devices and confound them,
Ver. 38 and 9. But the transgressors shall be destroyed together; the end of
the wicked shall be cut off. But the salvation of the righteous is of the Lord,
he is their strength in the time of trouble. And this is spoken to the
righteous in order to keep up their spirits and make them hold on, and hold
out, and not give up when engaged in a good cause, though their enemies be many
and potent, crafty and subtle, and have success in some measure attending them;
being permitted to carry into execution some of their malicious purposes and
wicked devices. And as we are now engaged in a contest with such as we justly
esteem usurpers and encroachers; who have in a most unjust manner levied war
upon us: And we, being satisfied of the justness and righteousness of our
cause, have appealed to heaven to decide the controversy; we should therefore
be often looking up to God, as the Lord of Hosts and God of armies, and depend
on him, more than on our own strength or wisdom: "For the race is not to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong." And we should take notice of every of his
providence, acknowledging his hand in them. -- With a view to this, I shall
further discourse from these words: Which naturally lead us,

IN the First place, to take notice of the malicious, crafty and evil
machinations, plots and devices of the wicked against the just.

AND then, Secondly, To show in what manner their unjust, proud and insolent
proceedings will turn to their own shame, disgrace or infamy.

First, then, WE are to take notice of the malicious, crafty and evil
machinations, plots and devices of the wicked against the just. It is here
asserted that the wicked plotteth against the just: For wise reasons and holy
ends they are permitted to do so, by the wise and righteous Governor of the
world; he permits them to take their course in contriving wickedness, that
their destruction may be of themselves.

WE shall begin at the foundation of the plotting of the wicked against the
just, and follow them from the beginning down to the present day, in as concise
a manner as possible; from which we shall be able, in the application, to
ascertain the true character of each, and make it appear, to which the one and
the other belong, in the present struggle between Great Britain, and the UNITED
COLONIES of AMERICA.

WE would observe then, that there is a rooted hatred and enmity in the hearts
of the ungodly against both God and his people: There is that in them, which is
contrary to holiness, righteousness and purity; for this reason they are said
to be of their father the devil, whose works they do. They imitate him in
contriving every wile and stratagem possible to be invented by them, to bring
ruin and destruction upon the righteous people of God, who never meant them any
harm, nor ever did them any wrong: This has been the case, ever since Lucifer,
once Son of the morning, but now prince of darkness, with hellish malice so
artfully and successfully practiced his devices upon the first Parent of the
human race: By which one plot he got the world, in a sense, under his dominion;
led mankind captive at his will, and gained them upon his side against a
righteous and holy God. Hence he is called the God of this world, and the
prince of the power of the air; and is said to be that spirit, which now
works in the hearts of the children of disobedience: And Christ has
undertaken to release these captives, "to open the prison doors to them that
are bound, to take them from the dominion and deliver them from the power of
Satan, and to bring them into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God." And the
great Captain of our salvation will not cease to ride forth conquering and to
conquer, till he has wholly spoiled the principalities and powers of darkness;
led captivity captive, and destroyed him that has the power of death, that is
the devil. This is the foundation of the quarrel which Satan has raised and
continues in the world: And he carries on his designs by deceit, low-cunning
and craft; he works in the dark, under handed, under ground; and so do his
imps; hence he is called the prince of darkness, and his children the children
of darkness; and both answer the character. In opposition to these the just are
called the children of light; who always act above ground, and are open and
fair in their proceedings, and do the thing that is lawful and right: But the
wicked never stick at the baseness of an action, no matter how vile, nor how
cruel, if it has but the appearance of subserving their malicious designs, in
gratifying their rage, pride, or lusts. It is enough to put them upon the most
inhuman and bloody actions, to see but the least prospect of accomplishing
their wicked designs: Thus Cain, that first child of the evil one, in a sly
under handed manner rose up against, and slew his righteous brother. And this
has been the manner of the wicked from the beginning to the present day;
whatever they do or devise against the righteous, it is unjust, and they
endeavor as much as possible to devise and practice it in the dark. And,
should we look through their proceedings as far as we are able, we should find,
that this has been their manner; we should see a great deal of cunning policy
and artful contrivance, dark schemes, and deep plots of the most black and
hellish nature against the people of God. But suffice it to say, that this is
the very nature of the kingdom of darkness; it is upheld, promoted, and carried
on by darkness and iniquity, as well in large bodies and communities, as in the
hearts of particular persons: And this is always the case, except when they
have got such power in their hands as to think there is no danger of
miscarrying in their wicked designs; and then they will be open, bold and
barefaced, being sure to drive all before them: And this power for a while is
sometimes given them. Thus, says Christ to his malicious persecutors, "this is
your hour, and the power of darkness." And they delight to work in the dark --
shut their eyes against the light -- choose not to see it, and even court
deception, when pursuing their malicious designs: Thus did that proud and
haughty Monarch Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and Saul, king of Israel, and the chief
rulers among the Jews in Christ's time, etc. And the kingdom of Antichrist has
been upheld to this day, by keeping the people in ignorance and practicing
deceit upon them; "by many dark signs and lying wonders the nations have been
deceived;" and in no other way could they uphold their kingdom, and proceed in
their evil devices; for, should the light of the truth be admitted, and
disperse the dark clouds of ignorance and error, in which it is involved; that
kingdom would shake to its very foundations, and totter to the ground. And the
necessity of keeping out of sight, in order to carry into execution their
diabolical plans, has introduced this maxim, that deception is a necessary
qualification to constitute a man an able politician: And it is so -- where
wickedness is at the bottom, in laying plots and concerting schemes of a
hellish nature, which will not endure the light of the sun; these must be
carried into execution, in darkness, by deception. Upon this principle it is
that the papal hierarchy have always been devising mischief and practicing
deceit, to destroy the protestants (whom they call heretics) from off the face
of the earth. And so wicked and abandoned are they, so full of deceit, that
they have often made oaths, promises and solemn protestations, for no other
purpose than to deceive; and, whenever it appears for their interest, make no
scruple to break over them all. And nothing is too bad for them to do; no
matter what, if it has but the appearance of affording them the least help and
assistance in destroying or extirpating the people of the Lord: Witness their
endeavors once and again to place the Pretender on the throne of England;
their powder plot, etc.

AND at this day Britons have joined hands with them in this, to violate oaths,
break promises and solemn engagements: The faith of kings is regarded as
nothing; solemn charters, the agreement between a king and his subjects (which
should ever be held as sacred) are set at naught, broken over, trodden under
foot, etc. and no stone has been left unturned, no scheme unattempted, nor
plot undevised, how villainous soever, if attended with any considerable
prospect of annoying, distressing, and reducing us to a state of vile
subjection, and base servitude. Observe their several steps, attempting, first,
by subtle devices and deep laid plots; then by big words, threatening our
destruction; then by endeavors to rob, impoverish and starve us into a base
submission; and then by open violence, with every instrument of death pointed
at our breasts, to destroy, or force us to bow our necks, and take upon them
the yoke of oppression, tyranny and servitude. All this is couched under Acts
of the British Senate: The revenue Acts, the Quebec Bill, the Boston Port Bill,
the fishery Bill, and the bloody Act, which dooms the American Colonies in a
state of actual rebellion, for nothing but asserting, and maintaining our just
rights, liberties and privileges. Never was there a more barefaced plotting of
the wicked against the just from the beginning till now; for there never was a
people more loyal to their King, never any that showed greater fidelity and all
due submission, till our rights and liberties were encroached upon, without the
least provocation given. They then plotted our ruin, when we gloried in being
the obedient subjects of England's King; long did they try to keep behind the
curtain, and in darkness hide their base and evil intentions; but this being
impracticable, through the vigilance of those whose breasts were filled with
patriotic virtue, and whose discernment was too great not to see through their
dark and malicious designs, who giving notice thereof to the people, with
united voices, they proclaim aloud, liberty and property; down with oppression:
Which voice reached the ears of King, Lords and Commons, who were so enraged at
our discovery of the snare set for us, and our resolutions not to be tamely
shackled with the fetters of slavery, that they gnashed upon us with their
teeth: The Lion roused, with grim and horrible looks, and with open mouth
rushed, to seize his prey; flushed with the hopes of certain and speedy
conquest, they disdained our remonstrances, nor would they listen to our humble
petitions: Nothing would satisfy their rapacious appetites, short of an
absolute surrender of our liberty and property into their hands; we must
submit, and acknowledge that they have a right to bind us by acts of their own
in all cases whatsoever, or suffer the utmost that their power and policy, rage
and malice could inflict upon us; there was no alternative: Therefore, upon our
non-submission, they soon began their horrid and bloody design; when God and
nature, justice to ourselves, and posterity, love to our country, to our wives
and children, and the blood of our fellow countrymen, wantonly spilled upon
the ground, called loud upon us to rush to arms; we obeyed; and, through the
interposition of heaven, success has hitherto remarkably crowned our
endeavors, to frustrate their evil designs, to bring to naught their deep laid
plots, and make their schemes abortive. Disappointment, shame and confusion
has hitherto fallen upon them; and thus it is with the wicked, in their
malicious plotting against the just, and gnashing upon them with their teeth.

THE manner of its being effected, was the next thing to be shown. We proceed
then to show,

Secondly, IN what manner their unjust, proud, subtle and insolent proceedings
will turn to their own shame, disgrace, or infamy.

HERE it may be necessary to observe that God often suffers the wicked to
proceed to great lengths, before he laughs at them; permits them to proceed
with such an high hand, as to make the righteous fear, that they will drive all
before them; but however successful they may be in any of their enterprises,
those that trust in God, and believe his word, have no reason to be
discouraged, or to give up a righteous cause on that account: If this should
now be the case; should our enemies appear most formidable in their
preparations, and like a flood threaten to swallow us up, and be in any measure
successful against us; it should serve, not to discourage, but make us cleave
faster and depend more upon the Lord of Hosts and the God of armies; believing
that he will in due time disappoint and confound them: This word is enough to
keep up our spirits, so long as we make God our trust and refuge, the Lord
shall laugh at him, for he sees that his day is coming: For there is nothing,
that they can devise or plot, but what God permits, nor can they proceed an
inch farther, in carrying their schemes into execution, than he suffers them;
and, when they have proceeded so far as that their shame and disgrace shall be
most conspicuous, or fall with the greatest weight upon them, then will be the
time for the Lord to laugh at them and pour contempt upon them. And this is
brought about by various means; as God in his infinite wisdom sees fit and
best, sometimes in one way and manner, and sometimes in another; but by
whatsoever method, or means it is effected, we should always remember, that
God's hand is principal: When the wicked are put to confusion and shame, and
infamy comes upon them, it is the Lord's doing; and God's people should
attribute it, not to themselves, as if by their superior wisdom, strength or
courage, they had put their enemies to confusion, flight or shame. For if we
have wisdom, resolution and bravery to make a bold and manly stand, this should
be attributed to God, and all the success of it to him, who "gives power to
the faint, and increases strength to them that have no might."

BUT the way and manner in which he most commonly effects their shame and
disgrace, is, by permitting them to concert their schemes and lay their plots
in secret, and to proceed in such a manner as to raise their expectations high,
presuming their plans to be so well concerted, as that nothing can disappoint
them; and, when they have got ripe for execution, to blast all their hopes,
frustrate their evil designs, and many times turn the mischief they intended to
others upon their own heads; Ver. 14 and 15. of the context.
and this by means that they least though it of, and which were looked upon by
them, as insignificant and not worthy their notice. And the more despicable the
means are, by which it is effected, so much the more conspicuous is the hand of
God; and nothing can be more apparent; unless, where means are made use of,
that are above the reach of men; as when the stars in their courses, the winds,
waves, etc, are employed (as is often the case) to put a stop to the evil
proceedings of the wicked. And being unable to execute their malicious
purposes, and having lifted up themselves upon high raised hopes and
expectations; priding, vaunting and boasting of sure success in their
enterprises; disappointment under these circumstances falls with a double
weight upon their heads, bringing an insupportable load of shame and disgrace.
Thus oftentimes God pours contempt upon Princes, and makes proud insolent
oppressors gnash their teeth for rage at their disappointment.

SOMETIMES God opens their eyes and gives them to see their folly in their
unjust and evil proceedings; and shame and confusion cover their faces.

SOMETIMES by putting fear, dread and terror into their hearts, by which they
are rendered unfit and unable to proceed in their evil designs. This, He, who
has all hearts in his hand, can, and often does effect, by the smallest means.
A rumor is sufficient to dishearten and affrighten the Assyrian host. 2 Kings
xix.7. Yea the sound of a shaken leaf is enough to chase and make them flee, as
if flying from the sword; and in their flight to destroy each other, Lev.
xxvi.36. This was remarkably the case, when the Midianites, Amalekites, and all
the children of the East, an innumerable multitude, were routed and put to
confusion by Gideon, with his three hundred men, Judges vii.21, 22.

SOMETIMES by bringing to light their dark designs and setting them in open
view, shame and disgrace is bro't upon the contrivers; and when malicious, deep
laid plots are discovered and laid open; the wicked machinators will gnaw their
tongues with rage, at their overthrow: And God often makes the means, which
they use to bring about their wicked purposes, to effect their own shame, and
so "takes the wise in their own craftiness.

GOD knows how to deal with all the wicked, how far to let them proceed in
their evil designs, and when is the best time to put a stop to their evil
proceedings; and, when that time comes, he will then do it in his own way and
manner, which is always the best: God's own people may sometimes think it is
time for God to arise and work for their salvation and for the destruction of
their enemies, long before it is accomplished; no doubt, but Israel of old when
they shook off the yoke of Egyptian bondage, and were pursued by Pharaoh and
his mighty host, thought it was time for God to appear for them, before they
were so hemed in as to see no possible way of escape: But the event proved that
God's time was the best time, and most for his glory and their safety.

THE wicked may be permitted to accomplish some of their evil purposes against
the just; but in the end they will be frustrated and put to shame; thus Saul
could never wholly effect his malicious purposes against David; though he long
pursued him and hunted him as a Partridge upon the mountains, he was always
disappointed, confounded and often ashamed: Many a time Saul thought it almost
impossible for David to avoid his fury, yet always a way was found out for his
escape; and thus the Lord laughs at the wicked, by suffering them to build
high, on the foundation which they think is laid deep and strong, and, when
their day is come, to disconcert their plans and frustrate all their evil
designs: And this is what is intended by the expression, the Lord shall laugh
at him, for he sees his day is coming; a day, a set day there is for them to
be cast down and brought into derision, a day for their high looks to be
brought low, and for the proud to be abased; thus was it with proud Pharaoh, he
was lifted up on high, with sure expectations of destroying the Israelites and
dividing the spoil, flushed with the hopes of certain success, he rushes
forward, till his glory, his pomp and his multitude are altogether buried in
the sea.

SOMETIMES God permits the wicked to go on without much molestation or
hinderance, to fill up their measure of wrath; and the time he has set to
laugh at them is in the other world, when they will be presed down under an
everlasting weight of infamy, shame and disgrace, "for the wicked shall not go
finally unpunished; the Lord shall laugh at him, for he sees his day is
coming."

APPLICATION.
And, first, WHAT has been said should serve to prevent the people of God,
from complaining of, fretting against or finding fault with Him or his
providence, for suffering the wicked to become great, to plot against the just
and to be in some measure successful in their evil designs; but, on the
contrary, the more spiteful and malicious they are, the greater they be and the
more they succeed in their wicked purposes, so much the more should God's
people, with humble dependence look up to and wait upon him, who is higher than
the highest, greater than the greatest, and wiser than the wisest of them:
Nothing doubting but that he, who knows how to reserve the prince of darkness
and all his legions, under chains of darkness, to the judgment of the great
day; knows how far to suffer those, who belong to his family to proceed, and no
further can they go: Let us then, who profess to have the Lord for our God,
believe and rest satisfied in this, that the Lord sees his day is coming. Let
us confide in him, who knows both how, and when is the best time to restrain
and disappoint them. And this is the best policy, that the children of God can
make use of, even, to leave all with God, in confident hope and firm trust,
that he will find means to extricate his faithful people out of all their
difficulties; that he will take care of them, prevent what they fear, and bring
about all events in the issue to their full satisfaction: Their enemies in due
time shall be impotent, ashamed or destroyed; and the righteous at last be made
to triumph over them all. Only trust in the Lord and do good, and use the
means, that are put into our hands, and then we need not fear what man can do
unto us: If we are careful to mind our duty, fear God and keep his
commandments, and are truly conformed to the character of the righteous, we may
then be certain, that the triumphing of the wicked will be short, that the Lord
will laugh at them, bring derision and contempt upon them, and never suffer
them to devise evil devices or plot mischief and execute it any further than He
in his infinite wisdom sees fit and best, even best for us. Ver. 32.3. of the
context.

NOT but that God's people may for a time suffer greatly by them: The righteous
may be brought low by rebukes of providence for their sins, as some sin cleaves
to the most upright among men, and will do so, till they put off their robes of
mortality: But the chastisements they endure are so far from being hurtful,
that they are really subservient to their good; they reap profit and benefit
from them: The wicked indeed plot their mischief, their ruin; but God means it
for good. This it becomes us so firmly to believe, as to refer all to God and
leave it with him, by his wise and good providence to dispose of all our
concerns as he pleases: To trust wholly in him, to bring all to a good issue,
with full satisfaction that all is well, is best, that God does. Our part is to
mind and do our duty, and then leave the event with God: Leave it with him to
take care of and deal with those, "who are the scandals and burdens, the
blemishes and common nusances of the earth." We should not therefore fret at
God or be any ways uneasy, as though God was unkind to his church and people, in
suffering such malicious, sly, crafty and subtle men to live, prosper and
prevail as they do; for he never would, if he had not wise designs to answer by
them: This we should also believe, and therefore not fret ourselves with
vexation at their success, in their evil projects, at any time.

LOOK upon wicked Pharaoh; see how he was permitted to afflict and distress the
people, whose God was the Lord; and they then thought, that all these things
were against them; that their God was unkind to them, when in truth it was only
to make way for their freedom from bondage and slavery, to let the oppressed go
free: Which could not be effected so easily by any other means. Had not their
burdens been insupportable, beyond what they were able to bear; perhaps it
might have been impossible for Moses to have persuaded them to leave the
tyrant's service; but their grievous impositions, which Pharaoh intended as a
means to keep them all under his iron yoke, had directly the contrary effect;
it united them together, and made them all with one heart and mind resolve to
be free. Such instances we should now remember, to keep us from anxious
disquietude, and to encourage our hope and trust in that God, who brings good
out of evil. Perhaps in this view, we may see much of the goodness, mercy and
loving kindness of our God toward us, and our children, even in those things
which in themselves, and for the present, are not joyous, but grievous; and
this should also serve to keep us from fretting or complaining, and make us
acquiesce, and with patience wait for the event, till the end be: Only let us
be careful to improve present troubles aright; this we must do, in order for a
well grounded hope, that good to us, to our posterity and land, will come out
of all this evil.

PERHAPS our God, by these commotions, contentions, disturbances and overtures,
is about to lay a firm foundation for the lasting future peace, tranquillity and
liberty of these American Colonies for ages and generations yet to come:
Hitherto, every thing bears this favorable aspect! The means, that our
unnatural enemies have made use of, to bring and keep us under their power and
control, are much the same which Pharaoh, Egypt's haughty Monarch used, and
they have as yet had the same effect: Their schemes to oppress, divide, and
then subjugate these Colonies, have served to unite our hearts, as one man, to
cast off the burdens they have been imposing upon us: And there is no way,
which could be thought of, that would so speedily and so firmly have united us
together, as the ways by them taken to divide and oppress us. Our God has so
ordered and disposed of the means, which they wickedly devised and used, as to
make them have directly the contrary effect to what they intended by them:
"This is the Lord's doing and is mavelous in our eyes." These things
considered should prevent all hard thoughts of our God, who in the midst of
judgment remembers mercy, and gives us so much reason to think, that he designs
good unto us, if we will but cleave fast unto him. See the six first verses of
this Psalm.

Secondly, WE may learn from what has been said, how to distinguish between
the plots of the wicked, and the proceedings of the just. Wicked men devise
evil devices; they plot, they work in the dark, saying, no eye sees us, they
hate the light, lest their evil deeds should be reproved; but the righteous,
who are ever opposed to the wicked, are of upright conversation, are open and
fair in their proceedings, are desirous of, and endeavor to set things in a
true light; their works are not works of darkness.

AND here it may not be amiss at this time, when we are engaged in so great a
contest and weighty affair, as opposing by force of arms those whom we once
revered, in whose welfare and prosperity we rejoiced, and in whose glory we
gloried, as our own; who have unnaturally become our foes. premeditately risen
up against us, plotted and threatened our ruin; to run something of a parallel
between the conduct of the British nation and that of these Colonies, by which
we shall see clearly, who are those wicked, that are now plotting against the
just.

WE would observe then, that it is an infallible mark of the wicked's plotting,
when by subtilty and craft, or open violence, they endeavor the hurt of those,
that have done them no wrong, nor given them any just provocation. The first
wicked plot, that was ever concerted in this our world, was by a most wicked
apostate, against those that never did him wrong, nor afforded him the least
just provocation. His envy and malice was enough to urge him on to the
destruction of millions; and ever since envy and ill will are continually
striking at the felicity, tranquillity and growing opulency of the brave and
good. How evidently does this character belong to those that have risen up
against us? They then began to plot our ruin, when we were at ease and quiet,
and had done them no wrong; yea then, when we were doing them all the good in
our power; had been assisting them, at the expense of our blood and treasure to
acquire vast territories to the British crown; and were carrying into their
bosom all our riches; they then framed an act, THE STAMP ACT
which, if it had been put into execution, we had now been wearing out our
lives in more than Egyptian bondage; and ever since, all the craft and subtilty
they were masters of has been employed, to bring us effectually under the yoke
of oppression.

Which leads to another observation,

THAT it is a sure mark of the wicked's plotting, when they endeavor to hide
the truth; and, as much as possible, to keep their evil designs out of sight.
How exactly has this been the case with administration? They would fain make
us believe, that they meant us no harm, that they had no design of depriving us
of our rights, liberty or property, even then, when they were endeavoring by
deep laid plots to effect it. They worked as it were in the dark, out of sight;
and tried every method, that their cunning and subtilty could invent, to make
us implicitly acknowledge, that they had a right to put their hands into our
pockets, and take a little from thence, without our consent, that so they might
in process of time come at the whole. But, when by all their art and policy
they could not bring us to submit to this; when they perceived, that we saw
through their dark designs, and would not believe them, though they asserted
never so strongly that they meant us no hurt, while they were endeavoring to
rob us of our rights and properties; they then showed themselves; and plainly
declared what they were after, to make us servants, tributary to them. And,
thinking that they had power sufficient to do with us as they pleased; they
then became open and barefaced in their proceedings; their language then was,
own us for your masters, or receive the point of the bayonet in your breasts.
-- And wicked plots and devices require wicked and base means to execute and
accomplish them, as one lie requires another to support it. Therefore, we may
observe further,

THAT it is an undoubted sign of the wicked's plotting against the just, when
they pursue such measures to bring about their malicious designs, as are evil
in themselves. For as truth needs no lie to support it; so a just cause does
not require unjust measures to defend it. But with regard to Britain, may we
not say, that truth is fallen in the streets, and equity cannot enter? For what
means have they not used to blind, deceive and hide the truth, and to promote
falsehood and lies? They have even courted deception and would never listen to
the true state of facts, though set before them as clear as the sun. And those on
this side the water, who have joined with them, have left no stone unturned, in
endeavoring to deceive both them and us See a full proof of this assertion,
and much more, in the letters of the late Governor Hutchinson.
. And since they have drawn the sword, what have they left undone, which they
thought would have the least tendency to distress and destroy us? It appears
plain, that they looked upon nothing too bad to do unto us; no measures,
however base, vile and inhuman, have been omitted either before or since the
commencement of hostilities: What could be more cruel, unmerciful and unjust,
than their several acts against us? One was made with a manifest design to
encourage murder, by making provision to protect the murderers: Another vacates
the Charter of a province (ever loyal to it is King) upon the ground of a false
report: Another to starve and impoverish one of the most populous towns on the
continent: What could be more cruel, unmerciful and unjust? But, this not
answering their malicious designs, they extended their cruelty to the four
New England Colonies, stoping the avenues of our riches, by depriving us of the
fishery, which God and nature had put into our hands; and when this proved
ineffectual, behold them enlarging their unmerciful cruelty to every province,
that would dare to stand up for us: And then, to crown all, drew the sword and
prepared every instrument of cruelty and death, to send desolation and
destruction through our whole land. And what unwearied pains have they taken,
and what cruel and barbarous schemes and hellish plots have they laid? Negroes
and Indians, Barbarians, Infidels and Papists, have all been applied to by our
malicious foes. Surely had their cause been righteous; were they not wickedly
plotting against the just, they would not have wanted such base props as these
to support it; nor accept them if offered. Add to all this, their using every
stratagem possible, in the most secret manner, to stir up the Negroes in the
midst of us, to cut our throats at unawares, and to set the Savages and Roman
Catholics, like bloodhounds on our backs, while they like lions (as they term
themselves) were roused, and came to meet us with open mouths, gaping for their
prey; most furiously and maliciously gnashing upon us with their teeth; filled
with rage and indignation, threatening to eat us up; yea, so big as to devour
us at a mouthful, and spread desolation far and wide, by fire and sword. And
their burning several populous towns, over the heads of women and children,
whose piercing shrieks and infantile bitter cries, were heard unrelented by
those, who would be thought humane; such acts of cruelty are without a parallel
among civilized nations. Not to mention the barbarity exercised upon those of
our brave countrymen, who have unfortunately fallen a prey into their
relentless jaws. Again,

IT is a sign of the wicked's plotting against the just, in their endeavors to
annoy and destroy them, when they are insolent, proud and haughty, and open
their mouths against the heavens, as well as against the people of God. Such as
these are an abomination to the Lord; He hates the proud look, as well as the
lying tongue; and "pride goes before destruction, and an haughty spirit before
a fall." And we need not say, how Britons have vaunted themselves, and even
defied the Lord of Hosts, if at the head of Americans (if report be true) at
least they have derided us, for making application to the God of armies, on our
days of fasting and prayer for that purpose; being sure that no force of ours
could withstand them, they have derided and looked down upon us, with utmost
scorn and contempt, being flushed with hopes of certain and speedy conquest:
Never was a people puffed up with a greater conceit of the sufficiency of their
own wisdom, power and policy to accomplish all their evil designs against us.
Once more,

DISAPPOINTMENT attending all their undertakings, and shame and confusion
covering their faces is another mark of the wicked's plotting against the just.
The Lord shall laugh at him: And never was this more evidently the case than it
is at present with our enemies: Though proud and insolent, contempt has been
poured upon them; they have hitherto made themselves ridiculous: And their
attempts have proved vain, fruitless and ineffectual in a great measure: Their
rage and malice has been impotent; the lion roused has been held fast in a
chain, he has gnashed his teeth and shut his mouth: Their strength has failed
them; their boasted courage melted away; their hearts failed them for fear;
confined as it were in a prison; their counsels turned into foolishness; their
deep laid plots all brought to light and frustrated; Barbarians, Infidels,
Negroes, Indians and Papists, refused (generally) to assist them in their evil
designs; and, to crown all, shame is come upon them to the uttermost; the Lord
has laughed at them, poured contempt upon them, and filled their hearts with
fear, dread and terror; that those, who styled themselves Britain's invincible
troops, fled for their lives, from the face of those, whom they despised in
their hearts; no one pursuing them. "This is the Lord's doing, and it is
mavelous in our eyes." If they had a little time, a little strength, and a
little success allowed them, it was only to lift them up for the greater fall*
Thus God often abases the proud and lays low the haughtiness of man. Witness
Egypt's tyrant, and the Assyrian's proud blasphemous Monarch, whose glory,
greatness, pomp and multitude perished at once. Thus every mark of the wicked's
plotting against the just is to be found on them: And those words of the
prophet Isaiah xvii.12. on to the end, seem applicable to Britain's troops at
this time -- "Woe to the multitude of many people, which make a noise like the
noise of the seas: And to the rushing of nations, that make a rushing like the
rushing of mighty waters. The nations shall rush like the rushing of many
waters: But God shall rebuke them, and they shall flee far off, and shall be
chased as the chaff of the mountains before the wind, and like a rolling thing
before the whirlwind, and behold at evening tide trouble, and before the
morning he is not: This is the portion of them, that spoil us, and the lot of
them that rob us."

LET us turn now and look upon the conduct of the United Colonies; and see if
it is not the conduct of the just: However we have been a sinful backsliding
people, and provoked the Lord against us by our sins; yet to Great Britain
(considered as a people) we have done no wrong: And we may hope and believe
many of this land are truly just and righteous; whose frequent, fervent
prayers, and sincere cries to the Lord of Hosts, under our distressed and
oppressed condition, have entered the ears of the Lord of Sabbath, the God of
armies; and, in answer to them, he has appeared for our help against the
mighty, to the confusion and shame of our enemies, crowning our endeavors with
most remarkable success. Let this not elate us, but make us more deeply humbled
before God, and excite us, with united hearts and voices to cry more earnestly
to, and depend more upon him, "who gives power to the feeble, and to them that
have no might, increases strength."

But to return from this digression.

LET us look and we shall see, that our conduct has been directly the reverse
to that of those, with whom we are contending: Ever open and fair have been our
proceedings; in all our representations truth has been the object aimed at;
and by plain facts, accompanied by sound reasons and demonstrative arguments,
we have endeavored to undeceive those, who were led to believe lies: But they
ever shut their eyes and ears against them, and would not perceive nor
understand.

PARTICULAR provinces first remonstrated against their evil proceedings; showed
the iniquity and injustice of them, which were followed by many humble
petitions to no effect, being rejected again and again without a hearing.

THEN the whole United Provinces by their Congress, stated matters most fairly;
held up truth to light, and humbly petitioned for redress of grievances, they
asked for no more; but were answered with the bayonet pointed at our breasts.

OUR Congress, chosen for the purpose of effecting a happy reconciliation
between Great Britain and these Colonies, were insulted, treated with the
utmost scorn and contempt, and looked upon as nothing, and less than nothing.

AND the measures we have taken to save our land from the threatened ruin, have
ever been just, honest and upright; whatever has been done, that may be fairly
attributed to the people of these Colonies, in their conduct toward England's
King and his ministry, well deserves the above epithets The doings of
particular persons, small communities, or a number rising and doing unjustly,
is not to be attributed to whole towns, much less to whole provinces. Thus we
are free from being chargeable with the destruction of the India TEA, sent
hither by Act of Parliament. It was not the act of a colony or even of a town,
but only of a small number of persons in disguise.


ALL that we have done (as a people) besides praying them to desist from their
evil designs and reasoning with them, has been only to defend ourselves from
their unjust encroachments. And they compelled us to arms, by first unsheathing
the sword and laying a number of our fellow countrymen dead on the ground: At
Lexington a company of Militia were fired upon in cool blood, by troops of
George the 3d. only for appearing under arms in their training field; six were
killed on the spot. This commenced the war between Great Britain and America;
which was on the 19th of April, 1775.
Whose innocent blood would have cried to God against us, had we not pursued
the murderers and endeavored to bring them to justice.

WE may now ask what evil have we done to Great Britain? Was it an evil for us
to endeavor to open their blind eyes? Was it an evil for us to try, by humble
prayers, to soften their hard hearts? Was it an evil for us to remonstrate
against most iniquitous proceedings? Or was it an evil for us to defend
ourselves, our wives and our little ones from the jaws of that roaring Lion who
had roused himself, and with open mouth rushed to seize his prey gnashed upon
us with his teeth; yea, whose cruel jaws were reaking in the gore of human
flesh? We may not forget to observe another part of our conduct, which has
been derided by them. As a people we have once and again been called upon, by
those whom we have set to rule over us, to humble ourselves in the sight of
God, and to implore his assistance and direction in all our concerns; and though
many there be, that are forsaking the Lord, and still live in sin,
notwithstanding all his judgments upon us, yet it is to be hoped, that many of
God's people among us, have learnt righteousness by the judgments that have
been abroad in our land; which have caused them to live nearer to him, and to
walk more humbly and prayerfully before him.

FURTHERMORE, If a blessing attending the means, and success the endeavors of
a people, be any mark of the righteousness of the cause; never was it more
conspicuouss than at this day; never had a people more reason to take notice of
the interposition of heaven in their favor than we; who by the help of the
Lord have been enabled to rise as it were from nothing, to a force sufficient
to withstand our enemies, and get the better of them every way: From North to
South success has in a most remarkable manner crowned our endeavors. The
speed, with which the reduction of ST. JOHN's and MONTREAL was accomplished,
and the few lives that were lost, were very remarkable: And to the Southward,
discovering and disconcerting an horrid plan to raise an army of Tories and
Negroes, routing and driving Lord Dunmore and his forces from the land: And now
the strong hold of BOSTON is given up into our hands, etc. etc. and but four or
five lives lost.


AND it is not to us that the success is to be attributed; for the stars in
their courses have fought for us, the winds and the waves have destroyed
thousands: This refers to the destruction brought upon them by the immediate
hand of God, and it may be proper to mention some few instances of this kind of
the many which might be mentioned; the destruction of their fishing fleet by a
violent storm, in October last. whereby most of their vessels were lost, and
upwards of a thousand souls perished. What renders this the more remarkable is,
that these men were to join the army under General How at Boston, and the arms
that were sent over for them, fell into our hands. Also the shipwreck, which
the fleet met with last fall, that was designed for a reinforcement to General
How. by which some of them were lost, and the most of them rendered unable to
proceed on their voyage. The Hanoverians likewise, in their voyage to England,
were shipwrecked and greatly damaged: And also, late in the fall, one of their
(...) was struck by lightening and entirely consumed, etc.
And God Almighty has wonderfully preserved our lives and given us courage, to
which must be attributed that success which has attended our enterprises, and
brought confusion on our foes: that those who, but a few months ago, vaunted
themselves against us, being sure of overcoming us, laughed us to scorn, and
gnashed their teeth in rage against us; the Lord having laughed at them and
brought forward the day of their confusion, now gnaw their tongues for
disappointment. It is not for what we have done, but for his great name's sake,
that he has dealt thus favorably with us. From all these things it appears,
that the character of the just and righteous belongs to us, as that of the
wicked to them: For the wicked fear where no fear is, and flee when none
pursues; but the righteous are bold as a lion. Those, who called themselves
brave and invincible; and us cowardly dastards, have been seized with such a
panic, as none but He, who has all hearts in his hands, could strike into
them: And the resolution and courage, which has been given to our soldiers,
has been as remarkable.

Thirdly, WE should now be led to pay our grateful acknowledgments to that God.
who rules on high and below; who has taken such wonderful care of us, saved us
from that ruin and destruction, with which we have been threatened, we have
lately seen the salvation of the Lord; and to be thankful for what our God has
done for us, and improve past favors to his glory, is the way to engage his
kindness, and to be favored with the continuation of his smiles.

AND what reason have we to be thankful to that God, who has hitherto
restrained the rage, tied the hands, and put fear into the hearts of our
enemies, and caused them to flee before us. For had they been suffered to
succeed in their malicious designs: who can conceive of the dreadful havoc and
destruction, that would have been made? Our land filled with the blood of the
slain; we driven from our dwellings; our houses pillaged and burnt; our towns
laid in ashes; our fields and vineyards laid waste; our country spoiled, and we
either fallen by the sword, or become tributary servants to those, whose tender
mercies are cruel. -- Let us never forget the goodness of our God and his
kindness to us: Let it lead us to repentance and new obedience, and engage us
to faithfulness in his service. The acquisition lately made affords abundant
matter for thanksgiving and rejoicing; not only to those who have long been
driven from their beautiful seats and commodious habitations, and may now
return to them in safety; but to us all, having obtained (at a very little
expense of blood) one of the strongest holds, the best fortified towns, and
most commodious harbor, that our enemies have possessed.

Fourthly, WE will now conclude with a few words of direction and encouragement
to God's people. As we know where our great strength lies, even in God; let us
then trust all in his hands; let us wait upon him; let us seek to him in every
time of need, and, having referred all our important concerns to him, let us
not despair, or be discouraged, though our enemies are many, potent, subtle,
crafty and malicious; let both the favors and frowns of God upon us serve to
make us fly to him, and to be more earnest with him to interpose by his grace
and providence to reform us from our wickedness; to extricate us out of our
difficulties; disperse the dark clouds, which hang over our heads; return and
visit us with his loving kindness and tender mercies; and make us yet a people
beloved of the Lord and favored by our God: thus let us apply always to him,
who can bring to light the darkest, deepest plots; who can frustrate the best
and wisest concerted plan of human politicians; who can stop the mouths of
lions, deliver out of the paw of the bear, chain the tiger and restrain the
wrath of man: Let us trust in the Lord, wait also on him, and he will bring it
to pass: For he that is higher than the highest regards it: And the Lord
shall laugh at them, and bring them into derision and contempt.

TO leave all with God, in the use of the means afforded us, is our wisdom, our
strength, our safety and our deliverance; for through God we shall do
valiantly, for he it is, that shall tread down our enemies; and the Lord on
high is mightier than the noise of many waters; yea than the many waves of the
sea. What then, though the waters roar and be troubled; though the mountains
shake and tremble; and the earth be removed; the Lord of Hosts being with us;
the God of Jacob being our refuge; we may even then triumph and rejoice in him;
saying, God is in the midst of us; we shall not be moved; our God shall help us
and that right early.

AMEN.

