AN ATTEMPT To nip in the Bud, the unscriptural Doctrine of UNIVERSAL
SALVATION, and some other dangerous Errors connected with it; which a certain
STRANGER, who calls himself JOHN MURRAY, has, of late, been endeavoring to
spread in the First Parish of GLOUCESTER, to draw away Disciples after him.

IN A LETTER Addressed to one of those that are drawn away; if possible to
reclaim him and the others. To this End and in Hopes that it may by the
Blessing of GOD serve also to confirm all in some of the most important
Doctrines of GOD's Word, it is made public, in Answer to the Desire of a very
respectable Number of Persons of Reputation and Influence in said Parish.

TO WHICH IS SUBJOINED, The DYING TESTIMONY for the Truth, and against Error,
of their worthy Minister, the Reverend Mr. SAMUEL CHANDLER, lately deceased.

By JOHN CLEAVELAND, A. M. Pastor of the Second Church in IPSWICH.

2 Cor. xi. 3. But I fear lest by any Means, as the Serpent beguiled EVE
through his Subtilty, so your Minds should be corrupted from the Simplicity
that is in CHRIST.

SALEM: N. E. Printed by E. RUSSELL, at his Printing-Office, Upper-End of
Main-street. M, DCC, LXXVI.

TO THE READER.
IT is now about a year since the following Letter was sent to the late Essex
Printers -- hostilities commencing soon after, by the British troops against
the Americans, opened such a scene of business, etc. as hitherto to prevent
it is publication.

The Author, though he looks upon the followers of the Stranger, herein
referred to, to be under a sad and sorrowful delusion, yet has a benevolent
affection to them, and his daily prayer to God for them is, that they may be
undeceived in time and made wise, unto eternal salvation; and earnestly prays
them to read the following Letter with unprejudiced attention and an honest
desire to know the Truth: "It is no more their interest than the Author's to be
deceived." Nay, if the doctrine of universal salvation, or of the final
happiness of all men is true, we run no hazard in denying it to be true; we
shall as certainly be saved and finally happy, as those will who avouch it, and
enter heaven at death without going through purgatory or their intermediate
state, provided we are washed and sanctified and justified in the name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of God, before we die; which the advocates for
universal salvation must allow we may -- without believing their doctrine of
universal salvation to be true; otherwise deny there are, or ever were any true
Christians -- any born of God in this life, but those that believe that
doctrine; which will not only deny all the Protestant Churches of the present
and past generations, but also all the Christian Martyrs, etc. to be true
Christians, sanctified in Christ, and called to be saints. -- But what if this
doctrine is not true? What if you have been given up to a strong delusion to
believe a lie? Where will the sinner -- Where will the unbeliever, the
impenitent, the profane, the ungodly apppear? Will it be your interest in this
case to be deceived? If your doctrine of the final happiness of all mankind is
true, the Bible is not true! Let common sense speak, yea let Deists and
Infidels say, whether they do not with one consent acknowledge that the Bible
teaches in an open and express manner, that the unbeliever, the ungodly and
impenitent, dying such, shall be punished with an everlasting destruction? Pray
consider death is coming on us all, and the deceived will then be undeceived:
-- But what comfort will it be to find ourselves in hell with a lie in out
right hand and a great gulf fixed? -- O my dear fellow-probationers, let us
consider our latter end -- let us be wise for eternity -- let us repent and be
converted while the long-suffering of God is waiting, and the door of salvation
is open before us. -- Let us fear God and keep his commandments, and be holy as
God is holy in all manner of conversation and godliness, for without holiness
no man shall see the Lord, but true holiness consists in real, hearty,
practical conformity to our Lord's will in his word.

APRIL 26, 1776.
AN ATTEMPT, etc.
IPSWICH, March 1, 1775. DEAR SIR,
BY a benevolent affection to you and others you now associate yourself with to
attend the ministrations of the Stranger lately come into your Town, and from a
serious concern for the cause of Christ and glory of God, I am moved to write a
few things, which, I pray you and others concerned to take under proper
consideration, viz.

I. That all men are naturally in a sinful, condemned, and perishing state. --
Sinful, for there is none that does good, no not one -- so then they that are
in the flesh (as opposed to a being in the spirit) cannot please God. --
Servants of sin -- under the power of satan, who works in the hearts of the
children of disobedience. -- Condemned and perishing, for he that believes
not, is condemned already -- by the offense of one, judgment is come upon all
men unto condemnation -- under the curse -- guilty before God, and the wrath of
God abides on them, which is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men.

II. That it is absolutely necessary that we be born of the Spirit -- have
repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

-- Born of the Spirit, for except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he
cannot see the kingdom of God; he cannot enter the kingdom of God; Christ says,
Marvel not, that I said unto you, ye must be born again. The unrighteous shall
not inherit the kingdom of God; he must be washed and sanctified. -- Without
holiness no man shall see the Lord with comfort; hence we must be renewed in
the spirit of our mind. -- We must be created after God in righteousness and
true holiness. -- None will receive Christ, or believe on his name, but such as
are born of God. -- The natural man discerns not the things of the Spirit of
God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither CAN he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned. -- No man CAN come to Christ, except the Father draw
him. -- None will or can love God or man with such a love as God requires in
his commands, without being born of God; he that loves is born of God and
knows God. -- True saints are God's workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works. -- Such as are passed from death unto life love the brethren --
love them, not in word or in tongue, but in deed and in truth: -- And this is
love, that we keep God's commandments and Christ's sayings. They do their
Lord's will. They do not live in the practice of what they know their Lord
forbids, nor in the neglect of what they know he commands. We must have
repentance toward God and faith toward Christ our Lord and Savior; for except
sinners repent they must perish -- they must repent and be converted that their
sins MAY be blotted out. -- God now commands all men every where (where the
gospel comes) to repent. -- Such as are not moved to repentance by the
goodness, long-suffering, and forbearance of God, are, after their hardness and
the impenitency of their hearts, treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. -- Woe unto Chorazin and
Bethsaida, that repented not! It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah
in the day of judgment than for them; -- they that repent not, are the children
of their father the devil, and the lusts of their father they will do. -- They
are the enemies of God and Christ, they will not be reconciled to God, nor have
Christ to reign over them. -- Impenitent sinners, dying such, must be damned;
consider this, says God, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces and
there be none to deliver: It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God, who has said, Vengeance is mine, I will repay it -- and will by no
means clear the guilty. -- If the sinner turn not, God will whet his sword, he
has bent his bow and made it ready, and yet calls to sinners saying, Turn ye,
turn ye, for why will ye die? -- We must turn to God with weeping and mourning,
with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, loathing ourselves for all our
abominations, and abhorring ourselves in dust and ashes before God, lying low,
infinitely low, in the deepest humility at his feet. -- But we must repent and
turn to God by faith in Christ, for no man can come to God but by Christ, or by
faith in Christ; Christ is the only way to the Father; it is by faith we see
the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. -- If our gospel be hid, it is
hid to them that are lost, (as all unbelivers are) in whom the god of this
world has blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the light of the
glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God should shine unto them.

Faith toward our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is expressed by receiving
Christ, the gift of God; coming to Christ; eating his flesh and drinking his
blood; believing in him with all the heart; coming after Christ; denying
ourselves, selling all we have, or leaving all and following Christ; by being
in Christ. -- abiding in him as the branch in the vine, rejoicing in Christ
Jesus without any confidence in the flesh; counting all things as loss and
dung, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, to win Christ and be found
in him. -- Fleeing for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before us. -- All
which variety of expression of faith in Christ necessarily implies, that in
true faith, there is application to Christ, union to Christ and a change of our
state. -- We are in Christ, and no longer out of Christ, or with out Christ. --
We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. -- Old things are
done away with such. Behold all things are become new! There is no condemnation
to such -- they shall be saved: -- They have peace with God: -- They are
justified, Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to them: -- They are
God's adopted children! They have power or right to become the Sons of God. --
They have the Spirit of Christ, and are led by his Spirit. -- Walk in it, walk
after it, and live to Him that died for them -- in newness of life -- in
righteousness and holiness. -- Their delight is in the law of God after the
inner man. -- Their faith works by love to God, by love to saints, and by love
of benevolence to the persons of wicked men and to personal enemies, for they
pray heartily for them. -- These belive to the saving of their souls, are kept
by the power of God through faith unto salvation and shall receive the end of
their faith the salvation of their souls, they shall be glorified.

III. That all such as die out of Christ, neglecting so great salvation, cannot
escape damnation in hell forever: It is Christ that says, He that beliveth not
shall be damned. -- Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. --
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful
generation, of him will the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory
of the Father with the holy angels. -- Woe unto you that laugh now, for ye shall
weep -- shall be cast into outer darkness, where there is wailing and gnashing
of teeth. Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men,
neither in this world, neither in the world to come. -- And in the day of
judgment, Christ will say to the wicked, depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels, where the worm dies
not and the fire is not quenched. -- The wicked shall go away into everlasting
punishment. -- There is a great gulf fixed between heaven and hell, or the
spirits of just men made perfect in heaven and the damned in hell torments, so
that there will be no passing from heaven to hell, nor from hell to heaven. --
But wide is the gate and broad is the way, which leads (from us on earth) to
destruction in hell, and many there be that go in thereat; because strait is
the gate and narrow is the way, which leads from us on earth, to life, in
heaven, and few there be that find it. -- And as to what the inspired Apostles
say of this matter, time would fail me to relate -- it is enough to observe,
that such professors of religion as draw back, draw back to perdition; -- that
there remains no more sacrifice for sin, for such as sin wilfully after they
have received the knowledge of the truth, but a fearful looking for of judgment
and fiery indignation. -- That it is impossible to renew such again unto
repentance, who fall away and crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh and
put him to an open shame, after they have been once enlightened and tasted of
the good word of God, etc. That the heavens and the earth which are now, by the
word of God are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment
and perdition of ungodly men. -- That Christ will be revealed from heaven in
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God and obey not the
gospel of Jesus Christ, whom he will punish with an everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord and the glory of his power. -- Behold the Lord
comes with ten thousands of his saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to
convince all that are ungodly among them of, etc. -- We must all stand before
the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in the
body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad. -- Unto them
that are contentious and do not obey the truth but obey unrighteousness, the
righteous Judge will render in that day, indignation and wrath, tribulation and
anguish of soul. And the smoke of their torment will ascend up forever and
ever. From the whole it appears as evident as inspired language can make it.

1. That the time of life here on earth is our only probation-time for
eternity. Behold now is the accepted time! Behold now is the day of salvation!
God is now in Christ Jesus reconciling the world unto himself -- he is now on a
throne of grace, but after death is the judgment; after death, they that are
filthy will be filthy still; and they that are holy will be holy still. -- When
Christ comes to judgment then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up
the kingdom to God even the Father -- that God may be all in all. -- And

2. That after death unto the final judgment, while our bodies are in the grave
our souls will be in a fixed state of happiness or misery, according to the
state we were in when we gave up the ghost; -- if in Christ, of happiness; if
out of Christ -- of misery, and after the resurrection and final judgment the
wicked will be in a state of punishment in soul and body forever and ever.

Now if all mankind will finally be saved and happy, Why did Christ and his
inspired Penmen of holy scripture speak of the damnation and punishment of
wicked men, dying in their impenitence and unbelief, as being, after the day of
judgment, fixed for an eternal duration? Or why do they, when speaking of the
misery and punishment of wicked men in hell, always make use of such terms and
expressions, as are the most emphatical to impress our minds with an
apprehension of their eternal, or endless and neverceasing duration; without
the least hint, in other terms or expressions, that the damned shall finally be
released from the punishments of hell, and be translated to the regions of
eternal blessedness? What end could Christ and his inspired Writers have in
view, in using such words in such a manner, upon this awful subject of the
damnation of hell, as they knew all men of common sense must and would
understand to import endless, neverceasing duration; if they knew at the same
time the punishment of wicked men in hell will not be eternal, but have an end?
Yea, What reason can be given why Christ did not tell his hearers, that no man
would be finally lost, but every individual of mankind should finally be saved,
especially when one of his hearers made it almost necessary, by putting this
question to him. Are there few that be saved? Christ did not answer him saying,
"You are under a gross error or mistake by means of the damning doctrine of
your Teachers, who are proclaiming every where through the country, that wide
is the gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be
that go in thereat; because strait is the gate and narrow is the way that
leads to life and few there be that find it." -- No, No; but he said unto
them, "Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many I say unto you will seek
to enter in and shall not be able, when once the master of the house is risen
up and has shut to the door, and you begin to stand without and to knock at
the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us, etc." -- Which answer plainly
teaches, That none will be saved but such as enter the strait gate which opens
into the narrow way that leads to life eternal. -- That many of those that
shall seek to enter therein shall not be able and hence shall not be saved, and
that the reason why they shall not be able to enter the strait gate is, because
they will not begin to seek, or to stand at the door and to knock until after
the master of the house is risen up and has shut to the door, until after
their probation-time is at an end.

But if, notwithstanding what Christ and his inspired Penmen say to the
contrary, the damned, after suffering in hell a certain finite or limited
duration, shall be translated to heaven: Before we can receive this as an
article of faith, we must be able to produce in the scriptures of truth, a thus
says the Lord for it; but where will you find the divine testimony in the book
of God, that the wicked in hell will in some future period, either before, at
or after the day of judgment, be delivered from the pains of hell and made
blessed in heaven forever? And where is it said in the bible, that though
Christ and the inspired Writers speak of hell-punishment as everlasting,
eternal, forever and ever, etc. Yet it must not be understood, that they
taught, it would be properly everlasting, eternal, forever and ever, or to an
endless durarion? Or where is it said in the word of God, that the words
eternal, everlasting, forever, The original word (in the Greek) is but one for
all these in English.
signify endless, neverceasing duration, when joined with life and blessedness
in heaven; but never so when joined with destruction, punishment, or misery in
hell?

Besides, if the wicked in hell shall ever, hereafter, come out of hell and be
blessed in heaven, they must first pay the very last farthing or mite of the
debt of ten thousand talents, for which they were cast into the prison of hell;
for they shall not come out thence, until they have paid the very last farthing
or mite, is the testimony of Christ; that is, they must suffer in hell as much
and as long as they deserve to suffer at the hands of justice for the infinite
evil of sin, as it is a violation of infinite obligation to love and obey God!

Now it is possible for a finite Being to suffer as much as he deserves to
suffer for his sins, in a limited duration of time, or it is not: If it is
possible, then we did not stand in absolute need of Christ, as an infinite
Person to become our surety, and to make atonement for our sins by suffering
for us, the just for the unjust, in order to deliver us from the wrath that is
to come. For after persons have suffered as much as they deserve to suffer for
their sins, they must be immediately delivered from a state of suffering; it
will be no act of justice to hold them under punishment any longer: But such as
are delivered from hell on account of their own suffering, will not join with
the redeemed in heaven in ascribing their redemption to Christ, as having
redeemed them unto God by his blood: -- But it is not possible for sinners in
their own persons to suffer, in a limited duration of time, all that they
deserve to suffer for sin at the hands of justice, because sin is an infinite
evil, which God infinitely hates, and therefore an infinite punishment in
duration is what the sinner deserves to suffer for it at the hands of divine
justice.

But supposing it possible to suffer in hell as much s we deserve for our sins,
so as to be released from a state of punishment, this would not qualify the
sinner for the enjoyment of heaven; the inflicting punishment on men or devils
in hell has no tendency to take away their enmity against God, and to make them
his cordial friends; but this is absolutely necessary to our enjoying heaven,
if we do not love God for his own sake, if we do not love him supremely, yea,
if we do not love him in all his moral character as the heaven of heaven,
heaven will be no heaven to us!

But we are sure from the most sure word of prophesy, unto which we do well to
take heed, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God -- and
that such are all we, by nature as fallen creatures, and by practice sinners,
and therefore, that none of us will inherit the kingdom of God, but such as are
washed and sanctified and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus and by the
Spirit of our God.

4. That the holy scriptures abundantly call upon us to watch and pray that we
enter not into temptation -- to examine ourselves whether we be real christians
-- to watch our own hearts -- to see that we receive the love of the truth,
because such as do not receive it are in danger of being given up to strong
delusions to believe a lie that they may be damned -- to be vigilant and sober,
because the devil, our adversary is going about seeking whom he may devour, as
a roaring lion. -- To beware of satan's ministers -- wolves in sheep's
clothing, who transform themselves into the ministers of Christ: We must not
believe every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God, because there
are many false prophets gone out into the world, who will privily bring in
damnable heresies, by means of whose pernicious ways, the way of truth shall be
evil spoken of; and because, by all deceivableness and by good words and fair
speeches they will deceive the hearts of the simple, and use such cunning
craftiness to corrupt the minds of people from the simplicity in Christ, that
if it were possible, they would deceive the very elect, we must not go after
them, but let them alone -- for they are blind leaders of the blind -- their
words eat as does a canker -- their doctrine like leaven will spread and
infect, or like a fascination or charm, captivate the reason and bewitch the
senses or minds of people. "O foolish Galatians who has bewitched you, that
you should not obey the truth, etc. -- Ye did run well, who has hindered you?
I bear you record, if it had been possible, you would have plucked out your own
eyes and have given them to me. Am I therefore become your enemy, because I
tell you the truth?"

Ah, ah, you will say, false Teachers and their doctrines are to be avoided:
But who are these false Teachers? I will answer.

1. False Teachers (wolves in sheep's clothing) are ungodly men; sensual not
having the spirit of Christ; they may have the form of godliness, yet they
always deny the power thereof. -- They are of the world. -- They have never
been convinced, by the Holy Ghost, of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment.
-- Have never been slain by the law; never through the law become dead to the
law -- that they might live to God. -- Never had their mouths stopped and
become sensibly guilty before God, as justly condemned. -- Never seen
themselves cut off for their parts and brought to the feet of sovereign mercy
with a God be merciful to me a sinner. -- Never brought to justify God, should
judgment proceed against them in their everlasting punishment. -- Never had the
eyes of their understandings opened in the knowledge of Christ to see him in
his true character, as the Son of God and Savior of men, as having all fullness
in him, as being altogether lovely, so as to forsake all things, in affection
for him, and to have every imagination and high thing which exalts itself
against the knowledge of God, cast down, and every thought brought into
captivity unto the obedience of Christ. And to worship God in the spirit and
rejoice in Christ Jesus without any confidence in the flesh: -- Never been
formed into such a temper of mind, as to delight in the moral law after the
inner-man, as being just, holy, and good -- to love God's glory for its own
sake, as an ultimate good, and to live to the Lord, and glorify him in their
body and in their spirit which are his -- to esteem God's precepts concerning
all things to be right, and to hate every false way -- to repent and turn from
every evil way, and to abhor themselves and repent in dust and ashes. -- And to
exercise a truly benevolent affection toward all men, friends and enemies. --
It is true, they may have had awakenings and illuminations, and joys and
comforts, and great confidence of their good estate before God, and great gifts
of knowledge and utterance, speak with the tongue of men and angels, etc. and
yet have no charity, no love to God, no genuine benevolence to men, no friendly
affection to Jesus Christ and his kingdom; but be wolves, dogs, concision,
wholly wrapped up in a base, contracted, selfish spirit, inimical to God, Jesus
Christ, and mankind. -- And you may be sure, that Teacher is a wolf in sheep's
clothing, is destitute of true love to Christ, who lives in the neglect of
family religion, and teaches others to do so, at least by his practice, and
makes light of Christ's ordinances, institutions, and sacramental seals of the
covenant of grace.

2. False teachers are hirelings, whose own the sheep are not, they do not
naturally care for the good of the flock, the things which be Jesus Christ's.
-- They do not travel in birth of souls until Christ be formed in them; they do
not wrestle in prayer with God for the outpouring of his Spirit on sinners to
convince them of sin, to regenerate and effectually call them unto the
fellowship of the Father and of his Son Christ Jesus. -- And such are false
teachers, and manifest they have no true care for souls, that neglect to press
sinners to speedy repentance -- to a speedy flight by faith to Christ for
refuge -- neglect to pray and beseech them in Christ's stead to be reconciled
to God, to be at peace with him, and to live a life of universal obedience to
all the revealed will of God; and neglect to do it on principle! John said,
"The ax is laid to the root of the trees, every tree that brings not forth
good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire:" -- Christ said, "Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish." -- That such as will not cut off a right
hand, or put off the old man that is corrupt, must go to hell with all their
lusts, where the worm dies not and the fire is not quenched; and wept over
hardened Jerusalem saying, "How often would I have gathered thy children, as a
hen gathers her brood under her wings and ye would not." -- "Behold," etc. --
The Apostles called on sinners to "repent and be converted that their sins
might be blotted out." -- Prayed souls and beseeched them in Christ's stead to
be reconciled to God, and knowing the terrors of the Lord persuaded men,
saying, "How can ye escape if ye neglect so great salvation! -- Awake thou that
sleep and arise from the dead and Christ shall give you light: -- But while
ye cry peace and safety to yourselves, sudden destruction shall come upon you,
etc."

Such do not care for the flock, that neglect from time to time to urge
professors of religion to give all diligence to add to their faith virtue, and
to virtue knowledge, etc. And to give diligence to make their calling and
election sure; -- neglect to urge them to be holy in all manner of conversation
and godliness, and to give diligence to be found of the Lord in peace without
spot and blameless, from a consideration, "that the heaven and the earth which
now are, by the word of God are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the
day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men:" -- Neglect to urge them to
believe to the saving of their souls from a consideration, that such as draw
back, draw back unto perdition, and God's soul has no pleasure in them, and he
will swear in his wrath that they shall not enter into the rest which remains
for the people of God, as he swore unbelieving Israel should not enter into the
promised land of Canaan. -- The Apostle Paul says, "I have kept back nothing
that was profitable unto you, testifying both to the Jews and also unto the
Greeks repentance toward God and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ: Wherefore
I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men, for I
have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God." -- And again,
"Whom (Christ) we preach, warning every man and teaching every man in all
wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus."

3. Such are false teachers, who privily bring in damnable heresies. -- Privily
under sheep's clothing -- under a cloak of zeal for our good, they zealously
affect you but not well. -- Wrap them up in good words and fair speeches to
deceive the hearts of the simple. They corrupt the word of God, retain hidden
things of dishonesty -- walk in craftiness, and handle the word of God
deceitfully -- wrest the scriptures by their forced interpretations to speak
what the Holy Ghost never intended, yea, what is contrary to the letter and
spirit of the written word of God. -- The Apostle Paul says, "That we
henceforth be no more children tossed to and fro and carried about with every
wind of doctrine, by the slight of men and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie
in wait to deceive."

And here it may be affirmed without the least hesitation, that such a person
is a false teacher, who advances certain leading principles or tenets in
religion, which have a tendency to produce very fatal consequences to the souls
of men, if embraced, to maintain and support which, he is forced to contradict
the common sense of mankind, the common sentiments of the whole Protestant
Church, and the plain and obvious meaning of Christ and the inspired Penmen of
sacred scripture: -- Such is the doctrine of universal salvation as advanced by
the Stranger, his doctrine of purgatory or intermediate state, and of no
application of Christ, or effectual calling, conversion, or believing in Christ
as necessary in order to our being pardoned by God, justified as righteous in
his sight, received into his favor, and made heirs of eternal salvation through
Christ's name.

It may also be affirmed to be an infallible mark of a false teacher, if at his
first coming into a strange place, it is his practice to make use of such
language only, or forms of speech as he understands convey to them orthodox
sentiments until he has gained their affections, and then by little and little,
as he finds it will bear, to devulge his corrupt tenets in language directly
contrary to what he used at first* -- That is, more open and less equivocal;
thus the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty -- and thus the Apostle
feared the minds of the Corinthians would be corrupted from the simplicity that
is in Christ, by those Ministers of satan, who transformed themselves into the
apostles of Christ, or as the ministers of righteousness, even as "satan
himself is transformed into an angel of light."

4. As false teachers are of the world, they speak of the world and the world
hears them; but the Apostle says, "We are of God, he that knows God,
hears us; he that is not of God hears not us; hereby know we the spirit of
truth and the spirit of error." And Christ says to the Jews, "I am come in my
Father's name and ye receive me not; if another shall come in his own name, him
ye will receive." -- Again, "Why do ye not understand my speech? Even because
ye cannot hear my words -- and because I tell you the truth ye believe me not.
-- He that is of God hears God's words, ye therefore hear them not, because
ye are not of God. -- Many therefore of his disciples when they heard -- said
this is a hard saying, who can hear it? -- From that time many of his disciples
went back and no more walked with him." These were only nominal, that is to
say, not disciples indeed. -- Now as none can cordially acquiesce in the
doctrine of Christ, but such as are born of God, because it is directly
contrary to the sinful inclinations of our hearts, and we must deny ourselves
in complying with it; we must conclude, such teachers come not with the
doctrine of Christ, nor in his name, but in their own name and with the spirit
of the world; if wicked and carnal men find no difficulty in complying with
their doctrine arising from their own corrupt and sinful inclinations, and that
they would gladly become their disciples, but are kept back by the objections
from common sense, the light of their reason and conscience, and a rational
belief of the contrary truths. -- Let us illustrate this a little.

Christ preaches, that we must believe in him, repent and be converted and
become as little children, must deny ourselves and take up our cross daily and
follow him -- must forsake all that we have and love him above father, mother,
wife, children, house, land, and even our own life, yea must cut off a right
hand and pluck out a right eye that offends, or otherwise we must be damned, we
must go to hell with both hands and both eyes, even into a state of everlasting
punishment, where the worm dies not and the fire is not quenched.

But supposing a Stranger comes into Gloucester in A. D. 1775, and teaches,
"That Christ, by making complete atonement for sin by the sacrifice of himself,
has made up the breach between God and fallen men, so that all men are now
pardoned, all are justified, and all will finally be saved; Christ has bound up
the broken in heart; my bible says he has done it. Some, indeed, speak of
application to Christ as necessary, but my bible knows of no such application
as necessary to our being pardoned, justified, or saved eternally; no, we are
saved by grace, and justified freely through the redemption of Christ; all
mankind were in Christ before the foundation of the world; all men were chosen
in him in contradistinction to the fallen angels. -- Christ having given
himself a ransom for all to be testified in due time, he has made peace by the
blood of his cross for all, and God is now reconciled to the world, not
imputing to them their trespasses, and Christ is made of God unto all men
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. -- As we are in Christ
before we believe, so we are pardoned and justified before we believe, and our
sanctification is not in ourselves, but in Christ as our justification is in
him. -- God sees no iniquity in men, all men are the children of God. -- No man
is a child of the devil. -- The children of the devil, or of the wicked one,
are the tares, which the enemy or devil sowed in the world. Did the devil send
men into this world? No, no; but sin is of the devil and there are doctrines of
devils. -- These sins and errors are the tares, the hay, wood, and stubble,
which shall, in the end of the world be bound in bundles and sent away into
that everlasting fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels.

"That all mankind will finally be saved and made eternally happy, appears from
the declaration of the divine goodness and his will relative to this matter: As
I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; and
the Apostle Peter says, The Lord is long-suffering, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance, and the Apostle Paul speaking
of God our Savior, says, Who will have all men to be saved and come to the
knowledge of the truth -- nay, is it not expressly said, " As by the offense of
one judgment came upon all men to condemnation, even so, by the righteousness
of one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life. -- For as in
Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive. -- Christ gave himself a
ransom for all to be testified in due time. -- He tasted death for every man.
-- Christ is a propitiation for the sins of the whole world, and will draw all
men unto him.

"You must be sensible, beloved, that preaching this doctrine of universal
salvation, and that all are beloved of God, and interested in Christ, etc. is
preaching the gospel, that is, glad tidings of salvation unto all people. --
For how can ministers preach the gospel unto every creature, if every creature
has not an interest in Christ? Yea, How can God sincerely offer salvation to
all, if all are not to be saved? And how can any person believe; yea, how can
all be required to believe, if all are not to be saved?

"It is true, he that believes not shall be damned, but you know that the
words damned and condemned are used as synonimous, as for instance, he that
doubts is damned if he eats; and the word damnation signifies some temporal
loss, judgment, or calamity, when it is said, he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, for which cause some are
sickly, etc. Therefore, he that believes not shall be damned, must signify no
more than this, he shall be condemned in his own mind, and suffer the loss or
want of that comfort, which such enjoy, as believe; it does not mean that he
shall be damned forever; yea though such as die in unbelief may go to hell, or
to an intermediate state, where Judas went, when he went to his own place,
which may be a state of inquietude, or perplexity, yet they shall in due time
be finally released from that state and be blessed in heaven forever; for mark
the words, Christ gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time,
But To Marturio^ kairois idiois, as these words in other places are translated,
would literally be read thus in English, viz. A testimony or witness in his
times, or in proper times* -- Christ's giving himself a ransom for all, was a
testimony of God's grace, and of his being himself the one Mediator between God
and men; and this he did in the proper time fixed upon in the counsel of God's
will, or in his determinate counsel and foreknowledge. -- And there is also a
proper time for calling in the elect by the preaching of the gospel, called the
testimony of Christ: And it is to be preached to all nations for a witness or
testimony, and in every age to the end of the world, but to none after the end
comes -- for the Master of the house will shut to the door and Christ will
deliver up the kingdom to God even the Father, etc. -- Nor to any after they
give up the ghost, because the souls of wicked men are immediately in hell, and
good men in heaven, and a gulf is fixed between them, etc.
and Judas himself shall hereafter, as well as the rest of the twelve apostles,
sit on a throne judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

"And as to faith, or believing, which pretended divines and ministers of
Christ have wrote loads of volumes to define, that serve only to confound and
perplex the minds of the people; it is in no sense at all a condition or mean
of our interest in Christ, of our pardon, justification, or salvation; for
otherwise how are we saved by grace and justified FREELY? And besides;, is it
possible for our believing, to make a change in our real state, or to give us a
real interest in Christ? But whom shall we believe, the Bible or this Stranger?
The bible says, he that believes not is condemned already: -- By whom is he
condemned? By God. -- Again, that there is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus: -- And he that believes on Christ has everlasting life and
shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death unto life. -- That
all, while in a state of unbelief, are without Christ, having no hope, and
without God in the world, strangers to the covenant of promise, and children of
wrath; -- but when they believe in Christ, Christ dwells in their hearts by
faith, they are made nigh by his blood -- are no longer strangers afar off, but
fellow-citizens with the saints and of the household of God, they are all the
children of God by faith in Christ; if children then heirs -- heirs of God and
joint-heirs with Christ Jesus. -- A rich gift may be offered freely to a poor
man, which, if he receives, will make him rich; the free offer gives him a
warrant to receive it and use it as his own; but if he does not receive it, it
is neither his own, nor has he any grounds to expect any benefit by it: --
Bread is offered to a poor man perishing with hunger, but if he refuses to
receive and to eat it, he has neither interest in it as his own, nor is saved
from perishing by it. -- The king's son, heir apparent of the crown, offers
himself in marriage to a poor woman, with the full approbation of the king,
with a promise upon her accepting, that she shall be received into the royal
palace and considered as a joint-heir with her dignified husband. In this case
her accepting will make a great change in her state, and by refusing she not
only remains poor and low but is guilty of making light of the most
condescending offer!
-- No, it is only a believing the gospel, these glad tidings, which I preach,
that all men are interested in Christ. -- That God is reconciled to all. --
That all men shall be finally happy, etc. And hence that God is reconciled to
me in particular, that my sins are pardoned, etc. In believing thus our hearts
are filled with all joy and peace, and this faith works by love to God, we love
him because we believe he loved us first. -- We love Christ because we believe
he loved us and gave himself for us. -- Hence, my Brethren, away with all the
damning doctrine inculcated by all the preachers in these American Colonies,
except one or two at most. -- You do not hear me insist upon the nature and
necessity of regeneration, nor upon repentance toward God and faith toward
Christ as necessary to our being interested in Christ, pardoned, justified, or
saved; nor on our being new creatures -- holy as God is holy in all manner of
conversation and godliness -- on our keeping Christ's sayings, attending on the
administration of gospel-sacraments, and praying always with all prayer in
secret, in family, and public worship as necessary to evidence to ourselves and
before men, that we are in Christ, that our faith is not a dead faith, but that
we are such as are or shall be saved. -- And much less do ye hear me telling
the drunkard, the profane swearer, the whoremonger, etc. that they must repent
and be converted now while they have a space to repent and the long-suffering
of God is waiting on them, or else they must hereafter lift up their eyes in
torments, in an unalterable state of misery, where the worm dies not and the
fire is not quenched and the smoke of their torments shall ascend up forever
and ever! No, no; I do not choose to offend the ears of my hearers with such
disagreable sounds, but rather, leaving this to the preachers of this land, I
choose to entertain my auditory with noble speculations in divinity and
explications of deep mysteries in sacred scripture, such, for instance, as the
man's going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, etc. that this signifies Adam's
gradually falling -- fall-ing -- fall-ing until he quite fell among thieves,
even death and the devil, which, it seems, after stripping him of his raiment
and wounding him, departed from him and left him but half dead. Mark, my
hearers, Adam was but half dead, he had a life hid in Christ, which the eye of
that vulture, the devil, did not discern!" etc. And would it not be as just and
full as consistent with Christ's scope in the parable, to remark, that the
thieves were departed from the wounded man, before the Samaritan came to him!


Now, my Friend, is it necessary to ask the question, which of these two sorts
of doctrine and preaching is the most agreeable to corrupt nature, to our sinful
inclinations, and the selfish spirit of the world -- such as Christ and his
apostles preached, as specified in the foregoing pages -- or such as has been
just specified above, and which your Stranger may be supposed to preach quite
consistently with his leading principles? You must know, Sir, that drunkards,
profane swearers, whoremongers, and the most abandoned sinners, feel no
opposition to, no quarrelling in their sinful inclinations, affections, and
lusts, with such doctrine and preaching as the latter. -- They do not say, it
is a hard saying who can hear it? No, for it encourages them to bless
themselves in their hearts, saying, we shall have peace, though we walk in the
imaginations of our hearts to add drunkenness to thirst! And the little boys in
your streets are already caught in the snare and say, "We may swear and curse
and lie and quarrel and do what we will that is bad without any danger of going
to the devil in everlasting burnings; for Mr. M -- preaches that all men will
be saved and be happy forever."

This new scheme of religion is totally destitute of divinity, self-denial, and
true holiness -- it is Antinominiasm itself -- contrary to all divine law of
religion and holiness. -- The carnal mind, which is enmity against God, it
being not subject to the law of God, nor indeed can be, is cordially pleased
with this new scheme! -- This carnal mind is a mere selfish spirit -- a selfish
spirit is the very soul or spirit of wickedness, iniquity, or sin; -- if a
selfish spirit reigns in us, sin reigns in us, and we are the servants of sin
and under the power of the devil, and hate the Father and hate Christ, and are
enemies to both: -- And such persons will not come to Christ -- will not
believe in him -- will not have him to reign over them as Lord of their
conscience, faith, and obedience: They must be drawn of the Father -- they must
be born of God in order to believe in Christ; and must deny themselves and
forsake all they have, in the act of believing: -- But what is there in this
new scheme, that a person wholly under the power of sin, a selfish spirit, or
the carnal mind, could not heartily subscribe to? What need is there of being
born of God, in order either to believe, or to love God and Christ as required
in this scheme? If there is no application to Christ -- no application of
Christ to ourselves -- no uniting to Christ in believing, an unregenerate
person will be as able to believe as one that is born of God: -- And if wicked
men love such persons, as they believe love them, and an apprehension that
others love them, is the only motive of their love to the others; then wicked
men may love God and Christ with just such a love as is taught in this scheme,
to be the fruit of the faith described therein. -- The love which wicked men,
who were never born of God, have to God, to Christ, and to mankind, is wholly
selfish -- founded in self, even in the carnal mind, which is enmity against
God; and hence is not in the least degree holy, but altogether sinful.

Neither does this new scheme require godly sorrow for sin -- deep humiliation
and repenting as in dust and ashes -- watching and praying -- keeping under the
body and crucifying the flesh with the affections and lusts and the like, lest
otherwise we die -- we become castaways as urged by Christ and his apostles!
But on the contrary teaches, that God sees no iniquity in us, let us live as we
list, and that strait is the gate and narrow is the way which leads to
destruction and few there be, none at all, that find it; because wide is the
gate and broad is the way which leads to life and many there be, even all
mankind, go in thereat! What is the broad way to destruction, spoken of by
Christ, but error and sin? And what is the narrow way to life, but faith or
truth as it is in Jesus, and holiness?

This new scheme is a compound of heresies founded in a wrong application, a
misinterpretation, a perversion, and a wresting of the holy scriptures. The
written word of God contains a perfectly consistent system of religion, yet
every person of common sense, who reads the same with careful attention will
find many words used which have not in every place precisely the same meaning,
as for instance damned, saved, or damnation and salvation -- the will of God --
all men, etc. -- And the meaning may in general be known by the context and
parallel texts, or by the general analogy of sacred scripture.

What if the word damned may be used in some place to signify the same as
condemned, or the word damnation, the same as judgment, even a temporal
judgment; will it be agreeable to common sense, from thence to conclude, that
the damnation of hell, resurrection to damnation, and eternal damnation signify
no more than a temporal judgment! -- And wont it be just as sensible and
reasonable to conclude, that if the word saved or salvation may be used in some
places to signify only temporal deliverance from some judgment, eminent danger
or distress; that salvation from wrath to come, eternal salvation, and a being
saved as opposed to a being damned, signify no more than a temporal deliverance
from some temporal judgment? Christ says, he that believes -- shall be saved
and he that believes not shall be damned; if damnation here is temporal, why
not the salvation too? Follow this scheme but a little farther and you will
deny a future state of reward as well as punishment, and then join issue with
the atheistical and swinish Epicures, saying, Let us eat and drink, for
tomorrow we die. q. d. When we die there will be an end of us; we shall cease
forever to know either pleasure or pain, happiness or misery.

And what if the word God's will in some places is used to signify God's
absolute and sovereign decree, the purpose which he purposed in himself, called
his determinate counsel and the counsel of his will, after which he works all
things and which none can resist, for who has resisted his will? Will you from
thence affirm that this word is never used to signify something else? Or can
you deny that God's will in some places is used to signify the moral law, and
in some other places the gospel of salvation? The moral law is God's will, as
our moral governor and lawgiver and judge of all the earth, pointing out what
we must do to please him and what we must forbear to do on pain of suffering
his infinite displeasure. -- It is the will of God in the moral law that we be
holy as God is holy, perfect as he is perfect: But this will of God is not done
on earth as it is in heaven by any mere man; it is totally resisted and
rebelled against by multitudes; many that know their Lord's will, yet do not do
according to it. -- And it is the will of God, as a righteous judge, in the
sentence of condemnation, passed upon all men to suffer that punishment, which
is the just demerit of sin, that all men shall be damned; or the sentence of
condemnation, as it is a binding the condemned over to suffer damnation, is
God's willing as a righteous judge, that all such be damned. -- A judge's
condemning a criminal to suffer death by hanging until he is dead, is his
willing as judge that the criminal shall thus suffer.

The gospel of salvation is the will of God considered as the God of grace and
on the throne of grace, God reveals to us in the gospel, that a door of
salvation is opened for perishing men, that through the redemption of Christ he
can justify us freely, yea be both just and the justifier of him that believes
in Jesus: -- That he is willing to be reconciled to us, to pardon, justify, and
save all that will come to him by Christ, and his commanding his ambassadors to
go into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature, praying all in
Christ's stead to be reconciled to God, as though God by his ministers did
beseech them, and his commanding all men every where by the gospel to repent,
believe on Christ and to take the water of life freely and thus be saved, is
his not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance,
or his willing that all men be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth as
the means or way of salvation. -- Even as a king's issuing out an act of grace
to pardon all such rebels as will throw down their arms, submit to his
government, and accept of the offered pardon, is his not willing that any of
these rebels should perish as rebels, but that all should come to repentance
and receive a pardon. -- But there are many that resist the will of God in the
gospel, make light of God's gracious calls and invitations -- neglect so great
salvation -- and will not come to Christ that they may have life -- will not
repent and be converted that their sins may be blotted out, but go their ways,
provoking the holy one of Israel to anger until he swears in his wrath, that
they shall not enter in his rest, and in the great day will say to them,
because I have called and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand and no man
regarded; but ye have set at naught all my counsel and would none of my
reproof. I also will laugh at your calamity, etc.

As to all men, a careful reader will observe, that it signifies sometimes all
mankind, Adam with all his posterity coming into the world by ordinary
generation, as when it is said, by the offense of one judgment came upon all
men to condemnation. -- In Adam all die. -- By the deeds of the law no flesh
living can be justified in his sight. -- We must all stand before the
judgment seat of Christ; though when it is said, it is appointed unto all men
once to die -- there is an exception not only of Enoch and Elijah, but of many
millions who shall remain alive upon earth at the coming of Christ -- we shall
not all sleep but we shall be changed. -- Sometimes all sorts of men, as, that
-- supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all
men; for kings, and for all that are in authority. -- We are not required in
the word of God to pray for those that are in heaven; nor for those in hell, or
in your STRANGER's intermediate state, his purgatory; nor for such on earth as
have sinned the sin unto death; nor for the eternal salvation of the non-elect.
-- And sometimes all men signify all that the Father gave Christ out of the
world of mankind -- all that the Father chose in Christ before the foundation
of the world, that they might be holy, etc. All that were predestined to the
adoption of sons by Jesus Christ -- all that Christ calls his sheep for whom he
laid down his life with a special design to save; -- all called his seed, for
whose sins Christ made his soul an offering; -- all foreordained to be Christ's
church, which he loved and gave himself for that etc. -- foreordained to be
members of his body, and he to be their head as the second public man; the
second Adam: -- As the first man -- the first Adam had his body to which he
stood related as head, so the second man -- the second Adam has his body to
which he stands related as head; and as the body, or all men of the first Adam
were his natural seed by natural generation and birth, so the body, or all men
of the second Adam are his spiritual seed by a spiritual birth, by regeneration
-- created in Christ Jesus unto good works; -- hence, when it is said, by the
righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men to justification of life
-- in Christ shall all be made alive -- who gave himself a ransom for all. --
Tasted death for every man -- there is no difficulty in understanding all men
-- all and every man -- to mean, all that were chosen in Christ -- chosen to
salvation through sanctification of the spirit and belief of the truth -- all
given to the Son by the Father that shall come to him, and whom Christ will in
no wise cast out. -- We must either understand it thus, or else that by the
righteousness of one the free gift came upon all mankind unto justification of
life, and all mankind shall be made alive in Christ, and that Christ gave
himself a ransom for all mankind with an absolute design to save the whole and
every man in particular. -- But this latter we know is false, because
multitudes die in their sins, will be raised up at the last day to damnation,
and be punished with an everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord
and the glory of his power!

Yet as Christ took on him that human nature, which is common to all men,
whether considered as elect or not; as he brought in an everlasting
righteousness for the justification of men -- by his obedience to that law,
which is the law of righteousness unto all men. -- And obtained redemption for
men, by suffering, the just for the unjust, to the full satisfaction of divine
justice, that penalty which all mankind stood bound by the sentence of
condemnation to suffer; it follows, that his righteousness and atonement are as
sufficient for the justification, pardon and salvation of one sinner among men
as another, and for every sinner of mankind individually considered; and that
God can, as consistently with the honor of his moral law and government, on
Christ's account, pardon, justify, and save one as another, and every one
equally that shall accept of his gracious offer.

And as God's method of addressing himself to men in the ministry of
reconciliation, by setting before them life and death, a blessing and a curse,
yea, by holding out to them pardon, justification, and eternal life as a
free-gift, and inviting, beseeching, and praying them by his ambassadors to
accept of the same, or otherwise they must eternally perish, is a treating men
as men, as reasonable creatures, drawing them with the cords of a man. -- And
as he addresses himself to men in the ministry of reconciliation, not
immediately, but through the instrumentality of his ambassadors who know not
the hearts of men, nor whether all to whom they are sent to preach are elect or
not -- one has as good a warrant to belive in Christ the Savior as another, to
whom Christ is preached: -- And as every one is to blame for not believing in
Christ, it is his own fault that he does not, because he either sinfully
neglects, voluntarily makes light of, or wickedly treads under foot the offer,
and will not come to Christ that he might have life; it follows, that it is the
duty of one sinner as much as of another and of every one alike under the
gospel, to repent, to come to Christ, or believe in him: And as God knows none
can, none ever will come to Christ and be saved, except he draws them by his
efficacious grace, and yet when drawn they actually come -- beliving in Christ
as set before us in that gospel which is committed unto his ambassadors to
preach to every human creature, and commonly are drawn, and do come while
hearing the blessed gospel preached, for faith comes by hearing, etc. And as
they come to that Christ that all are invited to come to, beliving no one
proposition but what all are required to believe and cordially accepting of
that offer only which is made to all in the gospel: -- It follows, that such as
are saved, are saved wholly by grace in a way that excludes all boasting from
themselves. And that such as perish under the gospel are wholly inexcusable for
their neglect and will be punished for not believing on the name of the Son of
God. -- And as Christ's righteousness and atonement are sufficient for the
salvation of the whole world; and as all mankind in general, by virtue of
Christ's mediation and merits, have a temporary salvation -- a day of God's
forbearance -- a space to repent, or a time of probation. -- And as God is in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself -- Christ may be called the Savior
of all men -- the Savior of the world -- and a propitiation for the sins of
the whole world, so far, that whosoever, in all the world, believes in him,
shall be saved; -- yea, that if the whole world would repent and believe in
Christ, as God commands them to do in the gospel, they should be saved. -- And
yet such as will not believe in him, shall be damned. -- In an army there is
one instituted to be a Surgeon-General to the whole army -- all the sick and
wounded in the army have a right, by virtue of his being a Surgeon-General, to
apply to him; yet such as will not apply, or do refuse the use of his means,
will receive no benefit by him: -- Christ is by office the Savior, and only
Savior of the world -- there is none other name given under heaven whereby men
must be saved -- all are called upon to come to him, where the gospel comes. --
Whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life -- and
him that comes to Christ, he will in no wise cast out; but such as will not
come unto Christ that they may have life, abide in death, and the wrath of God
abides on them: -- Yet all that the Father gives Christ shall come. -- God
has engaged, in the covenant of redemption, on condition of Christ's making his
soul an offering for sin, and his bearing the sins of many, that he shall see
his seed and by his knowledge justify them. -- Hence from the considerations
above, it appears, that God may as sincerely offer salvation to such as he
knows will never accept of it, as to such as he is determined to make willing
to accept of it in the day of his power, for God may sincerely treat men as men
or as reasonable creatures. -- It also appears, that such as do believe in
Christ, in the act of believing, do not believe any one proposition but what
such are called upon to believe as finally perish in unbelief; nor accept of
any thing but what is offered to all alike in the gospel. Hence saving faith is
not a believing that I am in Christ, that God is reconciled to me, and sees no
iniquity in me. -- That my sins are pardoned, that I was never a child of the
devil, etc. -- But it is a seeing the Son as the true God and only and
alsufficient Savior of men, and a believing in him, trusting in him alone for
salvation -- a fleeing to Christ for refuge from pursuing vengeance to lay hold
on him as the hope set before us -- a coming to Christ weary and heavy-laden
with the burden of sin and guilt for rest -- a coming to Christ, sensibly
perishing with hunger and thirst, as to a feast, eating his flesh and drinking
his blood, as meat indeed and drink indeed: -- A bowing the knee at the name of
Jesus, cordially submitting to him as Prince and Savior, Lord and Christ,
counting all our own righteousness as loss and dung for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ, etc.

But as to your strange notion, that all mankind were chosen in Christ before
the foundation of the world, in contradistinction to fallen angels, I do not
know of one text of scripture that can be forced, even by misinterpretation, to
show the least countenance to it. -- Let us consider it in relation to a few
texts where election is mentioned, viz. Many are called but few are chosen.
Have the fallen angels ever been called? Christ says, "I lay down my life for
the sheep -- my Father gave them me -- but ye believe not, because ye are not
of my sheep." Were these fallen angels that were not of Christ's sheep? --
Again, "I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gave me out of the
world; thine they were and thou gave them me -- I pray for them: I pray not
for the world, but for them, which thou have given me; for they are thine:
"Does the world here signify fallen angels? -- Again, "And as many as were
ordained to eternal life believed." Were all those fallen angels who did not
believe? For it is certain there were multitudes who did not believe so much as
the devils did! Jesus I know and Paul I know, but who are ye? said the evil
spirit. -- Again, "Though the number of the children of Israel be as the sand
of the sea, a remnant shall be saved -- even so then at this present time also
there is a remnant according to the election of grace. -- The election has
obtained it, and the rest were blinded." -- Were the rest and all beside the
remnant, (the election) fallen angels? -- Once more, "Give diligence to make
your calling and election sure." Does it mean that we are to give deligence to
make sure that we are men and not fallen angels?

And as to your notion that the tares, explained to be the children of the
wicked one, the devil, signify, not wicked men, not heretics, but sins and
heresies, which shall be gathered together bound in bundles and burnt in the
end of the world, it is too senseless to be maintained by any person in his
right mind and professing to be guided by the scriptures of truth! Christ
expressly says, he means, by the tares, the children of the wicked one, the
devil, and by the children of the wicked one he means, them that do iniquity,
and that these shall be cast into a furnace of fire, not to purify, but to
torment them, where their torment is expressed by wailing and gnashing of
teeth. -- Are sins and heresies subjects capable of pain and torment!!! But to
wicked men Christ will say, in the judgment, "Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire -- I was hungry and ye gave me no meat," etc. Christ is
speaking to wicked men, when he says, Ye are of your father the devil and the
lusts of your father ye will do. -- Paul calls Elymas the sorcerer a child of
the devil -- because he was full of subtilty and all mischief -- an enemy of
all righteousness: And the apostle John says, Such men as commit sin are of the
devil, that is, who are workers of sin -- live in sin, and these he expressly
calls the children of the devil as opposed to the children of God, who are born
of God, do not commit sin but do righteousness, and are righteous even as their
Father is righteous. -- Their sanctification is not out of themselves, for they
are created in Christ unto good works -- are renewed in the spirit of their
mind -- created after God in righteousness and true holiness, are new creatures
-- have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts and have put on the
new-man, and as the elect of God, holy and beloved, have put on bowels of
mercies, kindness, gentleness, humbleness of mind, etc.

Dear Sir, time will fail me to say all that I want to say, to recover you out
of the snare of the devil. The scriptures speak of false teachers bringing in
privily damnable heresies, and of some being given up to a strong delusion to
believe a lie that they might be damned, and this as a punishment for not
receiving the love of the truth that they might be saved! I am sure that the
leading doctrines in this new scheme are damnable heresies, because they are
false doctrines, also when embraced for truth will effectually keep persons
easy and secure in an unconverted, Christless state. -- And how is it possible
for a godly man, an experienced christian, who has received the love of the
truth to be carried away with such gross errors, so contrary to the plain
letter of the word, and common sense, and gracious experience of all the godly?
-- Christ says, if it were possible they would deceive the very elect: Persons
must be infatuated or bewitched by a spirit of delusion, as the foolish
Galatians were, to be captivated into a belief of such palpable errors!

Once I did hope that you was a good man, that you had received the love of the
truth -- you did run well, who has hindered you? But if you was ever truly
converted to God through faith in Christ the Mediator, you was convinced of sin
-- that it rendered you obnoxious to the wrath and curse of God -- you saw
yourself in a condemned state, in danger of eternal damnation in hell -- the
wrath of God revealed from heaven against you -- your feet standing in slippery
places -- you was pricked in your heart, and with the three thousand, cried,
What must I do? Or, with the publican, God be merciful to me a sinner! You saw
yourself condemned by the just judgment of God, so that your mouth was stopped
and you felt yourself guilty before God. -- You found also, your heart was a
heart of stone, contrary to that which is good -- full of enmity against God --
that you stood in absolute need of a new heart and a right spirit: -- You was
also convinced, if you was ever saved, it must be in the way of free, sovereign
grace! -- And if you are truly converted, you was also convinced of
righteousness and judgment; Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to
every one that believes -- that by his obedience and death has brought in an
everlasting righteousness and made complete atonement for sin. You saw Christ
in his person and offices to be altogether lovely, desirable, precious, and
suitable, so that your whole soul united to him and counted all things as loss
and dung for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, to win Christ and be
found in him. -- You now began to find peace with God, began to delight in God
and his holy law, and to wage war against sin, all sin, and to feel a
benevolent affection toward all men, desiring that all might have repentance
toward God and faith toward our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that their sins
might be pardoned and their souls made happy in the favor, friendship, and
fellowship of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in walking in the light of truth
and holiness as God is in the light. -- Now a change of this importance every
true christian is experimentally acquainted with: And Christ's ministers are
traveling in birth of their people that Christ may thus be formed in them; and
if you have experienced a change of such importance, how unaccountable is it,
that you should be carried away after one, whose avowed principles necessarily
teach, That such a change is needless, and that all convictions of danger of
eternal punishment and wrath to come, which move sinners to strive to enter in
at the strait gate -- to press into the kingdom, (whereby the kingdom of heaven
suffers violence and the violent take it by force) and to flee for refuge to
lay hold on the hope set before them, are a mere delusion! Pray consider these
things -- and the Lord give you understanding in all things: -- It is no light
matter to be deceived in such matters as these -- or to be turned aside by a
deceived heart, so as not to be able to say, Is there not a lie in my right
hand? -- Christ says, "If any man will do God's will, he shall know of the
doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself -- and every one
that is of the truth, hears my voice."

To conclude, if you, Sir, or any other person, shall maintain for
scripture-truth, that the whole race of Adam, or all mankind will finally be
saved and happy; and that application or union to Christ by faith is not
necessary to our enjoying any saving benefit of Christ, or the like, I am as
sure that you, or such an one, is under a strong delusion to believe a lie, as
I am that the bible is a book of divine revelation, or that there is salvation
in Christ for men! adieu. -- I am your hearty welwisher,

JOHN CLEAVELAND.

POSTSCRIPT.
JUNE 25, 1776.
THAT cannot be true christian doctrine, which naturally tends to turn the
grace of God into lasciviousness: But such is the doctrine of universal
salvation, at taught by this Stranger, for nothing can have a greater tendency
that way than to teach, that all men shall be finally happy, even though they
live and die Pagans, Mahometans, worshippers of the Antichristian-Beast, open
enemies to the cross of Christ, whoremongers, adulterers, blasphemers,
murderers, etc.

That cannot be true christian doctrine, which is agreeable to corrupt nature,
or to that mere selfish spirit the carnal mind which is enmity against God: But
such is the doctrine of universal salvation; for nothing can be more agreeable
to carnal and wicked persons than this doctrine, that they shall have peace and
be finally happy, though they walk all their days in the imagination or
stubbornness of their own evil hearts, adding drunkenness to thirst, or the
like.

That cannot be true christian doctrine, which teaches, that it is no matter,
as to our future well-being, what our religion is in this world, whether the
christian or the pagan! Or whom we worship, the true God, or idols! Or whom we
serve and obey, Christ, or the devil! But such is this doctrine of universal
salvation; and hence it will not be at all strange, for those who embrace it,
to live, by and by, in the entire neglect of the instituted worship of God as
commanded by Christ, of family religion, and become openly, after awhile, as
their consciences grow more and more feared by resisting the light, downright
practical Atheists.

That cannot be true christian doctrine, which tends to make all, who embrace
it, Deists or Infidels: But such is this doctrine of universal salvation; for
such as embrace it, cannot embrace it, because it appears more evidently to
common sense to be scripture-doctrine than that of the everlasting punishment
of impenitent sinners in hell; nor because they can interpret what the holy
scriptures say of the eternal damnation of the wicked, so as to make the same
consistent with the doctrine of universal salvation, without doing the greatest
violence to the common sense, or meaning of words and language. -- What
boldness and violence too, to say, the chaff or tares, which shall be burnt in
unquenchable fire, signify, not men, but the sins and error of men, when they
cannot but know, that Christ says, They are the children of the wicked one, and
they that do iniquity! -- Also, to say, the goats, on the left hand of the
Judge, signify not men, but either the sins of men, or devils themselves, when
they cannot but know Christ says, the sheep and goats are the righteous and
wicked of all nations, and that as the righteous shall go away into life
eternal, so the wicked shall into everlasting punishment, represented by fire
unquenchable or everlasting! -- Now he that will do such violence to the
meaning of some passages of sacred scripture to establish a particular tenet,
would do violence to every passage to serve a turn, and thereby proves himself
to be an infidel, and hence that he never embraced this doctrine of universal
salvation from a conviction of divine authority for it, but because it was
agreeable to corrupt nature: Men that do not like to deny themselves and take up
their cross daily in following Christ -- that do not choose to have Christ to
reign over them, nor to keep his commandments, would be glad to persuade
themselves of enjoying happiness hereafter without passing the strait gate into
the narrow way of holiness and self-denial, even in the broad way that the
multitude goes in to do evil; for what wicked man is there that would not
heartily like to serve the devil all his days, or the desires of the flesh and
of the mind, and would not do it, if he could persuade himself that he should
be happy for all this, or should not suffer for it in the coming world? -- And
they that have fallen in with this persuasion, commonly advance this argument
for it; "That God is a merciful Being" and therefore for him to damn any of
mankind forever would be inconsistent with the goodness of his nature, and
imply that he made creatures to damn them, which is a thought they cannot
entertain of so good a Being: -- Which necessarily supposes several things, viz.

1. That devils will either be finally happy, or else, as they are creatures as
much as sinful men, God created them to damn them forever: By the way, God made
angels and men for his glory; but fallen angels and fallen men have fitted
themselves for destruction.

2. That there was no need of the sacrifice or atonement of Christ, in order
for our discharge from condemnation; for if it was inconsistent with the nature
of divine goodness to punish us with everlasting destruction for our sins, what
need could there be of Christ's dying for us to redeem us from the curse of the
la^^, and deliver us from the wrath which is to come, that we were condemned
unto? Yea, how came God to condemn us to everlasting punishment, if it was
inconsistent with the nature of his goodness to inflict it upon us? Or if it
was not an everlasting punishment that Christ died to redeem us from, what was
it? -- Only a temporal punishment, which would have had an end, though he had
not died for us! Then Christ died in vain, and the Deists are right, and the
bible is a book of nonsense! -- If I were to embrace this new doctrine I would
be so honest and consistent with myself, as at the same time to fling away the
bible, for it is impossible to reconcile it with the bible-religion, let common
sense be judge.

3. That those persons, who plead the above argument, have no proper conviction
and sense of the moral rectitude of God, his moral law and government -- of the
nature, evil, and demerit of sin -- of the nature of the remission of sin and
of salvation from it, nor of the nature and necessity of the atonement by
Christ in order to the same.

In a word, that cannot be true christian doctrine, but damnable heresy, which
makes sad the hearts of the godly, as it encourages wicked and vicious persons
to live without fear of eternal punishment, in the neglect of repentance -- of
their own salvation -- of religion and virtue, in the practice of every vice.

The following anecdote was communicated to me by a person of reputation, who
assured me that there was good authority for the truth of it, viz.

Turning to a part of his audience, where a number of privateers-men were
swearing at one another, said, "Well, you may go on and drink and swear and
damn your fellow-men and blaspheme your Maker and think to dishonor him; but
you do not dishonor him at all; you only magnify his grace and display the
merits of Christ so much the more." -- Huzza! Good doctrine for privateers-men!
cried out a certain C -- of a privateer.

It would not be acting out of character in the least for that person to
address vicious persons in such a manner, who asserts and endeavors to
propagate, that all men shall finally be happy, and that the most vicious and
criminal persons are beloved of God, if not as much beloved of God, while in
the practice of sin, as after they become penitent and virtuous. -- Query 1.
Whether such a teacher is not a minister of satan, an encourager of vice and
irreligion, and an enemy to virtue and pure religion? Query 2. Whether such a
teacher ought not to be taken care of by authority as an enemy to mankind and a
bane to civil society? "Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a reproach
to any people; -- one sinner destroys much good -- Let not an evil speaker be
established in the earth." -- God saw, in certain pretended prophets of
Jerusalem, "an horrible thing; they commit adultery, and walk in lies; they
strengthen also the hands of evildoers that none does return from his
wickedness; they are all of them unto me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof
as Gomorrah. Therefore, thus says the Lord of hosts concerning (those)
prophets, Behold, I will feed them with wormwood and make them drink the water
of gall; for from (these) prophets of Jerusalem is PROFANENESS gone forth into
all the land. -- Thus says the Lord of hosts, hearken not unto the words of
(these) prophets, that prophesy unto you; THEY MAKE YOU VAIN; they speak a
vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord; they say still
unto them that despise me, the Lord has said, YE SHALL HAVE PEACE; and they
say unto every one that walks after the imagination of his own heart, NO EVIL
SHALL COME UPON YOU." Jer. xxiii. 14, 17.

J. C.

THE ADDRESS OF THE LATE REVEREND MR. CHANDLER, TO HIS PEOPLE, By the Desire of
many of his bereaved flock is here inserted, in order to preserve it, and that
though he is dead, they may as it were hear him still speaking in his dying
testimony for the truth and against error. It is here verbatim as printed in
the Essex Gazette, February 14, 1775.
"To the Printers of the Essex Gazette.
"The following Address was lately delivered to the people of my charge, and
many of the hearers have desired it might be printed in your Gazette. If you
will insert it in your next, you will oblige them, many of whom are your
constant readers.

" Gloucester, February 3, 1775. "My Brethren and Friends,
"I Have much sorrow of heart considering the state of affairs among us. -- I
am far advanced in life, and labor under threatening maladies, and know not how
soon I may be taken from you and from this world. As one drawing near the
eternal world I would give you caution -- Take heed what you hear. The seeds of
heresy are sowing and sprouting up among us; and souls are in danger of being
seduced into errors.

"There is one, who calls himself John Murray, It is not the Reverend Mr, John
Murray, of Boothbay.
who has declared the following things to be his settled opinion. -- That the
whole human race, every one of Adam's posterity, have an interest in Christ and
are God's beloved ones. -- That the whole human race, every individual of
mankind shall finally be saved. -- That Judas shall sit upon a throne in the
kingdom of heaven. -- That at death the good go into happiness and the bad into
an intermediate state, a place of misery, to abide there for a certain season,
but shall finally be saved; which however dressed up in soft terms and smooth
expressions, is the very popish purgatory.

"The substance of these things, and many other errors, he has openly avowed
and fully declared to be his sentiments, at my house, in the hearing of many
witnesses. "The witnesses are men of reputation for veracity, solid judgment,
and religion, and are ready to attest the truth of what is related in this
address, and would do it, if there was need of it."
These are unscriptural tenets, and notwithstanding all his perverting of the
holy scriptures, and wresting and torturing the word of God, he was not able to
produce one plausible proof, nor one rational argument for the support of these
pericious principles. -- They naturally lead to many other gross errors and
popish absurdities. -- And they are extremely dangerous to the souls of men:
They encourage the wicked in their wickedness; for upon these principles a man
may live and die in sin, and yet go to heaven at last; he may get drunk, and
commit fornication and adultery, he may cheat, and steal, and lie, and indulge
all manner of carnal gratifications, and be saved notwithstanding.

"But you may say, you do not discover any of these errors in his preaching. --
Why others, who have been accounted serious, discerning, judicious men, and
whose judgment would heretofore have had some weight in your minds, have
discovered them in his public discourses.

"But however, he seems artfully to hide them, your minds are not prepared to
receive them, your affections must first be broke off from your ministers, and
your minds filled with prejudices against them by their being reviled and
vilified, and your affections set upon himself, and you brought to receive the
words of his mouth with an implicit faith, then doubtless these dangerous
doctrines, and many others, will be inculcated.

"My brethren and friends, I must caution you to take heed and beware of false
teachers. Beware, lest ye be led away with errors and fall from your
stedfastness. -- Beware of false prophets, concerning whom our blessed Savior
has warned us, that if it were possible they shall deceive the very elect.

"SAMUEL CHANDLER.

FINIS.
Now in the press, and speedily will be published, and sold by E. RUSSELL, at
his printing-office, upper end of main-street, Salem. The Fifth EDITION of Dr.
GILL'S excellent Three SERMONS on the present and future State of the Church.
SER. I. Isa. xxi. 11, 12. The burden of Dumah. He called to me out of Seir,
Watchman what of the night? Watchman what of the night? The Watchman said, The
morning comes and also the night: If ye will enquire, enquire ye; return,
come. -- Wherein he shows there has, from the beginning, been a succession of
night and morning, darkness and light. -- And shows what time of the night is
is with us at present. -- SER. II. 1 Chronicles. xii. 32. And of the children of
Issachar which were men that had understanding of the times, to know what
Israel ought to do: The heads of them were two hundred, and all their brethren
were at their commandment. -- Which is an application to the former Sermon, in
which he gives us an excellent description of good works, placed upon their
proper foundation. -- SER. III. Psalm lxxxvii. 3. Glorious things are spoken of
thee, O city of God, Selah. -- In which he represents to us not only the
spiritual, but likewise the personal reign of Christ on earth a thousand years.

* Those Gentlemen who are possessed of subscription-papers for these Sermons
are requested to return them to the Publisher immediately, as the names of the
subscribers will be printed.

The Publisher hereof intending in a few weeks for Boston, his native place,
from whence, during the troubles which that unfortunate and devoted Metropolis
has met with, he was drove by the tyranny and cruelty of a British
administration, would inform Country Shopkeepers, Travelling-Traders,
Flying-Stationers, and others, That he has still remaining on hand a number of
new books, etc. on the times, which he is determined to sell EXCEEDING CHEAP,
either by the groce, hundred, dozen, or single, rather than to be at the
trouble and expense of removing them. -- Among which assortment are, just
published, (curiously ornamented with Five Plates,)

The CONTINENTAL KEY of the LIBERTIES of AMERICA: In three Parts. To which is
annexed, The Lamentations of a bad market.

Perhaps the critics of the age,
May find a fault in every page,
Or yet, perhaps, in every line,
Well, they have their faults, I have mine.
If any man should ask the price,
One or two shillings take your choice:
Sometimes true whigs have given twenty.
But tories think that five is plenty.
The first and second volumes of that excellent and much-admired pamphlet,
entitled, COMMON SENSE, addressed to the inhabitants of America. -- A Letter
from King Agba^us to our blessed Savior, with the Answer. -- The American
Wonder, or the New England Vision of the Night. To which is added, a Preface,
with a concise Retrospect of the present unhappy civil war in America,
containing a list of the killed and wounded officers and soldiers, as far as
the battle of Quebec. -- Nimble and Quick, or the Humor of the Age, etc. -- A
Poem on the death of the truly gallant and heroic JAMES MUGFORD, late Commander
of the Franklin Privateer, belonging to Marblehead, and the particulars of the
fight. -- With a variety of other new poems and songs. -- Likewise, a quantity
of good writing-paper, some pocket-books, and a parcel of household furniture.


