OBSERVATIONS: ON THE RECONCILIATION OF GREAT BRITAIN, AND THE COLONIES; IN
WHICH ARE EXHIBITED, ARGUMENTS FOR, AND AGAINST, THAT MEASURE.

By a FRIEND of AMERICAN LIBERTY.

Salus Populi suprema lex esto. Let the GOOD of the PEOPLE, be the Foundation
of all LAW, and CIVIL GOVERNMENT.

PHILADELPHIA; Printed, by ROBERT BELL, in Third-Street. MDCCLXXVI.

TO THE READER.
THE Substance of the following Piece was drawn up by a Friend to American
Liberty, to oblige a few of his Friends, some of whom were for, and others
against a Reconciliation with Great- Britain; they on both Sides freely perused
it in Manuscript, and as the principal Subject of it is become a general
Subject of Conversation, is in itself very important, and ought to be
deliberately weighed before it is determined; it appeared to some of the Persons
into whose hands the Manuscript had fallen, that it would be proper to have it
laid before the Public; accordingly they sent it to the Printer. And though
this is chiefly on one Side of the Question, yet they would be willing to see
the Arguments on the other Side calmly and rationally urged, and the Subject
set to view in its full Light.

As a Matter of such Importance should be well weighed before its determined,
and cannot be well weighed and considered, unless the Reasons on both Sides are
properly viewed; it is proper the Reasons on both Sides should be fairly
exhibited.

Just Printed, Published, and now selling, By R. BELL, in Third Street,
Philadelphia; (Price Three Shillings.)
PLAIN TRUTH; Addressed to the Inhabitants of AMERICA, containing, Remarks on a
late Pamphlet, entitled COMMON SENSE: wherein are shown, that the Scheme of
Independence is Ruinous, Delusive, and Impracticable: That were the Author's
Asseverations, Respecting the Power of AMERICA, as Real as Nugatory;
Reconciliation on liberal Principles with GREAT BRITAIN, would be exalted
Policy: And that circumstanced as we are, Permanent Liberty, and True
Happiness, can only be obtained by Reconciliation with that Kingdom.

Written by CANDIDUS.

Will ye turn from flattery and attend to this Side?
There Truth, unlicenc'd, walks; and dares accost
Even Kings themselves, the Monarchs of the Free*
THOMSON on the Liberties of Britain. N. B. To this Pamphlet, is subjoined a
Defense of the Liberty of the PRESS, by the sagacious and patriotic JUNIUS,
Author of the celebrated FREE LETTERS, to his present Majesty, and his
Ministers.

Also, Just Printed, Published, and now selling, by said BELL, in Third Street,
(Price only One Shilling.)
ADDITIONS TO PLAIN TRUTH; Addressed to the Inhabitants of AMERICA, containing
further Remarks on a late Pamphlet, entitled COMMON SENSE, wherein are fully
shown, that AMERICAN Independence, is as illusory, ruinous, and impracticable,
as a liberal reconciliation with GREAT BRITAIN, is safe, honorable, and
expedient. WRITTEN BY THE AUTHOR OF PLAIN TRUTH.

The enjoyment of Liberty, and even its support and preservation, consists, in
every man's being allowed to speak his thoughts, and lay open his sentiments.

Quotation of the American Congress, in their Address to the Inhabitants of
Quebec from that friend to Mankind, MONTESQUIEU. N. B. To this Pamphlet, is
annexed for the information of all AMERICANS, who wish to know, and to enjoy,
the very LAWS and PRIVILEGES, which themselves have decreed, A Defense of the
Liberty of the PRESS, by the HONORABLE, The CONTINENTAL CONGRESS.

MEMORANDUM. If to Preserve, any Part of the WORKS of valuable WRITERS, has
always been looked upon, as doing good Service to the PUBLIC; The EDITOR hereof
may hope, that his present endeavors will prove acceptable, at least, to all
the lovers of FREEDOM, who are so consistent, as to acknowledge, that the PRESS
ought to be free for OTHERS, as well as for THEMSELVES.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE RECONCILIATION 0F GREAT BRITAIN AND THE COLONIES.
A RECONCILIATION between Great Britain and the Colonies, has been much in the
thoughts of the Americans. At the beginning of the war it was ardently desired
in general, if not by all; but now it is not desired, but feared by many; and
it has become a public inquiry whether it is best there should be a
reconciliation, or a proper separation, and we in America be independent. It
certainly must be agreeable to all rational people to have the war properly
terminated. But how shall it be done? It certainly will be very difficult to
heal the breach that has been made, and bring the war to a proper end and
issue. It was begun, and has been carried on in such a manner, that the
termination of it, must be peculiarly difficult. Whenever the settlememt of our
affairs is attempted, it should be with great deliberation and calmness.
Self-interest, party spirit, heats and animosities should have no part in a
matter of so great importance.

To terminate the present war, to determine the rights and privileges of
America, and settle its civil government, is a most momentous affair. It is to
do the work of ages; it should not be done suddenly. All possible light and
assistance should be afforded to those that manage the business. It is really
too much to trust to any number of men, as representatives, if it could
possibly be avoided. If it was possible, it would be best the whole continent
should give their voice in the matter: But a few no doubt must be trusted with
this interesting concern; and they will doubtless find it a weight that they
will be ready to groan under, if they are impartial and faithful men, as I
trust they will be. It is so great an affair, that it should with caution be
entrusted to any men. Their is danger of men. There is danger that they may be
mistaken, or biassed, or some way influenced to take a wrong measure. If
Britain condescends to treat with America, by general congress, or any
representatives of ours, she will no doubt use all possible art, proffer many
favors, nor will her money be hid from those that are entrusted to settle the
affair. In this view we have more reason to fear the money and favors of
Britain, than her arms, and open opposition. Those have often done more fatal
execution than these. But we have reason to hope: Our congress has done
worthily. They have nobly exposed their lives and estates in the cause of
liberty, and defense of their country; and shall they, or any others that may
come in their room, give up our privileges? God forbid! I trust it will not be.

It was just now said, that if possible the whole continent should settle our
affairs; but since it must be done by representatives, they should as much as
possible know the minds of the people in general. For this reason among others,
it should not be done hastily. Whenever an accommodation is proposed, it would
be well for every country, if not city and town, to publish their views or
sentiments of the thing, as was done respecting our liberties at the beginning
of our present troubles. Then, almost every county, and many towns met and
published their resolves, concerning our rights and privileges, which thing
greatly tended to unite and strengthen the whole continent. Something similar
might be done now, or when matters are about to be settled.

The settlement of American government being as we hope for ages, or even to
the end of time, we may well take time for it; use all proper means, and get
all possible light. For this reason it might be proper, that a number of pieces
should be published on the occasion, with calmness, temper and sound reasoning.
There will be different sentiments, and which all may publish with candor, and
offer their reasons fairly. The grand inquiry is, concerning the issue of the
war; in what way and manner it must be accomplished, or attempted; or how we
shall settle matters with Great Britain? And here an interesting and important
inquiry occurs, viz. Shall we be reconciled to Great Britain, so as to be under
her government, or shall we be independent? To determine this, another question
arises, viz. Have we a right to be independent? We all believe an overruling
providence, we have appealed and applied to God in our present struggle; we
believe that the sovereign of the universe, the judge of all the earth,
disposes of nations and kingdoms, and that sooner or later he will visit for
iniquity. We have reason therefore to view the equity of our proceedings, and
inquire whether we have a right to be independent.

The question then is, Has Britain forfeited her right to our dependence, so
that she cannot in justice claim it, nor we be under any obligation to submit
to it? It is certain we were once dependent, and under British government; it
is a proper enquiry then, How can we be independent? To know whether Britain
has forfeited her right to our dependence, See the appendix at the end.
we must a little consider the nature of civil government. -- In a state of
nature, as in the first ages of the world, or before mankind were formed into
societies for civil government, every man had a right to enjoy himself, and the
work of his hands, and what he took in hunting, etc. if he injured not any of
his fellow creatures, who had the same right. And in that state of nature, each
man had a right to defend and vindicate himself, if assaulted or injured by
others. But when men were formed into civil societies, each man gave up this
right to defend and vindicate himself, to judge and determine in his own case,
and left all this to the civil magistrate; and the duty and proper business of
the civil magistrate, was, is, and ever will be, to defend and protect the
people, in the peaceable enjoyment of their properties and privileges.

The whole design of civil government or magistracy, is the good of the people.
A magistrate as such, has no right or authority but from the people. It is true
a man may in a tyrannical and arbitrary manner, assume power over others, and
oblige them to submit, as has often been the case; and the people may think
proper so to do; and this their submission may become a sort of compact, and
the ruler and ruled be mutually bound to each other. But still the proper end
and design of magistracy, is the good of the people, and in reason and equity
it cannot be any thing else. This is so easy that I need not enlarge. A
magistrate then by office, and by oath, if there is an oath in the case, is
bound to defend his subjects in the enjoyment of their properties and
privileges, and people are bound to him only in consequence of this, or in
connection with it. To suppose otherwise would be to destroy all liberty and
property, and to promote the most absolute tyranny; but I need not insist, for
this is out of dispute.

To come to the case in hand then, let us suppose that Britain, or any other
kingdom, had a part of its dominions, an island, or continent, lying at a
distance, America for instance. That this should be attacked by a foreign
enemy; upon which America cries to Britain the source of national power, for
protection and defense. Britain regards not, protects not, but leaves them to
the rage and fury of their enemy, by whom America is at length overcome and
subdued, when Britain had it in her power to have afforded help, protected and
saved them. After some time, by some means America extricates itself out of the
hand of the enemy, and defends herself. Has Britain, after this, a right to
govern America, and require submission to her authority? Would not Britain's
right to American government and dependence be forfeited? The case is clear;
Britain did not her duty to protect and defend, but left America to be subdued
by another, and America is thereby entirely free from British authority.

Again, let us suppose a case, that when America had been thus attacked, and
left destitute of British protection, America was not subdued by the enemy, but
after a long struggle, while Britain had opportunity to interpose, but would
not, the Americans should get the better of their enemies, though at a vast
expense of blood and treasure; would America, after that, be under any
obligation to submit to British authority? By no means. America had not the
protection that was her due, but expended her own blood and treasure, and no
thanks to Britain she was not wholly destroyed. Again, suppose that instead of
leaving America to the depradation, of a foreign enemy, Britain herself should
act the part of an enemy; refuse us the privileges which are ours by
constitution, seize our properties, and deprive us of our mutual rights; in
which case America expostulates, pleads, submits to all equitable impositions,
which are according to constitution, begs she may be relieved, and not driven
to extremities; but Britain proves deaf to entreaties, seizes our properties,
and deprives us of our privileges, by which means America is obliged to defend
herself, by force, which in t^^ reason and nature of things, she has a right to
do. That in this case we have a right to defend ourselves, is determined by the
declaration and conduct of these colonies in the present struggle, therefore
will not now be disputed by Americans. I do not pretend to reason with
professed tories, but with those that allow, that we have righteously and
properly taken up arms in our defense.


To proceed then; suppose in this struggle America should, after spilling much
blood, and expending much treasure, get the better of Britain and prevail till
Britain chooses to cease hostilities: would America then be under obligation to
submit to British government? Every rational person would say, that Britain had
forfeited her right to American dependence. There can be no more reason why we
should submit to Britain, after she had acted the part of a cruel enemy
herself, than if she had left America to the rage of a foreign enemy. Yea much
less reason.

I have only one case more to suppose; Should Britain proceed against America,
as in the last supposition, till she had put us to much expense, shed much of
our best blood, burnt our sea port towns, deprived us of our trade, and means
of livelihood, but when she found it would not answer to proceed against us to
bring things to a crisis by the sword, should propose a reconciliation, by our
being under her government; are we obliged in justice to comply? Has she a
right to require it? This is our case. What obliges us to submit to British
government! It is not for want of will and disposition, in her that she does not
proceed against us to the utmost. She has endeavored to crush us, and expected
that what she has done would have accomplished it. Britain expected by her
armed force, the Fishery Bill, and others of the same cruel kind, by starving
and blood shed, to have reduced us to an entire submission. She has acted
directly contrary to all her obligations to protect and defend us, most
unjustly pronounced us rebels, and treated us as such: And is still treating us
as rebels. How strange is it that Britain should declare us rebels, seize our
effects, and try every way to hurt us, at the same time that she proposes an
accommodation, and appoints Commissioners to treat with us! Is it not evident
that the commission for an accommodation is nothing but a sham, designed to
blind the people in England and keep them quiet, while they are made to
believe, that the Americans have very generous terms of accommodation offered
them, and also to give the tories among us, a covered opportunity to exert
themselves and cause divisions?
She proposed to bring the body of the people into subjection, and set the
heads of some of the chiefs; upon Temple Bar. Let her dreadful and bloody
treatment of us, against all our cries and petitions for lenity, a long time
presented, appear in its proper light, and stand full in view, as it ought; and
in that view judge whether she has forfeited her right to our dependence and
government, and whether it is necessary in point of equity for us to submit.

But if Britain has forfeited her right, and we are at liberty in point of
equity to be independent; yet it is a query whether it is prudent; whether it
will be best for us to assume our right, and whether on the whole we ought not
yet to desire and endeavor to be in connection, and under the government of
Great Britain. I come therefore to view the arguments for and against our
reconciliation with Great Britain.

First Argument. However, we may view the thing, Britain will not give up her
right to govern us, but will strenuously insist upon it, so that if we declare
for independency, it will involve us in a long and bloody war, and be our utter
ruin in the end; especially as in this case our friends in Great Britain will
forsake us, since most, if not all of them, have befriended us on supposition,
that we will still be in subjection to Great Britain. Our having so many
friends in Great Britain, is the reason that our enemies find themselves
perplexed, and cannot so fully exert themselves against us; if it is once found
that we declare for independency, Britain will be united against us. Those that
have been our friends will no longer embarrass our enemies, but Britain united,
will exert herself against us, with such vigor, that we shall soon be
overcome, or reduced to unknown difficulty.

Answer. Let Britain be ever so much united, she cannot victual out an army and
fleet, and maintain them at this distance, so as to destroy, or reduce us to
unknown difficulty. Should Britain, without foreign aid, attempt to fit out and
victual an army of 25,000 men, and 10,000 sailors to guard our coast, it would
cause such a scarcity among themselves as would be their ruin, now their trade
is so diminished, and their importation of provisions from us cut off. But
suppose they could and should do this; an army of 25,000, and 10,000 sailors,
would by no means subdue us. We can raise five to one against this number. And
should Britain call in foreign aid, as she must if she does any thing to
purpose; that would induce us to do the same. And should we make application,
we could soon have such assistance, that Britain could not prevail against us.

Second Argument. If we declare for Independency, Britain will not for time to
come, protect us against other nations, and we should in time, and probably
very soon, become a prey to the French or Spaniards, or some other enemy.

Answer. If we were once Independent, it would be the interest of all the
European nations to keep us so. They would not let any one nation engross us
and our trade, lest such an acquisition should enable that nation to be too
powerful for its neighbors. Thus some small states in Europe are kept
independent. The trade to North America would be such a boon to several
European nations, that neither of them would let it be engrossed, or us be much
hurt by another.

Third Argument. If we unite with Britain, we may have our expenses refunded,
and recover damages for our losses; but if we declare for independency, we
shall lose all.

Answer. 1st, It is not in the disposition, or even in the power of Britain, to
make good our damages. There are no such proposals by them, or like to be,
therefore it cannot be used as an argument with any propriety. 2d, If Britain
should consent to this, it would yet be much better for us to repair our own
damages as well as we can, in a state of independency, than to have Britain
repair them in a state of subjection to her. In a few years, it would be as
cheap to us, our expenses would be so much less, and our revenues so much
greater in a state of independency.

Argument Fourth. Our independency would ruin Britain, and surely we cannot be
so cruel toward our Parent, though she has dealt something hardly with us.

Answer. 1st, Notwithstanding our independency, we may trade with Britain as
much, if not more than with any kingdom in Europe; and if she will retrench her
needless expenses of placemen and pensioners, and the luxuries of the great,
she may yet survive. With a proper part of our trade, and a reformation of her
manners, Britain may subsist as well as some other kingdoms in Europe. 2d, We
may by treaty agree to help, and defend Britain upon particular occasions, as
need may require. 3d, If Britain is ruined, it is by her own misconduct, and we
cannot help it. If she is ruined, it is because she is ripe for ruin, and God's
judgments must come upon her; in which case we ought to be disunited, if we
can, and not connected with her.

Argument Fifth. If we will not submit to a reconciliation with Britain, she
will procure the French and Spaniards to join with her, to bring us into
subjection, or destroy us. Britain would grant part of those provinces to the
French and Spaniards, as a reward for helping to subdue the remainder, rather
than we should be independent. And should Britain grant this, the French and
Spaniards would soon help to conquer us.

Answer. 1st, This is but a mere imagination, or rather a bugbear to scare
people that know no better. 2d, The French and Spaniards had much rather help
America against Britain, than Britain against America. 3d, It would be much
better for the French and Spaniards to have America independent, and they
allowed a free trade with the whole continent, than for them to own a part of
it, without a free trade. It would cost them much to guard and defend their
part, which would probably be a bone of contention; whereas if we were
independent, they would have the benefit of our trade without any cost. 4th,
Should France and Spain join with Britain against us, we should apply to
Holland, the King of Prussia, and other powers, which would bring on a general
war in Europe, which would relieve us, so that we might continue independent.
5th, Against all such imaginary evil and danger as this argument supposes, or
any that may possibly occur, we have this to support us, that our cause is
good, and we have the Great Disposer of all things to confide in, and apply to.
We have not run presumptuously into danger, nor are we proposing an
independency that is unjust or unreasonable. What we propose is the most
equitable, rational, natural mode of civil government; most adapted to answer
the ends of government, according to the word of God. A government most
favorable to religion as well as liberty, and the natural rights of mankind.
In this way we have abundant reason to think that God will smile upon and bless
us; will prosper our equitable proceedings, and prevent the evils that earth or
hell may devise against us.

Argument Sixth. The Congress has lately applied to Britain, and petitioned for
a reconciliation, and therefore if Britain complies with our proposal, we
cannot with honor and justice refuse to treat with her.

Answer. 1st, We may hold a treaty, and try to come to some proper agreement,
as to trade; enter into a league offensive and defensive, and yet maintain our
independence as to government. 2d, Our petition and offer of reconciliation,
should be viewed only upon condition, that Britain would redress our
grievances, repeal several acts of parliament, and place us in as good a
condition as we were in 1763, which must imply making good our damages; which
Britain is by no means likely to do. 3d, But the most proper answer to this
argument is, that things are much altered since our petition last July, or the
beginning of September, when it was offered to the King. If our petition had
been complied with, it ought to have been complied with immediately. It was
offered in a critical time, we were then in the utmost danger, beset on all
sides. Since that time much of our precious blood has been spilt; one of our
best generals slain, several large towns burnt, and others cannonaded, beside
immense cost. If we were held by that offer of the Congress, it ought to have
been immediately complied with, or at least we should have been told that it
would be considered as soon as possible; that it should be laid before the
parliament as soon as they met. But instead of this, we were told that no
answer would be given, and there was not a word of it in the King's speech to
the parliament, framed by the ministry, nor an item of any reconciliation with
the colonies; nothing but the same process of fire and sword that we had been
treated with. Yea afterward, when Governor Penn had been examined before the
House of Lords, and the Duke of Richmond made a motion that the last petition
from the Continental Congress, should be made a basis for a plan of
accommodation; the ministerial party opposed it, and it was thrown out by 86
against 33. And if the petition is taken under consideration after all, it is
by constraint, not willingly; it is because they find that providence has
smiled upon us, and frowned upon them, and they know not how to accomplish
their cruel designs as they proposed. And is there not all the reason in the
world, that we should say that we cannot make the same offer now that we did
eight months ago, and that we are not bound by the offer we then made. If A
offers B a horse at a certain price, and B does not accept the offer, A has a
right to withdraw it, and is not obliged to let B have the horse on the same
terms any considerable time after, especially if circumstances are much altered
in the mean time, and more especially if the alteration is A's damage, by B's
neglect to comply with A's offer at first. This is our case with Britain. We
are therefore no way bound by the petition we sent last July.

I come now to offer the arguments for independency, and against our being
under British government.

First Argument. By independency we shall avoid tyranny, and oppression. If we
submit to British government, we shall be continually cramped with Governors,
and other officers appointed by the crown. All those in authority over us, will
be such as suit the ambitious designs of Great Britain, however contrary to our
interest. If we are under British government, we can make no laws to our
advantage, unless Britain views them so, and they receive a sanction there. Not
a new county can be formed, or choose representatives without leave from home.
If we are independent we may yearly choose such rulers as suit us best; but if
subject to Britain, we must be under a King that comes by succession, however
unfit to rule, which is often the bane of government. If we choose our rulers
annually, or once in three years, they are at the end of that time, again put
on a level with their fellow subjects, and are liable to be called to an
account for mal-administration, which is a great means of preventing
mismanagement when in power. But if the government is hereditary, we must take
the chief magistrate as he is; sometimes an infant, sometimes with scarce
common fense, sometimes inattentive to any public business, like Domitian
catching flies; sometimes ambitious, fierce, and cruel, using all the power of
the nation, to promote tyranny; sometimes a capricious woman; Should one of our
charter governments choose a girl, or an old woman for their governor, and give
her the usual salary, would not their money be nobly expended, and their
government finely managed! This among other things may serve to show, that
hereditary government cannot be founded in reason and equity.
and however thus unfit to answer the true ends of government, he or she, is
not to be set aside. Hereditary government tends to keep a continual opposition
between the court and the country: So that a courtier and a patriot are
opposite characters, which is the greatest absurdity in nature, if the design
of civil government is properly viewed. Rulers are, or ought to be wholly for
the good of the people: But how contrary to this, is the case in fact, in many
instances! The court and the patriots in continual opposition, has long time
been a reproach to a nation that boasts of liberty, and the best form of civil
government. What say scripture and reason? If a kingdom, or an house be divided
against itself, it cannot stand. Every man that has lived any time in America,
under regal government, knows what frequent, and almost continual opposition
there is between the country interest and those in power; what jars and
contentions between Governors and Assemblies, etc. This may be prevented by
keeping clear of British government; and a kind Providence seems now to open a
door for it. I have but imperfectly exhibited this argument; but our
oppressions, and the encroachments upon our natural rights by regal officers,
are so well known to every man that has any acquaintance with our public
affairs, that I need not enlarge.

Second Argument. By being independent, we shall be much less exposed to
foreign wars. Every large kingdom is often at war with neighboring nations.
The avarice, and ambition of a Prince, at the head of a powerful nation, will
not suffer it to be long at peace. If we belong to a large kingdom in Europe,
we must be at war whenever that kingdom is at war: And some part of America
will always be exposed in time of war. But if we are independent, it will be
the interest of all the European nations to keep us so, and no one of them will
view us as enemies, because they are at war among themselves. Holland often
enjoys peace while the neighboring kingdoms are at war. If we are independent
all the nations of Europe will protect and keep us so; for reasons that have
before been given. This will be much better than to be under the protection of
any one, though the most powerful nation in the world.

Third Argument. If we are independent, our taxes will be inconsiderable,
compared with what they will and must be, if we are under regal government. A
view of the public expenses in the Province of New York, and the Colony of
Connecticut, a few years past, may serve to evince this. If we are under regal
government, the Provinces will be dealt out to hungry officers, who will always
get what they can. There are so many hangers-on at the British court, who want
places; so many reduced gentlemen to be supplied; so many placemen and
pensioners, that we shall always be peeled and pillaged, and new methods of
raising revenues invented to supply them. A number of such hungry creatures
will always be gaping for the places of profit and honor, and their salaries
must be as large as possible. But if our principal officers were annually
chosen from among ourselves, the expenses would be inconsiderable, and the
business of government much better done. There are many ways more than I can
enumerate, by which our public expenses would be increased under regal
government, and diminished by being independent.

Fourth Argument. It will be much easier to settle the present disputes by
declaring for independency, than by attempting an accommodation. Should an
accommodation be attempted, the views of Britain and America are so very
different, if not diametrically opposite, that they could not be made to
harmonize. The demands of Britain and America would clash to such a degree, as
to render a reconciliation impracticable. America would insist upon so many
Acts of Parliament being repealed, so many rights and privileges ascertained,
such a reparation of damages, etc. many, or all of which things the court of
Great Britain would absolutely refuse, that an accommodation could not take
place.

Fifth Argument. If matters are settled by our being independent, the
Continental Congress, or the managers of that affair, will be relieved of much
difficulty and acquitted with honor; otherwise it is likely they will be
suspected of bribery, and loaded with blame and reproach. If a reconciliation
is possible, and should take place, there must probably be such concessions on
the part of America, as would be very grating to multitudes. And those that
were entrusted with the management of the affair, would probably be suspected
of bribery, whether guilty or not. If matters are not settled to the
satisfaction of people in general, the transactors of the affair will be the
objects of much public odium. Some part of the Continent has suffered so much,
is so irritated by cruel treatment, and there is now such a prospect of
settling things well by independency, that it will be impossible to make people
think well of the men that shall, without absolute necessity, again subject us
to British government. No man need desire to be a member of that Congress, that
shall again bring America into subjection to Great Britain, if it is not the
general voice of the country.

Sixth Argument. If we are independent, we shall be less liable to internal
tumults and rebellions. Our people have now such a sense of liberty; have been
so used to meet, form, and publish resolves, and assert their rights and
privileges, and have so well succeeded in our present contest with Britain,
that it will be very difficult to prevent something similar for time to come,
if they are put under British government; especially if they think it is
without necessity, and contrary to their natural rights. Should there now be a
patched up reconciliation, and we in subjection to Great Britain, we might
expect nothing but inward convulsions, struggles, and attempts for freedom,
till we were either ruined or set free.

Seventh Argument. If we are independent, this land of liberty will be glorious
on many accounts: Population will abundantly increase, agriculture will be
promoted, trade will flourish, religion unrestrained by human laws, It Is not
enough to say every religious sect should be tolerated, for no one should be
established; and religion in general should be encouraged, and every man not
only have the right, but be encouraged to think and judge for himself in
matters of religion: While no set or party should be allowed to molest, disturb
or encroach upon another, while they were all equally good subjects of the
common wealth, and their principles and practice not detrimental to civil
government.
will have free course to run and prevail, and America be an asylum for all
noble spirits and sons of liberty from all parts of the world, I wish that I
could add, that the guilt of slavery would be banished from us; and I cannot
but hope that in time it may. What a dreadful absurdity! What a shocking
consideration, that people who are so strenuously contending for liberty,
should at the same time encourage and promote slavery! And being thus guilty,
expose themselves to the judgments of Heaven! May slavery cease in America!
Well may the West India islands be afraid of their slaves, where that unnatural
iniquity is so abundantly practiced.
Hither they may retire from every land of oppression; here they may expand and
exult; here they may enjoy all the blessings which this terraqueous globe can
afford to fallen men.

I have thus briefly stated some of the arguments, for and against a
reconciliation with Great Britain: More might be produced, and I doubt not will
occur to every reader. -- These matters are now exercising the thoughts of many
among us. America's reconciliation with Britain is become a subject of
conversation, and I think ought to be impartially canvassed. In canvassing this
matter, and bringing things forward to a determination, the side of
reconciliation with Britain has considerable advantage; because many men in
office, and those that hope to be promoted if a union takes place, will exert
themselves, use all the plausible arguments and persuasions they can, to lead
people to think a union is best; and many of those are men that people have
been used to view as leaders and head men, to whom they have often applied for
advice. Many men now in power, and others who hope to come into places of
profit or honor, will from interested views, use their utmost endeavors to
lead people in general, to think that a reconciliation with Britain is best.
And it is easy for them to influence and lead many of the populous. Since I
wrote the above, I have been told, that there are in almost every county if not
town, men employed, and even hired by those who call themselves friends to
government, to persuade and influence people as much as possible, to favor and
promote a reconciliation with Great Britain. People therefore in general through
the country, should observe what sort of men are engaged to promote a
reconciliation with Britain; whether they be such as expect favor from
government, or whether they be such as act with a disinterested regard to the
good of the country.
On the contrary the side of Independency will have nothing to influence, but
barely the interest of the country, and people are often too thoughtless of
their interest in these matters, 'till it is too late. For this reason persons
of public spirit and capacity, should at this time exert themselves, and set
people's interest properly before them; avoiding heats and factions, but
showing people the weight and importance of the case, and giving a just view of
the state of America.

AN APPENDIX.
TO this piece, was intended, by the author: But as it was not ready when the
foregoing observations went to the Press, it was thought best not to delay the
publication.

The publisher likewise intended, at the end of the Appendix to have added a
note of his own, on a passage marked with an asterisk (*) page 5, and several
similar expressions in other parts of the piece on the dependency of the
Colonies upon Great Britain; which it was apprehended might, by less attentive
readers, be understood contrary to the design of the author, as if he admitted,
that ever there was a constitutional superiority in the people of
Great Britain, over the Colonies, or any legal right at all in the former, to
make laws to bind the latter in any case whatsoever. The general design of the
piece notwithstanding these incautious expressions shows, that the author never
intended to countenance such a doctrine as this; which is equally repugnant to
the English constitution, as to reason and justice; for the Colonies always
were, are, and ever will be, in rights, privileges, freedom, and internal
(exclusive of all foreign) legislative authority, in a state of perfect
equality with Great Britain, or the freest nation upon earth; and were never
dependents, nor ever will be. But the room here will not admit of a full
discussion of the subject.

THE PLAN OF AN AMERICAN COMPACT, WITH GREAT BRITAIN.
First Published at NEW YORK.
THE capital subject of conversation throughout America for these few weeks
past, has been excited by a Pamphlet, entitled, Common Sense; the author of
which endeavors to show the necessity of our final separation from
Great Britain, as our rights and privileges cannot be properly secured by any
mode of reconciliation whatever. None of the answers given to this ingenious
Pamphlet, have sketched out any plan of settlement, by which it might appear
that our rights and freedom would be fully secured, though again united and
harmonized with Britain. That such a compact or settlement is practicable, I
think ought to be made apparent to the people of America, before they can be
convinced of the propriety of reconciliation; and unless this can be effected,
I never wish to see the union; preferring, beyond all comparison, the toils and
dangers of erecting a free and independent fabric to the delusive promises of
freedom, pregnant with the principles of servitude and oppression. But, I
think, such a compact, or act of settlement, may be framed, as will secure to
Americans the rights of freemen, at the same time that it removes from them the
horrors of war, and the desolations with which even victory must be attended. I
think no considerate person will deny, that our truly honorable Congress were
of opinion such a compact could be formed, when they petitioned the King,
addressed the people of Britain, and prayed to the Father of peace for
reconciliation with Great Britain, as the greatest blessing these colonies
could enjoy. If such a settlement, in the opinion of the Congress could so
lately have been framed, I think no good reason can be given why it cannot now
be effected, since the same wise and salutary regulations, which six months ago
would have secured us against the inroads of tyranny and the designs of a
wicked Ministry, must at this day answer the same important purposes. What were
the articles of this compact, which our Congress must have thought would be
sufficient to secure our liberties, I do not know, it is impossible, therefore,
for me to relate them; but sufficient it is, for the purpose of destroying the
foundation of independency, to delineate the outlines of a compact, which would
reconcile us to Great Britain, and at the same time secure and preserve our
rights and privileges: Such a general plan, or groundwork, is here offered to
the public for their consideration.

ARTICLES of the COMPACT.
First. The British Parliament shall have no power to tax the colonies.

Second. The Parliament shall not intermeddle with the internal police of the
colonies: Let Britain provide for her own internal government, and the colonies
for theirs. By this clause all disputes about invasion of charters, rights of
trial by jury, manufactures of the colonies, etc. will be rooted up at one
stroke.

Third. The Crown shall appoint the officers of government in the colonies,
during good behavior, and the people of the colonies pay them; by this means
the officers become equally dependent upon crown and people, (as they always
ought to be.)

Fourth. The Parliament shall have the regulation of our trade; but least they
may lay heavy duties upon articles of our trade, under pretense of regulating
it, and so raise a revenue out of the colonies, they should have no right to
the duties, but they should go to, and be for the benefit of that colony from
which they were raised, to contribute in paying that colony's taxes, etc.

Fifth. As it is necessary there should be some general power to superintend
and regulate the interest of the colonies as connected with and interfering
with each other, which no Provincial legislature is competent to; and as it
would be dangerous to give the British Parliament that power least tyranny
might enter in at so indefinite a passage, there should be a general
Convention, consisting of Deputies from the several colony Assemblies, or from
the people, whose business should be to regulate the posts, the general
currency, and the proportion of the forces of the colonies, and all other
matters in which the separate colony legislatures have not sufficient
authority, and which are not contrary to the right herein allowed to the
British Parliament. One special business of this convention, should be to keep
a vigilant and careful watch over the designs and transactions of the British
Ministry and Parliament, that so by an early watch word it may prevent tyranny
in its embrio: But as absolute power might in time be assumed by this Congress,
were it without any check, its acts therefore should go home for the Royal
assent; the Crown to have no power to reject them, or the Provincial acts,
unless done within three years after passing here.

Sixth. For our security against the introduction of British troops to enslave
us in times of tranquillity, when we had forgot the use of arms, a perpetual
standing militia bill should form part of the compact by which means the people
of the colonies would keep up their martial spirit, and always be prepared
against the attack of arbitrary power: But, as it would be useful, in case of
sudden invasion, to have a small number of troops at all times ready to repel
such invasion, the King should have a right to send a certain limited number,
for instance, 10 or 12,000 upon the Continent, whose immediate exertions might
be sufficient to prevent an enemy, until the militia could be assembled and
brought up. Whoever asserts that 10 or 12,000 soldiers would be sufficient to
control the militia of this continent, consisting of 500,000 brave men, pays
but a despicable compliment to the spirit and ability of Americans. More than
this stipulated number the Crown should not send without the consent of the
general Convention or Congress.

Seventh. In order to prevent bribery and corruption from sapping the
foundation of the goodly fabric, the compact should contain these three
clauses, viz. That the Colonies should choose their Representatives and
Convention every two years: That they should choose them by ballot; and that no
officer or pensionary of the Crown should be elected.

Eighth. As these colonies would be protected by the power of Britain, and
would receive all the duties arising from the regulation of trade, the Colonies
should stipulate to allow them 8 per cent. upon all merchandises imported from
foreign countries. This would be the easiest of all methods for raising this
sum; It would be paid invisibly, and we should even then be gainers, since we
should receive a profit of 12 per cent. upon such foreign commodities. If the
exigencies of the state should at any time require a further grant, the same
should be obtained freely by way of requisition.

These are the outlines of the compact of reconciliation, by which it is
apparent our freedom may be amply secured. No doubt many additions may be made
to it by the wisdom of our venerable Congress, and the observations of my
countrymen. And since an honorable and secure harmony may again be established
between Great Britain and these Colonies, who would prefer the horrors of war,
the ruin of commerce, the destruction of private peace and happiness, and the
loss of thousands of our countrymen in battle, to the blessings of peace and
tranquillity, the enjoyment of plenty and abundance, the preservation of the
lives of our fellow creatures, and all these in the full possession of liberty?
And for what are we to encounter all these evils, and untried ways, which like
all novel experiments, must be attended with innumerable difficulties, if they
should happen to prove successful, and with dismal consequences should they
miscarry. It Is a form of government which Baron Montesquieu, and the best
writers on the subject, have shown to be attended with many mischiefs and
imperfections, while they pass high encomiums on the excellency of the British
constitution. But why should I dwell upon the dangers of this scheme; the
Continental Congress have never lisped the least desire for independency or
republicanism: all their publications breathe another spirit, and in their
justice, wisdom and virtue I can freely confide, for a restoration of peace and
tranquillity upon just and honorable conditions.

FINIS.

