MR. MANSFIELD's SERMON, PREACHED ON THE DAY OF THANKSGIVING, NOVEMBER 23, 1775.

A SERMON, PREACHED IN THE CAMP AT ROXBURY, NOVEMBER 23, 1775; BEING THE DAY
APPOINTED BY AUTHORITY FOR THANKSGIVING THROUGH THE PROVINCE.

By ISAAC MANSFIELD, jun. A. M. CHAPLAIN TO GENERAL THOMAS'S REGIMENT, IN THE
CONTINENTAL ARMY.

PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE OFFICERS IN SAID REGIMENT.

I will sing of Mercy and of Judgment.

Ps. CI.I. BOSTON: Printed by S. HALL, at his Office in School-Street. 1776.

GENESIS xxxii.9 -- 13. And Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, and God of
my father Isaac, the Lord which said unto me, Return unto thy country and to
thy kindred, and I will deal well with thee: I am not worthy of the least of
all the mercies and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant;
for with my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two bands.
Deliver me I pray thee from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau, for
I fear him, lest he will come and smite me, and the mother with the children.
And thou said, I will surely do thee good, and make thy seed as the sand of
the sea which cannot be numbered for multitude.


FROM the time of God's entering into covenant with Abraham, it became
necessary that the father of each family should, at the close of life, convene
his children to inform them in what line the blessing of Abraham was to
descend, as he the father had been instructed by God. The promised seed being
explicitly declared to be in Isaac, there was no occasion for Abraham's doing
this; but when Isaac was advanced in age and in the decline of life, he thought
proper to pronounce his blessing upon his sons, and proceeded without having
received any special direction from heaven. Isaac being partial toward Esau,
especially because he provided him with Venison, called him unto him. Rebeckah,
Isaac's wife, perceiving that he was about to promise the blessing of Abraham
not to the person for whom it was designed, resolved if possible to prevent it;
she accordingly concerts a scheme for Jacob's obtaining the blessing: The
artifice we find related in Genesis xxvii. Esau upon this hated Jacob and said in
his heart, the days of mourning for his father were at hand, then would he slay
his brother Jacob; which led Rebeckah to apply herself to Isaac, show the
unhappiness of Esau's connections, and the pleasure they might promise
themselves in Jacob if he would dispose of himself better; her governing design
was to get Jacob out of the way of Esau. Isaac called Jacob, blessed him, and
sent him away to Padan Aram, unto Laban the brother of Rebeckah, directing him
to take a wife of his daughters; Jacob went out from Beersheba agreeable to his
father's direction, went on his journey and came into the land of the people of
the East, and arrived at the house of Laban, where he married his daughters
Rachel and Leah. After twenty years he was directed by God to return unto the
land of his fathers and to his kindred, and he with his sons and wives retired
secretly. Laban following, overtook him, and when, after some conference, Laban
departed, Jacob recollecting the displeasure of Esau his brother, sent
messengers to him that he might find grace in his sight. The messengers upon
their return increased the fears of Jacob, and alarmed him greatly by telling
him that Esau was coming to meet him, attended with four hundred men:
Misapprehending the design of Esau, he contrived the most likely means of
defense and safety; and, as in the text, applied to God for success.

The text is a prayer, containing

1. An invocation of God, in these words, O God of my father Abraham, and God
of my father Isaac, the Lord which said unto me, Return unto thy country and
unto thy kindred, and I will deal well with thee. That the Lord was the God of
Abraham appears from his promises to him, and from the interposition of his
providence in his behalf; thus God promises that he will make of him a great
nation, will bless him and make his name great, and he shall be a blessing; he
will bless them that bless him, and curse them that curse him; Genesis xii.2, 3.
of the same tenor are all his expressions of regard unto him. In the course of
providence he was his shield and exceeding great reward; he influenced
Melchizedeck King of Salem, to bless him; when the cities of the plain were
destroyed he remembered Abraham, and warned Lot his brother to flee; he
interposed once and again with regard to a deception respecting his wife,
influencing Abimeleck to offer him a settlement in his land, and was at all
times at his right hand.

That the Lord was the God of Isaac likewise appears from his promising to be
with him and bless him, to perform the oath which he swear unto Abraham his
father, and to multiply his seed. Genesis xxvi.3, 24.
By the interposition of divine Providence his life was preserved when to
appearance in imminent danger; and he prospered and flourished. And,

From what we have already seen of Jacob, it is evident that the Lord was his
God.

There was then a propriety in Jacob's addressing the supreme Being in these
characters, and warming his heart with a recollection of God's favorable
regards to his family. There is in the prayer of the text

2. An acknowledgment of unworthiness of past favors. I am not worthy of the
least of all the mercies and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy
servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two
bands.

The mercy of God toward Jacob in having directed a method of evading the
immediate resentment of Esau, his presence with him to Haran, a kind reception
by Laban, succeeding in his design, and his prosperity upon the whole while
with Laban, with the repeated promises of God and his truth and faithfulness in
the performance of them, of these mercies of God and of all the truth showed
unto him, Jacob very humbly acknowledges himself not worthy. And particularly
of one expression of God's goodness he deems himself unworthy; when he went out
from Beersheba, he went as a traveller, having no more than necessary
provision, and the staff in his hand, but when he returns he has people with
him, and flocks, and herds, and camels, which for defense and safety he is able
to divide into two bands.

It was fit and proper that Jacob should by recognizing the mercies and truth
of God, impress his mind with a sense of his dependence upon him, especially
when about to ask any favor at his hand.

The text contains

3. A petition. Deliver me I pray thee from the hand of my brother, from the
hand of Esau, for I fear him, lest he will come and smite me, and the other
with the children. There is nothing particular here to be remarked, except that
Jacob's apprehensions of danger were great, and he expected nothing less than
total ruin and destruction. This same expression, smite the mother with the
children, is used by a prophet in comparing the destruction of Samaria with a
desolation made at Betharbel, where the mother was dashed in pieces, upon her
children, all the inhabitants being put to the sword without regard to age or
sex. Hosta x.14.


There is in the text

Fourthly and lastly. Encouragement of an answer taken from God's own promise,
in these words, and thou said, I will surely do thee good, and make thy seed
as the sand of the sea which cannot be numbered for multitude.

Jacob knowing the promises that God made to his fathers Abraham and Isaac, and
having observed his faithfulness to them, recollecting the repeated promises
and the truth of God to himself, has a strong faith; he confides in the
veracity of God, and is encouraged to hope for success.

In this part of his prayer, he refers to a seasonable relief afforded him some
years before; although he was the heir of a powerful family, we have seen that he
was obliged to take his leave of his aged parents, and depart from his father's
house, for fear of an angry brother; the night following, as it is represented,
his undertaking this journey to Haran, that beneficent Being who surrounds the
bed and path of every individual, assured him of his kind protection; a sublime
representation filled the mind of Jacob! a representation of a ladder extending
from earth to heaven, with angels descending and ascending upon it, and
emblematical of a particular Providence! Behold, the Lord stood above this
ladder and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac;
the land whereon thou lie, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed. And
behold, I am with thee and will keep thee in all places whither thou go, and
will bring thee again into this land; for I will not leave thee until I have
done that which I have spoken to thee of. Genesis xxviii.13.1^.
Though an exile and wandering in solitude, he had the pleasing assurance that
he was in the presence of his Maker, whose powerful arm would constantly
protect him from all dangers and difficulties, and under whose wings he should
be perfectly safe. Nelson's Exposition.


This was impressed deep in his mind: and from this, in his prayer for
deliverance from Esau, he takes encouragement to hope that God will hear from
heaven, and answer.

The words thus opened offer these observations, 1. That although our beginning
be but small, our latter end may increase. 2. That the prosperity of any
society or community depends upon public virtue, while distress and trouble
will be connected with vice. 3. That prayer is a proper exercise in a day of
trouble. And, 4. That our state may be so mixed as to afford us reason for
mourning, as well as rejoicing.


The first observation, That although our beginning be but small, our latter
end may increase, is true, whether applied to individuals or societies.

It is verified in Abraham, in Isaac, and in Jacob, which has been already
cursorily mentioned; and daily observation will furnish many instances of
persons rising from poverty to affluence, and from obscurity to eminence and
distinction.

Societies have, no less than individuals, rose from small beginnings to large
increase; for the truth of which, we need have recourse to no other people but
our own: Our fathers but few in number, yet how have we increased! their
territories but small, yet how are they enlarged! poor, yet how rich now!
trifling then, yet how important now to the parent state! though our beginning
was but small in all respects, yet what strides! what advances! and how great
the accession! The truth of the remark is thus obvious at the first sight.

But as a probability is not immediately connected with the possibility of our
still continuing to increase, I shall immediately proceed to the second
observation; and show the ground of that probability, which is righteousness or
public virtue.

That prosperity is intimately connected with public virtue, is a matter of
which we ought to be well ascertained; and so on the contrary that trouble will
follow vice.

It is reasonable to suppose that the supreme Being should call men to account
AS members of society, and dispense rewards and punishments as his justice
should direct: and THAT in this world, because we are not held by societies and
bodies of men to answer for our conduct in another world. God disposes and
inclines us to form social and civil connections, and has given us laws and
commands to govern ourselves by in those connections; and upon a regard to
those laws and commands, or public virtue, does the happiness and prosperity of
any people depend. Thus we find that when the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah was
great, when their sin was very grievous, the Lord went down to see whether the
inhabitants had done altogether according to the cry which had come unto him,
and upon enquiry finding that wickedness had become universal, that they were
unanimous in iniquity, and were sinners exceedingly before him, he rained upon
them brimstone and fire out of heaven, and overthrew the cities and all their
inhabitants and that which grew upon the ground.

In like manner, Babylon that glory of kingdoms and praise of the whole earth,
shall be, says the prophet Isaiah, as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah;
and this for their iniquity, for the punishment of their sin.

Moses promised the people of Israel that if they would diligently hearken to
the voice of God, observe and do all his commandments, they should be safe and
easy; their families should be blessed with abundance; success should attend
them in all their employments; they should have honor among their neighbors,
and be victorious over their enemies. But on the contrary, if they would not
keep God's commandments, his displeasure would overtake them; they should be
visited with sickness and famine; they should be so infatuated in their
counsels as not to discern their true interest, nor effect any thing for the
public good; and their name should be for an astonishment. See Henry upon
Deuter. 28.


But a question may here arise, viz. Whether this connection between vice and
misery, virtue and happiness is not in consequence of that political covenant
between God and Israel, and so peculiar to that people? and whether it be just
to argue from thence, that the prosperity of a people or society depends upon
their obeying the commandments of God, while adversity will be the consequence
of their disobedience? In answer to which it may be said, that it is the will
of God, who always consults the good of his creatures, that we should
incorporate ourselves into larger societies than those which every family of
itself forms; our general security and happiness could not otherwise have been
promoted, nor could we have been furnished with the conveniences of life. It is
highly just and reasonable, that God should take cognizance of, and call men to
account in this their capacity as societies; distributing upon the whole body
rewards or punishments, and assigning them to adversity or prosperity,
according to the nature of their united conduct. Seeing the bonds of society
are dissolved by death, after which personal characters only will be examined,
this business (as has already been observed) will be transacted in this world.
There is a greater necessity of such a distribution taking place here, than
there is of that with respect to personal characters; for although God often
suffers wicked men to pass unpunished here, they cannot escape his notice on
the day of general judgment; but communities and societies, as such, can never
be punished or rewarded, except in this world.

According to the common method of providence, the state of a people is good or
bad according to the general nature of their actions; if they are careful to
please God, good and virtuous, just and merciful, they flourish and are happy;
but on the other hand, if profanity and impiety gain footing among them, a
cloud sits upon their affairs, and calamity, ruin and destruction soon follow.
Such observations have found entertainment in the minds of men in all ages; the
decay of the Roman state was attributed not to chance, fortune or some unhidden
causes, but to the general looseness and corruption of manners. And it was
remarked by Scipio, that it is impossible for any state to be happy though
their walls were firm, if their manners were decayed.

That God does charge guilt upon nations as well as particular persons or
individuals, is implied in these passages of scripture; when Abner had revolted
to David, David said, I and my kingdom are guiltless before the Lord," 2 Samuel
iii.28.
etc. and when upon Amnon's being slain, the woman of Tekoah said unto the
king, my Lord O king, the iniquity be on me and on my father's house, and the
king and his throne be guiltless. 2 Samuel xiv.9.


Virtue promotes the honor of a people abroad, and will engage the confidence
of distant nations and higher powers; it prevents private animosities and civil
discord at home, it exhilerates the spirits and inspires with courage and
magnanimity; it is a security and defense against the greatest dangers; and
wherever we find it is generally countenanced and encouraged, there we find the
good of the whole is promoted; there the peaceable enjoyment of the comforts of
life is allowed, and the true end of civil existence is answered. On the
contrary, vice renders a people despicable in the eyes of the world; depresses
the spirits, and introduces confusion at home; and exposes to the greatest
evils. When the former takes place in a society, people or nation, that nation,
people or society will flourish; righteousness exalts a nation, Prove. xiv.34.
says the wise man. But when the latter, it is a reproach, and calls for divine
judgments.

The judgments either feared or felt in such a case, can be averted only by
reformation.

Which leads to the

3d Observation. That prayer is a proper exercise in a day of trouble.

There is a natural propensity in the mind of man, says a modern writer, to fly
to some superior Being for succor and relief in a time of trouble, danger and
distress; an inward principle that leads the mind to hope for relief from that
invisible Being from whom we believe we have received any extraordinary good.
See Angel on prayer, p. 25.
We are generally more sensible of our weakness in sorrow, than in joy; and
nature and reason point us to an arm superior to our own, to obtain relief and
deliverance from trouble and difficulty. Prayer is spreading the desires of
such deliverance before him, who can alone afford relief. If we feel the rod of
God, are properly attentive to his hand, we shall in this way cast our burden
upon him; and our waiting eyes will be directed to him, for that salvation we
stand in need of. This is the way appointed and instituted by the Disposer of
all events, the only way in which he has given us encouragement to hope for
success; if we apply for deliverance as a favor, he stands ready to confer it
as such, giving us that general rule, Ask and ye shall receive.

Trouble and affliction spring not from the ground, but from that God who is
the supreme origin of all things; He is the Governor of the universe, and
Superintendant of our public as well as our private affairs.

Sacred history affords a variety of instances wherein the suspension or
removal of evil has been the object of His providence; there was an instance,
in the case of Ninevah; and he suffered no man to do harm to Israel when but
few in number and passing from one nation to another, yea he reproved Kings for
their sakes. Ps. cv.14.


Profane history is likewise pregnant with interpositions of providence of the
like kind.

Is there evil in a city, and the Lord has not done it? Are the public affairs
of a people distressed and embarrassed, and God has not suffered it? Would He
have done that evil in the city, or permitted public distress and calamity to
have befallen a people, if He had not been provoked? Surely, no! Is he not able
to convert trouble into joy, bring light out of darkness and good out of evil?
Has he not repeatedly promised to individuals, that if they would walk before
him, he would be their God? Has He not promised the same to nations? And does
he not manifest, in the course of His providence, that when a people are holy,
they are a happy people? Surely, yes!

Nothing more is necessary to show the truth of the remark, that prayer
(attended with reformation) is proper in a day of trouble.

I hasten to the last observation,

4thly. That our state may be so mixed as to afford us reason for mourning, as
well as rejoicing.

Had experience never led us to the truth of this, the present state of Jacob
would convince us of it; his consideration of a vast accession in train and
interest, although his beginning had been but small, must excite sentiments of
gratitude; and at the same time the apprehension of danger from his brother
must depress his spirits. Oftentimes, we find ourselves in such a situation,
especially when in any trouble. Trouble, as such, must lead us to mourn; but
considered in some certain views, it must afford reason for rejoicing; David
could sing of judgment as well as mercy.

In our present situation we are attended with some circumstances which call us
to mourn, and with others which may lead us to rejoice.

It is inconvenient for the Parliament of Great Britain, at such a remove from
us, to regulate our internal policy; and it is impossible that they should do
it with propriety, equity and justice: Notwithstanding which they have
attempted it without our consent, in effect commanding our life and property.
This, very naturally alarmed us: Repeated remonstrances, a tenaciousness of
rights and privileges, a spirit of freedom and liberty, with a manly fortitude
on our part, have led them to involve us in difficulty and perplex our affairs.

Without being allowed an opportunity of defense, or being heard, we find our
Charter vacated; our trade and merchandise loaded with encumbrances, and
diverted from its proper channel.

Although foreign riches have been wont to meet in the streets of our capital,
and that has been the seat of commerce, yet now we see an unhappy reverse! That
city, to adopt the language of the Prophet, that was full of people, how does
it sit solitary! how is she become as a widow! She weepeth sore in the night,
and her tears are on her cheeks: All her gates are desolate: Her Priests sigh,
and she is in bitterness. A hand is spread out upon all her pleasant things. Is
there any sorrow, like unto the sorrow which is done unto her? She is made
desolate and faint all the day. Her strength is made to fall, she is delivered
into their hands, from whom she is not able to rise up. Lamentations 1.
That, which was once the seat of justice, opulence and virtue, is now unjustly
wrested from its proper owners; who are obliged to flee from the iron hand of
tyranny, or are held in the unrelenting arms of oppression. See the
Proclamation for the day.


Our other "seaports are greatly distressed," their inhabitants having been
obliged to escape with their lives in their hands. Marblehead, and Gloucester,
are evacuated of most of their inhabitants.


Our towns burnt by the foes, who have acted the part of barbarous
incendiaries. Charlestown was burnt June 17th. And Falmouth, October 18.


The most arbitrary measures have been pursued, and tyranny itself is making a
mean effort to support a claim which God Almighty abhors and detests, that of
making laws in all possible cases whatever.

In consequence of the unnatural, cruel and barbarous measures adopted and
pursued by the British administration; and in security of our rights and
privileges, those gifts of the Author of nature and more immediate patrimony of
our pious fathers and ancestors, we have chosen the alternative of defense and
taken the field; having seriously and firmly resolved to devote our lives to
such an important service: And now we feel the dreadful effects of a civil war!
a war, by which our land is stained with the blood of her valiant sons.

These things spread a gloom over the face of the whole continent; unhappy is
the altercation! a kingdom divided against itsef is brought to desolation!

We have certainly then great reason to mourn, especially seeing we ever "have
had," as a modern historian observes, a firm attachment to our mother country,
on account of the invaluable blessings we have enjoyed from her happy
constitution, and form of government. WYNNE's history of America.
And it is yet to be wished, that the sentiments of the British Parliament may
co-incide with those of this historian; where, concerning the regulation of the
Colonies, he says, that the repeal of taxes imposed upon them is so far from
being a sacrifice of the highest permanent interest, and of the whole majesty,
power and reputation of government, that it appears to be the only way to
secure them.

Wherever the seat of war is, there we must expect to find distress and
desolation; on which account we more sensibly feel the hand of God, than our
friends who are remote from us.

Droughts in several parts of the province, and wasting sickness in many of our
towns, have been additional reasons for mourning; peculiar to us, and which are
to be considered separately from the more general calamity.

I have now cursorily run over those circumstances which call for mourning; let
us change the view, and recollect the reasons we have for rejoicing.

We of this land, have been the peculiar care of Providence from our earliest
periods; the tender mercies of God have been constantly over us; through the
benignity of Providence, we have greatly flourished; in general, the seasons
have been fruitful, and we have been blessed with abundant provision.

At this present time the truth of that observation must strike us with force,
viz. that in the midst of affliction, we are surrounded with mercies.

The first and principal mercy to be regarded is this, that whereas many are
involved in darkness, others debarred a free use of the sacred scriptures, and
popery is making its strides into the Northern parts of this continent, See the
Quebec Bill, in the letter and spirit of it.
we are surrounded with the light of the gospel, yet allowed access to the
sacred scriptures, and favored with worshipping God as our consciences dictate
to us.

Another favor which demands our grateful notice, is, an exchange of wasting
sickness for the voice of health.

It is likewise a peculiar smile of Providence, that sickness has not prevailed
more universally in the army; and that so few, compared with the vast numbers
in the camp, have been unfit for duty.

Providence has likewise smiled upon the camp, in permitting so few fatal
accidents; I am informed that by means of upwards of 2000 balls that have been
thrown from the opposite lines, five men only, have been taken off! I perceive
likewise that by means of about 300 balls, etc. thrown into this place in the
course of one month, viz. from September 8, to October 8, but two were wounded
(one, but slightly; the other died after some time, of his wound) and no man
was immediately killed! It is to be remarked further, that not one person was
hurt, in the course of above 300 shells being thrown to a fortress erected upon
P^n^ed Hill.
and evidently been its safeguard and defense.

A competency of the necessaries and comforts of life instead of a scarcity,
which we had reason to apprehend, is a blessing we are not to be unmindful of.

The band of union which unites the American colonies, deserves our unfeigned
praises. Notwithstanding many might have entertained the thought of
recommending themselves to administration, by cool remonstrances and
persevering petitions; and therefore the people might have been divided with
regard to the mode of resistance; ( all joining in the expediency of
resistance) notwithstanding they might have been divided with regard to the
mode, we see a happy reverse! Persons of every rank and character throughout
the colonies have strained every nerve, and exerted themselves under Providence
to defeat the measures that are pursued against us; the whole continent from
North to South is connected as it were by an indissoluble bond, and have
unanimously devoted their interest, and what is still dearer, their lives in
their common defense. The ministry having pledged themselves to the deluded
people of England that there would be a defection among us, must now find
themselves, to their astonishment and confusion, greatly mistaken; the
association of the English colonies, daily gains new strength; the most
Southern has acceeded, the most Northern is manifestly well affected to the
same general cause, and Canada rather surpasses in zeal and ardour for the
common rights of America. See an address to the soldiery. etc. The means of
forming this union deserve some notice. Distinct Committees were appointed in
most of the towns of this province, and through the continent for the
management of special matters, particularly such as were of a commercial
nature. These Committees were large, and composed of persons that had not
before been honored with the confidence of the public; the public eye
stimulated them to exertion in their department; they naturally improved
others, that were still their inferiors; each one acquired a degree of
importance, which was new to him; and by this means, whole communities and
societies were cemented together. These Committees early corresponded with
similar Committees, far and wide. Those of the same county consulted, and
appointed County Congresses. Provincial Congresses succeeded to the honors of
General Courts. And the various Provincial Congresses committed the concerns of
the whole, to a Continental Congress, the most grand and august Assembly that
ever existed in America.
The union is remarkable, and beyond the reasonable expectation of any that
were acquainted with the complicated views and various tempers of mankind; it
is an union, which shows that each individual has imbibed the spirit of a dying
father, who, by a striking allusion to a bundle of sticks, recommended
domestic peace and harmony to his sons; an union, that shows that each
individual was strictly governed by that maxim, "united we stand, divided we
fall!" It has been universally admitted, that the greater part of a community
should govern the minority in all matters of public concern. When nine or eight
tenths of that community unite in any matter, commonly speaking, they are not
divided; their voice is in every sense the voice of the whole. That the
continent is as much united, if not more perfectly, cannot be denied.


It is not a small token of the goodness of Providence to us, that on the
contrary the counsels of administration appear not to be blended with sound
judgment. As rational creatures, they act upon a plan; but their plans, to
judge from past operations, do not appear to have been well calculated, and
consequently not to have been founded upon reason. In no particular respect
have they yet succeeded; but a kind hand has blasted every design, and turned
all their counsels into foolishness. They have not succeeded yet in their first
design of distracting and dividing us, although they have been ardent to effect
it. They have been equally disappointed in that design of intimidating, and
frightening us into a compliance with their measures; their loading our
innocence and virtue with reproach, their hostile array, and unprecedented
severity, has served to inspire us with an undaunted fortitude. What, but the
same kind hand, as it directed those that took the alarm on April 19: What, but
the hand of Providence preserved the school of the prophets from their ravage,
who would have deprived us of many advantages for moral or religious
improvement. General Gage, as governor of this province, issued his precepts
for convening a general assembly at Boston, designing to enforce a compliance
with Lord's North's designing motion; they were to be kept as prisoners in
garrison, till under the mouth of cannon and at the point of the bayonet they
should be reduced to a mean and servile submission. To facilitate this matter,
he was to send out a party to take possession of a magazine at Concord;
presuming that this might be done without opposition, the said party upon their
return from Concord were to lay waste till they should arrive at Cambridge
common; there, after destroying the colleges and other buildings, they were to
throw up an entrenchment upon the said common, their number was to be increased
from the garrison, and the next morning a part of the artillery to be removed
and planted in the entrenchment aforesaid. This astonishing maneuver, it was
supposed, would so effectually intimidate the constituents, that the general
assembly by the compliance designed would literally represent their
constituents." The author is not at liberty to publish the channel through
which he received the foregoing; but begs leave to assure the reader, that it
comes so direct that he cannot hesitate in giving credit to it. He recollects
one circumstance, which renders it highly probable; Lord Percy (on April 19.)
suspicious his progress to Concord might be retarded, by the plank of the
bridge at Cambridge being taken away, brought out from Boston several loads of
plank, with a number of carpenters; not finding occasion to use them, he
carried them on his way to Concord, perhaps about a mile and an half from the
bridge: About an hour after the plank were returned. If he had intended to
repose that river at night, he must have reserved the plank; if he designed to
stop in Cambridge, the plank must be an encumbrance. This conduct, in returning
the plank, may be accounted for upon supposition of the foregoing plan of
operation.


In a state of war, the final victory by no means depends upon early successes;
nor can a final conquest be argued from early defeats; the last national war in
which we were engaged was crowned with success, notwithstanding it commenced
with repeated defeats: Guarding ourselves by this observation from a vain
confidence, it becomes us to take a grateful notice of the success that has
already attended our arms. Viewed in connection with the final result of the
present controversy, and considering the precarious state which ever attends
the din of war; it is difficult to determine what attention this success
demands; but detached from the final result and viewed separately, must we not
say our arms have been wielded by a hand that is more than human? It is well
known that in order for unavoidable destruction upon our frontiers and back
settlements, vigorous efforts have been used, and indefatigable pains taken to
excite the savage vengeance of the wilderness and rouse the natives with their
former allies, to arms against us; yet Providence has miraculously defeated the
black design, by influencing the natives in general to support the united
colonies, and put it out of the power of those allies to distress us:
Remarkable success has attended the Western detachment of the continental army;
Providence has manifestly owned and blessed them, in permitting them to take
into possession two fortresses, one of which was doubtless the strongest they
will meet with. Fort Chamblee surrendered to the forces of the United Colonies,
October 18. And the fort at St. John's, November 2.


Lastly. We are to look upon this as a smile of Providence, that the
inconsiderate among us have been under such restraints, when left to the
exercise of lust uncontrouled by civil authority; amidst all our struggles,
commotions and perplexities, each one has looked upon his neighbor's person
and interest sacred, as when defended by wholesome laws uninterrupted in their
course; abuses of the former, and invasions of the latter, have been less
frequent in the present dissipated state of our affairs, than in any given term
of time before; no threatening quarrels, or animositions have subsisted; but
harmony and internal peace have ever reigned, and one soul has inspired the
body politic.

It now remains that we reflect upon our past lives, and by that means
determine whether we have not rendered ourselves less than the least of these
mercies, and deserved greater evils than we have yet felt.

Our sins which are the remote occasion of an obstruction in that harmony which
has subsisted between the parent state and us, are great; and God may be justly
provoked to punish us in proportion to the measure of our iniquities: Let us
then this day lay our hands upon our mouths, and our mouths in the dust, humbly
acknowledging our sins and iniquities. I doubt not but God has many faithful
and chosen servants among us; but a general view of the wickedness and
corruption that spreads far and wide, must tenderly affect every serious mind.
An acquaintance with the many examples of divine justice in the punishment, and
sometimes in the entire destruction of kingdoms, nations and societies, and a
comparison of their circumstances with our own, must excite fearful
apprehensions in us; especially as we see the displeasure of God manifested in
the calamity we now labor under.

Had this part of the world less knowledge and less light, there might have
been some excuse, and perhaps God might have winked at times of ignorance; but
of this we cannot make a plea. The gospel, in which the goodness of God is
displayed through a Redeemer, in which the holy Spirit is offered to all that
diligently seek it, and in which motives are set before us to engage our
attention, and guard us against sin, this gospel has reached our ears. But, how
has it been abused and neglected! Is it precious to our souls, sweeter than
honey, or the drops that distill from the comb? do we make it the theme of our
conversation by day, and the subject of our meditation by night? alas! where
are the persons that have a superlative esteem for the oracles of truth?

How have the institutions of religion been disregarded! and the table of the
Lord been rendered contemptible! are there not too many of us that have been
the unhappy means of the ordinances of God being brought into disrepute?

How has the Sabbath been profaned! wasted in idleness, or trifling
conversation! are there not many, very many, that do not remember to keep it
holy?

How has the name of God been taken in vain, and impiously blasphemed!

How has the worship of God in our houses, and family government, been laid
aside! and how have the duties of the closet been neglected!

How has vital religion decayed! do we not rest contented with the form of
godliness without the power?

How have animosities been cherished, instead of a christian, charitable temper
and frame of mind!

How has injustice abounded! And

How prevalent has been every kind of iniquity!

Consider these things, and whatever else your own observation may furnish, and
then enquire whether it is not to be feared the Lord is visiting for them.

It does not afford me pleasure thus to lay open the shame, or expose the
nakedness of my country; the task is disagreeable, it is irksome! with
sincerity I can say, better things than those I have now mentioned, I hope of
you; though it is more than probable that each one of us has been active, in
this way, to bring down the judgments of heaven.

It becomes us all to stem the torrent of iniquity that threatens a general
ruin; and, agreeable to the advice of our civil fathers, "with devotion of
spirit, penitence of heart, and amendment of life, to humble ourselves and
implore the favor of almighty God." See an address of the Continental
Congress, to the inhabitants of the colonies, 1774.


Our Father in Heaven, is the supreme disposer of events; he can preserve us
amidst the innumerable dangers of the day, and turn the hearts of our
adversaries, making even our enemies to be at peace with us, as in the case of
Jacob and Esau: Let us then fear him and serve him in truth with all our heart;
by this means recovering his favor and preventing the impending cloud from
bursting upon our heads; hereby shall we recommend ourselves to the present
age, and endear our memories to succeeding generations.

[Let us convince the world that our right hand shall sooner forget her
cunning, or our tongue cleave to the roof of our mouth, than we will forget
this our Jerusalem, and prefer to her our chief joy. Ps. CXXXVII.6. This
paragraph, inserted between the bars, was more immediately addressed to the
soldiers of the regiment; and founded upon a general apprehension that an
enlistment of a new army would be attended with difficulty.
While the sacred cause of liberty is so remarkably owned and blessed, and its
enemies as remarkably frowned upon, and whilst "victory waits for our
grasping," let us not meanly forsake the former, or turn a deaf ear to the
inviting solicitations of the latter: But let us remember that the voice of our
friends and country, and above them, the voice of God, is calling us to
maintain our ground till our enemies either fall before us, or leave us to a
quiet and peaceable enjoyment of the bounties of Providence. And let us not be
diverted from an attentive regard to this our duty, by an apprehension of
certain inconveniences which may occur under a new establishment; considering
that as the contest we are now engaged in, is singular and different from any
other, so we must expect some unavoidable incidents; though trifling when put
in a balance with peace and liberty, without which life would be an intolerable
burden.]

Finally, seeing our help must come from above, let us pour out our souls in
language similar to that of the Psalmist, and of Jacob in the text; "O God of
our fathers, who in the times of old did drive out the heathen with thy hand,
and plantedst them; by whose right hand, by whose arm, and by the light of
whose countenance they were supported; thou art our king, O God. We are not
worthy of the least of all the mercies and of all the truth which thou have
showed unto thy servants, for we have risen from the smallest beginnings, have
been cherished, supported and greatly enlarged by thy hand; but few passed over
to this land, and attended with very few of the conveniences of life, and now
we are become many bands. Deliver us, we pray thee, from the hand of our
brethren, for they have come and smote us."

"Awake, why sleep thou O Lord? Arise, cast us not off forever. Wherefore
hidest thou thy face and forgettest our affliction and our oppression? For our
soul is bowed down to the dust; arise for our help, and redeem us for thy
mercy's sake. Thou have saved us from our enemies, and have put them to shame
that hated us. We will not therefore trust in our own bow, neither shall our
sword save us. But in thee we boast all the day long, and praise thy name
forever."

A Multiplicity of Business, Sickness and Death in his Family, have prevented
the Printer from publishing the foregoing Discourse, earlier than the present
Time. It is hoped that this will be a sufficient Apology for it is late
Appearance.

April, 1776.
ERRATUM. In some of the Copies, for Animositions page 24. line 1. read
Animosities.


