Sin destructive of temporal and eternal Happiness: AND Repentance, Trust in
GOD, and a vigorous, harmonious, and persevering Opposition, the Duty of a
People, when wicked and unreasonable Men are attempting to enslave them: SET
FORTH IN A DISCOURSE DELIVERED AT HANOVER IN NORWICH, JANUARY 17th, A. D. 1776:
BEING A DAY SET APART FOR FASTING AND PRAYER THROUGHOUT THE COLONY OF
CONNECTICUT.

BY ANDREW LEE, A. M. Pastor of the eighth Church in said NORWICH.

PUBLISHED AT THE GENERAL DESIRE OF THE HEARERS.

It is not to be wondered at, [i. e. that some of our real Friends, are helpful
to our Enemies.] Few have ever been betrayed, except by their Friends. I have
done my Duty in warning you of your Danger: It remains that you do your Duty,
by defending yourselves to the utmost. If you can stand tamely by, while your
Enemies are so busy, you will fall despised and unpitied, as your Ruin will be
of yourselves. Mr. NISBET'S Speech in the General Assembly of the Church of
Scotland. Every wise Woman builds her House, but the foolish plucketh it down
with her Hands. SOLOMON. NORWICH: Printed by JUDAH P. SPOONER. M, DCC,LXXVI.

PREFACE.
THERE is nothing men bear so ill, as to be told with plainness of their
faults, yet there is nothing more necessary for them -- Sinners are often
offended because those who watch for their souls, set their danger before them,
and thereby disturb them in the way to ruin.

The case is similar with regard to things of a civil nature: when their
favorite opinions are contradicted, or refuted, it touches them to the quick.

It is often objected against the ministers of Christ, if they treat in public
upon any thing of a civil nature, that they are meddling with what does not
concern them; that their business is to preach the gospel, and not politics.

But when was this objected, unless the objector's principles or practices had
been censured? Such Instances are rare indeed. Where this has not been the
case, it is said, these matters are handled in the scripture, and therefore
naturally come under the consideration of those who are set apart to study and
explain the scriptures, and urge the duties therein contained; but the case
changes immediately, when their faults are reprehended, and the minister is
tied up to the gospel doctrines of faith and repentance. --

But, let men say what they will, every minister of Christ is bound to preach
the whole counsel of God; he never needs a better apology for treating upon any
subject, than that it is treated upon in the word of God: And as matters of a
political nature are to be found in the word of God, to discourse upon them is
sometimes their duty -- and it is especially so at this day, in which we are
called to contend for our civil rights -- It is now their duty faithfully to
warn their hearers of their danger, and seriously caution them, to beware of
every thing that may be prejudicial to their country's cause. --

The clergy in general may do much in this way to serve their country, as well
as by their prayers -- The author of the following pages, herein attempts to
cast in his mite, to help on the good cause; which he is resolved to do all the
little in his power to assist.

He has used plainness that will doubtless offend the enemies of American
liberty, and perhaps some of those who have inconsiderately acted against her
clearest interests -- He could not express himself with the unfeeling coldness
of a stoic, upon matters so important to mankind; in which also his country is
so nearly concerned, nor would he if he could -- It Is good to be zealously
affected always in a good thing.*

Indifference, at this day, is at best the badge of stupidity, and frequently
of something worse; be it of either, their country lothes them, she would they
were either cold or hot; and if they continue lukewarm, would be happy, could
she spew them out of her mouth.

HANOVER, March 5th, A. D. 1776. N. B. A few sentences are added since the
delivery, without any mark of distinction.



ISAIAH V.20. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter.


WHAT we shall attempt from these words, will be to point out the character of
the persons, against whom a woe is here denounced; and show what is implied in
it.

THE woe is against those who put evil for good, darkness for light, and sweet
for bitter -- all these may be done both in a moral and political sense; we
shall therefore consider the words in both these views --

I. In a moral -- In this sense nothing is more common than a mis-calling good
and evil -- Mankind in general, call this world good, as it stands opposed to
the kingdom of God -- their conduct shows that they think it good for them to
lay up their treasure here, where every thing is fading, and in a few days must
vanish away, rather than in heaven, where an inheritance would be durable, and
a good security against the time to come -- Here therefore they are careful,
and cumbered about with many things; but pay little, or no regard to the one
thing needful, Luke 10.42.
even that better part which could never be taken from them.

THAN this nothing can be more palpably absurd -- but a moment's reflection
must convince the maddest worldling of his folly; and that he herein calls and
treats evil as though it were good. Was the period of his existence to end with
mortal life, he might justify his conduct, in pursuing something here as his
chief good -- though even then, the eagerness with which many pursue wealth and
fame, would be folly, being destructive of present enjoyment, which did our
being end with this life, would be all the reward of our labor and sorrow under
the sun.

BUT as man is made for another, an eternal world, where he will be happy or
miserable according to his works here in this, it is the height of madness to
pursue this world as his chief good, to lay up his treasure here, and place his
affections upon these fading toys, all which are to perish with the using. Gal.
11.22.


IF such be the choice we make, we are always liable to have the very grounds
of our happiness taken from us in a moment; and death will certainly strip us
of our armor wherein we trust, and turn us more than naked into the other
world; it will send us to inherit the fruit of their folly and wickedness, to
suffer the natural and judicial consequences of our conduct here, and that
forever. As we brought nothing into this world with us, it is certain we can
carry nothing out 1. Tim. 6.7.
-- whose then shall these things be? Luke, 12.20.
If then we have not laid in store a good foundation against the time to come,
1. Tim. 6.19.
we shall be found naked -- If we do not serve God, and provide for our
immortal souls here, we shall have nothing there, but the reward of slothful
servants, nothing, that is, but endless misery and woe.

If the case be so, can any thing be plainer, than that they who call the
Earth, or any in it, the chief good, miscall things, calling that the chief
good, which is to them, through their folly, the greatest evil? the source of
endless misery and eternal ruin?

Now, what the woe is, that belongs to persons of this character is evident;
it is the wretchedness which their conduct naturally draws after it; it is the
loss of all happiness and the induction of all misery. This is what by their
mis-calling and mis-treating matters, they will bring upon themselves in a
future state! Well may it be said, woe be unto them!

II. The same may be said of those who make the pleasures of sin their chief
good; who seek happiness in ways prohibitted by God their maker and sovereign,
as well as from vain, transitory objects. -- Of those there are not a few in
the world: and they are a distinct class from those just mentioned -- there we
intended only those who are wedded to the world, and seek happiness in heaping
up to themselves, the good things of it; but who take no dishonest method to
attain them. --

But those we now intend, if the world be their idol, stick at no means to
attain it -- no laws, human or divine, obstruct them further than to escape
punishment here -- If it be some other vicious desire that predominates in
their souls, every thing is sacrificed to the gratification of it. -- In a
word: the persons, we now intend, are such as roll themselves in the pleasures
of sense, regardless of the commands of God, who requires mankind to be holy,
separate from sin, and pay a sacred regard to all his laws. --

In this class are to be ranked the thief, the drunkard, the profane, the
unclean, the extortioner, etc. -- and how great a part of the world are there,
who in some of these ways, seek happiness? All which, contemn the divine
authority, and also the rules and directions of eternal wisdom, which has so
ordered these matters, that men are in reality restrained, only from those
gratifications, which tend to misery even here, was there no hereafter -- Was
theft, drunkenness, etc. allowed by God, every one must see that the happiness
of the world, would forbid such indulgences; and that the liberty would only be
a liberty to be unhappy. --

If so, nothing can be more evident, than that they who call these
gratifications good, and in these ways seek happiness, in preference to the
rules which God has given to seek it by, do in truth, call evil good -- and the
woe that belongs to them is evidently, the loss of that felicity which is
reserved for the obedient, and their being doomed to (...) that strange
punishment, which is reserved for the workers of iniquity Job 31.3.
-- such will be their reward in a future state: and here in this they will be
wholly destitute of that rest and peace, which the righteous enjoy, who possess
their souls in patience, for there is no peace says my God to the wicked; but
they are like the troubled sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire
and dirt. Isa. 57.20, 21.


III. There is also a woe denounced against those who, put darkness for light,
and light for darkness -- this again is what many do in a religious, or moral
sense -- it is done by all, who set up their own understandings as a surer guide
to happiness than the word of God; or who think their own rational powers,
sufficient to lead them in the way to life, without any supernatural revelation
-- such reject, or at least neglect, that sure word of prophesy, that shines a
light in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1.19.
and trust, by those gifts alone, which enlightened by the word of God would be
a sure guide to glory, to feel out their way in darkness.

There are others who leave the real light of the word, to trust to that which
is imaginary, which they call by the name of spiritual or divine light. --
There are many spirits gone abroad into the world, and we are commanded to try
them, 1 John 4.1.
whether they be of God. -- Now, what rule of trial have we, beside the word?
We have none, that is sure, or so much as probable; so that they who leave the
word, and take any thing else for their guide, are liable to be seduced by
false spirits -- to be decoyed and led astray by false lights, if they deserve
that name, which lead men into error and down to ruin; which is generally the
unhappy lot of those who leave the word.

Men of this cast, profess a vast deal of light, and are ready to upbraid all
who trust the word, as ignorant, blind, and knowing nothing -- This, however,
makes no alteration in the nature of things; they who keep to the word, keep to
the light, after all; while these enlightened ones are in darkness, even until
now: they have left the true light to follow an ignis fatuus -- their religion
is fancical -- they mistake the impulses of a wild, warm imagination, for the
suggestions of the spirit of God; nor do they discern the imposture, though
thereby directed to the most glaring absurdities.

It will be of little service to those, who have an imaginary light superior to
the scripture, to show from them that those who leave them, or substitute any
thing instead of the plain gramatical sense of them, have forsaken the only
sure guide; but others perhaps it may profit -- and full to this purpose are
those words of the prophet, To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Isa. 8.20.
Those also of St. Paul, If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to
wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, he is proud, knowing
nothing. 1. Tim. 6.3, 4.


What the woe that is like to fall upon them is, will appear, if it be
considered, that satan rules in the children of disobedience, by blinding their
minds: he could not hold them prisoners as he does, and lead them about at
pleasure, if he did not first put out their eyes, so that they see not whose
service they are engaged in, or what the consequence of their continuing to
serve him will be -- while on the contrary, Christ leads men in the way of
life, by enlightening the eyes of their understandings with the word, -- so
that the woe that will fall upon those who thus put darkness for light, will be
their having their lot with him they serve; for it is as true of his, as of
Christ's servants, where their master is, there shall they also be, and this
shall be their reward. --

As it is happiness that mankind are in quest of, and in all their choices and
pursuits seeking after, it is obvious, that all those who have been mentioned
(viz. those who call evil good, and put darkness for light) do really put
bitter for sweet -- they make such choices and go into such ways, in hopes to
find pleasure; but the end thereof will be as a very bitter day, Amos 8.10.
'twill be as wormwood and gall -- now they may shut their eyes against the
light and refuse conviction; but the day is coming when they can shut their
eyes no longer; the light will break in upon them, and convince them of the
folly of their conduct to their eternal disappointment. --

But let us,

II. Consider the text in a political view, for men may call evil good, and put
darkness for light in a political as well as moral sense: it is often times
actually done, of which our own times are a witness. --

Here; they call evil good, who in such a day of difficulty and distress as the
present, say it is good to trust an arm of flesh for deliverance, rather than
the living God -- It is God that orders and overrules all the affairs of this
and all worlds. It Is he that calls for judgments and inflicts them, when the
state of the world and his glory requires it -- It is he that raises up tyrants
and oppressors, and that crushes them again in a moment, and gives his people
rest, when he sees best -- His purposes will stand, and the thoughts of his
heart unto all generations: Psalm. 33.11.
There is none that can alter the thing which he determines shall be done. --
If any then trust to the multitude of an host, or to the strength of the horse,
or the martial prowess of his rider, they trust to what cannot save or deliver.
He is able with a word, to defeat all the devices of men; with a word to carry
all their purposes headlong.

It is to him therefore we are to look; in him we are to trust for deliverance;
it can come from no other. -- When he gives quietness, who then can make
trouble? and when he hides his face, who then can behold him? whether it be
done against a nation, or against a man only. Job 34.29.


Whoever attends to the matter, methinks must adopt the language of the
inspired psalmist, and say, It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put
confidence in man. It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in
princes. Psa. 118.8, 9.
-- There is no king saved by the multitude of an host: a mighty man is not
delivered by his much strength -- An horse is a vain thing for safety: neither
shall he deliver any by his great strength. Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon
them that fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy, to deliver their souls
from death, etc. Psa. 33.16 -- 19.
--

Whoever considers these things, will be ready to say, of every one that relies
on an arm of flesh, or says it is good to trust in any other, than the living
God, that he calls evil good.

II. They make the same mistake, who say it is good to trust in the Lord
without forsaking the sins which are the cause of his controversy with us, and
of the judgments which he has called for, and is executing upon us for our
sins. --

Such is the goodness of the divine nature, that God does not afflict
willingly, nor grieve the children of men. Lam. 3.
Judgment is strange work, it is his strange act. Isa. 28.21.
-- He never calls for it, except when it is morally necessary; but when he
begins in this way to contend with a people for their sins, is it reasonable to
suppose that he will remove the rod, while those sins continue, which are the
cause of it? which it is sent not so much to punish for, as to reclaim from?
would not this be in a sense to give up the cause of his controversy with them?
Do the scriptures give us any reason to trust in God, while we continue in
those very sins which are the occasion of his bringing trouble and affliction
upon us -- I say, to trust in him for the removal of them? If they do not,
trust in God, while we hold fast our sins, is not properly speaking reliance on
God, it is no other than presumption. --

And we shall find that the scripture gives such no encouragement, if we attend
to them -- If ye walk contrary unto me, I will walk contrary unto you, Live. 27.
is a language of them -- All the Jewish fasts, and solemn feasts and
sacrifices, availed them nothing, while their hands were full of blood, and
they neglected to break off their sins, and the reason why they were not heard
and regarded in their cries, is often given them by the prophets, and always
amounted to this, that their prayers and tears were not accompaned with an
actual separation from sin; and there were many express promises given them,
that if they would forsake it, God would appear for them, and help and save
them -- If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land; but
if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword: for the mouth of
the Lord has spoken it. Isa. 1.19, 20.


The whole tenor of the scripture is of the same import, and all these are
written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come. 1. Cor.
10.12.
They point out our duty, even to return to God, with our whole heart, and not
feignedly; and admonish us, that we have little reason to expect divine aid
without it. --

III. They call evil good, and put sweet for bitter, who say, it is good either
for themselves or the community, that absolute and uncontrolable authority
should be lodged in their hands, or in the hands of any ruler, or number of
rulers on earth. --

Man was not made for absolute power or monarchy -- he is not fit for it, and
it has the most dangerous tendency, with respect to him that is invested with
it, and all under him. --

The nature of man is such, since the fall (and before there was no need of
government of any kind among men, other than divine) that it is very dangerous
to the person that is exalted, to be set above control; or elevated to that
degree, that there is none on earth who can call him to an account for his
conduct, and punish him when he is guilty of that toward his fellow creatures
which deserves and calls for punishment -- such power has a natural tendency to
make the head on which it is laid, swim and run around -- to make the man
forget what he is, and what reason and justice requires of him. -- It was this
pride that made most of the Heathen emperors and kings claim divine homage, and
order it to be paid them, by the servile wretches, who they knew durst not
disobey them -- And it was fear of this that induced the wise king of Macedon,
to order one every day to repeat in his presence, "Remember, Philip, you are
but a man."

Many who have not run to such extravagant madness, as to forget that they were
men, have forgot, or thought themselves above, the duties incumbent on them as
such, and gone into the commission of crimes they had never thought of, or at
least dared to commit, had they not been drunk with power -- Even good men,
when thus exalted, are often guilty of the most cruel and abominable actions:
Witness David in the matter of Uriah, and Solomon in multiplying wives
(directly against the divine precept Deuteronomy. 17.17.
) and then setting up idolatry.

As for wicked men, it has transformed them into monsters, and many among them,
instead of being fit for gods (an honor some of them have claimed) had their
abilities been equal to their wickedness, might well have passed for devils --
such were Tiberius, Caligula, and Nero, and most of the other Roman emperors,
of whom we have an account in profane history; and many of whom mention is made
in the scripture -- such was Hazael, in whom, it is clear from the sacred
records, that his exaltation was the cause of his inhuman cruelty, yea more
than brutal barbarity. -- The account the inspired penman has given us of the
matter, is worthy our attention. The prophet, when he behold this future
butcher of his nation, wept; and on his enquiring the occasion, answered,
Because I know the evil that thou will do unto the children of Israel: their
strong holds will thou set on fire, their young men will thou slay with the
sword, and wilt dash their children, and rip up their women with child.

Hazael, who was only a servant of Ben-hadad, stood astonished. But what, says
he, is thy servant a dog, that he should do this great thing! -- plainly
intimating that he must be void of all humanity to do it, though he had power,
which perhaps he had never then thought of. The prophet answers in these few
words, THE LORD HAS SHOWED ME, THAT THOU SHALL BE KING OVER SYRIA. 2 Kings
8.12, 13.
Enough this, to remove all wonder. He could tell of nothing too bad for him to
do, if he was to be a King, an absolute Monarch.

And it is observable that the bare prospect of a crown stripped him of all his
boasted humanity -- he returned home, and immediately waded to the throne,
through the blood of his master; Verse 15.
commenced king and murderer in a day, and was afterward the very dog the
prophet had told him he would be. And most kings have been but too like him,
especially absolute monarchs: their principal employment has been gratifying
their brutal appetites, and robbing the people of their lives and properties;
or in the expressive language of the prophet, catching the prey and devouring
men. Ezekiel. 19.6.


The danger arising from the possession of absolute monarchy, to the dignified
worm himself, is such, that it seems as though no good one could desire it --
certain it is, that his elevation must set him a much fairer mark for vice, the
destroyer of true peace and honor here, and tormentor of the soul hereafter.

But if this was not the case, if the court had no more temptation to vice than
the cottage; still a wise and good man must be mad to desire absolute or
monarchical power, on account of the burden that must necessarily attend it.
The care of the whole people must lie upon him: all their civil and military
concerns he must order alone, or look out and appoint proper persons to order.
The burden of Israel was found too heavy for Moses Exodus 23.18.
(assisted as he was in a very extraordinary manner;) he could not bear it
alone, though the people were in a camp, under his eye; who then is sufficient
for this thing? (viz.) alone to govern a whole nation, scattered not only through
different provinces, but countries, which is the case with most kingdoms.

If no wise man can desire such power for his own sake, much less can he desire
it for the people's sake. No person of common sense, can think himself alone
more capable of directing to measures that will be productive of happiness to a
whole kingdom, than he would be, assisted by wise men, and friends of mankind.
It is manifest that none among men are too wise to need counsel -- Where no
counsel is, the people fall; but in the multitude of counselors there is
safety. Prove. 11.14.


There must be some other motives, at bottom, beside the good of the people,
that influences men, when they desire unlimited power. This is generally,
opportunity to gratify their vicious desires, without fear or control, from
any of their fellow-men -- (For ambition, covetousness, revenge, etc. are all
vicious desires.)

When any plead up, that it is the people's good they have in view, in desiring
to establish monarchical power, in their own hands, or the hands of others,
they are arrant hypocrites; there is no truth in their pretenses, or else their
minds are as weak as their argument. (And it is not possible, when such is the
thing they are arguing for, there should be any strength at all in them.) They
call evil good, both as it respects themselves and the people: and a seeking
what, if they effect, will be destructive of happiness to both -- And all who
join with them, or plead for them, whatever specious name they may call their
conduct by, and to whatever virtuous cause they may attribute it, are really
acting against the good of society; it is the greatest possible evil that can
happen to it, they are attempting to effect. -- The world has suffered more
from tyrants, than from earthquakes, pestilence and famine. It is an argument
of human weakness and depravity that it has. -- Mankind can see when they are
oppressed, and the power they have trusted to men is abused, and made
destructive of their happiness. And they ought to rise up and punish the first
beginnings of oppression.

Had this been the case, a tyrant had never existed. But fear of destroying
legal authority, has induced mankind to permit evils worse than anarchy itself,
to arise from the perverson of it; worse, because with much greater difficulty
redressed -- For to use the words of a polite writer, No oppression is so heavy
or lasting as that which is inflicted by the perversion and exorbitance of
legal authority: the robber may be seized, and the invader repelled whenever
they are found; they who pretend no right but that of force, may by force be
punished or suppressed: but when plunder bears the name of impost, and murder
is perpetrated by a judicial sentence, fortitude is intimidated and wisdom
confounded; resistance shrinks from an alliance with rebellion; and the villain
remains secure in the robes of the magistrate.

RAMBLER, No. 145.


The woe that belongs both to those who endeavor to possess themselves of such
power, and those who assist them therein, is death by the hand of public
justice here, and (without repentance) damnation hereafter.

IV. They put darkness for light, and light for darkness, who misrepresent the
state, and temper of a people to their rulers -- who represent them (for
instance) as factious, disorderly and rebellious, when they are only tenacious
of their just rights; rights which the God of nature has given them, and
compact secured to them -- there has been much of this, in this land, and it is
one of the principal sources of our present calamities and troubles.

Had Governor Hutchinson, and others like him, instead of representing these
colonies as aspiring to independency; (than which nothing was farther from
their thoughts and desires at the beginning of the present controversy, though
the matter, it is highly probable, will now end in it) represented them as only
tenacious of their former liberty, which for a long time has been much less
than is contained in their charters; had they represented them as united, and
men of courage, who would defend their rights to the last; instead of divided,
and cowards, who dare not look regular troops in the face, matters would never
have come to what they are at present; however desirous, some tyrants, in Great
Britain, may be of the slavery and plunder of America. --

But in each of these respects, they have been deceived -- They imagined, from
the accounts sent home, by their tools (who knew their temper, and what news
would be agreeable to them) that they had a plausible pretense for taking away
our liberties, on account of the independent spirit that prevailed among us --
That was what they would -- and as they thought from the accounts transmitted
to them, that we could make but a feeble resistance, they have set about it,
without the least regard to justice, or the solemn charters which secured these
rights to us, as far as the faith of kings can do it.

Would any know what the woe is that belongs to those, who thus put darkness
for light? language cannot express it in full. -- He that sheds the blood of a
single person, is doomed to the most ignominious death by the hand of man: and,
if he dies without repentance, endless misery awaits him in the world to come;
for it is written, cursed is every one that hangs on a tree. Gal. 3.13.
What then must be the woe that must light on the guilty heads of those who
have ruined a nation, and caused the blood of thousands to be shed? who have
caused the most flourishing towns to be laid in ashes, and the most fertile and
pleasant country, depopulated and made desolate, yea who have deluged a
continent in blood and carnage?

All that man can do with respect to them, is to turn them out of a world in
which they are unworthy to live; and God Almighty will then do them justice to
the full! For such wandering stars (for, blessed be God, they have been obliged
to wander from this land) who are set up as lights, but instead of diffusing
light, scatter darkness, there is doubtless reserved the blackness of darkness
forever: -- The very dregs of the cup of trembling will undoubtedly be wrung
out to them; yea they will be made to drink at the hand of the Lord of the cup
of his fury.

V. They call evil good, who say it is good to submit to the will of tyrants,
or tamely part with liberty at the summons of any king or ministry on earth. --
At all events, nothing worse can happen to a people than slavery -- than being
sold, they and their children, for bondmen. And where the demand evidently
amounts to this, This is evidently implied in the claims of the British
parliament over America. -- A right to make laws, binding upon us in ALL CASES
WHATEVER, by a body in which we are not represented, is as complete a
definition of slavery as can be given -- it extends alike to matters civil and
religious.
there is no danger of resistance making the bondage harder than it would have
been, had there been a tame submission. Wretches who have so little regard to
justice, and are so void of all bowels of compassion, as to desire to rob
others of their rights, are not to be softened by a tame submission. Their
ruling passion is, commonly, love of gain; and where that has possession of the
heart, every thing else must give place. This will induce them, to make the
most they can, of the timid, servile creatures, who hope to soften them into
pity, by passive obedience and non-resistance.

There always are timorous persons to be found in every country, who had rather
be slaves themselves, and entail slavery on posterity, than enter the glorious
contest against the demands of tyranny and despotism. -- If this arises from
the timidity of their constitutions, they are to be pitied; and ought to be
employed in some honest peaceable calling at home -- They should not be
solicited, or even permitted to enlist themselves as defenders of liberty --
They will only betray it if they should. There are enough in this land who are
less afraid of death than slavery: and such are the men to be employed in its
defense.

Others there are, who plead, that it is better to submit, than enter the
contest, from other principles and causes: some because they expect to share in
the plunder of their country: others because they think (or pretend to think)
that resistance is forbidden in the word of God. The former of these are
equally criminal with the tyrants themselves; and the same woe belongs to them:
the latter, if they really believe that God has required mankind to submit to
the unjust demands of every tyrant, are to be pitied for their weakness; and
are to be considered and treated as persons destitute of common sense, or else
beside themselves, at least in this respect.

We shall not attempt at present, to give the true sense of the passages of
scripture on which the doctrine of passive obedience and non-resistance is
supposed to stand -- it is beside our purpose, and would lead us too far. We
would however observe, that to common sense, Self preservation should teach us
to defend ourselves as long as we can -- Est enim haec non scripta, sed (...)
ex, qu^ non didicimus, accepimus, legimus; sed ex ipsa natu^a (...) hausimus,
expressimus. (...).
nothing can be plainer, than that what we possess by right, no man has a
right to take from us without our consent: and from this principle alone,
evidently flows a right of resistance, against every lawless invader.

This is the plainest language of the reason which God has given us. It
evidently appears from the light which God has lighted up in every man; and no
command can possibly come from him that contradicts it; nor can he reveal any
thing contrary to it. Reason and revelation are both lights from God, the
latter was given to assist the former, not to destroy it. Reason is as real and
true light as revelation. The principal difference is, revelation goes farther
than reason alone could have gone, discovering what reason unassisted never
could.

As God is consistent with himself, his discoveries must be consistent with
themselves; so that what is obvious from reason, cannot possibly be opposite to
scripture. -- It is by reason, we are to judge of the evidences of scripture;
and if we find any thing, that comes to us as a revelation from God, that
evidently contradicts the plainest dictates of the reason he has given us, we
need be at no loss what to think of such a revelation. God cannot gainsay by
his prophets that common light and reason which he has placed in man to be
their guide and director -- Revelation may cast new light upon the principles
of reason, but can never contradict them. I cannot listen to revelation, but in
consequence of the natural notion I have of God, of his being, his wisdom,
power and goodness: destroy then the principles of reason, and there is no room
left for revelation. -- What spirit must that be, which I know contradicts the
spirit God has placed within me? In which case there is only this choice,
either to disown God for my creator, or reject the spirit which contradicts the
light of reason which God has placed in the minds of men. Bishop SHERLOCK.


So that arguments against liberty, that are pretended to take their rise from
scripture, are in fact arguments against revelation; and an attempt to destroy
that evidence of their truth, void of which nothing can support them.

If those who argue from the scriptures against freedom, are sincere, and
really think that they are speaking the language of inspiration, it is to be
hoped that themselves will be saved -- It will be so, however, as by fire,
whereas all these their works will be burnt up, as wood, hay, and stubble,
miserable trash, that cannot endure the slightest flame, but will be instantly
consumed by it, and they must suffer the loss. 1 Cor. 3.15.


If the case be otherwise with them, and they are attempting to pervert the
scriptures, that they may speak a language that suits their temporal interest,
the woe belongs to them, which is denounced against those who put darkness for
light, who handle the word of God deceitfully, and endeavor by means of that
which God has given for a light, to spread mists and darkness over the eyes of
mankind -- and we make no doubt, but this is the case with far the greater part
of those who do thus argue from the word of God. Woe be unto all such; it shall
be ill with them, for the reward of their hands shall be given them. Isa. 3.11*
As the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumes the chaff, so their
root shall be as rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust. Context, v.
24.


VI. They call evil good, who in such a day as the present (in which we are
struggling for every thing that is worth having) set up their own private
interest as the end of their actions, and the thing aimed at in all their
conduct -- Some of these, it is to be feared there are, among the friends of
liberty at this day.

This spirit manifests itself various ways, according to the situation and
circumstances of the persons who possess it. If a man of this temper is one
otherwise fit to be a defender of his country's rights in the field, you will
find him anxious to procure some very honorable and lucrative post, and
refusing to aid his country in her distress, if he cannot procure it. -- One
who had the love of his land uppermost in his heart, would not refuse to put
forth a helping hand to save her, though he might have none of those honors or
profits immediately, which he might think belonged to him; especially one who
considered that if his country was ruined, his own ruin would be involved in
it. Was this house on fire over our heads, what would mankind say of us, if we
stood disputing about the honors and profits that should be conferred on him
who went first to quench it; and if it was apparent that some of us were more
engaged to make our own interests, than to extinguish the flame, would they not
say we deserved to burn in it? -- Yes, doubtless; and very justly too.

Now, the case is similar with the inhabitants of our country at this day -- If
we stand to dispute about precedence, honors, and profits, our liberty will,
mean time, be taken from us; and then what will all avail us?

They who are principally concerned to make their own interests, amidst the
calamities and distresses of their country, act the same part, and are worthy
of the same honors with the thieves, who, during the conflagration of a city,
under pretense of assisting to extinguish the flames, are really intent only on
plundering for themselves, and making the general distress the means and
opportunity of their unjust aggrandizement.

It is not a time for us to seek great things to ourselves; if we can preserve
our lives and liberties, it should content us. If we expect and seek wealth and
honor amidst these confusions, the message with which the prophet was sent to
Baruch, may be applicable to us. Behold, that which I have built, will I break
down; and that which I have planted, will I pluck up. -- And seek thou great
things for thyself? Seek them not; for behold I will bring evil upon all flesh,
says the Lord. Jer. 45.4.


The same spirit will show itself in those who have no expectation of any post
of honor and authority, in murmuring that their immediate profits are no
greater, while they are defending their country, if they are abroad in her
service; and they will be ready to forsake her when most needed, if they can do
it without drawing the vengeance (or more properly, justice) of their country
upon them. This was evidently the case with some in our grand army of late,
who, because their pay was not at the rate of twenty-eight days to the month
(as I understand this was the principal cause of their uneasiness) determined
to leave the camp when the term of their inlistment was expired, though others
were not come in to guard our works! -- To their eternal disgrace be it spoken
-- for the pitiful sum of twenty shillings, they would sell their country! for
the dispute was about no more that. Since the delivery of this discourse, the
author has been informed, that the mutinous, allege other causes of their
disaffection, beside that mentioned above; (viz.) that they were commanded, and
not desired or requested to stay longer -- and that their officers engaged both
for themselves and their men, without ever consulting their men about it -- If
these were facts, they were no sufficient excuse for leaving the camp, or
refusing obedience to orders, when their country stood in such need of them --
Was the right of impressing men, when the state of an individual, much more of
a country required it, ever disputed? and who were so fit to be impressed, as
things were then circumstanced, as those who were then upon the spot, and
equipt for the business? indeed there were no others they could impress --
while they were gone to impress others, what they were wanted to guard, would
have been lost -- If officers endeavored not to persuade, before they made use
of this power of impressing or commanding, it was wrong -- so it was to return
their names to stay, without previously consulting them. (i. e. the soldiers)
There are very few however, would have thought that they run any great risque
in so doing -- for who could have thought that one of a thousand of our
soldiers, would on any account, have left our works unguarded?

Most of those who did this were doubtless led into it, inconsiderately, by a
few designing men; and therefore will easily obtain forgiveness, from their
injured country -- But the authors and ringleaders in this black affair (if
they still justify their conduct) cannot be too heartily despised, by every
lover of his country, or too carefully avoided by all who regard her
approbation and esteem. "Unto their assembly, mine honor be not thou united,"
Genesis 49.6.


-- If such be the soldiers who are sent forth to defend us, farewell liberty.
-- The enemy would have easy work, to conquer a country whose inhabitants were
of this disposition. But blessed be God, this was the case with but few --
There were many who like Caleb and Joshua, labored to still them, and persuade
them not to desert their bleeding country; who now share her blessing, and may
the blessing of the Almighty rest upon them. -- Again --

They who set up their private interests as the thing they have principally in
view, will be ready to murmur at defraying their proportion of the charge
incurred for our defense. Some who are friends to their country, have felt
uneasy at the expense, and been ready to complain on account of it, because
they have supposed a considerable part of it unnecessary.

But are we, my brethren, proper judges of this matter? Have we the means of
knowledge as a body chosen from all the colonies, who consequently know the
temper and disposition of the whole? Can we then determine this matter, with
the same probability, of best suiting the whole, as they can? -- No certainly
--

The temper and disposition of the whole must be taken into consideration, as
the charge is to be equal; and they who have determined the particular sums
allotted to those of each rank in the army, navy, etc. were the most competent
and proper judges, and have doubtless done much better than we could, had it
been referred to us. --

We must never forget that we are now a united continent, and can have but one
interest, of which every thing is destructive that tends to create uneasiness,
or divide us among ourselves. Were we in New England to insist that the reward
of the officers, (especially the principal officers) in our armies, should be
greatly diminished, as this is a matter chiefly complained of among us, we
might perhaps be deserted by all the southern provinces, It may not be
improper, here to observe (as some have been uneasy about it) that the officers
wages in our armies were raised for the present year, in compliance, with the
spirit and customs of the southern provinces, who in their turn, consented that
the soldiers wages should be higher than they would have fixed them. If they
had had no connection with us -- and we must condescend to each other, if we
would keep united among ourselves, without which, we shall lose all that is
deservedly dear to man, as all this we are contending for.
and left to defend ourselves, and bear the expense of it alone: and then if we
were able to withstand the whole power of Great Britain, which is engaged
principally against us, we should find the cost much greater than it will now
be; though it is highly probable such a division would prove fatal to the whole.

Let us not think hard of it, that we are called to part with some of our
interests to defend our country. If we refuse, we shall shortly lose the whole,
and have nothing we can call our own. Our inheritance will be turned to
strangers, our houses to aliens. We shall drink our water for money, our wood
will be sold unto us. Our necks will be under persecution: we shall labor and
have no rest. Lam. 5.2, etc.
-- As for the land that God gave unto our fathers, to eat the fruit thereof,
and the good thereof, behold we shall be servants in it: and it will yield much
increase to the kings whom God will set over us, because of our sins; and they
will have dominion over our bodies, and over our cattle at their pleasure, and
we shall be in great distress. Neh. 9.36, 37.


Finally -- They put bitter for sweet, who do not frown upon all who find fault
with the measures adopted by American rulers and leaders at this day, but
listen with attention to their seditious discourse, the tendency of which is to
sow seeds of uneasiness and division among us. We are far from intending to
insinuate that individuals have no right to judge of the conduct of their
rulers; they have it undoubtedly, but none have a right to judge of matters
before they are acquainted with them, and this is evidently the case with most
of those who are censuring and condemning our rulers at this day. They are
generally men, who of all others, are least acquainted with public affairs;
whose knowledge of the state of America, is confined to a single colony, or
part of a colony, and even of that is very imperfect: notwithstanding which,
they think themselves best qualified to hold the reins of government, and guide
the tottering state at this alarming crisis -- Such men should be frowned into
silence, whenever they thus open their mouths; for they are too weak and too
conceited to be reclaimed by reason.
-- Divisions among themselves has been the ruin of most free states that ever
lost their liberty -- It was so particularly of the Grecian and Roman
republics, which were invincible till rent by intestine divisions; and it is
morally certain, that nothing but this will ever yield us a prey to our enemies.

If we think every measure that is adopted, is not the wisest possible, we
should suspect our own judgments, while we believe our rulers to be our real
friends; remembering that we have not the means of knowledge that they have;
considering also, that the wisdom of their counsels has confounded our enemies,
and filled the wisest politicians with wonder. -- And did we even know, that in
some things they may have erred, it would be wise in us to bear with it, rather
than divide -- Nothing can be so fatal to us as division: that would be certain
ruin. We have heard of a few, who are very liberal in their censures of our
rulers, and free in calling them hard names, and calling their authority in
question, especially the authority of the general congress; and of a few who
have given broad hints, that they are determined never to defray their
proportion of the expenses of the war.

Such as these do all in their power, to ruin their country, and banish liberty
from the face of the earth, for it has hardly an existance out of America --
They show themselves destitute of every principle of virtue, of every spark of
love to virtuous freedom; and are unworthy to breathe the air of a free
country, and should be treated as creatures never dignified with humanity.

As to their refusing to defray their parts of the charge incurred for our
defense, we know of no way they can avoid it, unless they sly their country,
and carry all they possess with them, before the time comes for collecting
their proportion: and be their interests ever so great, their country will be
no looser by their removing the whole, so be they go with it themselves; nor
will the land in which they take up their abode be any gainer thereby. --




To conclude. -- A dreadful curse will light upon us, if we omit any thing in
our power for the preservation of our just rights. This is the most IMPORTANT
CRISIS for America that has ever been, or perhaps ever will be -- On the part
we now act DEPENDS the freedom or slavery of this land, probably to the end of
time. We are therefore called upon to exert ourselves not only on our OWN
ACCOUNT, but that of all FUTURE generations, whose happiness or misery depends,
under God, upon us.

This being the case, shall we let our little, paltry private interests divide
us? Shall any selfish considerations, extinguish or diminish our zeal for the
common good? any thing hinder us from putting forth a helping hand for the
common cause, at the present, and all succeeding ages?

If so, we are unworthy of the day and land in which we live: yea, fit only to
have been born the slaves of some eastern despot, and lived in a day or place
where the very name of freedom is never heard -- and the day is coming in which
we shall wish this had been our lot!

Every one that is born in this land, and lives at this day, has an important
charge committed to him: the preservation of liberty, as far as his powers
reach, is his care, and he must answer for the improvement he makes of it. Let
us not neglect a due regard to so sacred a deposite, which will certainly be
required at our hands if we do. -- Let us stand ready with life and fortune, to
defend what is entrusted to us; and if called to it, rather part with ALL we
possess, yea and our lives too, in the glorious cause, than consent to live the
slaves of an imperious tyrant, and suffer chains to be riveted upon our
children forever, and freedom to be blotted from the face of the earth.

What is necessary for us to do, may be collected from the foregoing discourse
(as far as we are capable of instructing you) which it is needless here to
repeat -- and therefore shall only say in general, that it consists in making
God our friend by repentance and faith in his Son; avoiding whatever has even
the remotest tendency to DIVIDE us among ourselves; and standing ready with
life and fortune to defend the rights of America, and repel every hostile
attempt of the enemies of freedom --

If we do this, happy, thrice happy shall we be, both here and hereafter, "for
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call us blessed," Luke 1.48
our names shall "be had in everlasting remembrance.' Psalm. 1012 6. Prove. 10 7.


But if we act another part, "woe be unto us, it will be ill with us, our names
will rot" Prove. 10.7,
-- all posterity will excerate the memory of the base, unnatural parent who
with unfeeling stupidity, did worse than devour their young! "Even the sea
monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their young ones;" and shall
"the daughter of my people become cruel like the ostriches of the wilderness?"
Shall we reduce posterity to such a state, "that the tongue of the sucking
child will cleave to the roof of his mouth for thirst?" -- that "the young
children shall ask bread, and no man break it to them?" -- that they who might
have "fed deliciously, shall be desolate in the streets?" -- that they who
might have been "brought up in scarlet, shall embrace dunghills?" -- If so, the
punishment of the "sin of the daughter of our people will be greater than the
punishment of the sin of Sodom, that was overthrown in a moment, and no hand
stayed her." Lam. 4.3, -- 6.
--

It will be greater cruelty to yield posterity as the property of haughty
tyrants, than to have butchered them with our own hands as soon as they were
born. If such be the part we act, will not all the curses in the book of God
light upon our devoted heads? -- Undoubtedly: for more than ten talents will be
shamefully abused by us. --

May God grant us all the wisdom, prudence, and fortitude that is necessary for
us, that we may so act our part here, as to shine as the brightness of the
firmament forever hereafter, through Jesus Christ.

AMEN.
FINIS.
ERRATA. -- P. 6. l. 15. for their read our. -- P. 7. l. 4. for those r. these.
-- P. 11. l. 22. after is r. his. -- P. 12. l. 3. from bottom, after than r.
the. -- P. 15. l. 5. f. b. r. arguments. -- l. ult. for a r. are.


