NECESSARIES; BEST PRODUCT OF LAND; BEST STAPLE OF COMMERCE.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JAMES HUMPHREYS, JUNR. M.DCC,LXXVI.

NECESSARIES, etc.
The following OBSERVATIONS were occasioned by this Extract of a Letter.
YEARS are past since first you bestrid the hobbies silk and wine, which seem
to be in full career; and sorry I am to see such speed, for aught that appears,
without any previous consideration of the effects they may be attended with to
the community, in an extensive view. I applaud the endeavors of your
Philosophical Society, in general; but in this particular, wish some less
mischievous object had flattered their attention. In a conversation at Bath,
when I was last there, it was said they are excellent objects to employ our
colonists in; for, silk and wine will come to us from our plantations, upon
much easier terms than we now obtain them; and in a little time we shall be
able to spare a part of them to the European Countries that at present supply
us. The plantations cannot sell to any other than ourselves; therefore, we
shall have their wine and silk upon our own terms, and be able to undersell our
neighbors in Europe, so as to render it not worth their while to make them.
Should this be accomplished, instead of wine they would make grain; which would
render them less dependent upon others, and we in particular should lose the
demand for our best article of export.
Much more past that affected me greatly; rather on behalf of your children
than yourselves; who, it may be, shall have scuffled through life ere the fatal
effects of your policy, in introducing the silken cord and luscious draught,
from your once better employed fields, shall be fully felt: and I plainly
perceived, rather indeed from intimations than from any direct discourse, that
the Americans are to be drawn, by degrees. into an humble state of dependence
and submission absolute, by such employments as may divert them from a prudent
and due attention to the raising necessaries.


Notwithstanding the readiness with which the projects for making wine and silk
have been received by the numerous class of wine drinkers, and fond ones for
novelty, I, though a wine drinker, have not yet been able to reconcile them to
my poor judgment; however fashionable it may have been to embrace and promote
them. On the contrary, some reflections in consequence of the hints in the
foregoing extract, have determined me, with a view to the public permanent
happiness, to declare my disapprobation of them.

It is a principle of sound prudence, whenever in matters of government, law
and commerce, any material alteration is proposed, that you beware of latent
consequencies -- be jealous of new establishments -- look forward, and consider
how flattering soever appearances are, what probably may be the mischievous
tendency of such new "It is not easy to determine, upon theory, the success of
political innovations." PRINC. P. L.
projects when adopted. It is often better to drudge on in a temperate and
middle state, than to aim at too much.

The proposed cultivations are intended to introduce wine and silk as an
American staple; and should the attempt be crowned with success, their produce
may, for a while, yield considerable profit to individuals; provided the hand
of power should not by imposts, or some other way, clogg and burden it. That
there is at least one other way, my friend has shown by the intimation, that
our English brethren would tie us up from selling to any but themselves, as is
actually the case of tobacco, and many other articles of American land produce,
which are already heavily burdened with duties in England. We have no
assurance it would not be clogged; and if we had, it might become a question
how far those who have recently committed repeated breaches of public faith,
are entitled to our confidence, in a matter of so great importance as the
parting with what is essential to our being.

The first and great essential in life is bread. Whenever we shall surrender
that -- throw away the sickle for the pruning knife and silk reel; for the
making fine wines and fine silk materials for our taskmasters, that they may
more readily besot and bedeck themselves; and in the end, through our pinching
necessities, which must follow, govern us with a bit of bread, then may they
tax at pleasure and command like true musselmen. We should have but little
spirits to claim, much less support constitutional rights, and it would be as
ridiculous to talk of them, as it would be for the meagre Spaniard or Italian,
who, with their bunnel and husks of grapes, are just enabled to drudge through
a dark, dull, slavish life. Unfortunate brethren! to be thus deluded and
debased by the arts of tyranny.

Being, from such a surrender, reduced to want bread, how could our dejected
minds contradict or disobey the most oppressive mandates of a Grand Vizier? I
would suppose that with our silk and wine we have, like the poor peasants of
South Europe, made some bread: but our labor and attention being, by the
artifices of those called politicians (too often enemies to plain honesty and
liberal sentiment) diverted, more especially to the purpose of raising
luxuries, which will neither sufficiently feed or cloth us, we have, alas!
only aimed at a scanty stock of grain, barely for our respective country
family's consumption, and falling a little short in that, become miserably
dependent on strangers Italy formerly exported corn; but afterward became
dependent on other countries for its daily bread: This is ascribed by the Roman
authors to the neglect of tillage. Columel. Prof. Suaeton. August. C. 42. etc.
The country about Volisso, in the island of Chio or Sciros, in the Archipelago,
is very pleasant, spacious and fruitful, the inhabitants raise 5000 weight of
silk yearly, with which they pay their tribute. It Is thought they lie under a
curse of being always destitute of bread. Thev. Trav. to Lev.


The curse is no more than the natural consequence of their neglecting to
cultivate a fruitful country for raising the gew-gaw silk. Had the tribute been
reserved in wheat, their attention being thereby drawn especially to that
object, the curse of wanting bread would never have fallen on them.


, for the surplusage of their necessaries of life: these we are to purchase
with our wine and silk, which they are under no necessity of buying -- or may
choose to get of others, when so disposed by starts of ill humor toward us;
whilst, from our starving condition, we are necessitated, not only to buy their
bread -- to give their price, but to sell our articles of luxury, the product
of our novel employment, to them, and to them only, at their poor offer, when
they may be pleased to call for them. Our people who shall then live in the
poor remains of once flourishing towns, at all times, and those in the country,
as often as accidents shall happen to their scanty pitched crops, must gape for
the arrival of ships with corn from abroad We can have no wheat so good as our
own, although as good may be shipped from abroad. By a sea carriage it is
liable to many accidents. Some years since in a scarcity in New England, wheat
was imported from England; but from the long Westward passages it became musty,
cast dark, and did not answer. Dougl.
.

View the state of the southern countries of Europe: -- all Italy, Spain,
Portugal, great part of France, and till lately that the cultivation of corn
became the first object of the attention of its government, the whole of
France, employing their chief attention and labor in making silk and wine: and
though they are fine countries for producing wheat, and some is made in them,
yet, not aiming at that article as a staple of commerce, how constantly are
they in want of, and how dear do, they pay for bread It may seem an odd
position, says Mr. Hume, that the poverty of the common people of France,
Spain, and Italy is, in some measure, owing to the superior riches of the soil
and happiness of the climate; and yet there want not many reasons to justify
this paradox. The fine vineyards of Champaign and Burgundy, are cultivated by
peasants that have scarce bread. But the farmers and graziers are in better
circumstances in those countries. Hu. Ess. Connecticut is valuable for grain
and pasture. Any country is happy where the meaner people are plentifully and
wholesomely fed, and warmly and decently clothed; thus it is in Connecticut.
Dougl.
.

In the war immediately preceding the last. France, in the midst of almost
uninterrupted victories and conquests, whilst her labor and attention were much
engaged by wine and silk, was compelled to make peace, and relinquish all her
fine prospects, merely from a great scarcity of corn in that kingdom: when her
enemies had only the barren island of Cape Briton to deliver up in exchange;
whereas it might well be thought that Madrass alone, then in her hands, was an
equivalent. Ever since that sore-felt scarcity, it has been her policy to
encourage the making of corn, preferable to all other produce; seeing and
feeling, as we may suppose, that however great or flourishing they may be in
other respects, bread being wanting submission must follow. This is an axiom
applicable to individuals as well as to provinces and kingdoms After the battle
of Blenheim, the French army wanted large recruits, and there being a great
scarcity of bread in the country, the French King ordered his public stores of
bread to be well taken care of. The soldiers alone were well fed out of them;
whilst the country people were starving, which occasioned them, through
necessity, to flock to the army and inlist in crowds. 2 Ha. Hus. 338. Here
then, we have an instance of the application to private, as the text is of a
public submission for want of bread, and that too in the same country.
.

A celebrated author reckons it bad policy in the English to obstruct the use
of French wines: and would encourage the French to turn their labor to the
making more wines, by the free use of them in England; because each new acre of
vineyard planted in France, in order to supply England with wine, would make it
requisite for the French to take the produce of an English acre sown in wheat,
in order to subsist themselves: "and it is evident, that we have thereby got
the command of the better commodity." Apply this to the lure now hung out to
America Hints and intimations were thrown out, from England, of immense riches
to America, should she employ her attention in making wine and silk. Such a
spirit as James I. attempted to infuse in the minds of the English nation, was
now to be caught by the Americans. -- But they are employments equally
inconsistent with the genius of this people as of that, and it is hoped that
nothing will lead this manly people into so dangerous an employment. Like their
English ancestors, they are too wise and considerate to enter into such an
effeminate basiness as silk making especially. In the time of the same James of
England, the silk raised in France, yielded such an immense apparent profit,
that our effeminate King repeatedly recommended it from the throne, to raise
Silk worms in England: But the nation was too prudent to be influenced to it by
the Royal recommendation, although it was, perhaps, more earnestly pressed by
him and his servants than any other matter -- even by the judges on the
circuits, however foreign to their office: and there could be no doubt of the
Silkworm thriving and working as well in England as in other parts of Europe;
as appeared by many experiments, besides what are recorded by the Philosophical
Society, in their transactions. It was not many years ere that brilliant
business began to decline greatly in France, where it is now quite trifling
compared with its then vast extent; for "the profit being little else than
apparent, was not realized." Why did England reject the Royal scheme, for
making her rich? -- It was against the genius of a free and manly people. -- An
employment fitted only to an effeminate and poor spirited people. Hence we may
observe that, all the world over, the making of silk mostly flourishes among
people of that stamp, who are every where in a state of miserable oppression or
slavery. The very nature of the employment tends to enervate that hardiness and
vigor, which is the general effect of manly labor, and to effeminate the
nation that unhappily stumbles on it.


. Why would our countrymen on the other side the water, coax us to drudge in
articles on which we may starve? Have we any reason to conclude, especially
from the present Asiatic temper of their rulers that there is in the project
the least regard for our welfare? Rather may we not suppose that the benevolent
motive is pointed out above, by Mr. Hume; when, what he would that England
should do by her implacable enemy France, that she would now do by us; --
cajole us out of the command of the better commodity, necessary to our
existence, and make it requisite for us to take the product of her acres of
WHEAT, in order to subsist ourselves If from their excessive luxury and their
endless manufactories, consumers of bread among them, should be in too great
proportion to their corn-makers, for these to supply them and us also with
wheat, yet the subjecting us to a dependence on them for bread, would be
answered by foreign wheat, purchased and sent to us in their ships, They have
been used to buy of us, to send to foreigners; why not buy of other foreigners
to sell to us? They are not to be deterred by the price to be given, whilst we
must buy of them at any rate.
. He further says, there are many edicts of the French King, prohibiting the
planting new vineyards, and ordering those lately planted to be grubbed up; so
sensible are they of the superior value of corn above every other product.

Let it not be said, I am so extravagant as to contend we should be wholly
employed in making corn, and nothing else: it would be a design too unnatural
for any legislative authority to enforce. My meaning is, that we drop not, nor
even relax from, the staff of life: -- that we so far attend to raising, within
ourselves, a plenty of heart-cheering subsistence, as to make luxuries and
delicacies subservient to it; and not that any of the necessaries, our first
care, should depend on them. I am, too, for preserving the connection with
Great Britain. But it may be expected she will allow us to be men who have
rights; and having feelings, such as she once had, that she will forbear to
play the tyrant over us Let America, when her constitutional freedom shall be
secured, support the true interests of her parent: She is old, drinks hard, and
her constitution is much impaired; and having litigious neighbors, let us
exert ourselves in her defense, not barely in proportion to her sickly state,
but to her justice and public virtue; and let affection accompany it -- when
possible! Let the commerce between us be so regulated, that whilst we render
her raw materials for her manufactories, she grudge us not an independent
security of our property, and such a share of foreign commerce as will enable
us to pay for those materials returned to us manufactured for use, burdened,
as they would be, with the internal taxes of England, and with the high profits
necessary to support the luxurious living of Messieurs the merchants, the
mariners, gentlemen -- tradesmen, gentlemen scavengers, and other gentlemen,
down to the shoe black -- If this be denied to us, then it becomes not our
choice but necessity, to disuse her wrought-goods, and to manufacture the raw
materials for our necessary occasions; further I hope we shall not attempt. It
is not the proper business of an infant country to engage in the manufacturing
materials for articles of commerce. We want lands cleared and improved. The
most natural, most advantageous article of trade, to us, is the produce of our
farms; which ought of choice to consist in necessaries; corn, cattle, wool,
hemp, flax, saltpetre, etc. -- Let these, and such like, be our staple of
commerce; and let even the wool, hemp, and flax go in gross to England, so long
as she will leave to us a trade elsewhere open to enable us to buy her wrought
wares. When this regulation, so beneficial to the Mother Country, is refused,
if we have been so provident as to have made necessaries our staple, we shall
have the comfort to find our hands full of materials for our own necessary
consumption -- I should say salvation! with these we may be warm and robust,
which with wine and silk alone we cannot. Here then is an advantage in choosing
the "better commodities" for staples of trade, in attempting to raise all we
can, a safe game is played: we have a moral certainty of our real wants being
ever supplied; and, generally, if not at all times, there will be a surplusage
of those necessaries to exchange with others for their delicacies and luxuries,
whereby our imaginary or artificial wants would also be gratified. -- Nor am I
indifferent to a glass of good wine: I admire, and am seldom without it; but it
is obtained in a way that America ought only to get it; by a commerce and
exchange of a surplusage of necessaries for that delicious juice.

Should I ever be without such surplusage, which has not yet been the case (for
my ground yields abundant corn!) then I shall only miss of, for a time, what I
can always do without. Nor yet do I carry my objections so far, but that those
gentlemen who have the opportunity, may proceed in wine-making, for amusement
or for family use: and even, should the humor so run, for general internal
consumption: though, perhaps, it were better not carried so far as this, for
fear we should reach to exportation.

The question has been repeatedly asked: "would you have every body make
grain?" I have declared it cannot be; a law to that purpose would be as
ridiculous as inconsistent with the various dispositions and humors of men.
And yet too much cannot be made. Mountains of grain would invite a market. But
husbandmen will in these cases ever choose for themselves; all that I say is,
let not our provincial legislators, or men of influence, mislead the people, by
encouragements of any sort, to labor in making for the principle commodities,
articles of luxury; but rather dissuade them from it: and let the fat farmer be
on his guard, nor part with his staff, "the better commodity" for vines and
worms It is not thirty years since wheat first became a considerable object of
exportation, in Maryland; nor twenty since Virginia first attended to it.
Before these times, acts of assembly were not unfrequent for prohibiting
exportation of corn, from the scarcity of it to answer the necessary wants of
the country; and so inconsiderable was the quantity of wheat, and it was so
unusual to export it, that the prohibitory acts chiefly affected indian corn;
-- scarcely touching wheat. The people of these countries were then poor and
spiritless to what they now are. Tobacco and indian corn, engrossed the
planters whole attention. Of tobacco, they constantly aimed at making all they
could; all Dung was for tobacco ground; -- not a scrap for grass or grain;
their cattle indeed were numerous; but being usually hide-bound for want of
food, made not much dung: They were apt to take an ugly disorder in the spring
of the year; -- they could not eat, -- could not chew the cud -- for want of
food, -- they died. Of corn the planters aimed at making but little or no more
than might suffice themselves, their Negroes and beasts: more would interfere
with the quantity of tobacco. -- So would wheat interfere with wine, and wine
with wheat. What of their corn they had to spare -- it was but sometimes, and
seldom much, was purchased with a little rum: -- The tobacco, by English or
Scotch stores of dry goods; or it was shipped in driblets, to London, on
consignment, the planters receiving returns according to the cunning of their
factors there. But so much was sold in the country to those stores, or rather
bartered for family necessaries, and too often for luxuries, that many
planters, at the end of the year, had nothing they could call their own, except
their lands and utensils of husbandry; and not always these. They were strictly
delvers, -- planters for Britain; -- always in debt, year over year; -- begging
indulgence, -- cringing for more credit, and humbling themselves before foreign
factors, and their boys; -- who being birds of passage had no feelings for the
interests of the country -- they rather poisoned the minds of the planters from
behind their counters, with principles and opinions inimical to American rights
and the planters own interests, in favor of that people -- that paliament --
which was to second the views of those very factors and the British merchants
as often as they should call for aid, to facilitate their designed advantages
over the planters -- "our planters" -- as they call the Americans. It was a
striking instance of wheat being the "better commodity," that, as the
cultivation of it advanced among us, the demand, and of course the price,
increased: and whilst, by its means, the upper counties of Maryland were
enjoying plenty, and a cheerful independence, being emancipated from the
tobacco stores, the lower counties, still continued for years, the cringing
mortgagers to British merchants; and, perhaps, are not quite clear of them, in
some counties, at this day. Thus, as the progress of wheat making traveled
southward, the people became daily more improved in their sentiments, manner of
life, and independency. Between tobacco and hemp -- how great the contrast!
Tobacco, a luxury. hemp, a necessary, in universal demand! It is in these, and
in every sense the planter and politician can examine it, "the better
commodity." -- for private, and for public advantage!
.

It is said that silk would be mostly women's work. It Is true; but, if our wives
and daughters were to raise as much silk as would, from its high price,
purchase a plenty of clothing and food, the men, after a while, would
undoubtedly become idle and indifferent to any other produce; our lands would
be but little, if at all, cultivated and improved and the women performing,
within a few weeks, the business of raising worms, would become equaly lazy and
worthless for the rest of the year; -- and, by degrees, both men and women
would be ignorant of husbandry and housewifery. Nor could their silk more
readily purchase necessaries and all we should want, than money would. Suppose
then mountains of guineas open to all the people of this country with which
they should purchase what at present they labor in the fields to make: Can any
be at a loss to conceive the wretchedness and dependency in which a country of
people, so circumstanced, would presently be plunged! how totally ignorant the
next generation, of agriculture, commerce, and the arts. "The riches and safety
of a country consist not alone in the number of its inhabitants, but of those
well employed." Look to Spain -- to New Spain and its rich mines; -- see the
crawling ignorant Spaniard! -- our oppressed, necessitous, and unhappy
neighbors!

It it probable, that in another century, silk, with other fine materials, and
even manufactured goods, will be articles of commerce, from the mountaineers,
back of Carolina, and other places, far from navigation, and not bulky, cheap
and heavy articles, because of a long land carriage; whilst all heavy, gross,
and cheap articles; will be from the countries most convenient to navigation:
of which corn is one, as being too heavy for its price, to bear a very distant
land carriage. Let us then, for as yet we have little else improved than the
maritime country, retain our bulky produce of necessaries, for the staple of
commerce. The more bulky, the better for the country exporting it; because it
employs more labor and shipping; Wheat is therefore better than silk, as well
as for the before mentioned reasons. Tobacco (although a luxury by the bye) is
better than the luxury furr, -- rice better than indigo.

Perhaps the chief export produce of the maritime country between Connecticut
and James river, will be wheat and flour; -- of the Carolinas, Georgia and the
Floridas, rice; -- Massachussetts, and other parts of New England, fish,
cattle, and horses; -- the Missisippi, lumber, iron, and hemp -- in ships built
there.

As to the success of the present design of raising silk, I am not without
hope, it will fail in Pennsylvania, as it has in Carolina and Georgia,
notwithstanding the industry used to induce the country people to bend their
attention to it. The Carolinas went heartily to work to enrich themselves, in a
hurry by making silk; but in fourteen years they exported only 251lb. of raw
silk; and in the same time imported the extravagant quantity of 26781lb.
wrought for apparel. This I take from a state of Carolina published in London,
in 1761, which seems to be the production of a Governor of that colony. I hope
the following reflection of his will not be disagreeable, although somewhat
foreign: I cannot help expressing my surprise and concern, to find that there
are annually imported into this province, considerable quantities of Flanders
lace, the finest Dutch linens and French Cambricks, chintzes, hyson tea, and
other goods, silk, gold and silver lace, etc. by which means we are kept in low
circumstances, and though it may have the appearance of being for the present,
beneficial to the British merchants, yet it retards our increase, both in
people and wealth, and consequently renders us less profitable to
Great Britain; for the riches of all colonies, must at length center in the
mother country.

It is said, in all countries there are spots of land too poor for any other
cultivation than the vine: -- and that it is the case in the colonies: I can
only declare. I know of no such soil in our America I affirm, there is no soil
suitable to the vine, that will not produce some other more necessary plant.
You have heard of this and that island, or part of some country, poor and
rocky, producing delicious wine: -- they are wine countries; -- countries,
where that culture has been introduced by despotic influence, and is rivited on
the backs of the miserable inhabitants: -- they want bread. There are other
countries equally portioned with rocks and poverty of soil, in as good
climates: -- these produce no delicious wine -- no wine at all, or none for
exportation, but they yield the necessaries of life in greater abundance; they
have bread! and enjoy some freedom -- consolation at least The truth is, where,
of lands very poor and rocky, you cannot cultivate above one acre; of better,
clear of rocks, you can cultivate an hundred acres, or more; in this you sow
fields of grain; in the other you are confined from sowing grain, sufficient
even for your little family's consumption. You then look for a plant that will
yield much of something from little land: -- this something in your country,
has hitherto, usually been the grape. But the vine requires manure: it will not
answer without it; and your acre of grapes requires as much labor and attention
as the hundred acres of corn. If poor land is the best for the vine, it is so
only with the addition of good manure and the highest cultivation. Cultivate
the poorest ground equally well, and look about for some plant of more
necessary use: -- suppose hemp, flax, grass, cotton, etc. But why hazard the
happiness and independency of the country, by introducing the vine culture, in
order, niggardly, to disturb the repose of a few acres of the very poorest
land, when a vast continent teems with better! -- Thousands -- millions of poor
land lay waste and uncultivated in the best countries of Europe, and of all the
world; and in the less happier countries, millions of acres, better and more
improveable, are equally neglected. -- If, still, you are determined to
cultivate the grape, for making wine, you will choose the land best adapted for
it: -- if the poorest is the best then cultivate it. But why wine? You want to
be employed: -- go then, to better lands; -- there seek the "better commodity"
-- in the better employment! and take example by the sufferings of a great
nation! France, as well as other countries. See before.
Your taste -- teazes you to attempt the making wine: -- indulge it! -- But, as
you will answer it to the necessitous husbandmen, hereafter, lead not one
mortal to delve in such barren soil, in an employment only tending to bronze
the voluptuous at their expense. Rather encourage them to avoid your taste and
be happy at home, admist a "plenty of wholesome food and decent clothing," with
their placid wives and rosy children, manufactoring all necessaries, under a
depressed trade, within themselves -- sparing to foreign countries the
surplusage of their GRAIN, their WOOL and HIMP; -- BEST COMMODITIES! --
ESSENTIALS OF DOMESTIC AND NATIONAL FELICITY!

CRESINUS.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHEN the country, six or seven years since, was anxious to introduce the
culture of Wine and Silk, the Writer of the preceding pages did no more than
now and then, in conversation, drop a hint of his apprehensions of the
mischievous tendency of such culture. But under an illness, whilst confined to
his room, he amused himself with scribbling off his sentiments nearly as they
now appear. He showed them to two or three friends, who thought them to be too
much against the spur of the day to be attended to. The piece was then thrown
aside, and lay unseen from that time, until lately that he showed it to several
Gentlemen, who thought it ought to be published: But he determined to print
only a few copies for Gentlemen, who are supposed to be better judges of the
subject and the expediency of publishing at large such sentiments, than the
generality of readers are.


