Mr. HUNTINGTON'S SERMON, TO THE FREEMEN, APRIL 18th, 1776.

THE HAPPY EFFECTS OF UNION, AND THE FATAL TENDENCY OF DIVISIONS. SHOWN IN A
SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE THE FREEMEN OF THE TOWN OF MIDDLETOWN, AT THEIR ANNUAL
MEETING, April 8, 1776.

By ENOCH HUNTINGTON, A. M. Pastor of the first Church of CHRIST, in Middletown.

" All the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this; Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thyself.

But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one
of another."

ST. PAUL. " As Magistrates were designed for the public good, so the
obligation to them must be understood so as to be still in subordination to the
main end; for the reason of all law and government is the public good." LORD
SUMMERS. HARTFORD: PRINTED BY EBEN. WATSON, AT THE SIGN OF THE CONNECTICUT ARMS,
NEAR THE GREAT BRIDGE. MDCCLXXVI.

MIDDLETOWN, April 8, 1776. REVEREND SIR,
MANY of us heard your Sermon, delivered to the Freemen of this Town this Day,
and others of us having heard of the same, do heartily approve thereof, and
think it might be especially serviceable to ourselves and others, to have it
made public: -- We therefore request of you a Copy of it, and we will get it
printed; and you will oblige your Friends, and Humble Servants.

To the Rev. Mr. ENOCH HUNTINGTON.
Jabez Hamlin, John-Earl Hubbard, Joseph Clark, Jonathan Allen, John Bacon,
Return Meigs, Samuel Russell, John Rogers, David Tryon, Samuel Lucas, Prince
Winborn, Sylvanus Young, Daniel Prior, Joseph Kirby Elijah Johnson, Jedediah
Johnson, Stephen Johnson, Samuel Carrier, Samuel Chamberlain, Nathaniel
Roberds, Solomon Sage, Eliot Rawson, Benjamin Galpin, Nathaniel Gilbert, Allin
Gilbert, Seth Wetmore, jun. John Hinsdale, Benjamin Henshaw, Richard Doud,
Elijah Hubbard, jun. Robert Hubbard, Lamberton Cooper, Oliver Wetmore, Daniel
Hall Hezekiah Hulbert, jun. William Southmayd, Joshua Rockwell, Job Bun, Josiah
Savage, David Strickland, John Kirby, Philip Mortimer, George Philips, Titus
Hosmer, Samuel Starr, Ebenezer Johnson, Isaac Miller, Giles Miller, Stephen
Hubbard, David Starr, Thomas Danforth, Timothy Cornwell, Samuel Adkins, jun.
Elijah Hubbard, Jedediah Hubbard, Elijah Loveland, Samuel Porter, Jonathan
Johnson, Edward Hamlin, jun. Comfort Sage, Nathaniel Brown, Thomas Goodwin,
Timothy Starr, Joseph Ward, Andrew Campbell, Elihu Starr, Joseph King, Thomas
Boteneau, Nathaniel Otis, Thomas Smith, Richard Hamlin, Jacob Whitmore, Joseph
Barns, Mary Talcott, Jonathan Otis, William Coggeshall, Othniel Clark, William
Sizar, George Phillips, jun. Theophilus Cande, Ebenezer Gilbert, Daniel Alvord,
Joel Atkins, William Joyce, Edward Eells, Daniel Southmayd Micah Hubbard,
Elijah Burr, Samuel Winship.


IN compliance with the foregoing request, the following Sermon is published;
and to the subscribers in particular, and the respectable body of the freemen
in general, humbly inscribed by

Their humble servant, THE AUTHOR.

THE HAPPY EFFECTS OF UNION, etc.
MATTHEW xii. 25. " Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to
desolution; and every city or house divided against itself shall not stand.
THIS is an observation made by HIM who, by way of eminence, is most justly
styled TRUE and FAITHFUL. The special occasion of it was this: while our
blessed REDEEMER was in the world, employed about his Father's business, at a
certain time there was brought unto him one possessed with a devil, blind and
dumb; and he healed him, in so much that the blind and dumb both spoke and saw,
and all the people were amazed, and said, Is not this the Son of David? But
when the Pharisees heard it, they said, This fellow does not cast out devils
but by Beelzebub, the prince of the devils. And JESUS knew their thoughts, and
said unto them, Every kingdom divided against itself, is brought to desolution,
and every city or house divided against itself, shall not stand. And if satan
cast out satan, he is divided against himself; how then shall his kingdom
stand? And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children cast
them out? Therefore they shall be your judges. But if I cast out devils by the
spirit of GOD, then the kingdom of GOD is come unto you. Or else, how can one
enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his goods, except he first bind the
strong man? and then he will spoil his house. He that is not with me is against
me; and he that gathers not with me, scatters abroad. The miracle which our
SAVIOR here wrought was indeed a notable one; giving to one that, under the
influence and power of a devil, was both blind and dumb, the power both of
seeing and speaking immediately. It excited the attention of the people, and
filled them with wonder and surprise, and brought them at once to quere, "Is
not this the son of David?" i. e. the promised and expected MESSIAH. But the
Pharisees his crafty and bitter enemies and opposers not being able to deny the
fact, or discredit the reality of the miracle, which was so great and visible;
or, bring the author of it into disrepute any other way, with equal absurdity
and malice attribute it to diabolical intercourse and influence. Our SAVIOR
refutes this vile aspersion, by showing that it is founded on the folly and
unreasonableness of supposing that satan, that crafty deceiver, should lend him
his power to pull down his own kingdom and work effectually against himself:
that it is supposing satan divided against himself and engaged for his own
destruction. Besides, if they attributed the miracle he had wrought to the
devil, he asks them, by whom do your children cast out devils? There were
certain Jews amongst themselves that cast out devils in the name of the GOD of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and it was acknowledged that they did it by the power
of GOD: and there was no cause separate from their malicious views and designs
why they should not acknowledge that what he did was by the same power. And,
says he, if I cast out devils by the spirit of GOD, then the kingdom of GOD is
come unto you, i. e. the MESSIAH is come, and the miracles which I work prove
my divine mission and character. And further, he uses another argument to prove
that the miracles which he wrought were by the power of GOD, and not by the
help of Satan, which is this; that it requires greater strength than Satan is
possessed of, to conquer and overcome him, and effectually counteract his
influence, and dispossess him of his dominion. He is the strong man that reigns
in this world or his house; he is styled the GOD of this world, and no power
but that which is truly divine, no strength but that of Almighty GOD, can bind
him and destroy his kingdom. He has too much subtilty to do any thing himself
to destroy it, the promised seed, the glorious MESSIAH only can do it, and
effectually bruise his head. And all mankind are to be ranked in two classes;
and are either the subjects of CHRIST, the KING of ZION, and through him the
children of GOD; or they are the subjects of Satan, the God of this world, who
rules in the children of disobedience. The former are free indeed, being made
free by the SON of GOD, and are disposed and engaged to promote the interest of
CHRIST'S kingdom, which consists in righteousness and peace and joy in the
HOLY GHOST; and which bears the most friendly aspect upon the happiness of
mankind. The latter are the slaves of sin and Satan; our SAVIOR says of them,
Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He
was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is
no truth in him. They are engaged in the interest and belong to the kingdom of
Satan, and their temper and conduct is inimical to the temporal and eternal
happiness of mankind. And both these classes of men are perfectly known to HIM,
who thus distinguishes and characterizes them in the context: He that is not
with me is against me, and he that gathers not with me, scatters abroad.
And when we see the HOLY JESUS while exercising his miraculous power in
infinite mercy and kindness to men, loaded with undeserved reproach, and
unreasonable, malicious calumny; and his most benevolent actions misconstrued
and asserted to be owing to the influence of the Devil, we are not to wonder
that the greatest and best of men, exerting themselves most in the way of their
duty, and for the good of others, often meet a similar treatment, and have all
their benevolent and faithful efforts attributed by wicked, malicious and
designing men, to the most absurd and diabolical motives, especially as he
himself has said The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above
his Lord. It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the
servant as his Lord. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how
much more shall they call them of his household?

HAVING said thus much of the original occasion and design of the observations
in the text; and of the sacred passage so immediately connected therewith, we
proceed to a more particular consideration and improvement of it, or a theme of
discourse pertinent to the important business of this day, and the alarming
state of public affairs.

EVERY kingdom divided against itself, is brought to desolution; and every city
or house divided against itself shall not stand.

THE truth of this observation carries its own evidence with it, and
immdeiately approves itself to the rational and considering mind. Two contrary
powers, of any kind whatever, that act against and oppose each other, can have
no other tendency but to destroy each other's force. And the greater the force
they oppose to each other, the greater and more speedy the mutual destruction
which they occasion. This is illustrated and verified in the natural and
material, as well as moral and rational, world, and holds true (not like the
declaratory right of the British Parliament to make laws to bind the colonies,
but in reality) in all cases whatsoever. And in all bodies of men and civil
communities whether great or small, whether considered as kingdoms, provinces,
cities, towns, or still lesser societies, even particular private houses, and
families, their strength and stability is in proportion to their union; and
disunion and division among them have the most fatal and destructive tendency.
In proportion as these increase and rage, ruin advances. They severally bring
kingdoms to desolution, and no city or house can flourish, or even subsist long
under their baneful influence. Raging and contending factions ever have been,
and forever must be, the ruin of those among whom they rise and rule. The
greatest and most powerful kingdoms and states are brought to desolution by
them, while much lesser bodies are preserved, and their interest, power and
prosperity wonderfully increased, by union, harmony and good agreement, with
their strength all employed in one design for mutual and universal good.

IN this way have gone to ruin many nations and people of past ages, which were
once great and flourishing, and chief among the nations, and many once small
and very inconsiderable states, and by them oppressed or greatly despised, have
succeeded to, even exceeded all their greatness, grandeur and glory. Division
and discord brought desolation upon the former; union, concord and perseverance
secured the prosperity and happiness of the latter. To union many a flourishing
state has owed its greatness, and its downfall to division. Concord and
perseverance advanced Rome to the height of its glory: And discord and faction
sunk it in debasement and ruin. The final overthrow of the Jewish nation, the
desolation of their capital city, their temple and their country, was chiefly
brought on by their divisions and factions; and they did ten times more to
their own undoing than all their foreign enemies and invaders.

WE see the observation in the text exemplified, universally, in all instances
without exception, as far as history or our acquaintance with kingdoms, cities
or houses divided against themselves can inform us. And worldly wise, ambitious
and designing statesmen, are so well apprized of this truth, that it is long
since a maxim with them, when they would weaken, enslave or ruin a people (if
not likely to be easily done by open violence and force) to do it by exerting
and fomenting divisions among them.

AND by the successful practice of this policy many have reached the summit of
iniquitous grandeur and power, and been the most awful scourges to mankind.
DIVIDE and TYRANNIZE is the stirrup by which they mount, and hold the seat of
their ill-gotten authority; and the goad too or spur with which they
unmercifully lash on those deluded and oppressed by them, wasting all their
substance and wearing out their very lives, merely to gratify their own
despotic will and pleasure.

THE inhabitants of Great Britain, both in the Southern and Northern parts of
it; and the kingdom of Ireland subjected with them to the British crown, have
all in their turns, been shaken to their foundations, with internal divisions,
which have been excited, fomented and guided by arbitrary designing men, and
spread ruin and desolation all around. Since the political union of the two
kingdoms of England and Scotland, Great Britain has more than once been so
unhappily divided against itself, as to appear evidently brought to the brink
of desolation, and inevitably falling into it, had not a speedy end been put to
such a division; or a glorious revolution taken place, through the kind
interpotion of divine providence.

AND such appears to be the unhappy divided state of the nation at present, and
her power and force so much and directly employed against her own interest and
strength, that without some great and essential alteration of measures, and a
timely happy revolution of affairs, ruin is inevitable; the power and glory of
Britain sunk; and her name, if not lost, only preserved to reproach her with
what she once was, and might still have been, had it not been for her own
wicked and wanton abuse of the favors Heaven blessed her with: And being
servilely subjected to some foreign power, she may be forced too late, to rue
her present measures and conduct; and herself experience those slavish chains
which she is now forging for America; whose numerous and gallant sons, had they
been treated by her as they ought to have been, as justice and her own interest
required, would always have been bound to her by affection and duty, and when
properly called to her assistance, would have most cheerfully adventured their
lives and fortunes, for her protection, defense, and real interest and honor,
and under providence rendered her superior to all her enemies.

SHE may one day, and that day not be very far off neither, want the help of
her affectionate colonists whom she has butchered and plundered.

BUT those she has cruelly slain can rise no more for her help: And with what
an ill grace will she call upon those who survive, whom she has striven all in
her power to weaken and oppress, beyond the power of helping themselves?

AND the following observations of an elegant English writer of the present
age, may not be impertinent to our subject, or unapplicable to the past and
present state of Great Britain, and what, in a human view, is likely to be her
future fate; or unimproveable by us.

"IN such a world as this, all things are in perpetual change, rotation and
revolution: It is nature's process. As the summer and winter gradually succeed
and encroach upon each other, or as the sun dawns and arises from darkness till
he reaches the midday fervor of his culminating beam, and thence declines
till he sets, in utter darkness; even so mighty nations, as well as families,
have their commencement, ascent and summit, declension, decay and period. The
virtue of all nations and families begins in poverty, thence arises to
industry, genius, honor, perhaps to conquest and empire; there is their
zenith; but then comes on the load of pondrous wealth that gradually weighs
them down from this meridian to indulgence, sensuality, guilt, corruption,
prostitution, slavery, perdition."

WE in this country, at the present day, have every thing to induce us to
cultivate union, and guard against divisions among ourselves. Whatever is most
dear and valuable, in this world, to millions now living, and will be so to all
the millions of their posterity after them, till the world shall be no more, is
at stake. The prize contended for is the LIBERTY of AMERICA.

THE strife whether this vast continent, extending in length and breadth more
thousands of miles, than Great Britain extends hundreds, shall be acknowledged
as an appendage to that island three thousand miles distant from it; and
subjected to the arbitrary government of a set of men, at such a distance, when
interest and humor may lead them perpetually to prey upon the property and
happiness of this country, nature, reason, common sense revolts at the thought.
We desire not to deprive them of their rights and privileges, their country and
possessions; or to have their property, or any part of it at our arbitrary
disposal: But wish them prosperity and happiness in the right use and
improvement of them all. And there is all reason that they should do the same
to us. But how different, in reality is their disposition and conduct. By the
force of arms they are trying to reduce us to a state of absolute subjection to
them; and have wantonly and impiously resolved that they have a right to make
laws binding us in all cases whatever, a right belonging to no man nor body of
men, and to no being, in the whole universe, nor to be trusted in the hands of
any one, but of GOD the great Creator and sovereign Proprietor of all things,
who is unerring in wisdom and infinite in justice, goodness and all perfection.
They have unrighteously begun the quarrel, and unsheathed the sword, and driven
us to the sad necessity of taking up arms for our own defense and protection.

CRITICAL, uncommon and peculiar as the circumstances are, which brought on,
and have hitherto attended, the unnatural contest, into which we have been
reluctantly forced, Heaven has wonderfully united the hearts of this country,
and in the midst of the most crafty and unwearied efforts to sow divisions
amongst us, preserved and increased the union, and crowned the exertions and
enterprises of the people of America with great and continued success: And in
many instances and respects, through the special interposition of divine
providence, with very unexpected and surprising success.

ALL such things are omens for good, demand our thankfulness, and encourage us
to prosecute the virtuous struggle, in humble dependence upon GOD, till he
shall be pleased to extricate us out of our troubles.

THE martial spirit that has been excited, among all ranks and ages throughout
this vast continent; the readiness with which men have willingly offered
themselves in the service of their country; the cheerfulness with which fond
parents and relatives, part with their children and friends, and encourage and
spirit them to go forth in the defense and for the protection of our rights and
privileges, is a happy presage of desired success. We have felt, we now feel,
and I trust posterity will ever feel the happy effects of the CONTINENTAL UNION
which has taken place, and has been hitherto (and we hope always will be)
cherished and preserved. It is owing to this that we are not reduced, by all
the policy and power of our enemies to that abject, dependant, oppressed and
slavish state which they aimed at, but have made a noble and virtuous, a
laudable and effectual resistance, the effects of which they feel, and long
must feel, to their own great mortification, disappointment and irreparable
loss. They affected at first to treat our union and efforts for the
preservation of our country, with contempt and ridicule; our union, said they,
would be but as a rope of sand; our attempts to resist, altogether folly and
madness. And to intimidate us, the fleets and armies of Great Britain have been
conjured up in imaginary representation, more powerful and formidable than they
really are, or ever have been, or ever can be, and marshalled for our
destruction.

WE find them not unassailable, not invulnerable, not immortal; not altogether
incapable of fear and being put to flight, and that a very hasty one too; but
in every encounter our brave countrymen have had with them upon any thing near
equal terms, as to number and circumstantial advantages, our men have been
constantly victorious, and conquered the enemy, and made them yield or retire,
with shame and loss. It Is true the war is calamitous: For the most righteous and
prosperous war is so on many accounts: But that our countrymen are as capable
of all the exercises and fatigues of war, and as bold to face danger in all its
forms, as any men need to be, or indeed can be; not to mention a great variety
of heroic actions, in the several parts of America, by sea and land during the
present struggle; the single march to Quebec, through such a length of
trackless, inhospitable wilderness, at so late a season; the gallant attempt
our little army made upon that strong fortress; and though repulsed, yet
supporting themselves, and maintaining the siege of the city, in that frozen
climate, at the coldest season of the year; and all this against numbers vastly
superior to them, lodged in the walls and enjoying all the accommodations of a
fine city. These things, I say, to everey impartial and unbiassed observer,
must exhibit the martial prowess, the courage, fortitude and persevernce of
Americans in the most respectable light.

THE heroic General MONTGOMERY, and the brave men who fell with him, enjoy, as
they justly deserve, the grateful tears of their country; and will be
remembered with love, honor, gratitude and admiration to the latest posterity.
The near relatives of the gallant men, who have thus nobly bled for their
country, are honored by their relation to them, and whatever reason there may
be to mourn their own and their country's loss, yet they justly derive
consolation from a view of their character which they have left behind them,
and of that peaceful rest and glory which they hopefully now enjoy. May GOD who
has the residue of the spirit raise up others in their stead to make up the
gap, and may America ever have and cherish in her arms, champions and defenders
of like spirit and bravery.

BUT should we fall into divisions and contentions among ourselves, the
consequences are certainly fatal; a complication of the most dreadful
calamities will involve us in inevitable ruin, we should soon be so weakened as
to fall an easy prey into the hands of those who are seeking the absolute
dominion and mastery over us.

THE resistance already made to their despotic designs and power, has
exasperated them to the most cruel pitch, and what we have to expect from them,
if left to their mercy, may be conjectured, from what has already been felt,
where their vengeance has been permitted to extend to execution. Falmouth,
Charlestown, Boston and Norfolk, all our maritime places accessable to them;
their spreading fire and sword, and desolation, wherever they could, give us
the most signal and convincing evidence that their "tender mercies are
cruelty." And should any be so base as to submit to them in all their claims,
the most they can expect is to hold their lives and properties (if they can be
said to have any) at their mere pleasure; and after they have been made the
wretched instruments of helping to destroy their brethren and fellow
countrymen, to be themselves last devoured. With respect to Great Britain, the
mother country, so called, upon the plan of conduct she has of late years
adopted toward the colonies; and pursued with incessant ardor and unrelenting
fury, amity is lost and confidence forfeited, and if the plan be continued,
lost and forfeited forever. If she be a mother, she is an unnatural, monstrous
one, who, if she does not forget, yet shows she has "no compassion" upon her
children, but rather delights in their blood.

The murderous sword, with all the wantonness of cruelty and revenge, in
instances too many, is already bathed in their blood. And if we were once
subdued to her will, and should be subjected to the control and power of her
exasperated, brutal soldiery, such cruel and dreadful scenes would take place,
as every good and benevolent man, unable to prevent them, might well desire to
hide himself from the sight of, in the dark and silent mansions of the less
cruel grave.

NOTHING but union and firmness will prevent our desolation, and effect our
deliverance; and in no other way can a reconciliation and connection between
the two countries take place that will be of any desirable or happy consequence.

AND providence has blessed us with the means, and calls upon us, by a
virtuous example, to show and convince the world, that tamely to submit to the
arbitrary, lawless, oppressive claims, of kings or courts, when the rights,
welfare and happiness of the people are at stake, is so far from being a duty,
that it is sin, and the contrary is indispensible duty, and every one is called
upon to make a resolute, virtuous resistance.

AND if a just sense of duty in this respect was impressed upon all minds, " No
servile tenets would admittance find,
Dectructive of the rights of human kind;
Of power divine, hereditary right,
And non-resistance to a tyrant's might;
For sure that all for one should thus be cursed
Is but great natures edict just reversed."


IRELAND, had remained separate and independent to this day, unsubjected to the
crown of Britain, had it not been for the fatal divisions, animosities and
contentions, which took place among themselves. The manner in which they were
subdued, and the treatment they have met with since, hold up sufficient beacons
for our warning. Divisions were created and fomented among them, by British
intrigues, and their own arms made use of against themselves. Not want of
courage, or gallant conduct, or resources among themselves: But want of union
in their councils and measures, left them a prey to the ambition and tyranny
under which they have so long and greatly suffered. And in rivetting the chains
which hold them, the most crafty policy has been made use of. Under the name
of a kingdom and a parliament of their own, they have been cajoled and bribed
into subjection to the British court; and brought under foreign influence; and
the people, under the specious pretense of being governed, according to the
genuine principles of the English constitution, choosing their representatives
and taming themselves by virtue of such representation, have been cruelly
restricted in their trade and manufactures, saddled with pensions, squeezed,
fleeced and oppressed into wretchedness, and the wicked and venal parricides of
their country, and idle pampered British pensioners, riot and fatten upon their
misery.

LONG since have their honest, sensible men and true patriots, of which they
have had a worthy and respectable number, who for learning and virtue would do
honor to any nation under Heaven, with virtuous indignation beheld, unravelled
and opposed all the wicked maneuvers of such arbitrary and enslaving measures:
But all their zeal and influence has never yet been sufficient to extricate
their country.

THE chains once rivetted are not easily shaken off, and the British
administration is always careful, by the various arts of bribery and
corruption, to gain over to its interest a venal majority. This is equally the
case with the parliament of Great Britain and Ireland; and the people ('it is
plain as sunbeams) are ruined by representatives of their own choosing, and what
is stranger still, buy their ruin with their own money.

IRELAND, no doubt (such is the knowledge, spirit and virtue of many of her
sons) had long ago been effectually aroused and emerged from such a wretched
state of vassalage, had it not been for her local circumstances, being an
island so near Britain, accessible on all sides to her fleets, and continually
watched at all points, by her internal enemies and domineering neighbors. Her
friends have sighed and groaned, and in all the ways they could, have vented
their just resentment. And when of late the ministry of Great Britain, equally
their and our enemies, applied to their parliament to lend their assistance and
send their troops, by butchery and force to subjugate America, while the venal
majority obsequiously complied; with what justness of sentiment, zeal for
liberty, and the unalienable rights of mankind; indignation at what they
themselves have already suffered, and may further suffer, and by such mean
compliance, be instrumental in bringing upon themselves; and with what force of
rhetoric and affecting pother in their speeches do they expose and oppose the
measures of the ministry with respect to this country? Their souls seem to
breathe in their sentiments, and their hearts to flow out with their
expressions. And we should take the warning to take care of ourselves, while we
may, and by a firm union and virtuous resistance, keep off the chains which are
forging for us. If we submit, we do it with our eyes open, and against the most
plain and solemn warnings; against the sentiments and ardent hopes and faithful
remonstrances of the greatest and best men in both the kingdoms of
Great Britain and Ireland.

AND our Continental Congress, composed, perhaps, of as wise, worthy and
learned a set of men as ever convened on earth (and this is not saying so much
of them as the great and wise Lord CHATHAM, once Mr. PIT, the patriotic,
beloved minister of the nation, and instrumental, in the hand of providence, of
the greatest blessing to Britain and America, has expressly and publicly said
of them.) I say, this respectable Congress, whose members are chosen by the
free voice of the people, whose interest and all is at stake with our own, and
who by their station, and the important trust reposed in them by their
constituents, as they stand in the front of danger themselves, and have the
best advantages for framing a right judgment; and have all the united motives
of duty and interest to incite them to the greatest watchfulness, zeal and
fidelity in the cause of their country; have all along been wise and faithful,
to spy out and warn us against the snares and dangers to which we have been
exposed; and to point out to us a plain and sure way, under the blessing of
providence, for our relief and safety. We are refused the privileges of
Englishmen, and unjustly commanded, and the British arms are employed to bow
our necks to the yoke of slavish subjection.

PROVIDENCE has blessed us on this continent, with all the resources which we
could ever desire, in a united, virtuous improvement of which, to be a free and
happy people. Not exposed to the disadvantages of a little island, surrounded
on all sides with ocean, and under the immediate eye of jealous arbitrary
power, we inhabit a vast continent, which, in itself, yields to the diligent
and virtuous industry and invention of the inhatants, all things necessary for
their subsistence, comfort, protection and defense.

IF we are not a free and happy people, it will be our own fault, and owing to
the abuse of the light and advantages providence has blessed us with: and the
present struggle, if not maintained with union and perseverance, till crowned
with success, but dropped through our own divisions, or timidity, will render
this country, to all future ages, instead of an asylum for persecuted liberty,
instead of the envy of slaves and tyrants, instead of the boast, happiness and
glory of freemen, a shame and reproach through all the earth.

OH, then, may this truth be engraven in indelible characters on every heart
among us, a truth approved of by reason, and experimental observation, and
sanctified by all the authority of divine revelation, UNITED, WE STAND, BUT
DIVIDED, WE FALL.

ALREADY do the avaricious courtiers of Great Britain, with the numerons train
of their needy dependents and hangers-on, with the whole tribe of dissolute
spendthrifts, and idle deboshee's, feast themselves with the prospect of
possessing the fruits of our past industry, and the spoils of our future
earnings, and if once subjected to them, we should find them greedy and
insatiable, like the daughters of the horse-leech, crying, Give, give, and like
the three things, yea, four, which say not, it is enough. The grave, and the
barren womb; the earth, that is not filled with water, and the fire that says
not, it is enough.

'TWAS for this that our fore fathers fled from the persecution and tyranny of
the age they lived in, and braved every danger and difficulty, to seek out and
settle this distant, and then wilderness country. They sought a peaceful
retreat for themselves and posterity, in which to enjoy the blessings of
liberty and religion. They from their graves, or rather "from the battlements
of heaven," call upon us to preserve and cultivate the fair inheritance they so
dearly purchased and left us; and posterity will most reasonably expect that we
transmit the same, undiminished to them; and our own happiness depends upon the
enjoyment and improvement of it.

REASON and religion, every argument and motive, that can influence a rational
and pious mind, call for the dutiful exertion of all our united powers, to
defend, protect and improve the rights, liberties and privileges with which
GOD, in his providence, has so richly blessed us, against all foes and
invaders whatsoever.

THE controversy in which we are engaged, is, in its nature and consequences,
of the greatest importance. A struggle of the kind, of such magnitude and so
interesting and extensive in its influence, has as yet no place in the history
of mankind. Things new and strange, dark and perplexing, things at one and the
same time most critical and interesting, and such as must be acted upon, and
must influence our conduct, and affect the public, often lie in our way; and no
wonder in many instances men differ in sentiment, even the wise and good, and
as true friends to their country as any it can boast: It Is much rather a wonder
that in such a strange perplexed state as we have been thrown into, the
difference has not been much greater.

THIS teaches us the wisdom and great necessity of mutual forbearance and
condescension toward one another; of guarding against all irritating,
reproachful language and injurious conduct; and aiming constantly at what we,
in our best judgment think is for the greatest welfare of our country. In the
pursuit of this our HEARTS and HANDS should be united, and if we cannot be
perfectly agreed in all particular measures, yet we should so keep the grand
end in view, as to aim in all our wishes and conduct at that; and thus bury all
uncomfortable and hurtful contentions among ourself, and do nothing to provoke
one another except to love and good works.

AND the guilt and wickedness of that man is hardly to be conceived, who is
disposed to take advantage of the times, and (under the specious pretext of
aiming at the liberty and prosperity of his country) asperse characters,
gratify his own revenge, or more personal self-interested views of any kind; or
is willing to owe his greatness to his country's ruin.

AND how absurd, inconsistent and malicious is the temper and conduct of those
who impute all the exertions of our wisest and best men, in the cause of their
country, to a spirit of faction, and self-interested and wicked motives and
designs, and to any thing besides the good of their country? This has been done
by those styled the friends of government, on both sides the water. And yet it
is notorious to all impartial observers, that these our patriots are acting
from the same principles and motives, with the greatest and best men the nation
could ever boast, and who are acknowledged by themselves to have been the
truest friends to her rights, liberties and happiness; and in defense of these
and opposition to tyranny, some of them nobly bled; and by means of their
virtuous struggle, the nation has enjoyed so much liberty and happiness as it
has.

DOES not this comprize the absurdity and malice of the ancient pharisaical
spirit? They act like true patriots, they venture life and their ALL in the
cause of their country, this cannot be denied, but then say our enemies, they
aim not at the good but the ruin of their country: just as well may Satan cast
out Satan.

IT is peculiarly our happiness in this colony, that in the midst of the
perplexed state of affairs through the country, our civil polity and form of
government has been and yet continues complete. And we have reason to think it
has had a very extensive happy influence through the whole continent. And
never did the freemen of it, need such wisdom, steadiness and integrity in
their conduct as at the present day.

WE need a just sense of the importance and happy effects of union; and of the
malignity and fatal influence of divisions, and of the solemn oath of GOD which
is upon us; and this, and this alone, will enable us to discharge a good
conscience; and thus doing is the only way in which we can hope for the
direction and blessing of Heaven.

I ADD no more, but pray ALMIGHTY GOD to bless what has been spoken agreeable
to truth, and cause it to have a genuine, practical influence upon us all.

AMEN.

