Doctor LANGDON's SERMON AT THE ANNUAL DUDLEIAN LECTURE, DELIVERED NOVEMBER 1,
1775.

THE Co-incidence of Natural with Revealed RELIGION.

A SERMON AT THE ANNUAL LECTURE INSTITUTED IN HARVARD COLLEGE BY THE LAST WILL
AND TESTAMENT OF THE Honorable PAUL DUDLEY, Esquire DELIVERED NOVEMBER 1, 1775.

By SAMUEL LANGDON, D.D. PRESIDENT OF HARVARD COLIEGE,

God, in times past, suffered all nations to walk in their own ways.
Nevertheless he left not himself without witness.

ACTS xiv. 16, 17. BOSTON: Printed by SAMUEL HALL, in School-Street. 1776.

MICAH iv. 5. For all People will walk every one in the name of his God, and we
will walk in the name of the Lord our God forever and ever.

IT is my part in this Lecture, according to the course appointed by the
Honorable Founder, to prove, explain, or show the proper use and improvement of
the principles of natural Religion, as it is commonly called by Divines and
Learned Men.

This subject has been again and again managed with great accuracy, by a number
of learned and judicious Ministers of Christ, who have gone before me in these
anniversary labors. But if I can add nothing to what they have already
delivered, it will not be wholly inconsistent with the design of the
institution, to bring again into view the main principles on which natural
religion is built, and show how far all mankind are bound by them, what
co-incidence they have with revealed religion, and in what respects they tend
to confirm Christianity, and perfect that practical obedience which the Gospel
requires.

The text now read mentions it as a well known fact, confirmed by a general
view of the world, that all people, all nations and persons, have some God or
Gods in whom they place their confidence, and to whom they pay religious
honors: This universal practice is supposed to have it is foundation in the very
nature of man as a rational creature, who, by the least reflection on the
universe around him, will be led to entertain general apprehensions of some
superior Power or Powers, presiding over the whole and every part. And from
this observation is deduced a strong argument in favor of that religion which
has the one living and true God for it is Object: for the worshipers of Jehovah
have reason to glory in their resolute adherence to him, and regulate their
whole conduct in life by the deepest reverence of his name, and a conscientious
desire to honor and obey him, since nature itself dictates the worship of a
God, and all mankind feel the obligation, however erroneous and gross their
notions of a Deity may be. The Prophet introduces God's faithful people, who in
the latter days should enjoy the privileges and blessings of the Gospel, as
rising superior to all the reproaches cast upon them for their unremitting zeal
in the worship of their God and Savior; and expressing, in one short sentence,
their determination to persevere in the religion they had embraced, and the
full conviction of their minds that this determination was justifiable by the
principles of reason, and the universal zeal of mankind in the service of those
Deities which they had set up according to their own imaginations, through
ignorance of the true God, -- For all people will walk every one in the name of
his God, and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever.

Let us then begin with some inquiry into the Religion of nature, and consider
what it is; what are the main principles on which it is built; to what
perfection it may be, or has been in fact carried; and how far all mankind are
held under the obligations of it.

When we speak of religion, we ought to include more in the idea than merely a
system of morality, adapted to the situation of mankind in the present world,
separate from the consideration of divine Government, and proper rewards and
punishments. If men had no knowledge at all of the Deity, or no manner of
regard to him; if they had neither hopes nor fears beyond the enjoyments of the
present life in the natural course of things, and consulted only temporal
security and comfort, they would find it necessary to observe those natural
laws which regulate the conduct of rational creatures for their good, both in
social connexions, and as individuals; but there would be impropriety in
calling such morality by the name of religion, unless in a much laxer sense
than is now commonly affixed to the word: for by religion is meant, not only an
obligation on conscience by a conviction of the reasonableness and beneficial
tendency of morality in the present state, but that more powerful obligation
which binds us, by the love and fear of God, to conform to his will, and labor
to be accepted in his sight in all our actions, from a persuasion that our
highest felicity is derived from his favor.

Religion begins in the acknowledgement of a Deity, and those acts of devotion
which immediately appear necessary as soon as God is known. Devotion is
maintained by a constant persuasion of our dependence on the Deity for all
things. And as he is Lord of all, and mankind are under his moral government,
we become conscious of guilt before him when we act contrary to the dictates of
reason and conscience, and enjoy the higher satisfaction in right conduct as we
hope to be approved and rewarded by him. Thus every branch or morality is
connected with religion, and becomes an important part of it; because in
regulating our behavior, we feel the bond of duty to God on our conscience,
without which morality might be considered as a good social system, but
entirely distinct from religion.

However; since the apprehensions of a Deity, and the obligations of conscience
thence arising, are as universal among mankind as the knowledge of those
natural laws, which are essential to good order and comfort in the present
world; we may consider the religion and the law of nature as the same thing.
For it is as plainly a law of nature, that we should honor and obey God, and
behave in all respects as creatures dependent on him, and accountable to him,
as that we should be just, merciful and kind to our fellow men, and govern
ourselves by rules of common wisdom and prudence.

The religion of nature, considered in the most perfect view, is that which we
suppose investigable by the natural powers of the human mind, without the
assistance of any revelation from heaven. If therefore the question is stated
in this view, and the inquiry is, -- What System of religion Reason alone would
trace out when exercised on this grand subject, -- we must proceed on the
supposition that the rational powers are exercised in full strength, without
the least prepossession, or wrong biass, to blind the mind, or pervert the
judgment. By such a perfect exercise of the rational faculties, the most
essential characters of God might perhaps be learned, from the signatures of
them marked on all parts of the creation. By just observations on the grandeur,
order, and beauty of the universe; the natures, purposes, and powers of the
various ranks of Beings, animate and inanimate; together with the many
indications of the constant agency of some supreme Intelligence, in continuing
the established order of things, providing for all possible changes of
circumstances, and exercising a more immediate government over mankind,
agreeable to their rational faculties and moral state; we may suppose the mind
would naturally be led to such reflections as these --

Surely this stupendous universe is the work of some invisible Agent, beyond
all comparison and conception superior to man: for such a grand complete
System, so infinitely complicate, and yet so exactly adjusted in all it is
parts, the most minute as well as the grandest, that all kinds of symmetry and
perfection concur to complete the whole, could never be the effect of chance,
or the product of endless essays and mutations of matter. This Agent must have
an unlimited mind, to comprehend these vast innumerable works in one perfect
Idea, before they were made. His power, also, must be equal to his unlimited
understanding. And He is evidently as good as he is wise and powerful;
otherwise malignity against his creatures would appear in universal discords
through nature, perpetually generating all manner of evils.

Whatever moral characters are necessary to render man honorable and amiable,
the same ought to be attributed to the glorious unknown Author of all things in
unbounded perfection; especially as the government of all worlds, and every
creature that exists must be in his hands. To imagine him capable of committing
any error, or having any moral evil imputed to him, would be to degrade him at
once, in theory, from all his honor as God, and judge him disqualified either
to be the maker or governor of the universe. If he is acknowledged as King and
Judge of all the earth, he must be worthy the highest confidence of mankind, --
as impartially just; determined to punish all wickedness, according to the
demerit of every crime committed by rational creatures against the law they are
under, whatever honorable distinctions they may claim in other respects, and to
show special favor only to the righteous; -- and as perfectly benevolent;
making it the grand design of his universal dominion, to secure to every living
creature all the happiness suitable to it is nature, and consistent with the
general order of the world, and the moral government of rational beings, and
manifesting his tender mercies toward all in circumstances of misery. All the
good mankind enjoy must come from his hands; -- all the evils they fear must be
under his direction; -- and according to their knowledge of his glorious
perfections, they must be bound to pay him homage, make their prayer to him,
give thanks for his goodness, love, fear, trust in him, and obey his Will.

If God is a Being of perfect moral rectitude (certainly he must be such) and
if he takes any notice at all of mankind, every immorality practiced among men
must be highly offensive to his nature. Reason is his Law given to man,
indelibly imprinted on his mind: but to prevent the labor and error of long
abstract reasonings in order to ascertain the necessary duties of life in their
various branches and changeable circumstances, He has furnished man with a kind
of instinctive knowledge, by which he is capable of distinguishing betwixt
right and wrong action, almost as immediately and necessarily as the inferior
creatures know their proper food, or shun their enemies. Reason and Conscience
therefore co-incide in the government of human actions, and to disregard them
must be a crime in the view of that Deity who gave mankind their rational
powers: and He that made us under this law of nature doubtless will enforce the
observance of it by the proper exercise of his authority, in bestowing suitable
rewards on the obedient, and punishing such as disregard it. Therefore the
practice of every thing good and virtuous is to be considered as duty to God,
as well as necessary for the preservation of Society, and the welfare of
individuals; it must render men amiable to that perfect Being who is above all,
to act in the most perfect manner of which their nature is capable; and on the
contrary, they must appear odious, and be exposed to his just displeasure, when
every maxim of wisdom and justice is counteracted; and from the favor of the
great God, the greatest good which can be desired may be expected; but misery
and death must be the effect of his displeasure.

In some such manner as this Reason in it is perfect state might be supposed
capable of arriving at the knowledge of the One true God, and deducing from
thence a complete system of natural religion. Yet it can hardly be conceived,
according to our experience of the labor of searching out truth, that the human
mind, in its utmost strength, could by one glance of thought discover all the
essential characters of the Deity, or the proper acts of worship and obedience
which he requires. We might as well affirm, that unimpaired reason must
naturally, at the first view of the heavenly bodies, have a clear knowledge of
their magnitudes, distances, and revolutions: or by looking round on the earth,
immediately be acquainted with the innumerable gradations of animal life, and
vegetable productions and Fossils of all forms and uses. In such limited Beings
as man, there cannot be an instantaneous knowledge of things, especially such
as are sublime and ren ote from sense; the discovery of one truth leads on to
another, and by constant progress we perfect every theory.

Therefore it may justly be questioned whether, if man at his first creation,
furnished with the strongest mental powers, and continuing innocent and free
from every biass against the knowledge of God, had been left to himself
entirely, to form his notions of a Deity, merely by his own reflections,
without any supernatural revelation, it would not have cost the labor of Ages
to demonstrate a true System of religion, as it has really taken near six
thousand years to search out the laws of the material system, and bring natural
philosophy to it is present perfect on. Indeed it may be doubted whether
religion could ever have been delineated, with such precision, and assurance of
truth, as now it has been, without the assistance of immediate revelation.

No sufficient experiment ever has been made to determine this question; there
never was a time when mankind were absolutely lest without revelation, though
some nations have approached very near to such a state, and have, for wise ends
of providence, to show the great imbecility of human reason, been suffered (as
the Apostle strongly expresses it) to seek the Lord, if happily they might feel
after him and find him, though he be not far from every one of us.
Notwithstanding any hypothesis confidently advanced to the contrary, Adam, who
came into existence in perfect stature of body immediately, and not by slow
advances, was at once as perfect in his mind, capable of exercising all the
faculties with which his Creator endowed him in the best manner; but it does
not appear that he was left to find out, merely by the force of reason, who was
the author of his Being. His Maker immediately discovered himself by an open
correspondence, and settled the terms of perpetual communion and friendship;
otherwise the first man, starting suddenly into Being, and filled with
amazement at the infinite variety of Objects presented before him in the new
world, might long have wondered what power created him, and wearied himself in
his inquiries concerning the Author of nature, before he could have gained full
satisfaction.

A revelation once made may have in some degree a perpetual effect. A point of
knowledge of the first importance, given from above in a supernatural way, would
be handed down to posterity with peculiar care. But when revelations are from
time to time renewed, and at such seasons, and in such methods as are most
likely to spread the report of them through the world, and continue their
remembrance, the knowledge communicated imperceptibly mixes with the natural
notions of mankind, so that it is difficult to distinguish between the one and
the other.

For this reason it is not easy to determine where any system of mere natural
religion is to be found; much less what nations have practiced on such a
system. As to the moral philosophy of the moderns, it is far from being the
production of simple nature. It has borrowed great light from the last and
clearest revelation of the grace of God to men, though pride forbids the
several Authors to give credit for what they have received, and they bend all
their force to destroy the reputation of those sacred Oracles of wisdom, to
which they owe every improvement they have made beyond the heathen Sages. Nor
can we allow that Plato, Socrates, or Cicero, collected their theology entirely
from nature. The fame of Jehovah, the God of the Jews, had long been spread
abroad in the world by the miracles wrought for his people, the great judgments
manifested in the sight of all nations on their account, and the many wonderful
deliverances granted them. By all these the divine perfections were clearly
demonstrated; nor were the sacred Oracles wholly unknown to the kingdoms
bordering on Canaan, or the countries where the Jews were dispersed by wars or
for the sake of commerce. Especially after the jewish scriptures were
translated into the greek language, great numbers in all parts became
acquainted with them, many were proselyted to the true God, and doubtless
Philosophers had the curiosity to read them, and did not neglect to make some
advantage of the knowledge they gained for the farther improvement of their own
schemes, however they might despise the peculiarities of the jewish religion.

The agreement of all nations in acknowleging some heavenly Powers, shows that
reason naturally admits the notion of a God, as far as he is discovered to
minds now greatly darkened. Their erroneous conceptions of him originate from
the evil dispositions of nature corrupted: for the love of sinful
gratifications directly militates against the love of truth, and that knowledge
of God which binds men to a wife, virtuous and pious conduct.

When the world was peopled after the Flood, all mankind were acquainted with
the one true God, and that rational and spiritual worship which he requires;
but as vice increased, they grew more averse to the purity of religion, though
natural reason would not suffer them absolutely to renounce the form; and so
they gradually lost what they knew of God, changed his worship into gross
superstitions, and step by step introduced the most abominable idolatries. In
Abraham's day Idolatry began generally to obtain; and that heaven might bear
public testimony against it, and prevent it is becoming absolutely universal,
that Patriarch was called out of his own Country, and his seed separated from
the rest of the nations and settled in Canaan, which became a chosen Theater
for new displays of the divine glory in the view of the whole world.
Notwithstanding which, Idolatry prevailed; and instead of being checked and
eradicated by the refinements of science, and politeness of manners among the
Greeks and Romans, the infatuation of their minds was continually increasing,
and superstition appeared dressed up in a multitude of additional ornaments;
for the world by all its wisdom knew not God. This well agrees with what St.
Paul says of the state of the Gentiles in the first chapter of his epistle to
the Romans -- "They are without excuse; because that when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing themselves to be
wise they became fools etc. -- And even as they did not like to retain God in
their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things
which are not convenient; being filled with all unrighteousness etc."

Did Reason naturally lead mankind into all these shameful superstitions and
vices? -- This would be the most reproachful reflection on Reason, and give us
the most contemptible idea of natural religion. -- No surely; but by all this
we have full evidence of the weakness and great corruption of human nature,
that reason no longer maintains its proper empire in the soul, but flesh and
sense have usurped an uncontrouled authority.

The utmost we can know of natural religion by any experiments among those that
have, in a great measure, lost that knowledge which was originally communicated
to mankind by revelation, is by the writings of their most eminent
Philosophers. But in the very best of them we find great errors and
deficiencies, both in theology and morals. Some of them, indeed, have done
wonders, considering the vulgar prejudices they had to combat, in asserting the
unity of the Deity and tracing out his perfections, as well as drawing a system
of morals: but it was not in their power to avoid some capital errors in both,
while reason was making efforts against the universal corruption; so that we
cannot from them gain an idea of the religion of nature altogether just.

We are not to expect to find the religion of nature exemplified in any systems
of theology or forms of devotion, generally received and observed among nations
unenlightened by revelation, though we abate much from the perfection even of
that to which their Philosophers attained, on account of the unavoidable
weakness of human nature as it now appears. The philosophic religion of the
ancient Sages came nearest to the dictates of mere reason, however chargeable
with many deviations and deficiencies; but it never generally obtained.

But now, after so many discouragements in our endeavors to find the theory of
natural religion verified in the practice of mankind, shall we wholly give up
the point, and say such religion is entirely imaginary? -- By no means: -- Let
us look more intimately into human nature, and see whether it is not so
constituted, that every man finds himself ready to admit the most essential
principles of religion, as soon as they are offered to the mind, whether
suggested by his own reflections, or otherwise communicated. Though we should
allow almost insuperable difficulty in arriving at the certain knowledge of one
supreme Being, the Creator and Lord of all; yet when by any means this primary
truth is in general declared, it strikes the mind with great power, every thing
around us serves to confirm it; the heavens declare the glory of God, and the
firmament shows his handy work, day unto day utters speech, and night unto
night shows knowledge. And when the unity and spirituality of the Deity are
clearly settled in the mind, his essential attributes may be discovered without
any long laborious deductions. His wisdom and power in all his works strike us
with irresistible conviction; his goodness every where appears; and as King of
the universe we are led to acknowledge him possessed of all the glorious
qualifications for such boundless dominion. If we should meet with any great
impediment in reasoning more abstractly, in order to investigate any of the
divine attributes, an attentive view of the creation will lead us at once to
discover what perfoctions, both natural and moral, necessarily belong to his
nature: " for the visible things of God are clearly seen, being known by the
things which are made, even his eternal power and godhead. But if, in any
respect, we should be liable to fail and err from the truth, when left merely
to our own reasonings, if some friendly instructor gives better information,
reason instantly feels the force of truth, without the necessity of a
miraculous confirmation, unless some vicious biass intercepts the light.

And upon such a discovery of the divine perfections the most important duties,
which men owe their Creator and King, immediately appear self evident; such as
adoration, prayer, thanksgiving, love, fear, confidence in his goodness, mercy
and justice, earnest endeavors to please him, and joy in the hope of his favor.
And though we first may be informed of these duties by revelation, yet reason
unites with it in bearing testimony, that these duties plainly result from the
knowledge of God.

As to the morality of our conduct, with respect to ourselves and one another,
it is so evidently the Law of nature that we regulate our actions by reason and
conscience, that it will not admit any controversy: and as far as this makes a
part of religion, the religion of nature appears to be universal. For they who
are most remote from all the advantages of an express Law given from heaven in
writing, are nevertheless conscious of a law written on their hearts, and "do
by nature the things contained in the law." This is the basis of all the penal
laws of civil society. This is the foundation of all the charges which men
bring, one against another, for any injuries received, the reproaches cast on
men of bad morals, and the high commendations of men of exemplary virtue. In
this part of religion men are most universally agreed in judgment, however
vicious their practice may be: for all condemn murder, injustice, theft,
adultery, lying, perjury, dissimulation, covetousness, and every thing
manifestly foolish, irregular, and dissolute in any man's personal behavior;
and on the contrary, praise men for wisdom, integrity, patriotism, liberality,
moderation, temperance, and the like. Without any revelation, nature itself
will teach these and all the larger branches of virtue and vice which cannot
easily be concealed: and when revelation gives a more perfect discovery of
these things in their most secret principles in the heart, reason and
conscience at once join in testifying the truth and peculiar excellency of the
morals it teaches.

Upon the whole then, we properly call that the Religion of nature, which may
either be discovered by the proper exercise of our rational faculties in the
present imperfect state of human nature, or which the reason of mankind cannot
but approve as soon as it is made known, without the necessity of supernatural
evidence: and what has been said may afford sufficient evidence, that a general
sense of religion is inseparable from human nature; that though, in theory, we
may imagine religion capable of being carried to great perfection by reason
alone, yet in fact it needs the assistance of divine revelation to revive it is
original strength, and regain it is influence.

One thing more remains to be considered under this first head, viz -- How far
all mankind are held under the obligations of natural religion.

Now the obligations of natural religion are of two kinds, viz. those which are
inseparable from the power of reason and conscience over men, even though they
have no dread of a Supreme Being; and those which arise from the consideration
of the nature and universal government of the Deity. These obligations are of a
moral nature, not implying irresistible compulsion, but the criminality of
disobedience, and the danger of suffering some punishment for it, according to
the very constitution of things, or by the just resentments of the Sovereign of
the universe.

Reason and Conscience, by the power they naturally have over men, oblige them
to observe the laws of nature, even though they have no dread of the Supreme
Being. For who dares to be guilty of so great an absurdity, as to attempt to
prove by reason. that he is no ways obliged to govern himself by the dictates
of natural reason? How is it possible for a man to justify to himself his own
conduct, when he plainly sees he is not justifiable, but is acting contrary to
truth and right, to wisdom and prudence, and even the genuine principle of
self-love? Can he blame, and feel resentment against others, for doing wrong,
and having no regard to their own or their neighbors welfare, and yet look on
himself free from all restraint, and feel no uneasiness in his own mind, when
he does the same things? To think ourselves at liberty to act irrationally, is
to renounce all the dignity of rational creatures, and sink human nature even
below the brutes, who uniformly act according to their several capacities and
instincts. Conscience, making an instantaneous judgment of what is our duty, as
a kind of instinct implanted in human nature to serve the most sudden
occasions, cannot but have tender feelings, and give uneasiness whenever we
neglect what we know ought to be done, or do what we cannot but condemn. The
mind can have no settled peace, when our conduct is manifestly contrary to the
principles we acknowledge; when we are quite regardless of the consequences of
our behavior, and are governed by no rules. If we live without any care of our
morals, we must be exposed to endless vexatious reflections on our selves, as
often as we feel the innumerable ill effects of our irregularities.

But when men likewise are persuaded there is a God who governs the world, so
far as they acknowledge the perfections of his nature, and his regard to the
conduct of mankind as their Lawgiver and Judge, they confess their obligations
to honor him, and obey that law which is inseparable from their rational
nature. The dread of his power and anger* the desire of his favor, oblige us to
comply with his will; and we are so conscious of this obligation, that we can
by no means enjoy peace and satisfaction of mind, when we are guilty of those
things which are offensive to him! Every truth concerning the Deity which men
discover, immediately produces a proportionate conviction of the importance of
those duties which result from this knowledge; and the clearest knowledge brings
us under the strongest bonds: so that no man, unless he is totally ignorant of
God, can be insensible of the obligations of religion. And surely the advantage
of a full revelation of God and his Will, must be so far from relaxing the
bonds we are naturally under, that it rather becomes most inexcusably criminal
not to obey the truth so perfectly made known; for revelation confirms every
thing which the law of nature teaches, and requires the most complete
observance of the duties of it, in order to our highest advances in religion.

This reminds us of another general Head which may require some attention
before we finish the Subject. -- It is comprehended in the following question,
viz.

II. How far do the Principles of natural religion coincide with Revelation;
and in what respects do they tend to confirm Christianity, and perfect that
obedience which the Gospel requires?

Now if Christianity did not coincide with natural religion, all the
supernatural evidences which ever were or might be adduced to prove the truth
of it, would be utterly insufficient to establish it is credit; for no evidence
can possibly prevail against the constant testimony of Reason and Conscience,
or the primary principles of truth implanted in human nature. For instance; --
If Christianity required us to believe the Supreme Being to be defective in
Wisdom, of limited power, capable of falsifying his word, unrighteous and cruel
in his government, or so weakly mild and merciful as never to execute his
threatenings against transgressors of his laws, and the like, mankind could not
be bound to receive such a religion: for by contradicting all the natural
documents of Reason, it would entirely destroy it is own authority. So it a
supposed revelation should teach us, that men may live as they please, bite and
devour, murder and destroy, rob and plunder, without crime or danger; and that
God will show as much love and kindness to such persons, and make them as
happy, as if they should give the most solemn attention to his voice, and
discover the utmost concern to comply with the laws of nature and the express
commands of heaven; if it should pretend to assure men, that there is no manner
of difference between pursuing a course of abandoned wickedness, or hearkening
to the dictates of conscience, and improving every advantage of gaining wisdom,
and finding the way to eternal happiness; but they are more likely to be
inlighened, and obtain all the blessings of the divine favor in the former way
than in the latter: such doctrines would be so shocking to common sense, so
destructive of all religion and morality, that reason and con'cience would
justify us in rejecting -- yes, they would constrain us to reject such a
revelation, with the greatest abhorrence.

But Christianity is far from contradicting the principles of natural religion
in the least degree. It reveals, indeed, surprising things which the light of
nature never could have discovered, -- the Mercy of God perfectly reconcilable
with the severest Justice and resentment against sin; Mercy and Truth meeting
together, Righteousness and Peace kissing each other! -- the Law executed and
fulfilled in every part, and the divine government honored, though the greatest
criminals may escape punishment and obtain heavenly glory! -- the
reconciliation of a rebellious condemned world to God, by the obedience and
sufferings of the Mediator! The Gospel assures us of a new ground of the
justification and salvation of sinners, not by their own works of
righteousness, but on account of that perfect righteousness of Jesus the Son of
God, which is well pleasing to the Father; and a new way of our admittance to
the enjoyment of the blessings of God's love, viz. by our believing the
testimony of the Gospel concerning the glorious characters and work of Christ;
-- believing effectually so as to trust in him with all the heart to render us
accepted in the sight of his Father, and to discipline us for heavenly
happiness, and love and serve him with fidelity. Where the light of nature
fails the Gospel offers itself as an infallible guide, discovering the things
of God which could not be discerned by the naked eye or the human intellect,
and correcting the errors of misguided reason; but it does not contradict any
first principles of reason, or any clear discoveries it has ever made: No, they
happily co-incide, and it confirms them all. Revelation teaches the same things
with natural religion, but it teaches more; and reason and conscience, if they
judge impartially, must allow the excellency of it is doctrines, and the
superior advantages received from the light it communicates. The attributes of
the great Author of all things are placed in the most glorious astonishing
point of view, and not only so, but the most refined branches of morality are
laid open, the grandest arguments for a sober, righteous, and godly life are
presented, and instead of rectifying some particular irregularities of
behavior, it aims at nothing less than such an entire change of the man, in his
inmost principles, temper and affections, as well as outward conduct, that he
may well be denominated a new man, as if he were created over again, and had
gained a new kind of life. Revelation aims to restore the soul, to liberty from
a state of base servitude to the flesh, to spiritualize or bring it to live
agreeable to its own spiritual nature, under the government of the Spirit of
God, -- to bring it to live as a citizen of heaven, by the clearest discovery
of spiritual and heavenly things, in hopes of being shortly united with the
society of angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect, and dwelling in
the presence of God forever.

Though Faith and Love are the capital graces of Christianity, and the sum of all
it is precepts, and we are taught not to claim the special favor of God and
eternal life on account of any virtues to which we have, or imagine we have,
attained, or any labors we have performed; yet the Gospel assures us, that
without holiness no man shall see the Lord, and requires believers to be
perfect even as their Father in heaven is perfect: it does not allow them to
stop short in their holy course, but urges their incessant progress from grace
to grace, from virtue to virtue; and accordingly it delivers a great variety of
particular precepts for a godly and virtuous life.

But precepts can never be framed to suit every action and every circumstance
in the practice of morality; therefore besides more particular rules of life,
not to be equalled by the most celebrated precepts of boasting philosophy, our
Divine Lord and Master has added new force to that capital Law of Nature,
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even the same unto them,
by commanding his disciples to observe it as the comprehensive rule of
Christian morals. So St. Paul gives this summary direction -- Whatsoever things
are true, whatsoever things are honest (i.e. honorable), whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report, if there be any virtue and if there be any praise,
think on these things: and in the apostolic epistles Christians are excited
both by exhortations and example to make it their constant care, and look upon
it as a general rule of holy living, to keep a good conscience in all things,
so that even their greatest enemies might not be able to find any just grounds
of accusation against them. Now what can all this amount to, but a full
confirmation of the Law of nature, and an implicit adoption of it into the
system of Christianity, so far as it toaches perfect morals? For, as to the
practice of every thing which could not be enumerated in particular precepts,
we are plainly referred to our own natural judgment and observation to
determine what is just and right, lovely and honorable: this is to be our guide
in all circumstances not easily reducible to any special rules, and we are
required to conform ourselves to what common reason and natural conscience will
readily point out as our duty. And unless we thus attend to the law of nature
for our direction in a multitude of cases, we shall be insensible of many
defects in our temper and conduct, and cannot carry the practice of Christian
morality to the utmost perfection designed.

I need not say any thing more to show how far natural religion and
Christianity co-incide, and how far they mutually assist and corroborate each
other.

I shall now conclude with a very few words of application.

Let us take heed of setting up natural religion too high, so as to vie with
the honor of divine revelation: for none can tell whether the reason of man,
absolutely left to it is own natural strength, in the most perfect state, would
ever have arrived at such a certainty in the knowledge of the invisible things
of God, as is necessary in order to pure worship and unreserved obedience.
While we pay due respect to the wisdom of the heathen Sages, let us remember,
that the simplicity of the Gospel incomparably surpasses all their labored
philosophy. May the Ministers of Christ never exchange the glorious doctrines
of the New Testament for the deficient schemes which men have invented, or
magnify reason in any respect above the revelation of God by his Son Christ
Jesus our Lord! But let us humbly and thankfully submit to the authority of the
divine word, and make it our care to teach the way of God in truth, and
manifest the favor of Christ's name in every place.

May all that are educated in this Seminary of Learning, consider the
excellency of the holy Scriptures above all the Wisdom of this world; and as
they desire the true knowledge of God, and to find the way to peace and
satisfaction in this life, and happiness in the world to come, may they never
treat the sacred Oracles with bold contempt, or careless neglect! My dear
Pupils, let me entreat you to read the Scriptures with the most serious and
earnest attention; make them your delightful study; remember they teach divine
science communicated from heaven to mankind, -- science which tends to elevate
the soul, enlarge its views, fortify it against all fears in this world, and
direct it in the way to heavenly glory. Prefer the word of God to the best
productions of human genius, that you may grow in wisdom every day, and not
only be acquainted with the duties which nature teaches, and that Literature
which may conduce to your credit and usefulness in this world, but also may
know Jesus Christ the divine Savior of miserable men, rejoice in his
instruction and government, yield to the power of religion, live a life of true
godliness and virtue, and having done eminent service in your generation, may
in the world to come obtain that glorious immortality which is the great
promise of the Gospel.

Finally; let all Christians glorify God, according to the peculiar advantages
of knowing him with which they are favored. Let none of us be ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, or of those religious affections and exercises which are
necessary for the honor of our God and Savior, and our advancement in a life of
true holiness. Reason, conscience, and revelation, join in obliging us to pay
our constant devotions to our Maker and Redeemer; and if we neglect to worship
and glorify the Eternal Father through his Son Jesus, agreeable to the revelation
of his nature and Will, even the superstitious heathen will rise up in judgment
against us. But while we attend to all the devotional duties of religion, let
us not forget the great importance of morality, as it makes an essential part
of that holiness which the Gospel requires. If we desire to press forward
toward the perfection of the Christian character, we must not content
ourselves with an apparent obedience to some of the primary precepts of the
Gospel, but continually judge within our own selves what is right, -- make the
most critical observations on ourselves and others, that we may see what reason
and conscience approve or condemn, -- and never allow ourselves in any temper
or practice which may not be justified both by the law of nature and the
revealed rules of righteousness. We are required to be holy as God is holy, --
to be followers of him as dear children -- and to be blameless and harmless, as
the Sons of God, without rebuke, shining as lights in the world by the wisdom
and rectitude of every part of our conduct. Labor therefore, my Christian
brethren, to keep a good conscience in all things; think and judge well what is
right in the sight of God and man in all circumstances; adorn your Christian
profession by adding to your faith all the virtues required both by natural and
revealed religion -- And may the God of all grace, who has called us into his
kingdom and glory, make you perfect in every good work, and work in every one
of us that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord and
Savior, in whose name we will walk, to whom be glory for ever and ever.

AMEN.

