PASSIVE OBEDIENCE CONSIDERED: IN A SERMON PREACHED AT WILLIAMSBURG, DECEMBER
31st, 1775.

By the Reverend DAVID GRIFFITH, RECTOR OF SHELBURNE PARISH, VIRGINIA.

PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE GENERAL CONVENTION.

WILLIAMSBURG: PRINTED BY ALEXANDER PURDIE.

IN CONVENTION, January, 4, 1776. RESOLVED, that the thanks of this Convention
be presented to the reverend mr. Griffith, for his truly patriotick and most
excellent sermon preached yesterday, and that he be requested to permit the
same to be printed at the public expense; and that mr. Henry Lee, and mr.
Adams, do wait on him therewith.

EDMUND PENDLETON, president.

To the Hon. the PRESIDENT and CONVENTION of the colony of Virginia.
GENTLEMEN,
THE following discourse, honored with your approbation, and brought into
light by your request, has a natural right to your protection and countenance.

To reconcile seeming contradictions; to make self evident truths (flowing from
the attributes of God, and loudly proclaimed by nature) agree with some plain
declarations of scripture; to remove bigotry; to effect unanimity; and to serve
the cause of truth and justice, was the occasion of its being written. If it
proves instrumental in promoting these desirable purposes the world will owe
you an obligation, and I shall rejoice that my intentions are answered.

With the most profound respect, I have the honor to be, gentlemen,

Your most obedient And very humble servant, DAVID GRIFFITH.

A SERMON, etc.
ROMANS XIII. 1. 2. THE POWERS, THAT BE, are ordained of God. Whosoever,
therefore, resists the power, resists the ordinance of God.
THAT man is a peculiar object of supreme regard, that his happiness and
comfort have employed the attention of the almighty creator and preserver of
the universe, is a truth so evident to all who will look round, attentively,
that nothing but the blackest ingratitude and most unpardonable negligence can
prevent their beholding and acknowledging. This, the whole face of nature
proclaims. Scarcely a visible object but man derives from it some use or
convenience. Light and air, indeed, he enjoys in common with other animals; but
numberless are the blessings which are peculiar to man: Even those very
animals, which partake the common benefits, are subject to his control and
devoted to his use by their creator.

The dispensations of God likewise, all, declare his love: Even the corrections
are proofs of his regard; for He chasteneth whom he loves, and scourges every
son whom he receives. The proofs of God's regard for man are, in short, so
many, and so glaring in nature and the declarations of his word, that, a
grateful mind, will readily acknowledge whence all his happiness and blessings
come.

Liberal minds have been, ever, studious to "vindicate the ways of God to man."
They have been constant in asserting, that God, in his providence, is,
uniformly, pursuing the one grand object, the happiness of mankind. It is,
likewise, an opinion which should readily obtain our belief, that he interests
himself in every thing that concerns that happiness; and that his providence
interposes whenever it is endangered. Nay, it is highly impious, it is
blasphemous, to suppose that every interposition of God's providence is not
from a benevolent motive, and with a view to general good.

It is a truth, fully confirmed by daily experience, that the happiness of
mankind depends, in a great measure, on the well ordering of society; on a
right administration of justice, and a due submission to wise and equitable
laws. Since this is evident, beyond contradiction, it cannot be deemed an
absurd supposition that the providence of God interposes in events of such
importance as the political regulations and government of society; it is
argument arising from the infinite goodness of God, and is confirmed to us by
numerous proofs, of divine testimony; all which, clearly, evince the will and
intentions of the deity; that man's welfare is the grand object of his
dispensations; that, with this view, he constituted laws for them, and that,
for this end, he appointed rulers over them. This reflection must occur to
every one who will read the scriptures with becoming attention: But lest it may
have escaped the observation of some who hear me, I shall lay before you a few
remarkable instances; from all which it will be evident, that the intentions of
God, in the appointment of temporal rulers, was the advancement of general
happiness: That the elevation and aggrandisement of those who were
distinguished by him, proceeded from no partial attachment, but that they were
chosen merely for their virtue and piety, and consequently, were better
qualified to answer the benevolent designs of the Almighty.

One of the first instances (Genesis xli. ch.) of God's interposition, in the
appointment of a temporal ruler, is that of Joseph over the country of Egypt.
It was, evidently, his discretion and wisdom that caused Pharaoh to promote him
to that honor, who rightly judged, that none could be so wise and discreet as
him, who had given the strongest proof of his possessing the spirit of God. It
is beyond a doubt, that Joseph's exaltation was by divine appointment, and to
answer the gracious purpose of rescuing from death not only Jacob and his house
(with whom he had entered into covenant) but to preserve Pharaoh and his people
from the distresses of a severe famine.

The command given to Moses (Deuter. xvi. 18, 19, 20) when he was ordered to
appoint judges and officers over the children of Israel, was, " Judges and
officers shall thou make thee, and they shall judge the people with JUST
JUDGMENT. Thou shall not wrest judgment, thou shall not respect persons; that
which is altogether just shall thou follow."

Among other commands which Moses received, respecting the king which God
foresaw would be set up among the Israelites, he received this also (Deuter.
xvii. 18 to the end) " And it shall be when he sits upon the throne of his
kingdom that he shall write him a copy of this law in a book; and it shall be
with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life; that he may learn
to fear the Lord his God; to keep all the words of this law and these statutes,
to do them; that his heart be not lifted up above his brethren; and that he
turn not aside from the commandment, to the right hand or to the left, to the
end that he may prolong his days in his kingdom." These were the terms upon
which favor and protection from Heaven were to be continued to rulers, even of
DIVINE APPOINTMENT.

God's dealings with Saul, the first person appointed king over Israel, were
exactly after these conditions. Success and victory were the fruits of his
labors, whilst he turned not aside from the holy commandment delivered. But
the prophet Samuel tells us (1 Samuel, xv. ch.) when he turned back from
following the Lord, the Lord also rejected him from being king. His successor,
David, by a more faithful administration, continued to enjoy the kingdom to a
good old age, and procured a conditional promise of it to his posterity. This
great and good man, far from being elated at the distinction shown him by God,
saw, clearly, the true reason of his promotion and the purpose of God in
appointing him: This he confessed when he was anointed king in Hebron, and
repeats among the last words which he spoke. The prophet Samuel tells us (2
Samuel, v. 12) "David perceived that the Lord had established him king over
Israel, and that he had exalted his kingdom FOR HIS PEOPLE ISRAEL'S SAKE." In
his dying hour he declared (2 Samuel, xxiii. 3) "He that rules over men must
be just; ruling in the fear of God."

The queen of Sheba blessed God, who delighted to set Solomon on his throne.
"Because," said she, "thy God loved Israel to establish them for ever,
therefore made he thee king over them, to do judgment and justice." (2 Chronicles.
ix. 8)

With these scriptures, the spirit which runs through the whole of the
evangelical writings, coincides to prove that the blessings derived to mankind
by the Christian dispensation, proceeded from the same divine principle of
love. "Herein is love," says the apostle John (1 John iv. 10) "not that we
loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son to be the propitiation for
our sins."

Notwithstanding the love of God to man is so loudly proclaimed by the voice of
nature, and the benevolence of his intentions so clearly revealed in his word,
and declared in all his dispensations; yet there are not wanting in the world,
those, who though they cannot but assent to the general truths, here asserted,
yet deny them in effect. By asserting that contrary opinions are more agreeable
to the word and will of God, and more favorable to the happiness of mankind,
they deny, in substance, what is demonstrably proved to be true. They insist
that, though rulers are bound to govern according to the immutable laws of
equity, yet an obligation lies on Christians to pay an exact obedience to all
their commands: That no abuse of power will justify disobedience; and, however
contrary their laws may be to the benevolent designs of the creator, that
Christians are bound to observe them with the most strict conformity.

They agree that God's care and attention is employed for the welfare of his
creatures. They admit that social regulations and the preservation of order are
necessary; and that the administration of justice is essential to peace and
security. They agree with us as to the end, but differ concerning the mode;
while the mode they contend for, is, as we humbly conceive, destructive of that
very end which all good men desire, and for which government was, at first,
established.

The advocates for despotism and an implicit obedience contend, that the
licentious and refractory disposition of man requires a restraint which only an
uncontrollable power can lay upon him: That a sense of honor, of religious
obligations, and regard for his fellow creatures, are motives too weak to
influence him when his own desires and interest interfere: And that no power,
but one independent and uncontrollable, would make laws sufficiently rigorous
to secure the peace of society. They insist that popular governments are
insufficient for this end; as popular and other unworthy motives, too often
induce men to propose laws that are destructive, from their lenity. That it is
necessary an implicit obedience should be paid to every law of their imposing,
in order to preserve the authority of the legislature; without which, say they,
order must cease, peace be destroyed, and justice interrupted.

To give farther weight to these opinions, they add, that the all-wise God,
foreseeing the best method of conducting human affairs, has declared, in his
revealed will, it shall be so; and, among other proofs, they bring in support
of their doctrine the words of my text; which, they say, amount to a full
proof, that God commands and expects us to follow, implicity and blindly, every
dictate of our superiors.

That God requires obedience from his people, to all laws that are equitable:
That he expects them to be obedient to magistrates and rulers, when their
commands do not contradict his own, is, undoubtedly, true, and abundantly
confirmed by his word: But I hope to be excused when I cannot agree with them,
that mankind are to follow every dictate of their superiors, without doubting
or murmuring. It is a principle so slavish, that no man who considers himself
in his true light, as descended from the common parent of his species, can
assent to. It is a doctrine so full of danger tending to destroy every
distinction between right and wrong, and to make justice or injustice depend
upon passion and caprice: It is a principle so destructive in itself; tending
so greatly, to debase the human mind, and to extinguish every virtuous effort,
that if deserves to be rejected by every friend of truth and mankind: And I
doubt not to prove, from the example of St. Paul's conduct, that he never
meant, by the declaration in my text, to give sanction to the crimes of wicked
and despotick men.

But it may be said, you would, then, have those to be judges of right and
wrong, from whom nothing is required but obedience; you would have those, to
govern, whom the laws were intended to restrain: How will such a mode answer
the important point you contend for; the preservation of order and justice? A
system of this kind, gives an opening for the most flagitious and licentious
practices; which, instead of securing, must destroy that peace and harmony you
recommend. I would wish to have it believed, that I am, by no means, an
advocate for anarchy. I am, very fully, convinced of the necessity of
subordination in society, in order to its happiness: But I must, still, think,
that this happiness is not best promoted by a scheme of despotism. Was
infallibility conveyed to man with the powers of government, I would instantly
subscribe to the doctrine. But, unhappily for human nature, we see the old
Latin proverb (humanum est errare) verified daily; and if any conclusions may
be drawn from the practice and policy of courts and princes, through all ages
of the world, we may venture to affirm that, abundantly more determinations
have proceeded from selfishness and ambition, than from disinterested and
benevolent motives.

Ignorance, darkness and superstition, have, ever, had their source in
oppression and injustice; while truth and science have been the constant
attendants upon liberty. The spirit of freedom will, indeed, sometimes, if
accompanied with imprudent conduct in rulers, be attended with disagreeable
consequences: But, few instances can be shown where these consequences have
followed, when the public good alone has influenced the councils of princes.
Mankind can, in general, distinguish between right and wrong; between justice
and oppression; where they see their rulers actuated by principles of
benevolence and a love of justice, there needs little else, than this
confidence, to secure their obedience: And how happy have those periods been,
where sentiments, of mutual obligation and duty, have subsisted between rulers
and their subjects. But how miserable the state of that people, whose prince,
disdaming the ties of humanity and justice, trampling on their most sacred
rights, and sporting with their wretchedness, impiously conceits himself the
anointed of God, and dares to presume on the authority of Heaven to sanctify
his crimes.

From the proneness of man's heart to selfishness and ambition, little pains
need be taken to persuade him to the belief of opinions that are favorable to
his views and inclinations; the many mischiefs which have arisen in the would
from the successful arts of sycophants are too notorious to be denied: Much
happier would it be for mankind, were princes and rulers, taught, faithfully,
to believe these truths, that no character, however dignified, can give
sanction to inhumanity and oppression; that justice and benevolence are
principles of universal obligation; that a mutual obligation subsists between
the governed and their rulers; that the happiness of mankind is the end of
their appointment; and that the uprightness of their conduct will be their best
security for the favor of Heaven and the obedience of their subjects. Where
princes are not deeply impressed with a sense of these truths, we may expect
neither peace nor happiness where they rule.

If we recur to experience, for satisfaction concerning this doctrine, what
will that teach us? Will it prove that truth and justice have prevailed, more,
in free countries? Or, that ignorance and error have been the inseparable
attendants on freedom? Will it not, on the contrary, be evident, that in
kingdoms where these principles have been established, the most insolent
tyranny, and most violent oppressions, have been exercised upon the wretched
subject by his lordly ruler? This is a truth, with which the world is, but too
well, acquainted. How great a part of mankind are, at this day, smarting under
the iron rod of power, and all the calamities which oppression can devise, or
tyranny inflict, no one can be ignorant of who is, in the least acquainted with
the affairs of the world.

And can we suppose, that God is displeased with those unhappy nations who,
when stimulated to complaints by the bitter lash of oppression, utter their
disquietude before him? Did he reprove that distinguished people the
Israelites, for complaining of the severe treatment of Pharaoh, who made their
lives bitter with hard bondage? Did he expect that they should pay a blind
obedience to all his ordinances? Did he rebuke their murmurs, or refuse to hear
their complaints? Surely neither: "I have seen the affliction of my people
which are in Egypt, says God to Moses (Exodus iii. ch.) and have heard their
cry, by reason of their taskmasters: For I know their sorrows, and am come
down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians." What a deliverance he
wrought for those murmurers and complainers; and what judgment was exercised on
their oppressors, the sacred book of God declares.

Upon a review of the subject; and from considering the many arguments that
convince us of God's gracious disposition toward man: From considering him as
impartial and dispassionate; that he has, manifestly, in his revealed will,
declared his intentions in appointing temporal rulers, and, clearly, pointed
out for them a line of conduct, from which they may not deviate without
incurring his displeasure; I cannot be induced to believe, that God will be
angry with his creatures for disregarding the injunctions of those who have
departed from that rule of rectitude laid down by him, and who would force them
into measures, which, they are convinced, are neither for the advancement of
his glory nor their own happiness.

Nor can I, upon a candid inquiry, admit that St. Paul meant, by the words of
my text, to enjoin Christians the practice of this doctrine. In order to
understand him rightly, let us compare the doctrine with his own practices. It
would hardly be supposed, of Paul, that he would practice any thing that was
contrary to the truths he was preaching: That an apostle of Jesus Christ, who
was desiring others to walk as they had him for an example, would, by the
pattern of his life, lead mankind into fatal errors. Yet, we find it recorded,
in the Acts of the Apostles, that this very man, when apprehended and punished
wrongfully and contrary to the laws and usages of the Romans, to which nation
he was subject, and entitled to all the privileges of one of their free
citizens, did not, tacitly and submissively, endure it, but complained aloud of
their injustice; and appealed to the laws and constitution of his country. We
are told (Acts xxii. ch.) that the chief captain of the Roman garrison, in
order to satisfy the Jews, was about to examine Paul by scourging, and had
ordered him to be bound with throngs for that purpose; but we do not find that
the apostle submitted to his authority, implicitly and without complaining: No;
he condemned this conduct, as unjust and tyrannical, and appealed to the Roman
constitution for that justice which he was not like to meet with from the
officer. " Is it lawful for you, says he to the centurion, to scourge a man
that is a Roman, and uncondemned? This remonstrance had the expected effect;
for we are told, the chief captain was afraid, after he knew that he was a
Roman and because he had bound him; and, the next day, he was loosed from his
bands.

When the high priest commanded Paul to be smitten on the mouth, for asserting
that, he had lived in all good conscience, before God, until that day; he
replied, " God shall smite thee, thou whited wall, for sit thou to judge me
AFTER THE LAW, and condemnest thou me CONTRARY TO THE LAW?" By which saying he
has, clearly marked (...) the line of conduct for those in power; and, (...)
time, left the most bitter and morti^^^^^ reproof to those who have not
exercised their authority agreeable to this rule.

In the sixteenth chapter of the Acts, we are told (...) when the magistrates
of Philippi, sent to dismiss Paul and Silas privately, after they had beaten
them openly and uncondemned, who were Romans: they, absolutely refused to obey
the command: Nay verily, says St. Paul, but let them come, themselves, and
fetch us out: Nor did they go till the magistrates came and besought them, and
brought them out; and desired them to depart out of the city. Here is, beyond
contradiction, an instance where this very Paul, who is said to have
recommended passive obedience to Christians, absolutely refused to obey the
command of magistrates. The reason, why he did, is obvious; he meant to reprove
prove them for the unjust punishment, inflicted on him and Silas; and for
exercising their authority in a tyrannical manner.

Again, when Festus, willing to do the Jews a pleasure, would have sent Paul up
to Jerusalem, to be tried there, he loudly exclaimed against it; well knowing,
how little justice he might hope for in that city. I stand at Caesar's judgment
seat, said he (Acts xxv. ch.) where I ought to be judged. To the Jews have I
done no wrong, as thou, very well, know: For if I be an offender, or have
committed any thing, worthy of death, I refuse not to die; but if there be none
of these things whereof these accuse me, NO MAN MAY DELIVER ME UNTO THEM: I
appeal unto Caesar. Here he, positively, denied Festus's right to do what the
Jews required; and appeals, for justice, to the laws of his country; well
knowing that, by them, no man could be delivered to death, before that he which
is accused have the accusers FACE TO FACE, and have license to ANSWER FOR
HIMSELF, concerning the crime laid against him.

Such was the practice of that Paul, of whom it is asserted that he taught the
doctrine of passive obedience. That he, ever, paid the most scrupulous
obedience to the established and just laws of the various nations he traveled
through, is reasonable to suppose. But that he endeavored to impress
Christians with the belief that, they were to obey, implicitly, every dictate
of power, however unjust and oppressive, and however contrary to the divine
will and intentions, is hardly to be imagined; because it is, as we have
instanced, inconsistent with his own conduct at Caesarea, at Philippi and at
Jerusalem.

St. Peter beseeches us to submit ourselves, to every ordinance of man. But are
we, hence, to infer that this is without any exception whatever; or that
Christians are to pay no regard to the rectitude of those laws, of human
authority, to which they pay obedience? This, certainly, never could have been
St. Peter's meaning: for we find (Acts iv. ch.) that when he and John were
forbid preaching, by the high priest and rulers, they actually refused to
comply. "Whether it be right, IN THE SIGHT OF GOD, say they, to hearken unto
you more than unto God, judge ye." But it may be said, these men were acting by
immediate command from their savior; and where his command is positive, man's
is not to be regarded. To which it may be answered: whenever oppression and
injustice are exercised by the ruling powers, the commands of God are broken:
That God expects no obedience of his people to those who live in daily
violation of his commands; who destroy, by their acts of power, the cause of
truth and the happiness of mankind; and pervert, by their nefarious systems,
the very design of social regulations. If we would understand St. Peter,
rightly, let us consider the whole of what he says, upon this subject, together
(1 Peter ii. ch.) "Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man, for the Lord's
sake, whether it be to the king, as supreme, or unto governors, as unto them
that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of
them that do well." The divine intention in the appointment of temporal rulers,
is, here, evidently, declared to be for the happiness of society, to restrain
vice and cherish virtue: And while they act conformably to the divine will,
it is, doubtless, the duty of every Christian a be obedient to their authority.
But when they mistake their commission, when evil doers get rewards instead of
punishment, and the good meet persecution instead of praise; when, not justice,
but power and self aggrandisement are the objects of their pursuit; when
ambition prompts, not humanity and benevolence; when passion rules
unrestrained, and the voice of reason is drowned by the clamours of sense, will
any body, under such circumstances, say that it is the duty of Christians to
pay an entire obedience to their superiors, or to consent to, and be aiding in
the execution of their wicked purposes? If the example of apostles should have
any influence over us, doubtless no obedience is due, from Christians, to the
impious and unlawful commands of their superiors.

To apply this doctrine to our own case, and the circumstances of the present
times, it will be necessary to consider it in another light. Hitherto, I have
considered it as it respects nations where princes are allowed an absolute
domination; where the power of legislation is vested, solely, in the chief
magistrate. And if in countries, so circumstanced, resistance, or a disregard
to laws, in certain cases, is not only justifiable, but a necessary duty; how
much more justifiable is resistance in a limited monarchy, where the people
have an equal share of the powers that be; that power which is ordained of God;
the power of legislation? The free exercise of which is the only security that
can be found against oppression and injustice.

As St. Paul has asserted, in my text, that the powers which be are ordained of
God; it will be necessary, in order to ascertain the line of obedience, to know
in what hands power is lodged by the constitution of our country. The nature of
this constitution having been frequently and fully explained of late, by able
pens; and the privileges of the subject clearly pointed out; I shall spend no
time in expatiating on its excellencies and the blessings which flow from it to
mankind. It is sufficient, for my present purpose, to say, that by the
constitution of England, the lives, liberty and property of every individual
are secured: That the commons, or the body of the people, make one branch of
the legislature; and have a share of power: That they have not only the power
of keeping and enjoying securely, peaceably, and at their discretion the fruits
of their honest industry, but also the power of making laws by their
representatives, by themselves chosen; and that they are accountable to no laws
but such as they in this manner assent to. It is a fact, agreed to on all
hands, that the subject of England is vested with a share of power and
legislation; and that, whilst he chooses to keep it, no earthly power can,
lawfully, deprive him of this privilege. Allowing St. Paul's assertion to be
true, then, in the most literal and confined sense that any despot would choose
to affix to it, it does not appear that, in the present contest between Great
Britain and her colonies, the colonists are resisting a power ordained of God,
a power to whom they owe obedience, an authority they are subjected to by the
constitution of their country. The dispute, as I conceive, is, whether the
king's subjects in America, their lives and property, are at the ABSOLUTE
DISPOSAL of the king and his subjects in England? Whether the legislature of
Great Britain has a right to make laws, binding of America, IN ALL CASFS
WHATSOEVER? The colonists think that, if this be the case, their situation is
truly slavish, and are justly alarmed for the consequences. They contend that
their fellow subjects in Britain are but their equals: That the power ordained
of God; that share of power which exists in the people, is, equally, the
privilege of every individual subject: They insist that a Briton cannot boast a
single blessing from the constitution, but what an American is, equally,
entitled to: They say the claim of the commons of Britain is an innovation;
that it is unnatural, unjust and oppressive; and destructive of that equal
justice and liberty which, by the constitution, was meant to be secured to all.
While, therefore, the colonists are contending with their equals, only; with
those who are ordained to have no greater share of power than themselves: While
they refuse obedience to those who have no right to exact it; and assert their
rights when it would be highly criminal to resign them: those rights which God
has appointed them and the laws confirmed; I cannot be of opinion that they may
be charged, justly, with a breach of God's ordinances.

Were the people of the colonies laboring to subvert the constitution; to
abolish monarchy, or even to diminish the just prerogative of the crown, they
might, truly, be said to be resisting the ordinances of God. But, upon an
impartial examination, it does not appear to be the case: For whatever may be
the wish of individuals, the body of the people are firm in their attachment to
the constitution; and all the great representative bodies have warmly declared
their loyalty, and an utter aversion to a change of government. In all their
petitions and remonstrances, to the King and legislature of Britain, they say
their only wish is to have their former privileges and liberties confirmed.
While, therefore, an opposition is carried on upon the principle of
self-defence. While they contend for the preservation of that power which alone
can render them secure and happy: While they do not aim at innovation, or to
infringe the rights of others, the colonists cannot, with the least degree of
justice, be charged with resisting the ordinances of God. The colonists, as St.
Paul was, are not free by purchase but by birth: Though not born in Britain,
are as much entitled to the privileges of Englishmen, as St. Paul was to those
of a Roman citizen, though born at Tarsus. Like him, too, they have asserted
their claim and appealed to the constitution of their country for relief from
the arbitrary will of man. But alas, their plea is rejected; it, therefore,
rests with the infallible judge to decide the controversy as to him seems
good.

I am aware of the objection which the enemies of American freedom are
constantly urging in favor of their pretensions. In my opinion, the doctrine
of transubstantiation is not a greater absurdity than the notion of America's
being represented in the British parliament. To attempt a refutation of this
incomprehensible doctrine would be vain: The voice of reason and of justice are
too feeble to be heard amidst the clamours of ambition and interest. Many
members of the British senate have, of late, interested themselves greatly to
procure relief from subscription to the articles of our church; and for this
reason, principally, that the doctrines they contain are incomprehensible and
absurd: Yet those very members, who wish to be excused from acknowledging,
publicly, truths which they cannot comprehend, would compel the colonists to
subscribe doctrines, which, they are convinced, are neither just nor true.
Conscience may prompt the one, but the impartial world can be at no loss to
determine what influences the other resolution. So blind is human nature to its
own failings; so deaf to the cries of honor and justice, when self interferes,
that what is just one day is most unjust the next; what, at one time, is truth,
is at another time error.

Upon the principle of self, alone, can the conduct of the enemies of America
be reconciled. The voice of God, of truth, of justice, of humanity, are,
totally, against it.

Sophistry may guild over the fashionable doctrine of expediency, which is,
now, become a substitute for truth and justice: We may be told of the "dignity,
safety and welfare of the British empire." But can the most flagrant injustice
add dignity to a state? Is the safety of a nation increased by a diminution of
affection and confidence among the subjects? Or will the decrease of commerce
add any thing to its welfare? And will any body say that Christians are obliged
to submit, tacitly, to measures so inconsistent and destructive; to obey,
passively, schemes of expediency and human policy which contradict the laws of
justice and humanity? If the laws of God are more to be revered than those of
man's invention, surely the Christian is to be justified in rejecting whatever
is contrary to divine precept.

There, never, was a time when it was more necessary to consider the truth of
the doctrine laid before you than the present. It has, long, perplexed the
minds of many pious and well disposed persons, who have been fluctuating
between duty to God and to themselves; and so long as they have acted from
conscientious motives, and have endeavored to make the laws of God the rule of
their actions, their conduct is highly commendable. But it is high time that
the mists of error should be removed from the eyes of every American, from
every friend to truth and justice; that while selfish and unworthy motives
actuate some, others may not be prevented, by bigotry, from uniting in the most
important cause that ever engaged their concern.

I would not be thought to stand here, "a mover of sedition" or an advocate for
licentiousness. It would ill become this sacred place, and the character of a
minister of the gospel of Christ, to inspirit rebellion and foment disorder and
confusion: But it becomes us, highly, to remove every impediment from the
progress of truth and justice to espouse the cause of humanity and the common
rights of mankind. In a particular manner, it becomes us to vindicate that holy
religion we profess; which does not seem altogether free from danger since some
late regulations in Britain. The temporal concerns of mankind claim the last
regard of a Christian: Things which end with this life, they should regard with
the indifference of a guest that tarrieth but a day: But the cause of truth,
immutable and eternal, should engage their warmest and unremitted attention.
The cause of an innocent and helpless posterity; of millions, yet unborn, plead
strongly for the utmost exertion of our care and vigilance, in defense of their
rights: And gratitude to the memory of our ancestors, should inspire an awful
reverence for that noble cause they have so often stood forth to defend, and
which, through their glorious efforts (under God) has been, to this day,
preserved.

To look toward futurity and contemplate possible events, is, at this day,
painful: The most consolatory reflection we now have, is, that the cause of
truth and justice is the cause of God, and that his almighty arm is
irresistible. From the example of past times we may, likewise, draw
consolation; the history of which proves, that zeal and unanimity, in a
righteous cause, have often been an overmatch for numbers and power. Next to
divine protection, let us place our hopes in, and exert all our faculties to
effect this most desirable object. Let no man strive, but who shall, best,
serve the cause of truth and his country. Let distinctions and prejudices
cease; and let the flame of patriotism, alone, blaze out to an excess. O that
it may rise to such height and power in the bosom of every American, as to
consume every engine and render uneffectual every effort of injustice, tyranny
and oppression.

May that great and gracious being, whose friendly aid and interposition are
essential to the happiness of his creatures, benignly smile upon the cause of
the injured and oppressed, the bless all our virtuous endeavors. May civil
discord cease: And may peace, with all its usual blessings, be again restored;
never to be interrupted by an unfriendly and unnatural contest between Great
Britain and her colonies.

For the sake of Jesus Christ. AMEN.

FINIS.

