MR. MACCARTY's THANKSGIVING SERMON. NOVEMBER 23, 1775.

Praise to GOD, a Duty of continual Obligation. A SERMON, Preached at
WORCESTER, THURSDAY, November 23d, 1775. Being a Day of PUBLIC THANKSGIVING, by
the Appointment of the GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

By THADDEUS MACCARTY, A. M. Pastor of the Church in WORCESTER.

Published by Desire of many of the Hearers.

MASSACHUSETTS BAY: WORCESTER, Printed and sold by I. THOMAS, at his
Printing-Office near the COURTHOUSE

A THANKSGIVING SERMON.
PSALM xxxiv. 1st. Verse. I will bless the LORD at all times: His praise shall
continually be in my mouth.
THE present state is a mixed state. This is so as to individuals, and also to
communities. In the course of God's providence, prosperity and adversity
succeed eath other; and there is oftentimes a quick transition from one to the
other. It is in this case as it is in the course of nature: When all is bright,
serene and cheerful, a storm suddenly arises, and rages with great impetuosity
and violence, and in some situations great is the distress and misery
occasioned thereby. After which all becomes calm and bright again. Neither
individuals nor communities "in their prosperity may say, they shall never be
moved." When they imagine their "mountain stands strong," it is easy with God
to shake it even to its center; to throw them down from the pinnacle of ease,
grandeur, wealth and affluence -- and it is easy for him again to exalt them.
-- To be raised from a low, depressed state, is agreeable to nature. Mankind
naturally desire prosperity, and deprecate adversity. Adversity, especially in
remarkable instances of it, spreads a gloom over them, and they are ready to
despond and give up all for lost. They view the dark side of things, and dwell
upon them in their mournful contemplations, not considering that the great
Governor of the world can cause light to spring up out of darkness, reverse the
scene, and bring good out of evil. They are apt to forget past mercies, and to
overlook those which God intermixes with their adversities, and so are unapt
and indisposed to make their proper acknowledgments to him.

THERE are two grand and important duties, which, both reason and the word of
God call men to, considering him as the great orderer and disposer of all
events both good and evil -- Prayer, for the bestowment of needed good -- and
praise for the receipt of it. Considering ourselves as needy creatures, the
duty of prayer is of continual obligation. And considering ourselves as the
daily subjects of the mercies of God, the duty of praise is also of continual
obligation. It was from an impresive sense of this, that the pious Psalmist
utters himself, as in the words of our text. "I will bless the Lord at all
times, his praise shall be continually in my mouth." THROUGH all the changing
scenes of life,
in trouble and in joy,
The praises of my God shall still
my heart and tongue employ.
TATE and BRADY'S version of the text.


THE words plainly import this -- That God's creatures, at all times, and under
all circumstances and conditions of life, have occasion to praise and bless him.

NONE surely will call it in question, that they have such occasion in times of
prosperity; when the aspects of divine providence are agreeable and pleasant.
Men must be lost to all sense of God, and of their obligations to him, not to
acknowledge that praise is a just tribute due to him on account of his favors
and benefits. There are few indeed that will carry matters to such a length as
this, speculatively, whatever they may do practically. That they do so
practically, is the case in a multitude of instances. Though they are the
subjects of many and great favors at the hands of God, yet they have no
grateful sense of them, and are grossly negligent in making their
acknowledgements to him. Their own reason, if they only appeal to that, must
utterly condemn them for such unworthy treatment of their Maker and bounteous
Benefactor.

It may be made evident, that in times of evil and calamity, men have even then
occasion to praise God. Surely then they have so, when it is clear, bright
sunshine with them. "I will bless the Lord at all times, says David, his praise
shall be continually in my mouth."

EVILS and calamities, it is true, in themselves, whether personal or public,
"are not joyous, but grievous." Thus it is as to bodily sickness and pain. Thus
also is it, when droughts and pestilences are sent into a land, and when their
peace and tranquillity is interrupted by the sword of war. -- Such calamities as
these, undoubtedly call for deep humiliation before God, as hereby he testifies
his anger and displeasure against a land for the many and heinous iniquities
that abound in it. These most certainly, are the procuring cause of them. If
piety and virtue universally prevailed, no evils or judgments would be sent
upon a land. The moral state of a people, we may well suppose, influences the
moral Governor of the world in his conduct toward them, either in a way of
favor or calamity.

BUT although judgments, such as we just mentioned, are to be considered as
tokens of God's anger against prevailing iniquities, and in this view call for
deep humiliation before a holy and offended Sovereign, yet consistent with
this, occasion is then offered for praise. -- For "God, who does not afflict
willingly, nor grieve the children of men," who delights not in their
distresses and miseries, has merciful designs toward them in his judicial
dispensations. He designs to humble them and purify them; to bring them to true
repentance, to reform all their vices and immoralities, to reduce them to the
love and practice of universal piety, godliness and righteousuess, and in this
way to prepare them for his smiles and blessings in all regards. For
"righteousness" has a moral as well as natural tendency to "exalt a nation" or
people. If now, such are the merciful designs of the great Governor of the
world, when he sends evils and calamities upon a land, then occasion is hereby
ministered for praise to his great name.

THE design of Heaven in calamitous dispensations, may be to bring people to
that, which his kind and merciful ones have been ineffectual to. For although
the merciful dispensations of GOD, especially a long series of them, and in
great and most important respects, ought in all reason to engage men's
unfeigned gratitude, and put them upon manifesting it in a life of true
godliness and virtue, yet frequently they have not such a desirable effect as
this. -- Their case is often, much as it is said of (...), that they "wa^ fat
and kick." While they talk of a long season in the sunshine of the divine
favors, they are unmindful of their great benefactor, riot in his bounties and
make them the fuel of their lusts. Thus evilly do they requite the Lord who
has done so many good things for them. -- The holy GOD who is hereby greatly
dishonored, sees fit to alter the scene, to take his rod in his hand and to
chastise them, and sometimes very sorely; that hereby they may be reduced to
such an obediential conduct as his manifold mercies were ineffectual to bring
them to. And so by his altering his hand, he designs upon the whole, their
benefit and advantage. For if they are brought to that humiliation, godliness
and virtue, which GOD expects of them, great is the advantage and benefit
resulting to them from his judicial dispensations, however sore and
distressing. -- They are then prepared for the removal of them, and for the
return of GOD'S favors and blessings in all desirable instances of them, so
that on the whole here, there is occasion to praise GOD in times of evil and
calamity; not for evils and calamities in themselves considered, but for the
good ends GOD has in bringing them on.

BUT then it may be further observed -- That sometimes, yea, for the most part,
there are many positive mercies enjoyed in times of evil.

INDIVIDUALS for the most part find it so. It is not often that their state,
though greatly afflicted, is yet quite forlorn and desperate. If they are in
pain and sickness of body, yet they may have comfortable houses, lodging,
medicines, food and fuel, and the tender care and help of near and
affectionate friends, all which serve in some measure to sweeten bitter cups,
to lighten heavy burdens, and to keep them from sinking under the pressure of
their troubles. -- So also, persons sometimes meet with sorrowful bereavements.
Those that were near and dear to them are taken away, upon whom they were wont
to place their hopes, and from whom they expected to have much comfort. But
then others are spared to them, and sometimes when they have been in the like
dangerous circumstances as those that have been taken away, sickness has been
removed from their families, and the voice of health and salvation again heard
in them.

IN these and other instances that might be mentioned, there is mercy
intermixed with afflictions. And at the same time that they are called to
humiliation and mourning, they have yet abundant occasion for thankfulness and
praise to GOD. In short, there is no condition that persons may be in, but upon
a view of all circumstances, they may find matter for praise to GOD. And
considering their deserts at his hands, their utter unworthiness before him, by
reason of their vileness, ingratitude, disobedience and rebellion toward his
sacred majesty, they may with the strictest justice take up that language, "it
is of the Lord's mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail
not." LAMENT. (...). (...).


THE same observation with respect to individuals, holds true with respect to
communities. Sometimes after a long Sunshine, GOD "creates darkness." After a
long calm, he raises a storm, and causes it to beat fiercely upon them. The
state of their affairs wear a different aspect from what they did not long
before. A very gloomy prospect opens before them, and it may seem as if utter
ruin and destruction awaited them.

THOSE terrible calamities of war, pestilence and drought come in the room of
peace, health and plenty. These blessings they may have long been in the
enjoyment of, but did not sufficiently prize them; but in having the scene so;
changed and altered, they are brought to know the worth of what they once
enjoyed. -- But now, upon a view of all circumstances, much of the goodness of
GOD is to be seen amidst all these evils, and they have occasion for praise as
well as humiliation.

THIS that I have now said, holds true with respect to us in this land.

For a long course of years, there has been a very general and remarkable state
of health throughout the land. No contagious mortal sickness has GOD sent into
it, as was formerly the case. I need not mention instances here. -- And by this
means we have greatly increased and multiplied, been enabled to extend our
settlements, and many of them, though young, have greatly flourished and
prospered, and have bid fair to do so more and more under the common smiles of
Heaven. But in the summer past GOD was pleased to send a most grievous
pestilence into the land, and great has been the mortality in one place and in
another, and in some not far from us. The disease above alluded to was the
Dysentry, or as it is commonly called, the Camp Distemper. A great mortality
hereby, there was in the towns of SUTTON, MARLBOROUGH, GROTON, DEDHAM, as well
as in diverse other towns in this, as well as in the neighboring governments.
In this matter, GOD has dealt as favorably with us in this place, perhaps as
with any in the land. But one single person in this large, populous town, died
of the above disease, many families were visited, though not severely. The
family to which this person belonged was the most so. A large family, almost
all visited, but all recovered except this one.
What special cause for praise and thankfulness have we for his great goodness
in such a time of calamity and distress? Is it, brethren! for our
distinguishing goodness, righteousness and virtue, that we have been thus
favorably dealt with! This is a matter worthy our consideration. And if upon a
serious and impartial consideration, it shall appear that we have been as
obnoxious as others who have been visited, the sparing mercy and goodness of
GOD demands our unfeigned gratitude. -- But then, with respect to the land in
general, the fatal malady is greatly abated if not wholly subsided. And the
voice of health is again heard in our land. And this also, as members of the
body demands our gratitude and praise to the great preserver of men.

IT may be added -- that peace is a blessing which for many years past has been
enjoyed in our land. No wars nor rumors of wars, no military campaigns and
battles -- "No confused noise of warriors nor garments rolled in blood." No
people on the earth have in this respect been happier, or it may be, so happy
as we have been. Public peace and tranquillity is a great and inestimable
blessing. Men feel and enjoy themselves in such a state, agreeable to the rank
they hold in the creation. Hereby scope is given to population and increase --
to the flourishing of the liberal and mechanic arts -- to the increasing in
their trade, commerce, navigation, etc. and under the smiles of divine
providence to their becoming great and opulent, and respectable both at home
and abroad. When they dwell in peace, unmolested by enemies, they then bid fair
to be in the agreeable situation, that Moses in GOD'S name encourages the people
of Israel with upon their obedience. "Thou shall lend unto many nations, and
thou shall not borrow. And the Lord shall make thee the head, and not the tail;
and thou shall be above only, and thou shall not be beneath." DEUTERONOMY. xxviii. 12,
13.
Plenty, wealth, dignity, liberty, all seem to be comprised here.

When such is the state of a land, we may very properly adopt the language of
David; having recounted some signal instances of GOD'S kindness, which he might
apply to his own people, or however leave for general application. "Happy is
that people that is in such a case." PSALM cxliv. ^5.
Among the instances of happiness that he mentions, is that of being free from
the molestations of enemies, and so of course, enjoying internal peace and
tranquillity, besides enjoying diverse other kinds of happiness in connection
with this, as noticed in the preceding verses. And I cannot but add with the
Psalmist, "yea," or rather, "happy is that people whose God is the Lord," whose
he is in a special peculiar sense, a GOD in covenant, through JESUS CHRIST, the
blessed mediator. And now, notwithstanding, as it has been observed, that vice,
luxury, and all kinds of immoralities are wont to increase in proportion, as
countries grow great and opulent, yet this cannot be the natural, unavoidable
tendency of things; but must be owing to a strange infatuation in mankind, to a
most wretched perversion of the designs of a good providence. The design of GOD
in all the instances of his goodness; public prosperity and happiness among the
rest, is to engage men to universal gratitude and obedience toward him. And
being in such a happy, prosperous state, as we have mentioned, as they are
under great obligations; so, they are under great advantages for improvement in
religion: To attend upon the public duties and offices thereof, which are
wisely designed and well adapted, and with a concurring divine blessing, have
often been succeeded to the effecting the purposes of real, vital piety and
Godliness; which should it generally prevail in a land, would be its greatest
glory, dignity, excellency, safety and defense. If it was said of the renowned
Elijah upon his translation, that he was "the chariot of Israel and the
horsemen thereof." What shall be said of a land, what of its greatness, dignity
and safety, when there are great numbers of his excellent spirit and character?
"Righteousness exalts a nation" more than any thing else, for it is the most
excellent thing, above gold, yea above fine gold. It is this that renders it
peculiarly, yea most eminently respectable. One observes upon the case of
Elijah, "that he was to that people, by his counsels, reproofs and prayers,
better than the strongest force of chariots and horses, and kept off the
judgments of GOD. His departure was like the routing of an army, an irreparable
loss. Better have lost all their men of war, than this man of GOD," How great
now must be the glory and safety of a people, when there are many, many Elijahs
among them? And I would observe, that the outward peace, prosperity and the
flourishing of a people, affords special opportunities and advantages for the
forming men in general to the excellent character we have mentioned.

So that peace and tranquillity in a land must be considered as an inestimable
blessing to it. Happy would it be was it to prevail amongst all mankind of
every tongue, tribe and nation. But this cannot be expected so long as the
lusts of men, their pride, avarice, revenge, etc. remain. Happy would it be
were these destroyed, and the kingdom of the prince of peace universally
established in the earth.

WE may now go on to observe, that war is a very great and distressing
calamity, and it is proportionally so, according as the seat of it is near or
far off. It is when it is sent into a land, greatly impoverishing to it, drains
it of its substance and occasions many sorrowful breaches in towns and
families. Things are put out of course, men's trade and commerce and various
occupations greatly obstructed, their subsistence, deriving from their industry
and diligence, greatly failing, and sometimes quite cut off, and they become
reduced to great straits and difficulties. Thus it is in a great many
instances. We have sufficient proof of this at the present day. -- At best a
variety of difficulties and hardships must necessarily be undergone by a
people, at a time when the sword of war is drawn upon them, and they are
exposed to the devastations of it. This is a calamity that has been very common
in the earth from age to age. "Nation has lift up sword against nation." And
what depopulation of countries, what slaughters and desolations have been made
in the earth? We may see the full proof of all this, if we only look into the
ancient scripture-history. There has been the like proof of it in latter times,
in our own, as well as in the times of our fathers.

As to internal peace and tranquillity in our land, as I said before, no people
on earth have been happier than we have, of a long season. Notwithstanding
frequent incursions in former years of the savages of the wilderness upon our
exposed frontiers, yet no invasion of foreign powers upon our seacoasts.
Whatever, attempts there have sometimes been of this sort, yet through the good
hand of our GOD toward us, they have proved abortive. We have been called to
"stand still and see the salvation of GOD. This was remarkably the case in the
year 1746, in the defeat of the powerful French Squadron, under the command of
the Duke D'Anville. Most fearful devastation would undoubtedly have been the
consequence, had he succeeded, especially upon our seacoasts. But GOD
"persecuted them with his tempest, and made them afraid with his storm." "He
sent out his arrows and scattered them, and shot out lightnings and discomfited
them. This defeat through the good hand and providence of GOD, is very
curiously set forth in a Thanksgiving Sermon preached at Boston, upon that
memorable occasion, by the late Reverend and learned Mr. Prince.
"

BUT the time is come, when the sword of war is drawn upon us; not by foreign
powers, but by our fellow subjects of Great Britain, with whom, we long
maintained a friendly, brotherly correspondence, equally to their advantage as
ours. And this would doubtless have continued without interruption, but for the
evil councils, the dark policies and base intrigues of some in power and high
dignity at home, aided and assisted, as is but too evident by some among
ourselves. I would be far from trespassing upon the rules of charity, but there
is notwithstanding clear light and evidence.

AND matters are now come to be very serious indeed. -- The contest it seems,
is not to be decided but at the point of the sword. This for several months has
been drawn upon us, and we have been pierced and wounded and greatly distressed
by it. Our capital town has been taken possession of by British troops -- from
its being the grand resort of the country, the seat of plenty, affluence and
administration of civil justice -- remarkable for its observation of the public
duties and offices of religion, and particularly on the christian-sabbath, as I
am thoroughly knowing to. -- This, which has also been the city of our
solemnities, whither our tribes both of the civil and sacred order annually
assembled to consult and promote the good both of church and state. This
stately, elegant city is converted into a garrison. One of its sacred temples
turned into a nursury for dragooning. The old South Meeting House.
Though we do not superstitiously with the papists, maintain the doctrine of
the real holiness of places set apart for the worship of GOD, yet methinks such
a treatment of a place of public worship, indicates a most shameful, horrible
impiety, and a public mockery of the established religion of the country It may
with propriety be so spoken of, if it be ONLY considered that the laws
respecting it, have received the royal sanction.
. When I consider what a grave and respectable assembly were wont to worship in
that house, now so shamefully desecrated and polluted; when I reflect upon the
memories of the venerable WILLARD, PEMBERTON, SEWALL, PRINCE, and diverse
excellent young ministers Two of which, viz. the Rev. ALEXANDER CUMMING, and
the Rev. JOHN HUNT, have deceased in the midst of their days and usefulness. --
Two others, viz. the Rev. SAMUEL BLAIR, and the Rev. JOHN BACON, of respectable
characters, received a dismission at their own request.
since them, who have burnt and shone in that golden candlestick; of the pure,
spiritual worship all along therein maintained. I cannot but feel an inward
grief, as well as just indignation, at such a horrible sacrilegious treatment
of it -- not by Roman Catholics, but by those that profess the Protestant,
reformed religion.

IT may be further said with regard to that devoted City, that its harbor is
crowded with powerful ships of war. -- Its trade, navigation and fishery wholly
cut off. Military law established in it. Its Churches broken up. Its
inhabitants even the most rich and opulent among them mostly gone off, leaving
all their rich and valuable effects behind them, with but very little prospect
of ever recovering them. Its poor that were publicly supported, turned adrift
into the wide world. And many that were comfortable to live, through their
honest industry in their several occupations, now obliged to the public
charity. And those that remain, for the most part, reduced to the greatest
strait and wants, cut off from all those supplies that were wont to flow in to
them, and out of the reach of their friends and brethren in the country, who
have very sensibly felt for them, and would gladly have ministered to their
necessities, had it been at all practicable. But all communication being wholly
stopped, they are in danger of perishing the ensuing winter, by hunger and cold.

THIS is a true picture of that once distinguishedly happy town. Nor am I
sensible of having at all heightened the colors of it. Much of our blood has
been spilt in battles and skirmishes. There have been diverse captures of our
vessels, with their valuable cargoes. And two of our large, flourishing and
wealthy towns, CHARLESTOWN and FALMOUTH, in Casco-Bay. The inhabitants of the
former, had for sometime before deserted it, and removed their most valuable
effects; and so were in no capacity at all of annoying the regular troops. Had
they been in any danger from this quarter, especially after they become masters
of Bunker-hill, they might have had some plausible pretense to lay it waste. --
As to the latter, it is at a great distance from the seat of action, and being
without any fortification was not capable of making any defense. Nor was that
place specially obnoxious. Some may call this true heorism and generalship; but
all sober, impartial persons, must look upon the destruction of both, as the
effect of wantonness, not to say, cruelty and barbarity.
wantonly laid in ashes. And a settled plan to reduce all our seaports, they
can have access to, to the same condition. And if possible to penetrate into
the interior parts of the country, and to spread desolation and ruin far and
wide, without any distinction of persons; and then to bring the miserable,
enfeebled inhabitants that remain, into a state of the most abject servitude.

BUT I would now go to observe -- That notwithstanding such a dismal state of
things has taken place among us, yet we have abundant cause for praise and
thankfulness to GOD that he has intermixed so many mercies with this calamity,
so that our case is not as yet come quite forlorn and desperate, whatever it
may be in time to come; yea, that we may entertain some hope, at least, of
being ere long delivered from this calamity, and of being again restored to
peace and tranquillity.

I have mentioned various favorable circumstances with respect to other
calamities we have been visited with, the pestilence and drought. And many
favorable ones have there been with respect to the war, in which we are
unhappily involved.

THUS when they first commenced it upon us at Lexington and Concord, they found
our people, contrary to expectation, brave and resolute; and though few in
number, in compare with them, yet they were repulsed with great loss, and
disappointed of performing their enterprise. Their having thus waged war upon
us, If giving the first fire determines the point of commencing war, abundant
evidence has been exhibited both from the living and the dead, that they (near
a 1000 in number) commenced it upon our little handful at Lexington. However,
it has been justly obseved -- that "he that arms himself, to commit a robbery,
and demands the traveller's purse, by the terror of instant death, is the first
aggressor, though the other should take the advantage of discharging his pistol
first and killing the robber." -- Rev. President Langdon's Sermon before the
Provincial Congress, May 31, 1775.
at once roused not only this but all the colonies far and near: And they
immediately and readily poured in from all quarters to check and restrain them
from further onsets and violences. In consequence of which, they were soon
surrounded and hemmed in on every side, so that they have been in a besieged
state to this very day, and extremely drove, officers, from the highest to the
lowest, as well as privates, not only with respect to the delicacies, but even
the necessaries of life. Had they not been thus repulsed and restrained in the
beginning, in all probability great would have been the distress very soon in
the country towns. And this very town, it is with good reason supposed, was one
object in view in the excursion they made. But "the snare was broken, and we
have escaped. Blessed be the Lord, who gave us not a prey to their teeth."

THE affair of Charlestown, though they took from us, small in number in
compare with them (notwithstanding a contrary representation sent home) though,
I say, they took from us the ground and the works of a single night, yet it was
with amazing loss on their part, not only of privates, but of an uncommon
proportion of officers, and some of them of principal rank.

OUR Lines and impregnable fortresses, are now extended all around our capital,
which they have got possession of, and every preparation made to repel them in
case of an attack. Had an attack been practicable, no doubt it would have been
made before now. For it must be very humiliating to Britons who have been so
universally (and I will add, in times past, particular in the last war, among
the nations in Europe, so justly) celebrated for their gallantry, to be under
any restraint from raw, undisciplined Americans, of whose abilities they have
been wont to entertain the most contemptible idea, and upon whom they have been
wont to bestow the most opprobious names.

IT may be added, -- That GOD has raised up able and experienced Generals, who
have brought our army under a good regulation, and time has been given for
their acquiring and becoming very expert in the military art; nor are they
wanting in strength and agility of body, nor in manly courage and fortitude. A
remarkable state of health has prevailed in it. Notwithstanding multitudes
being visited with the Dysentry, yet few comparatively have been the instances
of mortality, not more perhaps, than if they had all tarried at home. A
remarkable union and harmony has ran throughout the whole. An abundant supply
of the necessary supports and comforts of life, has all along been flowing in
to them. Many of their vessels, with their rich freights, designed for our
annoyance, and their support and comfort have fallen into our hands. Not only
many vessels of theirs, laden with the richest wines, meat, grain and
vegetables, have from time to time fallen into our hands, and which they could
but poorly spare; but one, fraught with vast military stores, not easily to be
collected by us in our own land; a particular account of which has been
published, and most perhaps have seen.
And by our various operations, they have been greatly distressed. And the
necessity of the case has obliged us to distress them in all ways in our power.

To enfeeble, dispirit and distress an enemy, from whom nothing could be
expected but desolation and ruin, without submitting to abjectness of
condition, must be justified upon the plainest principles of reason.

A remarkable and unexpected union has taken place, throughout all the
colonies; and their several Delegates met in General Congress, who have had the
direction of our military affairs, have discovered a wonderful penetration,
sagacity, wisdom and sore-cast in all matters at this critical juncture, big
with the fate of America, and have rendered themselves worthy of the public
respect and gratitude.

I may add here as a favorable event in divine providence; that part of our
forces have been led to penetrate the country of Canada; that they have been
put into possession of several of their strong and important fortresses, and
that there is so promising a prospect of their becoming masters of the whole
country. Ticonderoga and Crown-Point, they soon became masters of with but
little opposition. The Forts of Chamblee and St. John's, after a short siege
surrendered. And presently, Montreal. They have very lately met with a repulse
at Quebec. Herein they have met with but the fortune of war, but they still
hope to carry their point there.
An important affair this -- as part of the plan for subduing us, it appears
probable from various circumstances, was to let loose the Canadians and
Indians, to act over upon our new settlements, and so gradually along from one
stage to another, the same bloody tragedy that they were wont formerly to do:
So placing us, as it were between two fires, from the one or the other of which
rendering our destruction unavoidable. But this plan, by our operations in the
country of Canada, bids fair, according to human prospect to be defeated, and
especially as the inhabitants thereof very generally manifest a friendly
disposition toward our people, and are ready to afford them all necessary
supplies.

So that from the various favorable events in the course of GOD'S providence in
this day of war and great calamity, we are furnished with abundant matter of
praise and thankfulness to his great name. It appears that though he is
chastising and correcting us, yet that he has not wholly cast off his people,
neither has forsaken his inheritance. And we may even now adopt the grateful
language of the redeemed Captives from BABYLON. "The Lord has done great
things for us, whereof we are glad." PSALM cxxvi. 3.
Upon a survey of his goodness in the many important instances of it, "his
praise should be continually in our mouths."

HOWEVER, though GOD has manifested his goodness toward us in this day of
evil, in the manner that has been said, yet we may not "boast as though we had
put off the harness." This we have but just "girded on." We may not expect any
thing properly miraculous in the course of GOD'S providence toward us, but
must look to the stated course of it. In his governing providence, he is wont
to make use of means and instruments, which are adapted to such and such ends.
Such and such causes are wont to produce their correspondent effects: Though it
is true, that he can, if in his wisdom he sees fit, suspend the influence of
natural causes. But we may in no case of a certainty, depend upon it, that he
will do so.

IT appears, that on the other side the water, no conciliatory measures have
been adopted, nor like to be so. Indeed GOD has the hearts of all men in his
hands, even of Kings and the great ones of the earth, and it is easy with him
to turn their hearts toward us. But what lengths it may please him the holy
and righteous governor of the world, to permit them to go, and how far he may
see fit further to chastise and punish us through their instrumentality, we
cannot tell. Considering our multiplied and aggravated iniquities against him
as a people, who have been so highly favored and distinguished by him, lifted
up to heaven in regard of privileges, civil and sacred -- Considering our
baseness and ingratitude, for his abundant goodness and loving kindness, may
not our flesh tremble for fear of him, and we be afraid, of his judgments, such
as shall be totally ruining and destroying, which we must acknowledge we have
justly exposed ourselves to? GOD has many ways in which he can destroy a
people. Indeed whenever he sees fit, he can do so, by an immediate act of his
almighty power. But he is wont to make use of instruments, and sometimes that
of the sword. This, as we have before observed, he has permitted our brethren
in Great Britain, to draw upon us. It is vastly unhappy, it cannot be too much
lamented, that we are thus at odds, with a people and nation, that we have been
so nearly connected with, who have been above all other nations dear to us,
being "bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh." -- Her glory has been great
and we have greatly rejoiced in it. Her moral state indeed has been very sad.
It is no unjust reflection upon her to say this. May not the holy GOD complain
over her, as he did over his ancient professing people, "Ah sinful nation, a
people laden with iniquity, a seed of evildoers, children that are corrupters"?
Isaiah i. 4.
What a prevalence of Deism and infidelity, profaneness and immorality,
dissipation, luxury, venality and corruption? This wretched, corrupt state has
long been complained of, with respect to that highly distinguished nation,
which has hereby justly exposed itself to exterminating judgments. Did that
"righteousness by which a nation, is exalted," generally prevail in it, such a
contest with the colonies, and the calamities consequent upon it, it is
probable, would not have taken place. And the unnatural, hostile, bloody
treatment of them at this day, may be looked upon, not as one of the least of
the heinous abominations she stands chargeable with in the sight of Heaven.

NOTWITHSTANDING the agency of GOD in calamitous events, such particularly, as
he has brought upon us, and the great and important ends he may have in view,
yet the instruments employed by him (intelligent, voluntary ones I mean) may be
actuated from very bad motives and principles, and may have it in their view to
answer very bad ends. And thererefore, they are highly culpable in the sight of
GOD. Thus it was as to Joseph's brethren in their unnatural treatment of him,
of which we read in the book of Genesis. -- They meant what they did unto him
"for evil," and they were thoroughly convinced of this in process of time, and
led in the anguish and bitterness of their hearts to acknowledge it. "GOD meant
all for good," as the event abundantly made evident. But this was no excuse for
their base conduct toward their own natural brother.

THE unnatural treatment we have met with from our brethren of Great Britain,
is unjustifiable in them and very culpable, whatever may be said of the
superintending providence of GOD, and the great and wise ends he proposes to
answer upon the whole. May a gracious GOD reform all her national errors and
vices, and make her "a holy nation, a peculiar people" to himself; and
mercifully prepare the way for an happy, lasting and honorable accommodation
to take place between them and us. War, it has been observed in this discourse
is a fore calamity. No one acting upon the principles of christianity, which,
like its author, breathes nothing but peace and good will to men; or even upon
the principles of common humanity, can "delight in it." Lucrative commissions,
high dignities and honors will weigh nothing against these principles duly
exercised. Thus far we may freely say, as to the Americans, that they do not
engage in the present war of choice and with delight. They regret the shedding
a drop of British blood. -- They are not disposed to lavish away their OWN
blood and treasure, merely for the sake of doing so. They are not chargeable
with such wretched absurdity as this. Nothing but the great law of
self-preservation, which is paramount to all the laws of civil establishments,
puts them upon drawing the sword. They would have rejoiced to have continued in
harmony with the parent state and they earnestly wish the restoration of that
harmony. The very idea of rebellion against their sovereign is abhorrent to
them. -- When a rebellion actually existed in North-Britain, in 1746, levelled
directly against the crown and dignity of his late Majesty George II. of
glorious memory, by attempting to introduce the pretender to the throne, his
loyal subjects in America, were universally fired with a just indignation at
the daring attempt. They stood ready to sacrifice their lives and fortunes in
support of their sovereign. They rejoiced when that unnatural rebellion was
suppressed under the victorious arms of his royal Highness WILLIAM, Duke of
Cumberland. They kept days of public Thanksgiving to acknowledge the great
goodness of GOD in interposing in that affair. And they ever remained his
dutiful and loyal Subjects afterward. At his decease, they testified their
lamentations in every public way, -- and then heartily transferred their fealty
and allegiance to their new Sovereign, his royal Successor George the Third.
All joined to hail his accession to the throne of his royal ancestors, and to
say "Let the King live for ever." And as they have never been disposed to
strike at his crown and dignity, but agreeable to the inspired direction, to
"(...)" him, so they cannot but be deeply affected that they lie under his
frowns. They desire nothing more, than to enjoy fully and unimpairedly the
benefits of that excellent civil constitution, at which he is placed at the
head by the providence of the great sovereign of the world, and that in order
to its full support and establishment, and that they enjoy inviolate, those
charter-rights and privileges, which were (...) to them by the royal faith of
the illustrious William and Mary. They have been happy, and rejoiced in their
happiness, in being connected with Great Britain. They do not desire to be
unconnected with or independent on her, but only to enjoy, what they think they
have an unalienable right to; their constitutional and charter rights and
privileges. In this view of the case they desire to leave their cause with that
GOD, who judges righteously They therefore cannot with any justice to
themselves, yield to the charge of rebellion, and look upon themselves as
greatly injured in being treated as though they were actually engaged in one.
However, I would observe, our case is not as yet desperate. We may hope in
GOD, that the event of all will be comfortable and happy to us. Hitherto, many
have been the favorable events of GOD'S providence, as we have particularly
mentioned them at this time. So that without being over anxious as to futurity,
we have great cause for thankfulness and praise to GOD. We have in all times
past had occasion to praise him, to do so "continually" as in our text. And
such we have at present, notwithstanding all gloomy circumstances that have and
do attend us. -- And we are met together this day in this public manner to
celebrate the praises of a kind and merciful GOD toward us as a community. --
Upon a survey of the goodness of GOD in the various instances of it,
notwithstanding all our unworthiness, let us see to it, that our hearts are
warmed with love and gratitude to Him. And let it not content us merely to
speak his praises -- let not any merely outward professions of gratitude
satisfy us; but in addition hereto, let us live the praises of the Most High;
putting away every evil and transgression, so provoking to GOD, and procuring
his judgments; devoting ourselves to his service and glory; looking to him,
that for the sake of his son Jesus, all past disobedience may be forgiven, and
that he would vouchsafe the vital influences of his blessed spirit to enable us
to a hearty return to him, and to the love and practice of all that duty and
service which he requires and expects from us. -- This would be to praise GOD
in the most genuine, substantial manner; and this would be an acceptable
sacrifice to him through Jesus Christ: And if we and this whole people could be
brought to this, we might then safely leave ourselves with GOD, commit our
cause to him, nothing doubting but that he would plead and maintain it. If we
are on GOD'S side, we may then depend upon it, that he will be on ours, and
then more is with us and for us, than can be against us. We need not then fear,
but that he would be with us, as he was with our fathers, (and he was with them
many a time, in their greatest straits and exigencies, such was their faith and
prayer and engagedness in his service) and never leave us nor forsake us. And
we might then take the comfort of that word with which I close the discourse,
-- Psalm 50, last verse, Whose offers praise, glorifieth me, and to him that
orders his conversation aright will I show the salvation of GOD.

THE publication of this discourse being unexpectedly delayed till now, the
author would just observe, that by our various operations, particularly upon
Dorchester heights, they were thrown into terror and confusion, and made a
precipitate and inglorious retreat, March 17th, even as they had suffered a
long, disgraceful besiegement -- leaving behind them all the marks of the most
cruel capacity, and even Turkish inhumanity.


