THE TRUE INTEREST OF BRITAIN, SET FORTH IN REGARD TO THE COLONIES; And the
only MEANS of Living in PEACE and HARMONY with THEM, Including Five different
Plans, for effecting this desirable Event.

By JOS. TUCKER, D. D. DEAN of GLOUCESTER. Author of the Essay on the Advantages
and Disadvantages which respectively attend France and Great Britain, with
regard to Trade.

To which is Added by the PRINTER, A few more WORDS, on the FREEDOM of the
PRESS in AMERICA.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed, and Sold, by ROBERT BELL, in Third-Street, MDCCLXXVI.

THE True INTEREST OF GREAT BRITAIN SET FORTH In REGARD TO THE COLONIES; And
the only MEANS of Living in Peace and Harmony with them: Including, FIVE
different PLANS For Effecting this Salutary Measure.
A VERY strange notion is now industriously spreading, that 'till the late
unhappy Stamp Act, there were no bickerings and discontents, no heart-burnings
and jealousies subsisting between the Colonies and the Mother Country. It
seems, 'till that fatal period, all was harmony, peace and love. Now it is
scarcely possible even for the most superficial observer, if his knowledge
extends beyond the limits of a Newspaper, not to know, "that this is entirely
false." And if he is at all conversant in the history of the Colonies, and has
attended to the accounts of their original Plantation, their rise and progress,
he must know, that almost from the very beginning, there were mutual
discontents, mutual animosities and reproaches. Indeed, while these Colonies
were in a mere state of infancy, dependent on their Mother Country not only for
daily protection, but almost for daily bread, it cannot be supposed that they
would give themselves the same airs of self-sufficiency and independence, as
they did afterward, in proportion as they grew up to a state of maturity. But
that they began very early to show no other marks of attachment to their
ancient parent, than what arose from views of self-interest and self-love, many
convincing proofs might be drawn from the complaints of, and the instructions
to the Governors of the respective Provinces; from the memorials of our Boards
of Trade, presented from time to time to his Majesty's Privy Council against
the behavior of the Colonists; from the frequent petitions and remonstrances
of our Merchants and Manufacturers to the same effect; and even from the votes
and resolutions of several of their Provincial Assemblies against the interest,
laws, and Government of the Mother Country; yet I will wave all these at
present, and content myself with proofs still more authentic and
unexceptionable; I mean the public Statutes of the Realm: For from them it
evidently appears, that long before there were any thoughts of the Stamp Act,
the Mother Country had the following accusations to bring against the Colonies,
viz. 1st, that they refused to submit to her ordinances and regulations in
regard to Trade. -- 2dly, that they attempted to frame Laws, and to erect
Jurisdiction not only independently of her, but even in direct opposition to
her authority. -- And 3dly, that many of them took unlawful methods to skreen
themselves from paying the just debts they owed to the Merchants and
Manufacturers of Great Britain.

These are the objections of the Mother Country to the behavior of the
colonies long before their last outrages, and their present conduct: -- For
even as early as the year 1670, it does appear, that MANY COMPLAINTS (the very
words of the Act) had been made against the AMERICAN Proprietors of Ships and
Vessels, for engaging in Schemes of Traffic, contrary to the regulations
contained in the act of Navigagation, and in other statutes of the Realm made
for confining the trade of the Colonies to the Mother Country. Nay, so sensible
was the Parliament above an hundred Years ago, that Prosecutions for the breach
of those laws would be to little or no effect, if carried on in AMERICAN
Courts, or before AMERICAN Juries, that it is expressly ordained, It shall, it
may be lawful for any person or persons to prosecute such Ship or Vessel
[offending as described in the preceding Section] in any Court of Admiralty in
England; the one moiety of the forfeiture, in case of condemnation, to be to
his Majesty, his Heirs, and successors; and the other Moiety to such Prosecutor
or Prosecutors thereof. See 22 and 23 of Chapter II. Cap. 26. 12 and 13.] And we
find, that two years afterward, viz. 25 of Chapter II. Cap. 7, the same complaints
were again renewed; and in consequence thereof higher duties and additional
penalties were laid on, for the more effectually enforcing of the observance of
this and of the former laws: But in spite of all that was done, things grew
worse and worse every day. For it is observable, that in the year 1696, the
very authority of the English Legislature, for making such laws and
regulations, seemed to have been called in question; which authority,
therefore, the Parliament was obliged to assert in terms very peremptory; --
and I may likewise add, very prophetical. The Law made on this occasion was the
famous Statute of the 7th and 8th of William III. Cap. 7 wherein, after the
recital of diverse acts made for the encouragement of the Navigation of this
Kingdom, and for the better securing and regulating the Plantation Trade, it is
remarked, that notwithstanding such laws, great abuses are daily committed, to
the prejudice of the English Navigation, and the Loss of great part of the
Plantation trade to this Kingdom, by the artifice and cunning of ill-disposed
Persons. Then, having prescribed such remedies as these great evils seemed to
require, the Act goes on at. 7. to ordain, That all the penalties and
Forfeitures before mentioned, not in this act particularly disposed of, shall
be one third part to the use of his Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors, and one
third part to the Governor of the Colony of Plantation where the offense shall
be committed, and the other third part to such person or persons as shall sue
for the same, to be recovered in any of his majesty's courts at Westminster, or
in the kingdom of Ireland, or in the courts of Admiralty held in his majesty's
Plantations respectively, where such offense shall be committed, "at the
pleasure of the Officer or Informer, or in any other Plantation belonging to
any subject of England wherein no Essoin, protection, or wager of Law shall be
allowed; and that where any question shall arise concerning the importation or
exportation of any goods into or out of the said plantations, in such case the
proof shall lie upon the owner or claimer; and the claimer shall be reputed to
be the importer or owner thereof.

Now here it is obvious to every reader, that the suspicions which the
Parliament had formerly conceived of the partiality of American Courts, and
American Juries in trials at Law with the Mother Country, were so far from
being abated by length of time, that they were grown higher than ever; because
it appears by this very act, that the power of the Officer or Informer was
greatly enlarged, having the option now granted him of three different
Countries for prosecuting the offense; whereas in the former of Charles II.
made 16 years before, he had only two. Moreover it was this time further
ordained, that the Onus probandi should rest on the defendant, and also that no
An Essoin signifies, in Law, a pretense or excuse.
Essoin, Protection. or A Wager at Law, is a power granted to the Defendant to
swear, together with other COMPURGATORS, that he owes nothing to the Plaintiff
in the manner set forth. -- It is easy to see what use would have been made of
such a power had it been allowed.
Wager of law should be allowed him.

But above all, and in order to prevent, if possible every sort of chicane for
the future, and to frustrate all attempts of the Colonies, either to throw off
or evade the power and jurisdiction of the Mother Country, -- It was at 9.
further enacted and declared by the authority aforesaid, that all Laws,
Bye-Laws, Usages, or Customs, at this time, or which hereafter shall be in
practice, or endeavored, or pretended to be in force or practice, in any of
the said Plantations, which are in any wise repugnant to the before mentioned
Laws, or any of them, so far as they do relate to the said Plantations, or any
of them, or which are any ways repugnant to this present Act, or to any other
law hereafter to be made in this KINGDOM, so far as such Law shall relate to,
and mention the said Plantations, are ILLEGAL, Null, and Void to all INTENTS
and PURPOSES Whatsoever.

Words could be hardly devised to express the sentiments of the English
Legislature, more fully and strongly, than these have done: And if ever a body
of uninspired Men were endowed with a spirit of Divination, or of foreseeing,
and also of providing against untoward future events, as far as human prudence
could extend, the King, Lords, and Commons of the Era 1696, were the very Men.
For they evidently foresaw, that a time was approaching, when the Provincial
assemblies would dispute the Right of AMERICAN Sovereignty with the great and
general Council of the BRITISH Empire: And therefore they took effectual care
that, whenever the time came, no law, no precedent, nor prescription, should be
wanting, whereby the Mother Country might assert her constitutional and
inherent right over the Colonies.

But notwithstanding these wise Precautions, some of the Colonies found ways
and means to evade the Force and meaning even of this express law; at least for
a time, and 'till the Legislature could be sufficiently apprized of the injury
designed. The Colonists, who practiced these disingenuous arts with most
success, were those who were endowed with chartered Governments, and who in
consequence of the extraordinary favors thereby indulged them, could nominate
or elect their own Council, and (if my memory does not fail me) their own
Governors likewise; -- at least, who could grant such salaries to their
Governors, and with such limitations, as would render them too dependent on the
will and pleasure of their Pay-Masters. Hence therefore it came to pass, that
in the Colonies of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, Connecticut, the
Massachuset's Bay, and New Hampshire; the Governors of these Provinces suffered
themselves to be persuaded to give their sanction to certain Votes and
Resolulutions of their Assemblies and Councils; whereby laws were enacted first
to issue out bills of Credit to a certain amount, and then to make a tender of
those bills to be considered as an adequate discharge of debts, and a legal
release from payment. A most compendious method this for getting out of debt!
And were the like artifice to be authorized every where, I think it is very
evident, that none but the most stupid Idiot would be incapable of discharging
his debts, bonds, or obligations; and that too without advancing any money.

However, as soon as the British Legislature came to be fully apprised of this
scheme of iniquity, they passed a Law, to regulate and restrain paper Bills of
Credit in his Majesty's Colonies or Plantations, of Rhode Island and Providence
Plantations, Connecticut, the Massachusetts Bay, and New Hampshire in America;
and to prevent the same being legal tenders in payments of money. -- This is
the very title of the Statute; but for further particulars, and for the
different regulations therein contained, consult the act itself, 24th of George
II. Cap. 53, Anno 1751.

Now will any Man after this dare to say, that the Stamp Act was the first
cause of dissension between the Mother Country and her Colonies? Will any Man
still persist in maintaining so gross a Paradox, that 'till that fatal period,
the Colonies showed no reluctance to submit to the commercial regulations, no
disposition to contest the authority, and no desire to question the right of
the Mother Country? The man who can maintain these paradoxes, is incapable of
conviction, and therefore is not to be reasoned with any longer. But the
Stamp Act made bad to become worse: -- The Stamp Act irritated and inflamed,
and greatly increased all those ill humors, which were but too predominant
before. Granted; and I will further add, that any other act, or any other
measure, of the British Government, as well as the Stamp Act, if it were to
compel the Colonists to contribute a single shilling toward the general
expense of the British Empire, would have had the same effect. For, be it ever
remembered, that the Colonists did not so much object to the mode of this
taxation, as to the right itself of levying taxes. Nay, their friends and
agents here in England were known to have frequently declared, that if any tax
were to be crammed down their throats without their consent, and by an
authority which they disallowed, they had rather pay this Stamp-Duty than
another.

BUT indeed, and properly speaking, it was not the Stamp Act which increased or
heightened these ill humors in the Colonists; rather, it was the reduction of
Canada, which called forth those dispositions into action which had long been
generating before; and which were ready to burst forth at the first opportunity
that should offer. For an undoubted fact it is, that from the moment in which
Canada came into the possession of the English, an end was put to the
Sovereignty of the Mother Country over her Colonies. They had then nothing to
fear from a foreign enemy; and as to their own domestic friends and relations,
they had for so many years preceding been accustomed to trespass upon their
forbearance and indulgence, even when they most wanted their protection, that
it was no wonder they should openly renounce an authority which they never
thorougly approved of, and which now they found to be no longer necessary for
their own defense.

BUT here some may be apt to ask, Had the Colonies no provocation on their
part? And was all the fault on one side, and none on the other? Probably not:
-- probably there were faults on both sides. But what does this serve to prove?
If to exculpate the Colonies in regard to their present refractory behavior,
it is needless. For I am far from charging our Colonies in particular with
being sinners above others; because I believe (and If I am wrong, let the
history of all Colonies, whether ancient or modern, from the days of THUCYDIDES
down to the present time, confute me if it can; I say, till that is done I
believe) that it is the nature of them all to aspire after Independence, and to
set up for themselves as soon as ever they find that they are able to subsist,
without being beholden to the Mother Country. And if our Americans have
expressed themselves sooner on this head than others have done, or in a more
direct and daring manner, this ought not to be imputed to any greater
malignity, or ingratitude in them, than in others, but to that bold free
constitution, which is the prerogative and boast of us all. We ourselves derive
our origin from those very SAXONS; who inhabited the lower parts of Germany;
and yet I think it is sufficiently evident, that we are not over complaisant to
the descendants of these lower SAXONS, i. e. to the offspring of our own
Progenitors; nor can we, with any color of reason, pretend to complain that
even the Bostonians have treated us more indignantly than we have treated the
Hanoverians. What then would have been the case, if the little insignificant
Electorate of Hanover had presumed to retain a claim of Sovereignty over such a
Country as Great Britain, the pride and Mistress of the Ocean? And yet, I
believe, that in point of extent of Territory, the present Electoral Dominions,
insignificant as they are sometimes represented, are more than a moiety of
England, exclusive of Scotland and Wales: whereas the whole Island of Great
Britain, is scarcely a twentieth part of those vast Regions which go under the
denomination of North America.

Besides, if the American Colonies belonging to France or Spain, have not yet
set up for Independence, or thrown off the masque so much as the English
Colonies have done, -- what is this superior reserve to be imputed to? Not to
any greater filial tenderness in them for their respective ancient Parents than
in others; -- not to motives of any national gratitude, or of national honor;
-- but because the constitution of each of those Parent States is much more
arbitrary and despotic than the constitution of Great Britain; and therefore
their respective offsprings are But notwithstanding this awe, it is now pretty
generally known, that the French Colonists of Hispaniola endeavored lately to
shake off the Government of Old France, and applied to the British Court for
that purpose.
awed by the dread of punishments from breaking forth into those outrages which
ours dare do with impunity. Nay more, the very Colonies of France and Spain,
though they have not yet thrown off their allegiance, are nevertheless as
forward as any in disobeying the Laws of their Mother-Countries, wherever they
find an interest in so doing. For the truth of this fact, I appeal to that
prodigious clandestine Trade which they are continually carrying on with us,
and with our Colonies, contrary to the express prohibitions of France and
Spain: And I appeal also to those very free ports which the British Legislature
itself has lately opened for accommodating these smuggling colonists to trade
with the subjects of Great Britain, in Disobedience to the injunction of their
Mother-Countries.

Enough surely has been said on this subject; and the upshot of the whole
matter is plainly this, -- That even the arbitrary and despotic Governments of
France and Spain (arbitrary I say, both in temporals and in spirituals)
maintain their authority over their American Colonies but very imperfectly; in
as much as they cannot restrain them from breaking through those rules and
regulations of exclusive trade; for the sake of which all Colonies seemed to
have been originally founded. What then shall we say in regard to such Colonies
as are the offspring of a free constitution? And after what manner, or
according to what rule, are our own in particular to be governed, without using
any force or compulsion, or pursuing any measure repugnant to their own ideas
of civil or religious Liberty? In short, and to sum up all, in one word, how
shall we be able to render these Colonies more subservient to the interests,
and more obedient to the laws and government of the Mother Country, than they
voluntarily choose to be? After having pondered and revolved the affair over and
over, I confess, there seems to me to be but the five following proposals,
which can possibly be made, viz.

1st, To suffer things to go on for a while, as they have lately done, in hopes
that some favorable opportunity may offer for recovering the jurisdiction of
the BRITISH Legislature over her Colonies, and for maintaining the authority of
the Mother Country. -- Or if these temporising measures should be found to
strengthen and confirm the evil, instead of removing it; -- then,

2dly, To attempt to persuade the Colonies to send over a certain number of
Deputies, or Representatives, to sit and vote in the BRITISH parliament; in
order to incorporate AMERICA and GREAT BRITAIN into one common Empire, -- Or if
this Proposal should be found impracticable, whether on account of the
Difficulties attending it on this side of the Atlantic, or because that the
Americans themselves would not concur in such a measure; then,

3dly, To declare open War against them as Rebels and Revolters; and after
having made a perfect Conquest of the Country, then to govern it by Military
Force and despotic sway. -- Or if this scheme should be judged (as it ought to
be) the most destructive, and the least eligible of any; -- then,

4thly, To propose to consent that AMERICA should become the General Seat of
Empire; and that Great Britain and Ireland should be governed by Viceroys sent
over from the Court Residencies, either at Philadelphia or New York, or at some
other American imperial City, -- Or if this plan of Accommodation should be
ill-digested by home-born Englishmen, who, I will venture to affirm, would
never submit to such an Indignity; -- then,

5thly, To propose to separate entirely from the Colonies, by declaring them to
be a free and Independent People, over whom we lay no Claim; and then by
offering to guarantee this Freedom and Independence against all foreign
Invaders whomsoever.

Now these being all the plans which, in the nature of things, seem capable of
being proposed, let us examine each of them in their order.

FIRST PLAN.
And 1st, as to that which recommends the suffering all things to go on as they
have lately done, in hopes that some favorable opportunity may arise hereafter
for recovering the jurisdiction, and vindicating the honor of the
Mother Country.

This first proposal is very unhappy at first setting out; because it takes
that for granted, which history and experience prove to be false. It supposes,
that Colonies may become the more obedient, in proportion as they are suffered
to grow the more headstrong, and to feel their own strength and independence;
than which supposition there cannot be a more palpable absurdity. For if a
father is not able to govern his son at the ages of 14 or 16 years, how can it
be supposed that he will be better able when the youth is become a man of full
age and stature, in the vigor of health and strength, and the parent perhaps
more feeble and decrepid than he was before? Besides, it is a fact, that the
Colonies, from almost one end of North America to the other, have already
revolted from under the jurisdiction of the British Legislature; -- each House
of Assembly has already arrogated to themselves a new name, by stilling
themselves an HOUSE OF COMMONS; in consequence of which style and title, they
have already declared, that the British House of Commons neither has, nor
ought to have, any right to intermeddle in their concerns. Now, after they have
advanced thus far already, what Rhetoric would you use for calling these
revolters back? And is it at all probable, that the Provincial Assemblies would
be induced by the force of oratory to renounce their own importance, and to
acknowledge that to be a crime, which both they, and the people whom they
represent, glory as in their birthright and unalienable prerogative? The man
who can suppose these things, must have a most extraordinary opinion of his own
eloquence.

BUT here perhaps some may be inclined to ask, Why would you meddle with the
Colonies at all? And why not suffer things to remain in statu quo? The obvious
answer to which questions is this, -- That it is not the Mother Country which
meddles with the Colonies, but the Colonies which meddle with the
Mother Country: For they will not permit her to govern in the manner she ought
to do, and according to the original terms of the constitution; but are making
encroachments on her authority every day. Moreover as they increase in riches,
strength, and numbers, their civil and military establishments must necessarily
increase likewise; and seeing that this circumstance is unavoidable, who is to
defray the growing expenses of these increasing and thriving Colonies? The
Colonies themselves you will naturally say, because none are so fit, and none
so able: And perhaps some American advocates will likewise add, That the
Colonies do not refuse to defray these expenses, provided they shall be the
sole judges of the quantum to be raised, or the mode of raising it, and of the
manner of its application. But here lies the difficulty, which remains yet to
be solved: For if the Colonies are to be allowed to be the sole judges in these
matters, the sovereignty of the British Legislature is entirely at an end; and
these Colonies become in fact, as much independent of their Mother Country, as
we are independent of Hanover, or Hanover of us; -- only indeed with this
difference (which an American always chooses to forget) That whereas we lay a
duty on all raw materials coming from the Electoral Dominions, we give a bounty
on those which are imported from the Colonies. Besides, many will be apt to
ask, could not this matter be compromised in some degree? And will nothing less
content the Colonies than a total revolt from under the jurisdiction of the
Mother Country? -- Some well-meaning persons have proposed, that each Colony,
like each County here in England, should be allowed to raise taxes for its own
internal uses, whilst the British parliament, the sovereign council of the
British Empire, should preside over the whole; and therefore should enact such
laws for the levying of those general taxes, which are to be applied for the
common protection, the good, and benefit of all. But the misfortune is, that
the Colonies will not consent to this partition of power and jurisdiction;
consequently any scheme of this nature is utterly impracticable. Indeed the
late Stamp Act itself was no other than a part of this very scheme: For the
money to be raised by that tax, was to be applied to the sole use of the
Colonies, and to be expended no where else but in the Colonies. Nay it was not
the moiety, nor yet the third, nor the fourth part of the sum which
Great Britain was to have raised on the same account, and to have expended in
the same Provinces: -- So anxious was the ancient indulgent parent not to lay
too heavy a burden on her favorite children. But alas! Favorites of all kinds
seldom make those returns of gratitude and obedience, which might be expected.
For even as to that boasted loyalty, which the colonies have hitherto
professed, to maintain toward his Majesty King George, -- this stands, and
must stand, according to their present political system, on as precarious a
footing as any of the rest of our claims. For if the British parliaments have
no right to make laws to bind the Colonies, they certainly ought not to be
allowed to prescribe to them "who shall be their King; -- much less ought they
to pretend to a right of enacting, That it shall be a most capital offense,
even "high treason" itself, in a colonist to dare to controvert the title of
any prince, or any family, to the American throne, whom the British Parliament
shall place thereon.

BESIDES, some of those lower Houses of Assemblies (which each Province now
affects to call its House of Commons) have already proceeded to greater lengths
of sovereignty and independence than a British House of Commons ever presumed
to do except in the days of the grand rebellion. For they have already
arrogated to themselves a power of disposing, as well as of raising the public
moneys, without the consent of the other branches of the legislature; which is,
in fact, nothing less than the erection of so many sovereign and independent
Democracies. Nay more, there is a general combination and confederacy entered
into among them all: For each House of Assembly has lately appointed a
standing committee for corresponding with the standing committees of other
Provinces, in order the more effectually to oppose the authority and
jurisdiction of the Mother Country.

WHAT then is to be done in such a case? Evident it is beyond a dispute, that
timid and temporising measures serve to no other purpose but that of confirming
the colonies in their opposition, and strengthening them in their present
revolt.

PLAN Second.
WHEREFORE the 2d proposal is, To attempt to persuade the Colonies to send over
a certain number of Representatives to sit and vote in the BRITISH Parliaments,
in order to incorporate AMERICA and GREAT BRITAIN into one common Empire.

See a Pamphlet, -- Considerations on the Expediency of admitting
Representatives from the AMERICAN Colonies into the British House of Commons.
-- LONDON, printed "for B. WHITE, 1770.
THIS is the scheme of a very worthy gentleman, eminently versed in the laws and
constitution of Great Britain, and what is still better, a real, not a
pretended Patriot. Let us therefore examine it with as much respect and
deference to his opinion, as the cause of truth will permit; which I am well
persuaded, is full as much as he would require.

HE begins with observing very justly, page 4. That the subjects of the Crown
of Great Britain, must (i. e. ought to) continue to be so in every respect, in
all parts of the world, where they live under the protection of the British
Government; and that their crossing the Atlantic Ocean with the King's license,
and residing in America for the purposes of trade, cannot affect their legal
subjection to the governing powers of the community to which they belong.

BUT yet he observes, that the total want of Representatives in the great
Council of the nation, to support their interests, and give an assent on their
behalf to laws and taxes by which they are bound and affected, is a misfortune,
which every friend to liberty and equal government must be sorry to see them
labor under, and from which he must wish them to be relieved in a regular and
constitutional manner, if such relief can possibly be afforded them, without
breaking the unity of the British Government.

He therefore proceeds, at page 10, to propose his scheme for remedying this
misfortune; viz That about eighty persons might be admitted to sit in
Parliament, as members of the Commons House of Parliament for all the Kings's
Dominions in America, the West Indies, as well as North America; and that their
Style and Title should be "The Commissioners of the Colonies of AMERICA." After
this he goes on to fix the numbers requisite to represent each Colony, their
qualification, and the mode of their election; also the time of their
continuing in office, and the manner of their being re-elected, or superseded
by others, if that should be judged necessary: In all which, though the proposals
are not quite consistent with the unity of the British Government, yet as he
has obviated the principal difficulties, it would be both ill-natured and
unjust to spy out every small fault, or to magnify objections.

But when he comes to give us the form, the Extent and the limitation of these
Commissions; nay, when he proposes to circumscribe the authority and
jurisdiction of the British Parliament itself, even after it has been
strengthened by the accession of these Colony-Representatives; there, I humbly
apprehend, the importance of the subject should preponderate ever more
deference and complaisance. Nay I will go still further, and add, that if the
measures proposed should be shown to have a tendency to beget endless
jealousies, quarrels, and divisions, between the Mother Country and the
Colonies, instead of proving a means of reconciliation, and a center of union,
the Gentleman himself, I am fully persuaded, would be among the first in
rejecting his own plan. Let us therefore now descend into particulars.

And 1st, it is proposed, page 11, that they (the commissioners) should receive
a commission in writing from their Electors, viz. (the QUIRE, Whether it is
intended that the Lower Houses in each Assembly should have the sole Right of
voting for these Commissioners? Or both Houses jointly? If the former, then the
Colony Governments would become still more democratical than they now are, though
already so, to such an excessive degree, as to be almost incompatible with an
idea of Monarchy, but if each House is to vote separately, what jars and
factions, and reciprocal reproaches, would this occasion! And how would they be
able to agree? In short, either way, the prospect is alarming!
Assemblies in each Province) impowering them to sit and vote in the British
House of Commons, and consult with the King, and the Great Men of the Kingdom,
and the Commons of the same in Parliament assembled, upon the great affairs of
the Nation, and to CONSENT on the behalf of the Province, for which they were
chosen, to such things as shall be ordained in Parliament, etc.

Now this Form might pass very well among ourselves at Home, where the majority
are not continually on the watch to spy out every flaw, real or imaginary: But
in regard to the Colonists, and especially an Assembly of Colonists, the case
is widely different; For it is well known that their wits are perpetually at
work to avail themselves even of the shadow of an Argument to oppose the Right
and Authority of the Mother Country. Therefore they will immediately seize on
the words impowering and consent, and reason after the following fallacious
manner: -- The Assemblies who elected the Commissioners, have a Right to
instruct them; and these Instructions, when properly drawn up, are no other
than so many trusts or powers granted to them from Time to time, by the
assembly which elected them; which Assembly has therefore a Right to contract
or enlarge their Commission, as they shall find it to be the Interest of the
Province so to do. Consequently, if these Commissioners should at any Time Vote
contrary to their instructions, that is, to their commission, it follows, that
in these respects they have exceeded the bounds prescribed by their Electors.
Therefore, being themselves prohibited from voting, and having no authority to
vote in such a Question, every Law wherein they gave their suffrage, affecting
the Interests of the Colonies in general, or any province in particular, is
IPSO FACTO Null and Void. AGAIN. -- The Colony Commissioners are to give their
consent in behalf of the Province for which they are chosen, to such things as
shall be ordained in Parliament. This is the Foundation and Cornerstone of all
the Building: and therefore, if such commissioners did not give their consent
in behalf of the Provinces for which they were chosen, then it follows, of
course that no law, affecting the interests of such respective Provinces, is
obligatory, no tax due or payable, nor any regulations made by the pretended
authority of the British Parliament without the consent of such commissioners,
are to be at all regarded by the American Electors. -- These are a few of those
blessed conclusions, which the Politicians on the other side of the Atlantic
will certainly draw from the terms and expressions contained in such a form.
And what is still worse, both our own hair-brained Republicans, and our Mock
Patriots at Home will as certainly adopt the same language, and echo back the
same specious, though false allegations, from one end of the Kingdom to the
other. Indeed many there are, even among ourselves, who with the most honest
and upright intentions, are at a loss at present how to disintangle themselves
from these fallacious reasonings. For having unhappily learnt in Newspaper
Dissertations, and from coffee-house harangues, that the Deputies sent to the
great Council of the Nation, are the mere Attorneys of those who elected them;
-- the inference is but natural, that these Attorneys ought to do as they are
bid; and that in case of competition, they ought not to prefer their own
private opinions to the judgments of their constituents. -- I say, this
inference is natural; nay it is necessary, just, and true, were the premises
but true from whence it is deduced.

Wherefore, having often had the advantage of hearing no less a person than the
late excellent Judge Foster, that true friend to all reasonable liberty, civil
and religious, -- I say, having often heard him discoursing on the rise and
origin of parliaments, I will venture to lay his state of the case before my
reader, hoping that it may remove all his difficulties (if he has any) and work
the same fullness of conviction in his mind, which it did in mine.

To reason accurately, said this upright and able lawyer, on the origin of
Parliaments, we must trace the matter up to its constituent principles. Now the
first idea which strikes one on this occasion is, that of a large Assembly of
different tribes of warriors, either preparing for some military expedition, or
got together, after a victory, to share the booty and divide the lands among
the conquerors. When all are met together in one place, they choose a Committee
for managing their affairs; having found it impracticable to transact any
business of consequence in any other way. Now this Committee, chosen by the
whole Nation, actually assembled, gives us the first rude draught of a National
Parliament, or a National Council. But in process of time, and when the Nation
had made large conquests, and was cantoned into distant provinces, it was found
to be extremely inconvenient to assemble the whole Nation totogether into one
place. Therefore the next, and indeed the only expedient, was, that each canton
or each district, which could assemble should be authorized to elect a deputy,
or deputies, "not for itself alone, that is the grand mistake" but for the
Nation at large which could not assemble; and the powers to be granted to such
deputy or deputies, were just the same as the nation would have granted to
them, had it been actually assembled. Hence therefore it comes to pass, that
each deputy represents the whole Nation in general, as much as if he had been
elected by the whole Nation; and consequently such a deputy is the Attorney,
(if he must be called by by that name) not of any one particular Tribe, Society
or District, but of the whole collectively: So that it becomes the duty of his
office to take care of the interests of all the people in general, because he
represents them all. In short, he cannot consistently with the duty which he
owes to the whole pay any deference to the request, instruction, remonstrance,
or memorial, of his particular electors, except in such cases only wherein he
is convinced in his conscience, that the measures, which they require him to
pursue, are not incompatible with the public good.

Thus far this great Judge of the British constitution. And though many important
inferences might be drawn from hence, which would effectually remove those
difficulties, with which the Subject has of late been artfully and studiously
perplexed (and particularly in the case of the expulsion Surely the Nation
might have expelled Mr. Wilkes, or have struck his name out of the list of
Committee, had it been assembled, and had it thought proper so to do. What then
should hinder the Deputies of the Nation from doing the same thing? And which
ought to prevail in this case, the Nation in general, or the County of
MIDDLESEX?
of a Member of the House of Commons) yet I shall content myself with one
general remark at present; viz. That as each class of Men, each Society or
District, throughout the British Empire, are as much represented by those
deputies, whom they did not personally elect, as they are by those whom they
did; it therefore follows, that there is no need, that the deputies,
particularly elected by them, should give their personal consent to any acts of
the Legislature; because a vote of the majority is in fact a vote of the Nation
to all intents and purposes.

But it is now high time to atttend to another part of this Gentleman's plan
for admitting Commissioners from the Colonies to sit and vote in the British
House of Commons.

And that is, 2dly the extent of their commission, and indeed the boundary line
prescribed to the British Parliament itself, whenever it shall interfere in
American affairs. For it seems (see p. 14.) That this legislative power of
Parliament should be exercised but seldom, and on occasions of great necessity.
Whatever related to the internal government of any particular Colony (such as
raising the necessary taxes for the support of its civil government, passing
laws for building bridges, or Churches, or Barracks, or other public Edifices)
should be left to the Governor and Assembly of that Colony to transact among
themselves, unless in cases where the domestic dissentions of the Colony put a
stop to public business, and created a kind of necessity for the interposition
of the supreme Legislature. But when any general Tax was to be imposed upon all
the American Colonies for the support of a war, or any other such general
purpose; or any new law was to be made to regulate the Trade of all the
Colonies; or to appoint the methods by which debts owing from the Inhabitants
of one Colony to those of another, or of Great Britain, should be recovered; or
to direct the manner of bringing Criminals to justice who have fled from one
Colony to another; or to settle the manner of quartering the King's Troops in
the several Colonies; or of levying Troops in them, and the number each Colony
should contribute; or to settle the proportionable values of different coins
that should be made current in the several Provinces; or to establish a general
Paper-Currency throughout America; or for any other general purpose that
relates to several Colonies: -- In these cases the authority of Parliament
should be employed.

Here now is a kind of barrier set up between these two contending powers, the
British Parliament, and the Provincial Assemblies; -- a barrier, which must be
held so sacred by both parties, as to limit their respective pretensions, and
to extinguish all further claims. Let us therefore see how well this scheme is
calculated to answer to such good purposes.

And first it is said, that the Parliament ought to interfere but seldom; and
then only on occasions of great necessity. Now here permit me to ask, who are
to be the Judges of what is seldom, or what is frequent? Moreover, who is to
determine between the Parliament and the Provincial Assemblies, when there is a
great necessity for the interference of the former, and when there is but a
little one, or none at all? -- Obvious it is, to all the World, that these
jealous rivals will never settle such points among themselves; and if they will
not settle them, indeed if they cannot, who is to be their commmon Umpire or
Referee? Besides, granting even that this difficulty could be got over in some
degree, another formidable one immediately starts up like another Hydra; viz.
What are these Colony-Agents to do in our House of Commons, when no
Colony-business happens to be transacted? Are they to remain as so many MUTES,
without speaking a word, or giving a single vote for weeks, or months, or
perhaps for a whole session together? -- Or are they to sit and vote in all
British causes, great or small; notwithstanding that the British Senators are
precluded from voting, excepting in extraordinary cases, in respect to the
Colonies; In either case here seems to be something introduced into the British
constitution of a very heterogeneous nature; something very repugnant to that
unity of government, which the Gentleman himself allows ought to be preferred
to every other consideration: And I will add further, that if the Colony
Commissioners are to sit and vote in all our causes, though our British
Representatives are restrained from voting in theirs, perhaps ninety-nine times
in an hundred, this will be the setting up of one of the most partial, unequal,
and unjust systems of pacifications, that ever yet appeared in the World.

We therefore proceed to another weighty objection against the present plan. --
The terms of this new compact are declared to be, that the Colony Assemblies
shall be invested with the right of internal and Provincial jurisdiction and
Legislation; while the British Parliament, even after the Accession of these 80
Colony Commissioners, shall be content to retain only that which is external
and general. -- But here alas! the very same difficulties return which pressed
so hard before: For who is to judge between the British parliament and the
Provincial Assemblies in these respects? Who will venture to ascertain in every
case what is external and general; and what is merely internal and provincial?
Nay indeed, may not the very same things justly pass under both denominations,
according as they are seen from different points of view? Surely they may; and
to convince any man of this, let him attend to the very catalogue of articles,
with which this Gentleman has himself presented us. For at page 14, he
observes, That whatever related to the internal government, of any particular
Colony, should be left to the Governor and Assembly of that Colony to transact
among themselves; among which articles belonging to internal government he
enumerates the building of Barracks, and of other Public Edifices; and yet both
he and every man must allow, that the building of Barracks, of Forts and
Fortresses, the making of King's Docks and careening places for the Navy, the
laying out of military roads, and the providing of magazines for provisions and
military stores, considered in another view, are of a general nature; in the
erection and preservation of which, the whole British Empire is deeply
interested. And yet were the British Parliament to frame laws, and to levy
taxes on the AMERICANS for these purposes, what outcries would immediately be
raised against the Mother Country! Every Fortress, nay every Barrack, would be
described as an odious badge of slavery; and every little Magazine would be
termed a monumennt of tyranny and despotic power, and a prerogative for
destroying the sew liberties that were lest. Again, at the bottom of the same
Page, he declares, that the authority of Parliament should be employed in
settling the manner of quartering the King's troops in the several Colonies. I
will not object to the interposition of Parliament in such a case: For I well
know, that if (...) Parliament did not interfere, the troops would very often
have no quarters at all; and yet this very circumstance would afford an
AMERICAN Assembly the most inviting opportunity for exclamation and opposition.
What! the British Parliament to take upon them the manner of quartering troops
in our own Province, and on our own Inhabitants! who so proper Judges as
ourselves, when or where, or after what manner, they should be quartered? And
how came the Gentlemen, met at WESTMINSTER, to be acquainted with the
circumstances of our People, and the situation of places, better than we who
reside on the spot? No! These acts of the BRITISH Parliament are all barefaced
encroachments on our liberties, and open violations of our Rights and
Properties: they are the chains which our pretended protectors, but in reality
our EGYPTIAN taskmasters, have been long forging for us. Let therefore all
unite and manfully resist them; let us postpone the paying of debts, and enter
into a general association to refuse their goods, to distress their trade, and
to harrass our cruel enemies by every method in our power; and if we are thus
united, they must yield, as they did before. In short it would be endless to
recount all the topics which such a scheme as this Gentleman has proposed,
would certainly furnish to every popular Declaimer in every popular Assembly;
and the more improbable, the more absurd and unjust his harangues were in point
of sound argument and just reasoning; so much generally speaking, the more
greedily would they be received.

However, there is one point more which I cannot omit, because it will throw a
further light on this matter, and disclose a new scene of patriotic maneuvers,
and the wiles of Politicians: at page 13, this author lays down a general rule
for the conduct of parliament with respect to America, That it ought to be made
a standing order of both Houses of Parliament, never to pass any law, whether
for imposing a tax, or for regulating trade, or for any other purpose
whatsoever relating to any of the American Colonies, 'till one whole year after
the first reading of the bill; unless it be to renew some expiring laws of
great importance, and of immediate and urgent necessity, such as the act for
billeting the King's Troops, and perhaps some few others that might be
specially excepted in the order.

This is the restriction in point of time, which our author proposes to lay on
the Parliament of Great Britain. They never must pass any law for imposing a
tax 'till one whole year after the first reading of the bill: Why? -- In order
to give the several Colonies an opportunity of making proper representations
against it, and to prevent the Parliament from making injudicious laws, not
suited to the condition of the Colonies. A fine contrivance truly! and a most
effectual expedient to prevent the Parliament from ever making any laws to
oblige the Americans to discharge their duty toward their Mother Country: For
this Gentleman might have known, indeed it is hardly possible, that the fact
could have escaped his notice, had he recollected it, that this very
circumstance of a year's procrastination was the main engine employed to batter
down the late stamp act. When the duty on stamps was first proposed, the
Americans made as little objection to it, as could be supposed to be made to
any new tax whatever, Nay, several of their popular Orators and Leaders used
considerable interest to be employed as Agents in the distribution of these
stamps: and one among the rest, whom I need not name, was more than ordinary
assidious in his application on this head: So that had the Act passed within
the usual time, instead of being a flaming American Patriot, he would probably
have acted the part of a Tax-Gatherer and an American Publican. But when the
outs and the pouters on this side the water, saw the advantage which the
Minister gave them by a whole year's delay, they eagerly seized the
opportunity; Emissaries and Agents were dispatched into all quarters; -- the
Newspapers were filled with invectives against the new-intended Tax. It was
injudicious! -- it was ill-timed! -- oppressive! -- tyrannical! -- and every
thing that was bad! letters upon letters were wrote to America to excite the
People to associate, to remonstrate, and even to revolt. The most ample
promises were made from hence, of giving them all the assistance which faction,
and clamor, and mock-patriotism, could muster up. And then it was that this
very man, this self-intended Publican, changed sides, and commenced a zealous
Patriot: Then he appeared at the Bar of the House of Commons to cry down that
very measure which he himself had espoused; and then, as the avenging Angel of
America,

"He rode in the Whirlwind to direct the Storm."
Well, the storm fell on the Minister for the time being, and overset him. Our
Outs at Home became the Ins; and the storm having now done its business, they
had no further occasion for it, were its most obedient humble Servants, and
wished it to subside. But here they found themselves egregiously mistaken. For
the Americans had, in their turn, learnt the art of making tools of them,
instead of being made tools by them: so that having been taught by these
Preceptors to feel their own weight and independance, they were not to be
wheedled by soothing and cajoling letters to give over their enterprise, or to
become a tractable, obedient People for the future. In short, hence it came to
pass, that even during the continuance of this new and favorite
administration, the American spirit was rising all the while, instead of
sinking. And as like causes will always produce like effects, especially since
things have been suffered to grow to such an height, evident it is to common
sense, that any future attempt of the British Parliament to levy a tax on
America, will meet with no better a fate than the Stamp Act has done. Moreover
a years delay in laying it on will be just so much time given the Colonies to
prepare for battle; and woe to that administration which shall propose it; for
they will certainly be overturned by the same arts and managements which the
former were, and with much greater ease.

I should now have done with this Gentleman's scheme, were it not that I find
him, at page 28, making a kind of apology to the Americans for the conduct of
our parliament in paying the King's debts of his civil list. And I own myself
more hurt by this paragraph, than by all the rest of his pamphlet: for as I am
thoroughly persuaded, he wrote from conviction, and not from any sinister
views, one is sorry to find so able, so honest, and upright a man, carried away
by the torrent of the times to such a degree, as to adopt notions, which are
almost too crude for a club of Livery Politicians met in some blind alley at a
city alehouse. His words are these: -- It is certain, that no such (exorbitant)
grants as are above mentioned have been made, unless in the single instance of
the sum of 513,000l. granted to his present Majesty for the discharge of the
debts of his civil list. And in this case I can easily suppose, that a motive
of compassion for a number of innocent persons who would otherwise have been
sufferers from that load upon his Majesty's revenue, and an affectionate desire
of relieving their excellent Sovereign (who has in no instance endeavored to
violate the liberties of his Subjects) from the unworthy streights and
inconveniences, ill becoming the royal dignity, into which some of his
ministers had brought him by the injudicious management of his revenue, may
have induced many members of the House of Commons to consent to this grant,
without any view to their own private interest; though at the same time I
acknowledge it to be, considering all its circumstances, a dangerous
compliance, and not worthy to be drawn into example.

Now if the compliance of the Parliament in discharging this debt was
dangerous, the reason must be, because the circumstance of contracting the debt
itself was really infamous; therefore ought not to be avowed, but had better be
suppressed in tenderness to the royal cause. But can this author point out any
such infamous circumstances, if he were minded to make the discovery? -- I dare
answer for him, that he cannot. And as I will not suppose that he has more
tales to tell than any other private Gentleman, or much less than he himself
was an accomplice in, or privy to any such scenes of iniquity as are here
insinuated. -- I will now undertake to prove to him and the World, how as great
a debt as this, nay a much greater, might have been contracted in the space of
ten years, without the least impeachment of waste, profusion, mismanagement, or
any other misapplication whatsoever.

Every office, dignity, rank, or station has a certain character to sustain,
which necessarily requires a correspondent train of expenses; so that whether
you consider the demands upon a King with a salary of 800,000l. a year, or the
demands on a private Gentleman with only a clear rental of 800l. a year, the
scale of expenses must be proportionate, the demands and expenses being
relative one to the other.

We will therefore reason on what we are most conversant with, (and with
respect to which we may be allowed to be competent judges) viz. on the case of
a young Gentleman of a respectable ancient family, just come to take possesion
of an Estate, which clears him 800l. a year.

1st. Therefore, being appointed Sheriff of the County, he must and ought to go
through that expensive office in such manner as would reflect no disgrace on
himself, or the respectable family from which he is descended (and the office
of Sheriff belonging to a private Gentleman is of much the same import in point
of expense, as the circumstances of a coronation in respect to Majesty.)

2dly. Many deaths and funerals within the above mentioned period create
another article of expense, which must be borne; with this peculiar
circumstance attending it, that though he must bury a grandfather suitably to his
rank, also an uncle, aunts, a brother and sisters, -- yet he himself acquires
no addition of fortune by their deceases.

3dly. Several marriages in the family, and his own Some shrewd Politicians
have been wise enough to ask, why did not his Majesty marry a large fortune, in
order to reimburse some of these expenses? -- What large fortune would these
Wiseacres have wished him to have married? A Duchy or Principality on the
Continent, in order to engage us still more in Continental measures? -- Or was
it to be a large landed Estate at home, to be annexed to the Crown, like
another Duchy of Lancaster? -- This would have a fine influence on
Electioneering, and English liberties. -- But perhaps they meant, that he
should have gone into the City, and have paid his addresses to Miss PLUMBE, the
rich Grocer's daughter, or to Miss RESCOUNTERS the heiress of the great Broker
in Change-Alley. And to be sure, such a match as this would have corresponded
rarely well with the sublime ideas of City-politics. Our ancient Nobility would
have been delighted in giving the precedence to such illustrious Princes of the
blood.
in particular, bring on a third charge, which surely in reason and conscience
ought not to be objected to.

4thly. Six or seven Christenings and lyingsin, expensive articles in all
families, necessarily happen from the circumstance of the case to be peculiarly
expensive in this: and yet neither the young Gentleman himself, nor any of his
friends and well-wishers to the family, ought to have been supposed to have
wished to have saved these extraordinary charges.

5thly. A train of unexpected visitants bring on another heavy load; and though
they were not invited, yet, as they chose to come, they must be received with
an hospitality suitable to his and their dignity, and the relation of
friendship and family ties, subsisting between them.

Add to this, 6thly, the uncommon dearness of all sorts of provisions, which
for some years past has exceeded any thing known in former times; and which
alone has actually swelled the amount of Housekeeping in every family to a
very considerable sum.

Now the young Gentleman having supported himself under these several pressures
and growing expenses for ten years together, at last is obliged to request his
nearest friends and dearest relations to grant him some assistance; because he
is 513l. Or almost three quarters of a year in debt. Heavens! What a sum! and
is this all against which such loud outcries have been raised? yes this is all!
Indignant reader, whoever thou art, Englishman or American, lay thy hand on thy
heart, and ask thyself this plain question, what would thou have thought of
such a young Man, had he been thine own Son, thy Grandson, or the heir-apparent
of thy fortune? And what sort of treatment would he have deserved at thy hands?
Therefore, mutato nomine. -- But I will add no more: Let Nature and humanity,
justice and equity, plead their own cause.

We have now, I think, very sufficiently discussed every part of this
gentleman's plan: nay, we have amply and particularly shown, that his apology
to the Americans in behalf of the British Parliament, for paying the arrears of
his Majesty's Civil List, was quite a needless thing. For if no stronger proofs
can be brought of their venality and corruption than this instance, they still
may be safely trusted with the guardianship of those liberties and properties,
which they have hitherto not only preserved, but also strengthened and
increased to a degree unknown before in this, or any other country. In one word
the scheme of an union under our present consideration, is of such a nature, as
would necessarily tend to exasperate both parties, instead of mollifying or
reconciling either, and as the Americans have already given us to understand,
both in their Provincial Assemblies, and at their General Congresses, that they
will not accept of an union with us; and as Great Britain ought not to petition
for it; surely more need not be added for laying the scheme aside. Indeed the
Gentleman himself, toward the close of his pamphlet, expresses but little
hopes of its success: for, after all, the best use he can put it to, seems to
be the justification of the Mother Country in declaring war against the
Colonies, in order to oblige them to submit to her authority, and to return to
their obedience. So that this scheme of pacification is to end in a war at
last. Therefore we are now come to consider the

THIRD PLAN.
The expediency of having recourse to arms, in order to compel the Colonies to
submit to the authority and jurisdiction of the supreme council of the British
Empire, the Parliament of GREAT BRITAIN.

In regard to which important point, the gentleman reasons after the following
manner: -- after such an offer (of an union, as above described) and the
contemptuous refusal of it by the Colonies, we may well suppose, that they (the
inhabitants of Great Britain) will act as one man, to support the just and
lawful, and necessary authority of the supreme Legislature of the British
Nation over all the Dominions of the Crown. The justice of their cause will
give vigor to their measures; and the Colonies that shall have the folly and
presumption to resist them, will be quickly reduced to obedience.

It is possible, nay indeed it is very probable, that if a war was to be
speedily undertaken before Great Britain and Ireland had been too much
exhausted of their inhabitants, emigrating to North America, -- the forces of
the Mother Country might prevail, and America, however unwilling, be forced to
submit. But alas! victory alone is but a poor compensation for all the blood
and treasure which must be spilt on such an occasion. Not to mention, that
after a conquest of their country, the Americans would certainly be less
disposed, even than they are at present, to become our good customers, and to
take our manufactures in return for those injuries and oppressions which they
had suffered from us: -- I say, injuries and oppressions; because the Colonies
would most undoubtedly give no softer an appellation to this Conquest, though
perhaps it would be no other in itself, than a just chastisement for the
manifold offenses they had committed. Moreover, as the Americans are
endeavoring even at present to set up all sorts of mechanic trades in order to
rival us, or at least to supersede the use of our manufactures in their
country, -- can any man suppose, that their ardor for setting up manufactures
would be abated, by their being forced to deal at the one only European shop,
which they most detested?

But what is still worse, if possible, -- though the British troops might
overrun the great Continent of North America at first, it does by no means
follow, that they could be able to maintain a superiority in it afterward for
any length of time; and my reason is, because the governing of a country after
a peace, is a much more arduous task, in certain circumstances, than the
conquering it during a war. Thus for example, when a peace ensues (and surely
it is not intended that we shall be forever in a state of war) then a civil
constitution of some kind or other must necessarily be established; and in the
case before us, there seems to be no other alternative, but either the
permitting the Colonies to enjoy once more those advantages of English Liberty,
and of an English Constitution, which they had forfeited; or else a resolution
to govern them for the future by arbitrary sway and despotic power. If the
latter should be the plan adopted, I then humbly submit it to be duly weighed
and considered, what a baneful influence this Government a la prusse, would
have on every other part of the British Empire. England free, and America in
chains! And how soon would the enslaved part of the Constitution, and perhaps
the greater, contaminate the free and the lesser? Nay, as America was found to
increase in strength and numbers, an army of English-born soldiers (for no
others could be trusted) first of 50,000, and afterward perhaps of 100,000,
would scarcely be sufficient to keep these turbulent spirits in awe, and to
prevent them, at such a prodigious distance from the center of Government, from
breaking out into insurrections and rebellions at every favorable opportunity.
But if the former were to prevail, and a return of English Liberties was again
to take place, it must also follow, that the system of trials by juries must
return with them: and then, when America shall grow stronger and stronger every
day, and England proportionably weaker, how is an insurrection to be quelled in
America? and what English officer, civil or military, would dare to do it? Nay,
I ask further, granting that he was so brave, or rather so foolhardy, as to
attempt to do his duty, who is to protect him in the execution of his office?
Or how is he to be preserved, by due forms of law, against the determination of
an American jury? a tumult is excited; -- the military is called forth; -- the
soldiers are insulted; -- many perhaps wounded, and some even killed. The
patience of the officers worn out, and in their own defense, they are obliged
to give the word of command to fire. The relations of those who fell by this
fire, bring on an appeal of blood. The American jury find the officers who
commanded, and perhaps the whole corpse who fired, guilty of wilful murder; and
then all the power of the Crown, legally exerted, is not able to save the lives
of these poor innocent men. Pitiable sure is such a case; and yet it is a case
which would and must frequently then happen in the natural course of things,
according to our legal constitution.

Perhaps it might be said, that American juries are as conscientious as other
juries in bringing in their verdicts according to law; and that it is very
uncharitable even to suppose the contrary. -- Be it so: But the question here
turns on, What will be the suggestion of conscience in the breast of an
American on such an occasion? -- What would be his ideas of law, justice, or
equity, when England and America stood in competition? -- certainly, if ever
the inhabitants of that country should come (and they are almost come already)
to be fully persuaded that the British parliament has no right to make laws
either to tax or to govern them (and the having once beaten them will not be
taken as a convincing proof that we always have either the right or the power
to beat them) then every attempt toward throwing off this odious yoke, would
appear in their eye, as so many noble struggles for the cause of liberty: and
therefore the base English hireling, who would dare to injure this sacred
cause, deserved to die a thousand deaths. Such undoubtedly would be the
language, and such the sentiments of the great majority of Americans whenever
such a case should happen. In a word, an erroneous conscience, and a false
zeal, would have just the same bad effects in the new world respecting civil
government, as they formerly had in the old, in regard to religion: And
therefore, either way, whether we should treat these Americans as an enslaved
people, or whether we should restore to them, after a conquest, the same
constitution which we enjoy ourselves, the final event would come to this, --
That England would be the greatest sufferer; and that America is not to be
governed against its own inclinations. Wherefore let us now now come to the

FOURTH PLAN,
Viz. To consent that America should become the general seat of Empire, and
that GREAT BRITAIN and IRELAND, should be governed by Viceroys sent over from
the Court Residencies either at Philadelphia, or New York, or at some other
American Imperial, City.

Now, wild as such a scheme may appear, there are certainly some Americans who
seriously embrace it: and the late prodigious swarms of Emigrants encourage
them to suppose, that a time is approaching, when the Seat of Empire must be
changed. But whatever events may be in the womb of time, or whatever
revolutions may happen in the rise and fall of Empires, there is not the least
probability, that this country should ever become a province to North America.
For granting even, that it would be so weakened and enfeebled by these
Colony-drains, as not to be able to defend itself from invaders, yet America is
at too great a distance to invade it at first, much less to defend the conquest
of it afterward, against the neighboring powers of Europe: and as to any
notion that we ourselves should prefer an American yoke to any other, -- this
supposition is chimerical indeed; because it is much more probable, were things
to come to such a dreadful crisis, that the English would rather submit to a
French yoke, than to an American; as being the lesser indignity of the two. So
that in short, if we must reason in politics according to the Newtonian
Principles in Philosophy. The idea of the lesser country gravitating toward
the greater, must lead us to conclude, that this Island would rather gravitate
toward the Continent of Europe, than toward the Continent of America; unless
indeed we should add one extravagance to another, by supposing that the
Americans are to conquer all the world; and in that case I do allow, that
England must become a Province to America. But

We come now to consider the

FIFTH PLAN.
Viz. To propose to separate entirely from the North-American-Colonies, by
declaring them to be a free and independent people, over whom we lay no claim;
and then by offering to guarantee this freedom and independence against all
foreign invaders whatever.

And, in fact, what is all this but the natural and even the necessary
corollary to be deduced from each of the former reasons and observations? For
if we neither can govern the Americans, nor be governed by them; if we can
neither unite with them, nor ought to subdue them; -- what remains, but to part
with them on as friendly terms as we can? and if any may should think that he
can reason better from the above premises, let him try.

But as the idea of separation, and the giving up the Colonies forever will
shock many weak people, who think, that there is neither happiness nor security
but in an overgrown unwieldy Empire, I will for their sakes enter into a
discussion of the supposed disadvantages attending such a disjunction; and then
shall set forth the manifold advantages.

The first and capital supposed disadvantage is, That if we separate from the
Colonies, we shall lose their trade. But why so? and how does this appear? The
Colonies, we know by experience, will trade with any people, even with their
bitterest enemies, during the hottest of a war, and a war undertaken at their
own earnest request, and for their own sakes; -- the Colonies, I say, will
trade even with them, provided they shall find it their interest so to do. Why
then should any man suppose, that the same self-interest will not induce them
to trade with us? with us, I say, who are to commit no hostilities against
them, but on the contrary, are still to remain, if they please, their Guardians
and Protectors?

Granting, therefore, that NORTH AMERICA was to become independent of us, and
we of them, the question now before us will turn on this single point, -- can
the Colonists, in a general way, trade with any other European State to greater
advantage than they can with Great Britain? If they can, they certainly will;
but if they cannot, we shall still retain their custom, notwithstanding we have
parted with every claim of authority and jurisdiction over them. Now, the
native commodities and merchandise of North America, which are the most
saleable at an European market, are chiefly lumber, Ships, iron, train-oil,
flax-seed, skins, furs, pitch, tar, turpentine, pearl-ashes, indigo, tobacco,
and rice: and I do aver, that, excepting rice and tobacco, there is hardly one
of these articles, for which an American could get so good a price any where
else, as he can in Great Britain and Ireland. Nay, I ought to have excepted
only rice; for as to tobacco, though great quantities of it are re-exported into
France, yet it is well known, that the French might raise it at home, if they
would, much cheaper than they can import it from our Colonies. The fact is
this, -- The Farm of tobacco is one of the great five farms, which make up the
chief part of the Royal revenue; and therefore the Farmers General, for
bye-ends of their own, have hitherto had interest enough with the Court to
prohibit the cultivation of it in Old France, under the severest penalties. But
nevertheless the real French Patriots, and particularly the Marquis de
Mirabeau, have fully demonstrated, that it is the interest of the French
government to encourage the cultivation of it; and have pointed out a sure and
easy method of collecting the duties; which was the sole pretense of the
Farmers General for soliciting a prohibition. So that it is apprehended, that
the French government will at last open their eyes in this respect, and allow
the cultivation of it. Tobacco therefore being likely to be soon out of the
question, the only remaining article is rice; and this, it must be
acknowledged, would bear a better price at the Hamburgh or Dutch markets than
it generally does in England. But as this is only one article, out of many, it
should be further considered, that even the Ships which import rice into
England, generally bring such other produce as would not be saleable to
advantage in other parts of Europe: so that there is no great cause to fear,
that we should considerably lose the trade even of this article, were the
Colonies to be dismembered from us. Not to mention that all the coasts of the
Mediterranean and the south of Europe are already supplied with rice from the
Colonies, in the same manner as if there had been an actual separation; -- no
rice-ship bound to any place south of Cape Finisterre being at all obliged to
touch at any Port of Great Britain. So much, therefore, as to the staple
exports of the Colonies.

LET us now consider their IMPORTS. And here one thing is very clear and
certain, that whatever goods, merchandise, or manufactures, the merchants of
Great Britain can sell to the rest of Europe, they might sell the same to the
Colonies, if wanted: Because it is evident, that the Colonies could not
purchase such goods at a cheaper rate at any other European market. Now, let
any one cast his eye over the bills of exports from London, Bristol, Liverpool,
Hull, Glasgow, etc. etc. and then he will soon discover that excepting gold and
silver lace, wines and brandies, some sorts of silks and linens, and perhaps a
little paper and Gunpowder; I say, excepting these few articles, Great Britain
is become a kind of a general mart for most other commodities: and indeed were
it not so, how is it conceivable, that so little a spot as this island could
have made such a figure either in peace or war, as it has lately done? How is
it possible that after having contracted a debt of nearly one hundred and forty
millions, we should nevertheless be able to make more rapid progresses in all
sorts of improvements, useful and ornamental, public and private, agricolic and
commercial, than any other nation ever did? -- Fact it is, that these
improvements have been made of late years, and are daily making: and facts are
stubborn things.

But, says the objector, you allow, that gold and silver lace, -- that wines
and brandies, some sorts of silks, -- some sorts of paper, gunpowder, and
perhaps other articles, can be purchased at certain European markets on cheaper
terms than they can in England: and therefore it follows, that we should
certainly lose these branches of commerce by a separation, even supposing that
we could retain the rest. Indeed even this does not follow; because we have
lost them already, as far as it was the interest of the colonies, that we
should lose them. And if any man can doubt of this, let him but consider, that
the lumber, and provision-vessels, which are continually running down from
Boston, Rhode Island, New York, Philadelphia, Charlestown, etc. etc. to
Martinico, and the other French islands, bring home in return not only sugars
and molasses, but also French wines, silks, gold and silver lace, and in short
every other article, in which they can find a profitable account: Moreover
those ships, which sail to Eustatia and Curacoa, trade with the Dutch, and
consequently with all the North of Europe, on the same principle. And as the
ships which steer south of Cape Finisterre, what do they do? -- Doubtless, they
purchase whatever commodities they find it their interest to purchase, and
carry them home to North America. Indeed what would hinder them from acting
agreeably to their own ideas of advantage in these respects? The Custom-House
Officers, perhaps, you may say, will hinder them, But alas! the Custom-House
Officers of North America, if they were ten times more numerous, and ten times
more incorrupt than they are, could not possibly guard a tenth part of the
coast. In short these things are so very notorious that they cannot be
disputed; and therefore, were the whole trade of North America to be divided
into two branches, viz. the voluntary, resulting from a free choice of the
Americans themselves, pursuing their own interest, and the involuntary, in
consequence of compulsory Acts of the British Parliament; -- this latter would
appear so very small and inconsiderable, as hardly to deserve a name in an
estimate of national commerce.

The 2d objection against giving up the Colonies is, that such a measure would
greatly decrease our shipping and navigation, and consequently diminish the
breed of sailors. But this objection has been fully obviated already: For if we
shall not lose our trade, at least in any important degree, even with the
northern Colonies (and most probably we shall increase it with other countries)
then it follows, that neither the quantity of shipping, nor the breed of
sailors, can suffer any considerable diminution: So that this supposition is
merely a panic, and has no foundation. Not to mention, that in proportion as
the Americans shall be obliged to exert themselves to defend their own coasts,
in case of a war; in the same proportion shall Great Britain be exonorated from
that burden, and shall have more ships and men at command to protect her own
channel Trade, and for other services.

The 3d objection is, That if we were to give up these Colonies, the French
would take immediate possession of them. Now this objection is entirely built
on the following very wild, very extravagant, and absurd suppositions.

1st, It supposes, that the Colonists themselves, who cannot brook our
government, would like a French one much better. Great Britain, it seems, does
not grant them liberty enough; and therefore they have recourse to France to
obtain more: -- That is, in plain English, our mild and limited Government,
where prerogative is ascertained by law, where every man is at liberty to seek
for redress, and where popular clamours too often carry every thing before
them, -- is nevertheless too severe, too oppressive, and too tyrannical for the
spirits and genius of Americans to bear; and therefore they will apply to an
arbitrary, despotic Government, where the people have no share in the
Legislature, where there is no liberty of the Press and where General Warrants
and Letters des Cachets are irresistible, in order to enjoy greater freedoms
than they have at present, and to be rescued from the intolerable yoke, under
which they now groan. What monstrous absurdities are these? But even this is
not all: For these Americans are represented by this supposition, as not only
preferring a French government to a British, but even to a government of their
own modelling and choosing! For after they are set free from any submission to
their Mother Country; after they are told, that for the future they must
endeavor to please themselves, seeing we cannot please them; then, instead of
attempting to frame any popular governments for redressing those evils, of
which they now so bitterly complain, -- they are represented as throwing
themselves at once into the arms of France: -- the Republican spirit is to
subside; the doctrine of passive obedience and non-resistance is to succeed;
and, instead of setting up for freedom and independence, they are to glory in
having the honor of being numbered among the slaves of the Grand Monarch!

But 2dly, this matter may be further considered in another point of view: for
if it should be said, that the Americans might still retain their Republican
spirit, though they submitted to a French government, because the French, through
policy; would permit them so to do; then it remains to be considered, whether
any arbitrary government can dispense with such liberties as a Republican
spirit will require. An absolute freedom of the Press! No control on the
liberty either of speaking or writing on matters of state! Newspapers and
Pamphlets filled with the bitterest invectives against the measures of
government! Associations formed in every quarter to cry down Ministerial
Hirelings, and their dependants! The votes and resolutions of the Provincial
Assemblies to assert their own authority and independence! No landing of troops
from Old France to quell Insurrections! No raising of new levies in America! No
quartering of Troops! No building of forts, or erecting of garrisons! And, to
sum up all, no raising of money without the express consent and approbation of
the Provincial American Parliaments first obtained for each of these purposes!
Now I ask any reasonable man whether these things are compatible with any idea
of an arbitrary, despotic government? Nay more, whether the French King
himself, or his ministers would wish to have such notions as these instilled
into the subjects of Old France? Yet instilled they must be while a
communication is kept open between the two Countries; while correspondences are
carried on; letters, pamphlets, and newspapers, pass and re-pass; and in short
while the Americans are permitted to come into France, and Frenchmen into
America. So much therefore as to this class of objections. Indeed I might have
insisted further, that Great Britain alone could at any time prevent such an
acquisition to be made by France, as is here supposed, if she should think it
necessary to interfere, and if such an acquisition of territory would really
and truly be an addition of strength in the political balance and scale of
power. But surely I have said enough; and therefore let us now hasten briefly
to point out, The manifold Advantages attendant on such a Plan.

And 1st, A disjunction from the nothern Colonies would effectually put a stop
to our present emigrations. By the laws of the land it is made a capital
offense to inveigle artificers and mechanics to leave the kingdom, but this law
is unhappily superseded at present as far as the Colonies are concerned.
Therefore when they come to be dismembered from us, it will operate as strongly
against them, and their kidnappers, as against others, and here it may be worth
while to observe, that the emigrants, who lately sailed in such multitudes from
the North of Scotland and more especially from the North of Ireland, were far
from being the most indigent, or the least capable of subsisting in their own
Country. No; it was not poverty or necessity which compelled, but ambition
which enticed them to forsake their native soil. For after they began to taste
the sweets of industry, and to partake of the comforts of life, then they
became a valuable prey for these harpies. In short, such were the persons to
whom these seducers principally applied; because they found that they had
gotten some little substance together worth devouring. They therefore told them
many plausible stories -- that if they would emigrate to North America, they
might have estates for nothing and become gentlemen forever; whereas, if they
remained at home, they had nothing to expect beyond the Condition of a wretched
Journeyman, or a small laborious farmer. Nay, one of these false guides was
known to have put out public advertisements, some few years ago in the North of
Ireland, wherein he engaged to carry all, who would follow him, into such a
glorious Country, where there was neither tax, nor tithe, nor Landlord's rent
to be paid. This was enough: it took with thousands: and this he might safely
engage to do. But at the same time, he ought to have told them (as Bishop
BERKLEY in his queries justly observes) That a man may possess twenty miles
square in this Country, and yet not be able to get a dinner.

2dly. Another great advantage to be derived from a separation is, that we
shall then save between 3 and 400,000l. a year, by being discharged from the
payment of any civil or military establishment belonging to the Colonies; for
which generous benefaction we receive at present no other return than
invectives and reproaches.

3dly. The ceasing of the payment of bounties on certain Colony productions
will be another great saving; perhaps not less than 200,000l. a year: and it is
very remarkable, that the goods imported from the Colonies in consequence of
these bounties, could not have been imported into any other part of Europe,
were there a liberty to do it; because the freight and first cost would have
amounted to more than they could be sold for: so that in fact we give premiums
to the Colonies for selling goods to us, which would not have been sold at all
any where else. However, when the present bounties shall cease, we may then
consider, at our leisure, whether it would be right to give them again, or not;
and we shall have it in our power to favor that country most which will show
the greatest favor to us, and to our manufactures.

4thly, When we are no longer connected with the Colonies by the imaginary tie
of an identity of government, than our merchant-exporters and manufacturers
will have a better chance of having their debts paid, than they have at
present: For as matters now stand, the Colonists choose to carry their ready
cash to other nations, while they are contracting debts with their
Mother Country, with whom they think they can take great liberties: and
provided they are trusted, they care not to what amount this debt shall rise:
-- For when the time for payment draws on, they are seized with a fit of
patriotism; and then confederacies and associations are to discharge all
arrears; or at least, are to postpone the payment of them SINE DIE.

5thly, After a separation from the Colonies, our influence over them will be
much greater than ever it was, since they began to feel their own weight and
importance: For at present we are looked upon in no better a light than that of
robbers and usurpers; whereas, we shall then be considered as their protectors,
mediators, and benefactors. The moment a separation takes effect, intestine
quarrels will begin: For it is well known, that the seeds of discord and
dissension between Province and Province are now ready to shoot forth; and that
they are only kept down by the present combination all the Colonies against us,
whom they unhappily fancy to be their common enemy. When therefore this object
of their hatred shall be removed by a declaration on our parts, that, so far
from usurping all authority, we, from hence-forward will assume none at all
against their own consent; the weaker Provinces will entreat our protection
against the stronger; and the less cautious against the more crafty and
designing: So that in short, in proportion as their republican spirit shall
intrigue and cabal, they will split into parties, divide and sub-divide, in the
same proportion shall we be called in to become their general Umpires and
Referees. Not to mention, that many of the late and present Emigrants, when
they shall see these storms arising all around them, and when their promised
earthly paradise turns out to be a dreary, unwholesome, inhospitable, and
howling wilderness, many of them, I say, will probably return to us again, and
take refuge at last in Old England, with all its faults and imperfections.

Lastly, Our WEST INDIA Islands themselves will receive signal benefit by this
separation. Indeed their size and situation render them incapable of
subtracting all obedience from us; and yet the bad precedents of their
neighbors on the Continent has sometimes prompted them to show as refractory
a spirit as they well could. -- But when they come to perceive, what are the
bitter effects of this untractable disposition, exemplified in the case of the
NORTH-AMERICANS, it is probable, it is reasonable to conclude, that they will
learn wisdom by the miscarriages and sufferings of these unhappy people; and
that from henceforward they will revere the authority of a Government, which
has the fewest faults, and grants the greatest liberty, of any yet known upon
earth.

But after all, there is one thing more, to which I must make some reply. Many,
perhaps most of my readers, will be apt to ask, what is all this about? And
what does this Author really mean? Can he seriously think, that because he has
taken such pains to prove a separation to be a right measure, that therefore we
shall separate in good earnest? and is he still so much a novice as not to
know, that measures are rarely adopted merely because they are right, but
because they can serve a present turn? Therefore let it be asked, what present
convenience or advantage does he propose either to administration, or to
anti-administration, by the execution of his plan? This is coming to the point,
and without it, all that he has said will pass for nothing.

I frankly acknowledge, I propose no present convenience or advantage to
either; nay, I firmly believe, that no Minister, as things are now
circumstanced, will dare to do so much good to his Country; and as to the Herd
of Anti-Ministers, they, I am persuaded, would not wish to see it done; because
it would deprive them of one of their most plentiful sources for clamor and
detraction: and yet I have observed, and have myself had some experience, that
measures evidently right will prevail at last: Therefore I make not the least
doubt but that a separation from the northern Colonies, and also another right
measure, viz. a complete union and incorporation with Ireland (however
unpopular either of them may now appear) will both take place within half a
century: And perhaps that which happens to be first accomplished, will greatly
accelerate the accomplishment of the other. Indeed almost all people are apt to
startle at first at bold truths: But it is observable, that in proportion as
they grow familiarized to them, and can see and consider them from different
points of view, their fears subside, and they become reconciled by degrees:
Nay, it is not an uncommon thing for them to adopt those salutary measures
afterward with as much zeal and ardor as they had rejected them before with
anger and indignation.

Need I add, that the man, who will have resolution enough to advance any bold
un welcome truth (unwelcome I mean at its first appearance) ought to be such an
one, whose competency of fortune, joined to a natural independency of spirit,
places him in that happy situation, as to be equally indifferent to the smiles,
or frowns either of the great, or the vulgar;

Lastly, some persons perhaps may wonder, that, being myself a clergyman, I
have said nothing about the persecution which the Church of England daily
suffers in America, by being denied those rights which every other sect of
Christians so amply enjoys. I own I have hitherto omitted to make mention of
that circumstance, not through inadvertance, but by design; as being unwilling to
embarrass my general plan with what might be deemed by some readers to be
foreign to the subject: and therefore I shall be very short in what I have to
add at present.

That each religious persuasion ought to have a full toleration from the state
to worship Almighty God, according to the dictates of their own consciences, is
to me so clear a case, that I shall not attempt to make it clearer; and nothing
but the maintaining some monstrous opinion inconsistent with the safety of
society, -- and that not barely in theory and speculation, but by open practice
and outward actions, -- I say, nothing but the avowedly maintaining of such
dangerous principles can justify the magistrate in abridging any set of men of
these their natural rights. It is also equally evident, that the church of
England does not, cannot fall under the censure of holding opinions
inconsistent with the safety of the state, and the good of mankind, -- even her
enemies themselves being judges: and yet the church of England alone does not
enjoy a toleration in that full extent, which is granted to the members of
every other denomination. What then can be the cause of putting so injurious a
distinction between the church of England, and other churches in this respect?
the reason is plain. The Americans have taken it into their heads to believe,
that an episcopate would operate as some further tie upon them, not to break
loose from those obligations which they owe to the Mother Country; and that
this is to be used as an engine, under the masque of religion, to rivet those
chains, which they imagine we are forging for them. Let therefore the
Mother Country herself resign up all claim of authority over them, as well
ecclesiastical as civil; let her declare North America to be independent of
Great Britain in every respect whatever; -- let her do this, I say, and then
all their fears will vanish away, and their panics be at an end: And then a
bishop, who has no more connections with England either in church or state,
than he has with Germany, Sweden, or any other country, will be no longer
looked upon in America as a monster, but a man. In short, when all motives for
opposition will be at an end, it is observable, that the opposition itself soon
ceases and dies away. In a word an episcopate may then take place; and whether
this new Ecclesiastical officer be called from a name derived from the Greek,
the Latin, or the German, -- that is, whether he be styled episcopus,
superintendent, supervisor, overseer, etc. etc. it matters not, provided he be
invested with competent authority to ordain and confirm such of the members of
his own persuasion, as shall voluntarily offer themselves, and to inspect the
lives and morals of his own clergy.

FINIS.
A few more WORDS, on the FREEDOM of the PRESS, Addressed by the PRINTER, to
the FRIENDS of LIBERTY in AMERICA.
Since the PRESS is FREE, LONG may it REMAIN FREE. BELL.
IT was the saying of an Ancient, and wise ENGLISHMAN, (TINDAL), who lived at
the time of the Glorious Revolution in 1688, That, While the Freedom of the
PRESS is preserved, all other Liberties, both Civil and Religious, will be
secured to us, under so faithful a Guardian. And it is the declaration of the
modern, and noble VIRGINIANS, that the Freedom of the PRESS is one of the great
bulwarks of Liberty, and can never be restrained but by despotic governments.
Notwithstanding these worthy and estimable authorities, if there are yet any
number of mistaken men existing, who under the specious pretense of there being
a necessity at some trying exigence for a temporary restriction of the FREEDOM
of the PRESS, and their foolish advice should at any one time be adopted, we
may then bid a final adieu to every thing pertaining to Liberty: For it is more
than probable, that like unto the wretched British Parliament, in the Year
1716, who pretended, there were at that time, too many Jacobites in the nation,
to suffer the triennial election of Members for that House. -- They then
tyrannically constituted themselves into a septennial parliament: And for the
last sixty years, have illegally and audaciously committed one continued insult
upon the constitution of the Kingdom, and upon the understandings of the whole
body of the people in Great Britain. -- Now, if Americans will agreeable to the
good old English advice --

"Learn to be wise, from others harm,
"They, they shall do full well.
But, if according to the opinion of some violents against the freedom of
enquiry, they will unwisely trample upon that greatest of all privileges, the
Liberty of the PRESS; then will they, like the foolish people of Britain,
commit suicide on their own liberties, and thus, entail upon themselves, the
scorn and contempt of all true and consistent friends to real Liberty; because,
if new modes of Government, are either in reality, or in appearance,
approaching toward the inhabitants of America; it is more peculiarly necessary
on these extraordinary occasions, that the Liberty of the PRESS should be
freely exerted: For, if in these changes, we do not fully retain all our
present happy privileges, but weakly suffer any restrictions or curtailings of
Liberty to advance upon us with new establishments, it will afterward be next
to impossible, to regain the desirable possession.

Thus far, the Printer still thinks it indispensibly his duty to support the
Freedom of the PRESS, in which all the lovers of genuine Liberty are deeply
interested. And, if there are any, who think otherwise, they may if they
please, peruse what follows.

A SHORT ANSWER TO SOME CRITICISMS. Which were Exhibited under the Signature of
ARISTIDES: Containing, a reasonable Vindication of the Propriety of those
Defenses of the LIBERTY of the PRESS, Which were Annexed to PLAIN TRUTH, And to
the Additions to PLAIN TRUTH; Published, in 1776. EXTRACTED from an Old
Pamphlet, Published in the Year 1756, Entitled PLAIN TRUTH: Or, Serious
Considerations on the Present State of the City of PHILADELPHIA, and Province
of PENNSYLVANIA.
By a Tradesman of PHILADELPHIA.
IT is said the wise Italians make this proverbial Remark on our Nation, viz
The English FEEL, but they do not SEE. That is, they are sensible of
inconveniences when they are present, but do not take sufficient care to
prevent them: Their natural courage makes them too little apprehensive of
danger, so that they are often surprised by it, unprovided of the proper means
of security. When it is too late they are sensible of their imprudence: After
great fires, they provide buckets and engines: After a pestilence they think of
keeping clean their streets and common shores: and when a town has been sacked
by their enemies, they provide for its defense. This kind of AFTER-WISDOM is
indeed so common with us, as to occasion the vulgar, though very significant
saying, When the Steed is stolen, it is time to shut the stable door.

(And the Printer of these useful and necessary DEFENSES, takes the liberty to
insert here,)

After the freedom of the Press has been circumscribed by the ignorance or
malice of mistaken zealots, it will then be time to cringe to some cowardly
Printer, to beg he would support its Liberty.

N. B. The quibblings of Aristides, concerning the Words first Edition, were
sufficiently confuted five days before they made their appearance, by the
publication of the second Edition of PLAIN TRUTH.

Now Selling, at the Late UNION LIBRARY, next Door to St. Paul's Church in
Third-Street, PHILADELPHIA.
PROVISION FOR SENTIMENTALISTS. By ROBERT BELL, Provedore to the Volunteers of
that Respectable Society, who practically know, that FOOD for the MIND, is
equivalent to MONEY. ROBERTSON's History of Charles the Fifth, 3 vols
Blackstone's Commentaries on the Laws, 4 vols The Palladium of Conscience, by
Priestly and Furneaux Leland's History of Ireland, 4 vols Cullen's Lectures on
the Materia Medica Swan's British Architect Viaud's Voyages and Adventures
Yorick's Sentimental Journey, 2 vols Marmontel's History of Belisarius Manual
of Prayers for those who aspire after Devotion Van Swieten's Cures for Armies
Jones on the Treatment of Wounds and Fractures Burgh's Political Disquisitions,
3 vols Lord Chesterfield's Letters, 4 vols Cooke's New Voyage Round the World,
2 vols Buchan's Family Physician Stern's Works, 5 vols Brookes's Juliet
Grenville, being a History of the Human Heart, 2 vols Josephus's History of the
Jews, with all his other Works, 4 vols The Young Clerk's Vade Mecum: Or,
Complete Law Tutor. Being a Collection of a great Variety of the most approved
Precedents in the Law, and adapted to almost every Transaction in Life wherein
an Attention to legal Forms is indispensibly necessary. To which is Added, A
Collection of English Precedents, Relating to the Office of a Justice of Peace.
The Politics of the Year 1776. (Neatly bound for Preservation in one Volume.)
Containing, Common Sense, with large Additions, Plain Truth, with Additions,
Observations against Reconciliation Strictures on the Pamphlet, entitled Common
Sense Tucker's True Interest of Great Britain, set forth in regard to the
Colonies; And the only means of living in Peace and Harmony with them:
Including, five different Plans for effecting this desirable Event.

THE FOLLOWING MILLITARY WORKS. Some of them very Valuable and seldom to be met
with: May be had at R. BELL's, next Door to St. Paul's Church, in Third-Street,
PHILADELPHIA.
LE Blond's Military Engineer: Containing, the Attack and Defense of all kinds
of Fortified Places; with numerous and excellent Copper Plates, 2 vols Nouvelle
Fortification, par Coehorn Ozanam's Ancient and Modern Methods of
Fortification, with VAUBAN's Manner of Fortifying Marlborough's Battles and
Sieges, from 1708 to 1715 Simes's Military Guide for Officers, 2 vols New
System of Military Discipline, founded on Principle, by a General Officer
Stevenson's Military Instructions Host and Webster's Mechanics,
Fortification, Artillery or Gunnery, adapted to the use of the Gentlemen of the
Army and Navy.
ARCHITECTURE HYDRAULIQUE.
DE La maniere de fair usage du course des eaux dans les operations de la
Guerre des Sieges and de Campaign. Comprenant l'art de fair usage des eaux
dans la Guerre offensive and defensive, accompagne d' un nombre d' exemples
d'occasions memorables ou I'on s'en est servi avec succes. Par M. BELIDOR,
Colonel d' Infanterie, Chevalier de IN Order Militaire de Saint Louis, etc.


