THE PRINTER TO THE PUBLIC: On the FREEDOM of the PRESS.
HAVING very lately, without any other authority, than THE LIBERTY OF THE
PRESS, ushered into the hands of the public, certain speculations

FOR AMERICAN INDEPENDENCY.

By the same AUTHORITY, viz. THE LIBERTY OF THE PRESS: ROBERT BELL, Provedore
to the Sentimentalists; has printed, publicshed* and is now selling (Price
Three Shillings) to all who are capable of practicing so much impartiality, as
to give a hearing to the other Side, by lending their attention toward certain
speculations.

AGAINST AMERICAN INDEPENDENCY.

And that no malicious person, or persons, may plead ignorance of this
indubitable and firmly established AUTHORITY, THE LIBERTY OF THE PRESS, which
does, and forever will prevail in all those countries, where FREEDOM is the
Basis of their CONSTITUTION. The Printer, has hereunto subjoined, the
following very substantial and definitive TESTIMONIES.

Extracts from the sagacious and patriotic JUNIUS, Author of the celebrated
FREE LETTERS, to his present Majesty and his Ministers.
"THE LIBERTY OF THE PRESS is the Palladium of all Civil, Political, and
Religious Rights".

"A considerable latitude must be allowed in the discussion of public affairs,
or the liberty of the PRESS will be of no benefit to society. -- The liberty of
the PRESS is our only resource. It will command an audience, when every honest
man in the kingdom is excluded."

"This glorious privilege may be a security to the King, as well as a resource
to his people. Had there been no star chamber, there would have been no
rebellion against Charles the First. The constant censure and admonition of the
PRESS, would have probably corrected his conduct, prevented a civil war, and
saved him from an ignominious death."

Extract from MONSIEUR DE LOLME's ESSAY on the English Constitution,
recommended by JUNIUS.
"IN short, whoever, considers what it is, that constitutes the moving
principle of what we call great affairs, and the invincible sensibility of man
to the opinion of his fellow creatures, will not hesitate to affirm, that, if
it were possible for the liberty of the PRESS to exist in a despotic
government, and, (what is not less) for it to exist without changing the
constitution: This liberty of the PRESS would alone form a counterpoise to the
power of the Prince. If, for example, in an Empire of the East, a sanctuary
could be found, which, (rendered respectable by the ancient religion of the
people,) might insure safety to those, who should bring thither their
observations of any kind; and that, from thence, PRINTED PAPERS should issue,
which, under a certain seal, might be equally respected; and which, in their
daily appearance, should examine and freely discuss, the conduct of the Cadis,
the Bashaws, the Vizir, the Divan, and the Sultan himself: These PRINTED PAPERS
would introduce immediately some degree of LIBERTY."

LATLEY PRINTED AND PUBLISHED, And now selling by ROBERT BELL, in Third-Street
COMMON SENSE; WITH THE WHOLE APPENDIX, THE ADDRESS TO THE QUAKERS. ALSO THE
LARGE ADDITIONS COMPLETE.

[PRICE THREE SHILLINGS.]

PLAIN TRUTH; ADDRESSED TO THE INHABITANTS OF AMERICA, Containing, Remarks ON A
LATE PAMPHLET, entitled COMMON SENSE.

Wherein are shown, that the Scheme of INDEPENDENCE is Ruinous, Delusive, and
Impracticable: That were the Author's Asseverations, Respecting the Power of
AMERICA, as Real as Nugatory; Reconciliation on liberal Principles with GREAT
BRITAIN, would be exalted Policy: And that circumstanced as we are, Permanent
Liberty, and True Happiness, can only be obtained by Reconciliation with that
Kingdom.

WRITTEN BY CANDIDUS.

Will ye turn from flattery, and attend to this Side.?

There TRUTH, unlicenc'd, walks; and dares accost
Even Kings themselves, the Monarchs of the Free!
THOMSON on the Liberties of BRITAIN. PHILADELPHIA: Printed, and Sold, by R.
BELL, in Third-Street. MDCCLXXVI.

TO JOHN DICKINSON, ESQUIRE;
ALTHOUGH I have not the Honor to be known to You: I am not unacquainted with
YOUR native Candor and unbounded Benevolence. As happy as obscure, I am indeed
a stranger to the language of Adulation. Flattery I detest; Virtue, I Respect.

BE not offended SIR, if I remark, that YOUR Character, is contemplated with
profound Veneration, by the Friends of the Constitution. Those Abilities, which
YOU so illustriously displayed in defense of the Constitution; they now
supplicate YOU to exert, in saving it from impending ruin, under the Siren form
of delusive INDEPENDENCE.

STEP then forth; exert those Talents with which HEAVEN has endowed YOU; and
cause the Parent, and her Children to embrace, and be foes no more. Ardous as
this extraordinary task may seem, perhaps YOUR Virtue and Talents, may yet
effect it. YOUR Endeavors to stop the Effusion of Blood, of Torrents of Blood,
is worthy of YOUR acknowledged Humanity. -- Even the honest attempt upon
recollection, will afford YOU ineffable satisfaction.

MY PRESUMING to inscribe to you, the following crude Remarks, is to remind
YOU, SIR, what YOUR distressed Country expects, nay, loudly demands from YOUR
extensive Capacity.

I BEG YOU will forgive this temerity; and that YOU may long enjoy the fruits
of YOUR Exalted Virtue, and remain an Honor to YOUR Country, and to Mankind: Is
the ardent wish of

Sir, Your most Obedient, and Respectful Servant, CANDIDUS.

INTRODUCTION.
IF indignant at the Doctrine contained in the Pamphlet, entitled COMMON SENSE:
I have expressed myself, in the following Observations, with some ardor; I
entreat the Reader to impute my indignation, to honest zeal against the
Author's Insidious Tenets. Animated and impelled by every inducement of the
Human Heart; I love, and (if I dare so express myself,) I adore my Country.
Passionately devoted to true Liberty: I glow with the purest flame of
Patriotism. Silvered with age as I am, if I know myself, my humble Sword shall
not be wanting to my Country; (if the most Honorable Terms are not tendered by
the British Nation) to whose Sacred Cause, I am most fervently devoted. The
judicious Reader, will not impute my honest, though bold Remarks, to unfriendly
designs against my Children -- against my Country; but to abhorrence of
Independency; which if effected, would inevitably plunge our once pre-eminently
envied Country into Ruin, Horror, and Desolation.

MEMORANDUM.
Only a small number being Printed of this first Edition, is one reason why it
is retailed at no less than THREE SHILLINGS.

N. B. Large Allowance to those who buy per the Hundred or Dozen.

If a numerous Second Edition (upon Small Types) should be desired, the Price
will then be determined in proportion to its Number; especially to those, who
are pleased to engage with the Printer for some certain Quantities, before it
again goes TO THE PRESS.

PLAIN TRUTH; CONTAINING REMARKS ON A LATE PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, COMMON SENSE.
I HAVE now before me the Pamphlet, entitled COMMON SENSE; on which I shall
remark with freedom and candor. It may not be improper to remind my reader,
that the investigation of my subject, demands the utmost freedom of enquiry. I
therefore entreat his indulgence; and that he will carefully remember, that
intemperate zeal, is as injurious to liberty, as a manly discussion of facts is
friendly to it. "Liberty, says the great MONTESQUIEU, is a right of doing
whatever the laws permit; and if a citizen could do what they forbid, he would
no longer be possessed of liberty, because all his fellow citizens would have
the same power." In the beginning of his pamphlet, the Author asserts, that
society in every state is a blessing. This in the sincerity of my heart I deny;
for it is supreme misery to be associated with those, who to promote their
ambitious purposes, flagitiously pervert the ends of political society. I do
not say that our Author is indebted to BURGH'S POLITICAL DISQUISITIONS, or to
ROUSSEAU'S Social Compact for his definition of Government, and his large Tree;
although I wish he had favored his reader with the following extract from that
sublime reasoner. "To investigate those conditions of society which may best
answer the purpose of nations, would require the abilities of some superior
intelligence, who should be witness to all the passions of men, but be subject
itself to none, who should have no connections with human nature, but should
have a perfect knowledge of it: A Being, in short, whose happiness should be
independent of us, and who would nevertheless employ itself about us. It is the
province of Gods to make laws for Men." With the utmost deference to the
celebrated ROUSSEAU, I cannot indeed imagine, that laws even so constructed,
would materially benefit our imperfect race; unless omniscience deigned
previously to exalt our nature. The judicious reader will therefore perceive,
that malevolence only, is requisite to declaim against, and arraign the most
perfect governments. Our Political Quack, avails himself of this trite
expedient, to cajole the people into the most abject slavery, under the
delusive name of independence. His first indecent attack is against the English
constitution; which with all its imperfections, is, and ever will be the pride
and envy of mankind. To this panegyric involuntarily our author subscribes, by
granting individuals to be safer in England, than in any other part of Europe.
He indeed insidiously attributes this pre-eminent excellency, to the
constitution of the people, rather than to our excellent constitution. To such
contemptible subterfuge is our Author reduced. I would ask him, why did not the
constitution of the people afford them superior safety, in the reign of Richard
the Third, Henry the Eighth, and other tyrannic princes? Many pages might
indeed be filled with encomiums bestowed on our excellent constitution, by
illustrious authors of different nations.

This beautiful system (according to MONTESQUIEU) our constitution is a
compound of Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy. But it is often said, that
the Sovereign, by honors and appointments, influences the Commons. The
profound and elegant HUME agitating this question, thinks, to this
circumstance, we are in part indebted for our supreme felicity; since without
such control in the Crown; our Constitution would immediately degenerate into
Democracy; a government, which in the sequel, I hope to prove ineligible. Were
I asked marks of the best government, and the purpose of political society, I
would reply, the increase, preservation, and prosperity of its members, in no
quarter of the Globe, are those marks so certainly to be found, as in Great
Britain, and her dependencies. After our Author has employed several pages, to
break the mounds of society by debasing Monarchs: He says, "The plain truth is,
that the antiquity of English Monarchy will not bear looking into."

HUME treating of the original contract, has the following melancholy, but
sensible observation, "Yet reason tells us, that there is no property in
durable objects, such as lands, and houses, when carefully examined, in passing
from hand to hand, but must in some period, have been founded on fraud and
injustice. The necessities of human society, neither in private or public life,
will allow of such an accurate enquiry; and there is no virtue or moral duty,
but what may, with facility, be refined away, if we indulge a false philosophy,
in sifting and scrutinizing, by every captious rule of logic, in every light or
position in which it may be placed."

Say ye votaries of honor and truth, can we adduce a stronger proof of our
Author's turpitude, than his quoting the anti-philosophical story of the Jews,
to debase Monarchy, and the best of Monarchs. Briefly examining the story of
this contemptible race, more barbarous than our savages: We find their history
a continued succession of miracles, astonishing our imaginations, and
exercising our faith. After wandering forty years in horrid deserts, they are
chiefly condemned to perish for their perverseness, although under the
immediate dominion of the KING of HEAVEN. At length, they arrive in the sterile
country of Palestine; which they conquer, by exterminating the inhabitants, and
warring like Demons. The inhabitants of the adjoining regions, justly therefore
held them in detestation, and the Jews finding themselves constantly abhorred,
have ever since hated all mankind. This people, as destitute of arts and
industry, as humanity, had not even in their language a word expressive of
education. We might indeed remind our Author, who so readily drags in the Old
Testament to support his sinister measures; that we could draw from that
source, many texts, favorable to Monarchy, were we not conscious, that the
Mosaic Law, gives way to the Gospel Dispensation. The reader no doubt will be
gratified by the following extract from a most primitive Christian.
"Christianity is a spiritual religion, relative only to celestial objects. The
Christian's inheritance is not of this world. He performs his duty it is true,
but this he does with a profound indifference for the good or ill success of
his endeavors: Provided he has nothing to reproach himself, it is of little
consequence to him whether matters go well or ill here below. If the state be
in a flourishing condition, he can hardly venture to rejoice in the public
felicity, least he should be puffed up, with the inordinate pride of his
country's glory. If the state decline, he blesses the hand of GOD, that humbles
his people to the dust."

Having defined the best government, I will humbly attempt to describe good
Kings by the following unerring rule. The best Princes are constantly
calumniated by the envenomed tongues and pens of the most worthless of their
subjects. For this melancholy truth, do I appeal to the testimony of impartial
historians; and long experience. The noble impartial historian Sully, speaking
of the almost divine Henry the Fourth of France says, "Thus was this god like
prince represented (by the discontented of these days) almost throughout his
whole kingdom, as a furious, and implacable tyrant: They were never without one
set of arguments to engage his catholic nobility in a rebellion against him;
and another to sow sedition among his protestant officers and gentry." HUME
says, that the cruel unrelenting tyrant, Philip the Second of Spain, with his
infernal Inquisition, was not more detested by the people of the Netherlands;
than was the humane Charles, with his inoffensive Liturgy; by his mutinous
subjects. The many unmerited insults offered to our gracious Sovereign; by the
unprincipled Wilkes, and others down to this late Author; will forever disgrace
humanity. For he says, "that monarchy was the most prosperous invention the
Devil ever set on foot for the promotion of idolatry. It is the pride of Kings
which throws mankind into confusion: In short, continues this Author, monarchy
and succession, have laid not this or that kingdom only, but the World in blood
and ashes." How deplorably wretched the condition of mankind, could they
believe such execrable flagitious jargon. Unhappily indeed, mankind in every
age are susceptible of delusion; but surely our Author's poison carries its
antidote with it. Attentive to the spirit of his publication, we fancy
ourselves in the barbarous fifteenth century; in which period our Author would
have figured with his " Common Sense -- and blood will attend it."

After his terrible anathema against our venerable constitution, and monarchy;
let us briefly examine a democratical state; and see whether or not it is a
government less sanguinary. This government is extremely plausible, and indeed
flattering to the pride of mankind. The demagogues therefore, to seduce the
people into their criminal designs ever hold up democracy to them; although
conscious it never did, nor ever will answer in practice. If we believe a great
Author, " There never existed, nor ever will exist a real democracy in the
World." If we examine the republics of Greece and Rome, we ever find them in a
state of war domestic or foreign. Our Author therefore makes no mention of
these ancient States. "When Alexander ordered all the exiles, to be restored
throughout all the cities, it was found that the whole amounted to twenty
thousand, the remains probably of still greater slaughters and massacres. What
an astonishing number in so narrow a country as ancient Greece? and what
domestic confusion, jealousy, partiality, revenge, heart-burnings must tear
those cities, where factions were wrought up to such a degree of fury and
despair." Apian's history of the civil wars of Rome, contains the most
frightful picture of massacres, proscriptions, and forfeitures that ever were
presented to the world.

The excellent Montesquieu declares, "That a democracy supposes the concurrence
of a number of circumstances rarely united, in the first place, it is requisite
that the state itself should be of small extent; so that the people might be
easily assembled and personally known to each other. Secondly, the simplicity
of their manners, should be such as to prevent a multiplicity of affairs, and
perplexity in discussing them: And thirdly, there should subsist a great degree
of equality between them, in point of right and authority: Lastly, there should
be little or no luxury, for luxury must either be the eflect of wealth, or it
must make it necessary. It corrupts at once, both rich and poor: The one, by
the possession, and the other, by the want of it."To this may be added
continues the same Author, "that no government is so subject to CIVIL WARS, and
INTESTINE COMMOTIONS, as that of the democratical or popular form; because, no
other tends so strongly and so constantly to alter, nor requires so much
vigilance, and fortitude to preserve it from alteration. It is indeed, in such
a constitution, particularly, that a Citizen should always be armed with
fortitude, and constancy; and should every day, in the sincerity of his heart,
guard against corruption, arising either from selfishness in himself, or in his
compatriots; for if it once enters into public transactions, to root it out
afterward would be miraculous.

Our Author asserts, that Holland and Swisserland are without wars domestic or
foreign. About a century ago, Holland was in a few weeks overrun by the arms
of France, and almost miraculously saved by the gallantry of her Prince of
Orange, so celebrated afterward by the name of William the Third. Almost from
that period, until the treaty of Utrecht, Holland was a principal in wars, the
most expensive and bloody, ever waged by humankind. The wounds she then
received were unhealed in 1744, when reluctantly roused from her pacific
lethargy, she was dragged into war; and losing her impregnable Bergenopzoom,
and Maestricht; was again on the brink of becoming a province to France, when
happily liberated by the British Nation. In the war of 1756. Holland
continually insulted in the capture of her ships, by our cruisers; preserved a
humiliating neutrality. If victory indeed had not crowned the the British
banners; the Dutch indubitably would have assisted their natural Allies, in
whatever quarter of the globe attacked: For it is incontestibly true; that the
existence of Holland, as a State, depends, and invariably will depend, on the
prosperity of Great Britain. Since the murder of Barnevelt, and the immortal
Dewits, by the deluded furious people, Holland has too often been convulsed by
anarchy, and torn by party. Unfortunately alas! for the cause of humanity; the
rugged and incult deserts of Swisserland, preclude not ambition, sedition, and
anarchy. Her bleak and barren mountains do not so effectually secure precarious
liberty, as daily vending her sons to the adjoining nations, particularly to
France; by whom the thirteen Cantons, could be subjected in as many days, did
that court meditate so senseless and delusive an object. Nugatory indeed, if we
consider, that France derives more substantial advantage from the present state
of Swisserland, than if she exhausted herself, to maintain numerous Battalions,
to bridle the Cantons. A moment, let us suppose, that our Author's
asseverations of Holland and Swisserland, are as real as delusive: His
inferences do not flow from his premises; for their superior advantages, do not
arise from their popular government, but from circumstances of peculiar local
felicity, obliging the Princes of Europe, to defend them from the omnipotent
land force, if I may so speak of France. After impotently attacking our
Sovereign; and the constitution: He contradicts the voice of all mankind, by
declaring, that America " would have flourished as much, and probably much
more, had no European power taken any notice of her."

If he means, that had this Continent been unexplored, the original inhabitants
would have been happier: For once, I agree with him. Previous to the settlement
of these Provinces by our Ancestors. The kingdom of France was convulsed by
religious phrenzy. This, and Sebastian Cabot's prior discovery, perhaps,
happily afforded the people of England, an opportunity of locating these
Provinces. At length, peace being restored to France, by her Hero, Henry the
Fourth: His nation in turn, were seized with the rage of colonizing. Finding
the English claimed the Provinces on the Atlantic; they appropriated the snow
banks of Canada, which we dare not suppose, they would have preferred to these
fertile Provinces, had not the prior occupancy, and power of England
interfered. I hope it will not be denied, that the notice taken of us, at this
time by an European Power, was rather favorable for us. -- Certain it is, had
not England then taken notice of us, these delectable Provinces would now
appertain to France; and the people of New England, horrid to think, would now
be counting their beads. Some years after the Era in question, the civil wars
intervening in England, afforded to the Swedes and Dutch, a footing on this
Continent. Charles the Second being restored; England reviving her claim,
rendered abortive the Swedish pretensions; and by conquest, and granting
Surinam to the Dutch, procured the cession of there usurpation, now New York. I
do indeed confess, my incapacity to discern the injury sustained by this second
"notice taken of us, by an European Power;" in default of which intervention,
the Swedes, to this hour, would have retained their settlement, now the famed
Pennsylvania; and the Dutch, consequently, had retained theirs. Some time after
this period, the people of New Engand were employed, in framing and executing
laws, so intolerant and sanguinary, that to us, they seem adapted for devils,
not men.

Indeed it is worthy of note, that the inhabitants of Jamaica, Barbados, and
Virginia, at that very time, enacted laws, breathing the spirit of humanity,
and such as men could bear. Soon after the period in question, arrived the
great and good WILLIAM PENN, with his philosophic people called Quakers;
together with toleration, industry, and permanent credit. The people of
England, encouraged by the extension of their laws and commerce to those
colonies, powerfully assisted our merchants and planters, insomuch, that our
settlements increased rapidly, and throve apace. It may be affirmed, that from
this period, until the present unhappy hour. No part of human kind, ever
experienced more perfect felicity. Voltaire indeed says, that if ever the
Golden Age existed, it was in Pennsylvania. France disgusted with the unhappy
situation of her American Colonies, had long meditated the conquest of one of
our middle provinces. To accomplish this purpose, she extended a line of forts
on our frontiers, and actually fortified the place now called Pittsburgh.
Justly alarmed by these encroachments in the hour of our distress, we called
aloud on Great Britain for assistance, nor was she deaf to our cries. The
English ministry, after in vain exhausting all the arts of negotiation,
declared war against France. After spilling torrents of blood, after expending
one hundred and ninety millions of their dollars, and four or five millions of
ours. They gloriously reduced the French settlements. Surely it will not be
said, that this last NOTICE taken of us by the people of England, was injurious
to us. Our enemies indeed allege, that this last intervention by bloating us
with pride, will eventually ruin us, and render the people of Britain objects
of derision, for lavishing their blood and treasure, in defense of provinces;
"a match not only for Europe, (according to our author,) but for the world." --
Our author next remarks* "that the commerce by which she has enriched herself,
are the necessaries of life, and will always have a market while eating is the
custom of Europe,"

I reply, that our exporting grain, is as it were of yesterday, that the recent
demand was principally occasioned by the distractions in Poland, and other
parts of Europe, and probably will totally or partly fail, soon as the fertile
country of Poland, and more fertile Ukraine shall again become cultivated. I
believe the Europeans did eat before our merchants exported our grain, and
perhaps will eat, when they cease to export it. I deny, that this momentary
commerce has enriched us; and I could adduce numberless melancholy proofs of
the contrary. I shall only remark, that in the most fertile and delectable
wheat country in America, bounded by Chesopeak-bay, and almost adjoining that
of Delaware. A tract of the best wheat land ten years ago, would hardly have
exceeded a guinea and a half per acre, indeed, in 1773, such land covered with
wood, would scarcely have sold for four guineas an acre, an undoubted proof of
want of PEOPLE, industry, and wealth; particularly so, if we consider that one
crop of corn and wheat on such land judiciously cultivated, would actually
repay the supposed price. Our author asserts, "that our present numbers are
sufficient to repel the force of all the world. That the Continent has at this
time the largest disciplined army of ANY POWER UNDER HEAVEN. That the English
navy is only worth three millions and a half sterling," which, in effect, would
reduce it to thirty-five ships of the line, twenty ships of forty guns, twenty
of thirty-six, and eight of twenty guns. "That if America had only a twentieth
part of this force, she would be by far an over-match for Britain, that
Independence is necessary, because France and Spain cannot assist us, until
such an event;" he also affirms, "that Great Britain cannot govern us, and that
no good can arise from a reconciliation with her."

I shall humbly endeavor to show, that our author shamefully misrepresents
facts, is ignorant of the true state of Great Britain and her Colonies, utterly
unqualified for the arduous task, he has presumptuously assumed; and ardently
intent on seducing us to that precipice on which himself stands trembling. To
elucidate my strictures, I must with fidelity expose the circumstances of Great
Britain and her colonies. If therefore, in the energy of description, I unfold
certain bold and honest truths with simplicity, the judicious reader will
remember, that true knowledge of our situation, is as essential to our safety,
as ignorance thereof may endanger it. In the English provinces, exclusive of
negroe and other slaves, we have one hundred and sixty thousand; or one hundred
and seventy thousand men capable of bearing arms. If we deduct the people
called Quakers, Anabaptists, and other religionists averse to arms; a
considerable part of the emigrants, and those having a grateful predilection
for the ancient constitution and parent state, we shall certainly reduce the
first number to sixty or seventy thousand men. Now admitting those equal to the
Roman legions, can we suppose them capable of defending against the power of
Britain, a country nearly twelve hundred miles extending on the ocean. Suppose
our troops assembled in New England, if the Britons see not fit to assail them,
they haste to and desolate our other provinces, which eventually would reduce
New England. If by dividing our forces, we pretend to defend our provinces, we
also are infallibly undone. Our most fertile provinces, filled with unnumbered
domestic enemies, slaves; intersected by navigable rivers, every where
accessible to the fleets and armies of Britain, can make no defense. If without
the medium of passion and prejudice, we view our other provinces, half armed,
destitute of money and a navy: We must confess, that no power ever engaged such
POTENT ANTAGONISTS, under such peculiar circumstances of infelicity. In the
better days of Rome, she permitted no regular troops to defend her. Men
destitute of property the admitted not into her militia, (her only army.) I
have been extremely concerned at the separation of the Connecticut men from our
army. It augur'd not an ardent enthusiasm for liberty and glory. We still have
an army before Boston, and I should be extremely happy to hear substantial
proofs of their glory. I am still hopeful of great things from our army before
Boston, when joined by the regiments now forming, which WANT OF BREAD will
probably soon fill. Notwithstanding the predilection I have for my countrymen,
I remark with grief, that hitherto our troops have displayed but few marks of
Spartan or Roman enthusiasm. In the sincerity of my heart, I adjure the reader
to believe, that no person is more sensibly afflicted by hearing the enemies of
America remark, that no General ever fell singly and so ingloriously unrevenged
before the inauspicious affair of Quebec. I am under no doubt, however, that we
shall become as famed for martial courage, as any nation ever the sun beheld.
Sanguine as I am, respecting the virtue and courage of my countrymen, depending
on the history of mankind, since the Christian Era, I cannot however imagine,
that zeal for liberty will animate to such glorious efforts of heroism, as
religious enthusiasm has often impelled its votaries to perform. If the cruel
unrelenting tyrant Philip the second of Spain, had never attempted to introduce
into the Low Countries, the infernal tribunal of the Inquisition: It is most
probable, that the present States of Holland, would to this time have remained
provinces to Spain, and patiently paid the fiftieth penny and other grievous
exactions. Certain it is, that the fanatics of Scotland, and people of
England, had never armed against the first Charles, if religious enthusiasm had
not more powerfully agitated their minds, than zeal for liberty, the operations
of which, on the human mind, has since the Era in question, ever been more
languid, than the former most powerful passion. These hardy assertions, are
supported as well by notorious facts, as by the learned HUME, and other
judicious historians. I cannot here omit remarking the inconsistency of human
nature. The Scotch, the most furious enthusiasts then in Europe, were
slaughtered like sheep, by Cromwell at Dunbar, where their formidable army
hardly made any resistance, if we except that made by a handful of loyalists,
destitute of that passion. Certain it is, that those enthusiasts, were often
cut in pieces by their countryman, the gallant Marquis of Montrose, whose
troops (Highlanders and other loyalists,) held Presbyterianism in contempt.

With the utmost deference to the honorable Congress; I do not view the most
distant gleam of aid from foreign powers. The princes alone, capable of
succouring us, are the Sovereign's of France and Spain. If according to our
Author, we possess an eighth part of the habitable globe, and actually have a
check on the West India commerce of England. The French indigo, and other
valuable West India commodities, and the Spanish galeons, are in great jeopardy
from our power. The French and Spaniards, are therefore wretched politicians,
if they do not assist England, in reducing her colonies to obedience. --
Pleasantry apart! Can we be so deluded, to expect aid from those princes, which
inspiring their subjects with a relish for liberty, might eventually shake
their arbitrary thrones. -- Natural avowed enemies to our sacred cause: Will
they cherish, will they support the flame of liberty in America? Ardently
intent, on extinguishing its latent dying sparks in their respective dominions.
Can we believe, that those princes will offer an example so dangerous to their
subjects and colonies, by aiding those provinces to independence? If
independent, aggrandized by infinite numbers from every part of Europe, this
Continent would rapidly attain power astonishing to imagination. Soon, very
soon would we be conditioned to conquer Mexico; and all their West India
settlements, which to annoy, or possess, we indeed are most happily situated.
Simple and obvious as these truths are, can they be unknown to the people and
princes of Europe? Be it however admitted, that those princes unmindful of the
fatal policy of RICHLIEU'S arming Charles's subjects against him, and the more
fatal policy of LEWIS the fourteenth permitting our glorious deliverer to
effect the Revolution. I say, be it admitted, that those princes regardless of
future consequences, and the ineptitude of the times, are really disposed to
succor us. Say, ye friends of liberty and mankind, would no danger accrue from
an army of French and Spaniards in the bosom of America? would ye not dread
their junction with the Canadians and Savages, and with the numerous Roman
Catholics, dispersed throughout the Colonies?

Let us now briefly view the pre-eminently envied state of Great Britain. If we
regard the power of Britain, unembarrassed with Continental connections, and
the political balance, we may justly pronounce her what our author does,
AMERICA; -- "A match for all Europe." Amazing were the efforts of England, in
the war of Queen Ann, when little benefited by colony commerce, and ever she
had availed herself of the courage, good sense, and numbers of the people of
Scotland and Ireland.

That England then prescribed laws to Europe, will be long remembered. Last
war, her glory was, if possible, more eminently exalted, in every quarter of
the globe did victory hover round her armies and navies, and her fame re-echoed
from pole to pole. At present Great Britain is the umpire of Europe. It is not
exaggeration to affirm, that the Russians principally are indebted for their
laurels, to her power, which alone retained France from preventing the ruin of
her ancient faithful ally, The Ottoman Port, superfluous it were to enumerate
her powerful alliances, or mention her immense resources. Her raising the
incredible sums of eighteen, nineteen, and twenty-two millions sterling for the
service of the years 1759-60, and 61, was more astonishing to Europe, than the
victories of her fleets and armies. The annual rents of the kingdom of England
only, many years ago, amounted to thirty three millions sterling. Thirty five
millions bushels of wheat are annually produced in that kingdom; and perhaps as
many bushels of other grain: Twelve millions of fleeces of wool are there
yearly shorn. In short, the Kingdom is a perfect Bee-hive, in numbers and
industry; and is said to contain more industry, consequently more wealth, than
all the rest of Europe. The famed HUME says, "I should as soon dread, that all
our rivers and springs, should be exhausted, as that money should abandon a
kingdom, where there are people and industry." The British navy, at the close
of last war, consisted of nearly two hundred ships of the line, one hundred
large frigates, and about one hundred smaller frigates, or other armed vessels.
Since the peace, I believe, the navy has been most vigilantly preserved by Lord
Sandwich, (said to be as equal to that ardous department, as any man in
Europe*) Since the war, several capital ships have annually been built; and it
is most certain, that on six months notice, Great Britain could equip fleets,
sufficiently formidable, to contend with all the naval force, that could, or
would act against her. The immense quantity of naval and other stores, in the
different arsenals, with the royal navy Seventeen capital ships were built from
1763 until 1771.
cannot at this time be worth less than twenty millions sterling. The island of
Great Britain, between six and seven hundred miles in length, and upwards of
two thousand miles circumference; and being every where indented with harbors,
forms (with other causes) such nurseries of seamen, as the world cannot produce.

Let us now examine our Author's account of the navy of Great Britain. "It is
says he, worth no more than three millions and an half sterling." This in
effect will reduce it to ten second rate ships of war, ten third rate, fifteen
fourth rate, ten ships of forty guns, ten of thirty-six, and eight of twenty.
"If America says he, had only a twentieth part of the naval force of Britain,
she would be by far an over-match for her, because as we neither have, nor
claim any foreign dominion, our whole force would be employed on our own coast;
where we should in the long-run have two to one the advantage of those who had
three or four thousand miles to sail over, before they could attack us; and the
same distance to return, in order to refit and recruit. And although Britain by
her fleet, has a check over our trade to Europe, we have as large a one over
her trade to the West Indies, which, by laying in the neighborhood of the
Continent, lies entirely at its mercy."

Were it lawful to joke on so serious an occasion, I would remind the reader of
our Author's modesty, in saying, "that we claim no foreign dominion:" Since we
have the most numerous, and best disciplined army under the Heaven; and a navy
sufficiently strong to combat that of Great Britain. For our present naval
armament compose a fleet more than equal to a twentieth part of the British
navy, (according to our Author's estimation.) Notwithstanding our Author's
delicacy, relying on the well known utility of Melasses, to the New England
governments: I hope they will order Admiral Manly to seize Jamaica, and the
other West India Islands. The Admiral cannot be at a loss for men; since,
according to our Author, "a few social sailors, will soon instruct a sufficient
number of active land-men, in the common work of a ship. I do indeed confess,
that the British ships of war, are constantly equipt altogether with very
social sailors; and as constantly drub the French ships, double manned, with
active landmen, though sufficiently instructed by a few social sailors. The
reader will perceive, that our Author, has humbled the naval power of Britain,
with more facility, than France and Spain could have done: And, has also
expelled her from our ports with happier success, than did Spain; who was
compelled to yield her Gibralter and Portmahon, for the convenience of her
fleets and commerce.

We must indeed allow, that Spain, though possessed of Mexico and Peru, cannot
maintain the most numerous and best disciplined army under Heaven, nor equip a
navy fit to contend with the fleets of Britain. It must also be confessed, that
he makes Great Britain, very favorably dispose of her humbled navy; by
employing nineteen parts of it in the Mediterranean, Asia, Africa, and I know
not where: When he knows we have so great a check on her West India trade, a
commerce, of the last importance to her.

I would blush for poor human nature, did I imagine that any man, other than a
bigot could believe these ridiculous stories, these arrant gasconades,
respecting our numerous and best disciplined army under heaven, about our navy,
and a few social sailors, and that France and Spain will not assist us, (who
by-the-by, according to our author, are able to conquer them,) until playing
upon words, we declare ourselves INDEPENDENT. Can a reasonable being for a
moment believe that Great Britain, whose political existence depends on our
constitutional obedience, who but yesterday made such prodigious efforts to
save us from France, will not exert herself as powerfully to preserve us from
our frantic schemes of Independency. Can we a moment doubt, that the Sovereign
of Great Britain and his ministers, whose glory as well as personal safety
depends on our obedience, will not exert every nerve of the British power, to
save themselves and us from ruin.

"Much says our author has been said of the strength of Britain and the
Colonies, that in conjunction they might bid defiance to the world; but this is
mere presumption, the fate of war is uncertain."

Excellent reasoning, and truly consistent with our author. We of ourselves are
a match for Europe, nay for the world; but in junction with the most formidable
power on earth; why then, the matter is mere presumption. The fate of war is
uncertain, It is indeed humiliating to consider, that this author should vamp
up a form of government, for a considerable part of mankind; and in case of its
succeeding, that he probably would be one of our tyrants, until we prayed some
more illustrious tyrant of the army, to spurn him to his primeval obscurity;
from all his ill-got honors flung, turned to that dirt from whence he sprung.
"A government of our own, is our natural right," says our author, "had right
decided, and not fate the cause, Rome had preserved her Cato and her laws."
Unfortunately for mankind, those are fine sounding words, which seldom or ever
influence human affairs. If they did, instead of appropriating the vacant lands
to schemes of ambition, we must instantly deputise envoys to the Indians,
praying them to re-enter their former possessions, and permit us quietly to
depart to the country of our ancestors, where we would be welcome guests. But
continues our author, "What have we to do with setting the world at defiance?
our plan is commerce, and that well attended to, will secure us the peace and
friendship of all Europe. Because it is the interest of all Europe, to have
America a free-port, her trade will always be her protection, and her
barrenness of gold and silver, will secure her from invaders."

I am perfectly satisfied, that we are in no condition to set the world at
defiance, that commerce and the protection of Great Britain will secure us
peace, and the friendship of all Europe. But I deny, that it is the interest of
all Europe, to have America a free port, unless they are desirous of
depopulating their dominions. His assertions, that barrenness of gold and
silver will secure us from invaders, is indeed highly pleasant, have we not a
much better security from invasions, viz. the most numerous and best
disciplined army under heaven; or has our author already disbanded it. Pray how
much gold and silver do the mines of Flanders produce? and what country so
often has seen its unhappy fields drenched with blood, and fertilised with
human gore. The princes of Europe have long dreaded the migration of their
subjects to America; and we are sensible, that the king of Prussia is said more
than once to have hanged Newlanders, or those who seduced his subjects to
emigrate. I also humbly apprehend, that Britain is a part of Europe. Now old
gentleman, as you have clearly shown, that we have a check upon her West India
trade? Is it her interest to give us a greater check upon it, by permitting
America (as you express it,) to become a free port. Can we suppose it to be her
interest to lose her valuable commerce to the Colonies, which effectually she
would do, by giving up America to become your free port. If therefore it is the
interest of all Europe, to have America a free port: The people of Britain are
extremely simple to expend so many millions sterling to prevent it. "It is
repugnant to the nature of things to all examples from former ages, to suppose
that this Continent can long remain subject to any external power."

Antiquity affords us to eclarcisement respecting the future government of
America. Rome situated in a sterile corner of Italy, long, long, retained the
then world in chains, and probably had maintained her dominion longer, had not
the cross, removing the empire to Byzantium, weakened the eagles, and in turn,
justly been destroyed by the Barbarians. I see no reason to doubt, that Great
Britain, may not long retain us in constitutional obedience. Time, the
destroyer of human affairs may indeed, end her political life by a gentle
decay. Like Rome, she may be constrained to defend herself from the Huns, and
Alaricks of the North. Ingratefully should we endeavor to precipitate her
political demise, she will devise every expedient; to retain our obedience; and
rather than fail, will participate those provinces amongst the potent states of
Europe. "The authority of Great Britain over this Continent, is a form of
government which sooner or later must have an end."

This I have granted, and I add, that a million of revolutions may happen on
this Continent, for every one of which, I am not indeed so over solicitous, as
our Phoenix of Whims, the Author of Common Sense. "The Colonies have manifested
such a spirit of good order and obedience to continental government, as is
sufficient to make every person happy on that head."

What is this union so highly vaunted off? whence the marching and
counter-marching through almost every province to disarm those denominated
tories? -- I perfectly agree, that glorious is our union. -- I execrate those
who say, it has been cemented by every species of fraud and violence: Yet
notwithstanding I dread its fragility; were an army of Britons in the middle of
our country. As the Author of Common Sense is now in the grand monde; and
cannot be acquainted with the language of many people in the provinces: I will
communicate the general purport of their discourse. -- "We, say they, do not
see through the wisdom of the present times. We remember with unseigned
gratitude, the many benefits derived through our connections with Great
Britain, by whom but yesterday, we were emancipated from slavery and death. We
are not indeed unaware, that Great Britain is uniformly reproached with
defending us from interested motives. In like manner, however, may every
ingrate, reproach his benefactor; since all benefactions may be said to flow
from no purer fountain. With predilection, we view our parent state, and
wishfully contemplate on our late felicity, almost realizing that state of old,
so beautifully feigned by the poets. We venerate the constitution, which with
all its imperfections, (too often exaggerated) we apprehend almost approaches
as near to perfection, as human kind can bear. We shudder at the idea of arming
with more virulence, more unremitting ardour, against the parent state, than
against France; by whom our RIGHTS, CIVIL, as well as RELIGIOUS, certainly were
more imminently endangered. With horror we reflect on the former civil wars,
when every crime, odious and baneful to human nature, were alternately
perpetrated by the soldiers, particularly by the Independents."

"Every quiet method of peace has been ineffectual: our prayers have been
rejected with disdain." I do not indeed agree with the people of England in
saying, that those, who so successfully labored to widen the breach -- desired
nothing less than peace. That they who shortly were to command the most
aumerous and best disciplined army under Heaven; and a navy fit to contend with
the fleets of England; imagining, the time had found us, disdained to be just.
I highly venerate a majority of the Delegates. I have not indeed the honor of
knowing all the worthy members; however, I wish the Gentlemen of the Congress,
'ere they entered on their important charge, had been better acquainted, with
the strength of our friends in parliament. I sincerely lament, that the King
did not receive the last ^^^ellent petition from the Congress; and I as
sincerely wish, the Gentlemen of the Congress had not addressed themselves at
that juncture, to (...) of Ireland. "As to government matters," (continues our
Author,) "it is not in the power of Britain to do this Continent justice: The
business of it will soon be too weighty and intricate to be managed with any
tolerable degree of convenience, by a power so very distant from us, and so
very ignorant of us; for if they cannot conquer us, they cannot govern us. The
difference between Pennsylvania, and Connecticut, respecting some unlocated
lands, shows the insignificance of a British government, and fully proves, that
nothing but Continental authority can regulate Continental matters."

Until the present unhappy period, Great Britain has afforded to all mankind,
the most perfect proof of her wise lenient, and magnanimous government of the
Colonies -- The proofs to which we already have alluded, viz. our supreme
felicity, and amazing increase. Than the affair of the Connecticut invaders;
Omnipotence only could grant us stronger reasons for praying a continuance of
our former beneficent government. Most certainly, every dispassionate person,
as well as the plundered Pennsylvanians, must confess; that the Arm of Great
Britain alone detained those Free-booters aforesaid, from seizing the city of
Philadelphia, to which without all doubt, they have as just a claim, as to
those fertile regions in Pennsylvania, which they surreptitiously have
possessed themselves of. In wrath to mankind, should Heaven permit our Author's
new fangled government to exist; I as a friend to Pennsylvanians, advise them
to explore new settlements, and avoid the cruel mortification of being expelled
by the Saints from their delicious abodes and pleasing fields -- "But (says the
Author) the most powerful argument is, that nothing but independence, (that is
a Continental form of government) can keep the peace of the Continent, and
preserve it inviolate from civil wars. I dread the event of a reconciliation
now with Britain, as it is more than probable, that it will be followed by
revolt somewhere; the consequences of which may be far more fatal than all the
malice of Britain. Thousands are already ruined by British barbarity, thousands
more will probably share the same fate. These men have other feelings, than
those who have nothing suffered: All they now possess is liberty, what they
before enjoyed is sacrificed to its service, and having nothing more to lose,
they disdain all submission."

Here we cannot mistake our Author's meaning, that if one or more of the middle
or southern Colonies reconcile with Great Britain, they will have war to
sustain with New England; "the consequences of which may be more detrimental,
than all the malice of Britain." This terrible denunciation, fortunately for
such Colonies; is as futile as its author. Should Great Britain re-establish
her authority in the said Colonies by negotiation; surely it is not temerity to
add, that the weight of Britain, in the scales of those provinces, would
preponderate against the power of New England. If Britain should reduce the
colonies by arms, (which may Heaven avert!) The New England provinces will have
as little inclination, as ability, to disturb the peace of their neighbors. I
do indeed most sincerely compassionate those unhappy men, who are ruined by our
unfortunate distractions. I do fervently pray, that Britain, and the Colonies
may most effectually consider their peculiar infelicity. Such attention will do
infinite honor to the parent state; who cannot view them as enemies, but as
men unhappy irritated by the impolitic measures of Great Britain. "The
diminution of trade affords an army, and the necessities of an army, create a
new trade." (So says our Author) I am surprised the ministry, so often
reproached with ruining the commerce of Britain; never urged, (what was never
thought or said before.) Our Author's excellent axiom; "that the diminution,
etc." Certain it is, the minority had replied, since the commencement of this
century; the diminution of the commerce of France has afforded her nearly one
million of soldiers; but the necessities of this prodigious number of troops,
created her so bad a commerce, that she has twice proved bankrupt since, and
more than once experienced the miseries of famine.

"If premiums (says our Author) were to be given to Merchants to build and
employ in their service, ships mounted with 20, 30,40, or 50 guns, the premiums
to be in proportion to the loss of bulk to the Merchants. Fifty or sixty of
those ships, with a few guard ships on constant duty, would keep up a
sufficient navy, and that without burdening ourselves with the evil so loudly
complained of in England, of suffering their fleets in time of peace to lie
rotting in their docks." Yield the palm of ingenuity to our Author, ye Dewits,
Colberts, Pelhams, and Pitts. He has outdone ye by constructing a beautiful
navy; alas! on paper only. -- First, no nation in Europe depends on such ships
for her defense: Secondly, such ships would be unfit to contend with capital
ships: Thirdly, in the hour of danger, these ships on their voyage, or return,
would alternately be taken by an active enemy: Lastly, six times as many such
ships would be unequally matched with that part of the naval power of Britain,
which she actually could spare to combat on our coasts. This cannot be thought
exaggeration, if we consider that the British navy, last war, carried about
seventeen thousand guns; and upwards of ninety five thousand social seamen."No
country (says our Author) is so happily situated, or internally capable of
raising a fleet as America. Tar, timber, Iron and cordage are her natural
produce." He speaks of forming a fleet, as if he could do it by his fiat. A
third rate ship of the line fitted for sea, is allowed to cost seventy four
thousand pounds sterling, which at the present exchange, is about one hundred
and twenty nine thousand pounds. Now, as labor, sail cloth, cordage, and other
requisites, are dearer than in Europe, we may reasonably suppose the advanced
price, at twenty-five per cent. which makes the amount one hundred and fifty
four thousand pounds. We must next suppose our navy equal to that of France;
which consists of sixty four ships of the line (fifty gun ships inclusive)
twenty five frigates, with ships of inferior force. In case of independence, we
cannot admit a smaller naval force. Indeed, when joined to the fleets of France
and Spain, the natives so united, and navigated principally with landsmen,
instructed by a few social sailors, will be vastly inferior to the squadrons of
Britain. The amount therefore of such our navy, will only require the trifling
sum of twelve million, six hundred and twenty five thousand pounds currency,
which I am very willing to believe we can spare, being scarcely one fourth the
value of our property, real and personal. With excellent management, our navy
would last eight, nine, or ten years: we therefore would find it extremely
convenient to rebuild it constantly at the expiration of that term: Of this
there cannot be a doubt, when we remember with our Author, "that ship-building
is America's greatest pride. The vast empire of Russia is almost shut out from
the sea, wherefore her boundless forests, her tar, iron, and cordage, are only
articles of commerce." I reply, that Russia containing ten times our numbers,
is destitute of Industry and commerce. She has ports sufficient to build and
contain a navy to subdue the world. Destitute as we have remarked of industry
and commerce, her navy is inconsiderable; and being equipt with landsmen,
cannot figure against ships navigated by social sailors. Who can doubt the
ability of Spain to build a navy. The cargo of two or three of her annual
galeons were sufficient to build a navy as formidable as that permitted to
Great Britain (by the Author of Common Sense.) In her Island of Cuba, possessed
of an immensity of fine cedar; she might construct a navy as formidable as that
of Great Britain, but to what purpose, other than to adorn the triumph of her
enemies; unless she could arm her ships otherwise than by active landsmen,
instructed by a few social sailors. Our Author says, "that the Terrible, Capt.
Death stood the hottest engagement of any ship last war, yet had not twenty
sailors on board," (though her compliment of men was upwards of two hundred)

We do indeed confess ourselves doubtful on this head, and therefore wish our
Author had produced his authority. We do apprehend, that naval actions, very
generally depend on seaman-ship, that is, on dexterously working the ship during
the combat. Now the judicious reader will remember, that ships of war in
engagement cannot be navigated by a few social sailors, nor even by a bare
competency, unless such sailors are more invulnerable than was the great
Achilles.

"Were the Continent (says our Author) crowded with inhabitants, her sufferings
under the present circumstances, would be intolerable, the more sea ports we
had, the more we should have both to defend, and to lose." This is rather
incomprehensible, I cannot imagine, that we would be less formidable with ten
times our present numbers, if at present we can defend one seaport; surely,
with ten times as many inhabitants, we could equally defend ten. If with our
present numbers, we are a match for the world, consequently with ten times as
many, we would be a match for ten worlds, which would indeed be prodigious! The
infant state of the Colonies as it is called, so far from being against, is an
argument in favor of Independence." This assertion is as absurd, as if he had
maintained, that twenty is inferior in number to two. "But the injuries and
disadvantages we sustain by that connection, are without number, and our duty
to mankind at large, as well as to ourselves, instruct us to renounce the
alliance. Because any submission to, or dependence upon Great Britain, tends
directly to involve this Continent in European wars and quarrels. As Europe is
our market for trade, we ought to form no political connection with any part of
it." Innumerable are the advantages of our connection with Britain; and a just
dependence on her, is a sure way to avoid the horrors and calamities of war.
Wars in Europe, will probably than heretofore become less frequent, religious
rancour, which formerly animated princes to arms, is succeeded by a spirit of
philosophy extremely friendly to peace. The princes of Europe are or ought to
be convinced by sad experience, that the objects of conquest, are vastly
inadequate to the immense charge of their armaments. Prudential motives,
therefore, in future, will often dictate negotiation, instead of war. Be it
however admitted, that our speculations are nugatory, and that as usual, we are
involved in war. In this case we really do not participate a twentieth part of
the misery and hardships of war, experienced by the other subjects of the
empire. As future wars will probably be carried on by Britain in her proper
element, her success will hardly be doubtful, nor can this be thought audacity,
if we remember the great things effected by Britain in her naval wars, then
secondary objects to her Germanic Connections, to which she now politically
seems indifferent. Our sailors navigating our vessels to the West Indies during
war, are exempted from impressment, and if our trade to any part of Europe is
then stagnated, it flows with uncommon rapidity in the West Indies, nor is the
object of captures inconsiderable.

Our author surely forgets that when independent, we cannot trade with Europe,
without political connections, and that all treaties made by England or other
commercial states are, or ought to be, ultimately subservient to their
commerce. "But (says our author,) admitting that matters were now made up what
would be the event? I answer, the ruin of the Continent, and that for several
reasons." Reconciliation would conduct us to our former happy state. The
happiness of the governed is without doubt the true interest of the governors,
and if we aim not at independence, there cannot be a doubt of receiving every
advantage relative to laws and commerce that we can desire. Montesquieu
speaking of the people of England says. "They know better than any people on
earth, how to value at the same time these three great advantages, religion,
liberty, and commerce." "It is a matter worthy of observation, that the more a
country is peopled, the smaller their armies are." This indeed would be worthy
of observation, did not daily experience contravert it. The armies of Russia,
France, Austria, England, and Prussia, are certainly more numerous than those
of Spain, Sweden, Denmark, Portugal, and Sardinia. Now, the first five states
contain nearly sixty millions, and the last kingdoms do not contain fourteen
millions of people. "In military numbers, the ancients far exceeded the
moderns, and the reason is evident, for trade being the consequences of
population, men become too much absorbed thereby, to attend to any thing else,
commerce diminishes the spirit both of patriotism, and military defense."

Every man of sense, now rejects the fabulous numbers of the army of Xerxes,
and other fabled armies of antiquity. The ancient armies, did not exceed in
numbers the armies of the moderns. If so, their states had been desolated by
the horrid carnage of their battles, arising from the military spirit of
defense, from the nature of their arms, and the arrangement of their armies,
which permitted the combatants to buckle together, who seldom gave quarter. The
Roman armies never exceeded twenty-five legions, which including auxiliaries,
did not exceed two hundred and fifty thousand, a number greatly inferior to the
armies of France or perhaps Britain during war. Notwithstanding my ardour for
liberty, I do most fervently pray, that we may ever exchange the spirit of
commerce, for that of military defense, even at the price of augmenting our
armies. Let us hear the testimony of Montesquieu in favor of commerce:
"Commerce says he, is a cure for the most destructive prejudices, for it is
almost a general rule, that wherever we find agreeable manners, there commerce
flourishes. Let us not be astonished then, if our manners are now less savage
than formerly. Commerce has every where diffused a knowledge of all nations,
these are compared one with another, and from this comparison arise the
greatest advantages. Peace is the natural effect of trade, etc." The Athenian
people, perhaps the most respectable of antiquity, did not long possess a
commercial spirit, but were almost continually afflicted by this spirit of
military defense. The common people in effect distributed the public revenues
amongst themselves, while the rich, were in a state of oppression. According to
Lysius the orator and others, it was their custom, when in want of money, to
put to death some of the rich citizens, as well as strangers, for the sake of
the forfeiture. In short, could we enumerate the infinite train of misfortunes
inflicted on mankind, in every clime and age by this self-same spirit of
military defense; our readers would surely join us in opinion, that commerce
has most happily humanized mankind. I am not unaware, that there are many
declamations against commerce, these I have ever regarded as trials of wit,
rather than serious productions. Our author's antipathy, and extreme aversion
to commerce, is easily accounted for. If his independence takes place, I do
aver, that commerce will be as useless, as our searching for the philosopher's
stone. "And history (says he,) sufficiently informs us, that the bravest
achievements were always accomplished in the nonage of a nation." The Greeks
in their early state were pirates, and the Romans robbers and both warred in
character. Their glorious actions were performed, (if I may so express myself)
in the manhood of their empire. Carthage, Greece, Asia, Spain, Gaul, and
Britain, were not indeed conquered during the nonage of the republic.
Agincourt, Cressy, Oudenard, Ramillies, Blenheim, Dettingen, and Minden, surely
were not fought in the infancy of the English empire. "With the increase of
commerce, England has lost her spirit." This is really a curious discovery; who
is unacquainted, that the English are the lords and factors of the universe,
and that Britain joins to the commerce of Tire, Carthage and Venice, the
discipline of Greece, and the fire of old Rome. "The City of London, submits to
continued insults, with the patience of a coward. The more men have to lose,
the less willing they are to venture, and submit to courtly power with the
trembling duplicity of a spaniel." That an inconsiderable part of the people in
London, submit to a person not very honorably distinguished in the world is
certain, but that the city of London submits to continued insults is certainly
a mistake. I suppose our author means, that by submitting to the best laws on
earth they submit to continued insults. The rich, whom he so very honorably
distinguishes, can be at no loss for his meaning. An Agrarian law, would
perhaps be convenient for himself and his independents. It may not however be
amiss to remind him of that, which in the multiplicity of his projects, he may
have forgot, viz. that the richest part of the community will always be an
overmatch for the poorest part. "It might be difficult, (says our author,) if
not impossible, to form this Continent into a government half a century hence."

Here I humbly apprehend our author's meaning is truly conspicuous. This
Continent fifty years hence, infallibly will be richer, and much better peopled
than at present; consequently abler to effect a revolution. But alas e're that
period, our author will forever be forgotten; impelled therefore by his
villainous ambition, he would rather precipitate his country into every species
of horror, misery, and desolation, rather than forego his fancied
protectorship. "But if you have, (says our author) and still can shake hands
with the murderers, then are ye unworthy the name of husband, father, friend,
or lover, and whatever may be your rank or title in life, you have the heart of
a coward, and the spirit of a sycophant, etc. To talk of friendship with those
in whom our reason forbids us to have faith, and our affections wounded through
a thousand pores, instructs us to detest is madness and folly."

Ye that are not drunk with fanaticism answer me? Are these words dictated by
peace, or base foul revenge, the constant attendant on COWARDS and sycophants;
Does our author so perfectly versed in scripture, mean to conduct us to peace
or desolation; or is he fit to legislate for men or Devils? Nations after
desolating each other, (happily for mankind,) forgive, forget, and reconcile;
like individuals who quarrel, reconcile, and become friends. Following the
laudable example of the CONGRESS; we lately have most readily shaken hands with
our inveterate enemies the Canadians, who have scalped nearly as many of our
people as the British troops have done: Why therefore may we not forgive and
reconcile -- By no means, it blasts our author's ambitious purposes. The
English and Scotch, since the first Edward's time, have alternately slaughtered
each other, (in the field of Bannockburn, more men fell, than are now in the
New England provinces) to the amount of several hundred thousand: And now view
each other as subjects, despising the efforts of certain turbulent spirits,
tending the rekindle the ancient animosity. Many of the unhappy men criminally
engaged with the Pretender: reconciled by humane treatment to that family
against whom they rebelled; served in their armies a few years after. Indeed
the conduct of the Canadians to our troops, as effectually illustrates our
doctrine, as it reprobates the Antichristian, diabolical tenets of our author.
-- "The unwarrantable stretch likewise, which that house made in their last
sitting, to gain an undue authority over the Delegates of that province, ought
to warn the people at large, how they trust POWER OUT OF THEIR OWN HANDS. A set
of instructions for the Delegates were put together, which in point of sense,
and business would have dishonored a schoolboy, and after being approved by a
few, a very few, without doors, were carried into the house, and there passed
in behalf of the whole Colony. Whereas, did the whole Colony know, with what
ill will that house has entered on some necessary public measures, they would
not hesitate a moment to think them unworthy of such a trust." This very
insidious charge, we cannot read without indignation. If the Pennsylvanians,
had happily adhered to their virtuous resolves, it is more than probable, that
a constitutional reconciliation had e're now taken place. Unfortunately,
rescinding their opinion, they perhaps adopted the sentiments of certain
persons, by no means superior in virtue or knowledge. Those not inebriated with
independency, will certainly allow, that the instructions to their Delegates,
were dictated by the true spirit of peace, justice, and exalted policy. If
inspiration had dictated those Resolves; obnoxious as they are to independency,
our author had reprobated them. How dare the author of Common Sense say, "that
they attempted to gain an undue authority over the Delegates of their
province?" Who so proper to instruct them, as those chosen by the people; not
in the hour of passion, riot, and confusion, but in the day of peace and
tranquil reflection. The gentleman, whom our author impotently attacks, in this
and other innuendos; will be long revered by his grateful countrymen, and the
friends of mankind; as well for his true patriotism and extensive abilities, as
his unbounded benevolence. Would we profit by the unhappy examples of our
ancestors, (which alas! mankind too seldom do,) let us remember the fate of
those illustrious patriots, of the first Charles's time: Allied at first with
the independents; they did not suspect those execrable hypocrites, of the
horrid design of destroying the King and constitution. When they saw through
their abominable views, it was too late to save the King and kingdom: For the
independents had seized the sovereignty. Soon as they were firmly possessed of
power; they persecuted those illustrious patriots, with more unrelenting
virulence, than the professed advocates of arbitrary power, Every virtuous
Pennsylvanian, must be fired with indignation at the insidious attack made by
this independent on the respectable assembly of his province. Indeed, the
Assembly of Pennsylvania in this unworthy treatment have a sure earnest of
their future expectations. -- "It is the custom of nations, (says our author)
when any two are at war, for some other powers not engaged in the quarrel, to
step in as mediators, and bring about the preliminaries of a peace. But while
America calls herself the subject of Britain, no power, however well disposed
she may be, can offer her mediation. Wherefore in our present state we may
quarrel on forever."

Nations, like individuals, in the hour of passion attend to no mediation. But
when heartily drubbed, and tired of war, are very readily reconciled, without
the intervention of mediators; by whom, belligerents, were never reconciled,
until their interests or passions dictated the pacification. If we may use our
author's elegant language mediation is "farcical." I grant however, that the
idea of our forcing England by arms to treat with us is brilliant. "It is
unreasonable continues (our author) to suppose that France and Spain will give
us any kind of assistance, if we mean only to make use of that assistance for
the purpose of repairing the breach, and strengthening the connection between
Britain and America; because those powers would be sufferers by the
consequences."

Considering "we have the most numberous, and best disciplined army under
Heaven; and a fleet fit to contend with the navy of Britain;" we must suppose
our Author's brain affected by dwelling constantly on his beloved independency,
else he would not have the imbecility to require the assistance of France and
Spain. The manner of his prevailing on France and Spain to assist us, is also a
strong proof of his insanity. Did those powers, hesitate to succor the Scotch
rebels in 1745, because they did not declare themselves independent. It then
was their interest to create a diversion, alas! too serious in the sequel for
the deluded rebels in that kingdom; and were they now interested in aiding us;
they undoubtedly would do it in spite of quibbles. In such case, e're this
time, their armies and navies had joined us without interruption: For we must
confess, that the efforts of Britain hitherto, would not have precluded the
republic of Genoa from aiding us. Suppose our Author, had a son or an
apprentice eloped to his intimate acquaintance, and desired to enter into his
service: If this person replied to the youth? I know your apprenticeship is
unexpired, notwithstanding declare yourself a freeman, and I will hire and
protect you. I demand, would such odious, ridiculous duplicity, render our
supposed person, less criminal in the eyes of our Author, or render the example
less dangerous to his own apprentice. "Were a manifesto (says our Author)
dispatched to foreign courts, etc." This also is a conclusive proof of our
Author's maniacum delirium. Our Author "challenges the warmest advocate for
reconciliation to show a single advantage this Continent can reap, by being
connected with Great Britain. I repeat the challenge, not a single advantage is
derived: Our corn will fetch its price in any market in Europe:" Were the
Author's assertions respecting our power, as real as delusive; a reconciliation
on liberal principles with Great Britain, would be most excellent policy. I
wave similarity of manners, laws, and customs, most friendly indeed to
perpetual alliance. The greatest part of our plank, staves, shingles, hoops,
corn, beef, pork, herrings, and many other articles, could find no vent, but in
the English Islands. The demand for our flour would also be considerably
lessened. The Spaniards have no demand for these articles; and the French
little or none. Britain would be a principal mart for our lumber, part of our
grain, naval stores, tobacco, and many other articles, which perhaps are not
generally wanted in any kingdom in Europe. If it is suggested, that the English
Islands, impelled by necessity would trade with us. I reply, that it is not
uncommon to see English flour for sale in those Islands; as our merchants have
more than once found to their cost. Since 1750, flour has sold in the islands,
at ten and twelve per cent. the price being reduced by flour from England.

Britain is also better calculated to supply us, with woollen goods and other
necessary articles, than any kingdom in Europe. Should a separation ensue;
Britain will open an extensive commerce to the Baltic, and Russia, for all, or
many of the commodities, she now receives from us. The Russians, since their
last glorious treaty with the Port; can now export the commodities of their
most fertile Ukraine, through the Mediterranean, until that period, they were
constrained to carry their hemp, eight or nine hundred miles to the Baltic,
whence by a long and dangerous navigation, it reached the different ports in
the Atlantic. I need not inform the reader that such immense land carriage,
precluded the subjects of Russia from raising wheat, which generally sold in
the Ukraine for ten-pence per bushel, as did rye at five-pence, in that
extensive region, than which no country on earth is more happily adapted for
that grain. The British nation, pre-eminently distinguished for industry and
enterprise, will establish factories in the provinces of Russia, and animate
those people to emulate our productions, which they will transport by the
Mediterranean, to the ports of Europe, and the West Indies. -- By these means,
and the culture of Poland, our grain would probably be reduced to its pristine
price, two shillings and six pence. As our Author is so violently bent against
reconciliation; he must either suppose a constant war with the incensed power
of England; or admit that he is a proper inhabitant of the domains of Ariosto,
(the world in the moon) Now, admitting "we have the most numerous, and best
disciplined army under Heaven; and a navy formidable for that of England;"
pray, what are our resources to pay such considerable armaments? Although I do
not wish to mortify my countrymen; I must acknowledge, that the neat proceeds
of all our produce is inadequate to that end. Our Author allows "that we have a
considerable check on the West India commerce of Britain, and that Great
Britain has a considerable check upon our European trade."

In case Great Britain insults therefore our European bound ships, we have only
to order our admirals to seize their West Indiamen. Unfortunately, the
Algerines, and other piratical states of Africa, have no West India commerce;
and not having the clearest distinctions of thine and mine; will be apt to
seize our vessels. Our author affirms "that our trade will always be our
protection." I therefore crave his pardon, and shall believe, that the sight of
our grain, and smell of the New England Codfish, will effectually serve as a
Mediterrannean pass, to the piratical rovers. I do humbly confess my
suspicions, least Portugal extremely dependent on Great Britain, may not insult
us. When independent, we no doubt will receive strong proofs of friendship from
France and Spain: Nevertheless, with the utmost humility I imagine, could we
seize Gibraltar or Portmahon, and there station a formidable squadron of
capital ships; we might as effectually protect our commerce, as our trade will
protect us. The author of Common Sense confidently affirms, "that our trade
will always be its protection." I cannot imagine that his purse or watch would
effectually protect him on Hounslow, or Blackheath from footpads or highwaymen.
Hitherto we have treated of reconciliation on the principles of our being as
potent as Great Britain. Let us now consider our army, nearly as I have stated
it, and our navy as an object by no means sublunary. It now behooves us well to
consider, whether it were better to enter the harbor of peace with Great
Britain, or plunge the ship into all the horrors of war. -- Of civil war. As
peace and a happy extension of commerce, are objects infinitely better for
Great Britain; than war and a diminution of her commerce. It therefore is her
interest to grant us every species of indulgence, consistent with our
constitutional dependence, should war continue, there can be no doubt of the
annihilation of our ships, ports and commerce, by Great Britain. The King's
ships now in New England, unhappily are more than sufficient to ruin the ports
and commerce of these provinces. New York is already secured; and I should be
extremely grieved to hear, that a small armament, were destined against
Philadelphia. In the opinion of the best officers of the navy; Philadelphia is
accessible to a few forty and fifty gun ships, in despite of our temporary
expedients to fortify the river Delaware. If such opinion is groundless, the
ministry by their imbecility have befriended us; since by guarding the River
Delaware with a few frigates only; they had precluded us from arming our
vessels and strengthening the river Delaware. I would remind our author of the
constant language, and apparent purport of all ranks in opposition to Great
Britain: "We have (say they) been the happiest people on earth, and would
continue to be so, should Great Britain renounce her claim of taxation. We have
no sinister views, we claim not independence; No! Perish the thought." Such I
believe also was the tenor of the petitions from the Congress to his Majesty.
Now I would ask every man of sentiment, what opinion our friends in Great
Britain, nay the whole world will entertain of us, if ingratefully, and madly
adopting our author's frantic schemes, we reject reasonable terms of
reconciliation? Will they not most assuredly believe, that our popular leaders,
have by infinite art, deluded the unwary people into their pre-concerted
schemes; on supposition, that the time had found us? Those acquainted with
Britain must confess, that the minority in parliament, hitherto have been our
main prop. Now independency for ever annihilates this our best resource. Let us
admit a part of the minority, republicans, or what is more probable, bent on
removing the present ministry from their power. Our author's schemes
annihilates all their consequence, all their opposition. In case of our
independence, should a BAR, or BURKE, patronise our government; such patrons,
would infallibly participate the fate of the great and good DEWITS; be torn in
pieces by the furious People. -- If my remarks are founded on truth, it
results, that the time has not found us; that independency is inexpedient,
ruinous, and impracticable, and that reconciliation with Great Britain on good
terms, is our sole resource. It Is this alone, will render us respectable; it is
this alone, will render us numerous; it is this only, will make us happy.

I shall no longer detain my reader, but conclude with a few remarks on our
Author's scheme. The people of those Colonies would do well to consider the
character, fortune, and designs of our Author, and his independents; and
compare them with those of the most amiable and venerable personages in, and
out of the Congress, who abominate such nefarious measures. I would humbly
observe, that the specious science of politics, is of all others, the most
delusive. Soon after the Revolution; the ablest statesmen in England, and
other parts of Europe; confidently predicted National ruin, infallible ruin,
soon as the Public debt exceeded fifty millions sterling. The Nation now
indebted nearly thrice that sum; is not arrived at the zenith of her credit and
power. It is perhaps possible to form a specious system of government on paper
which may seem practicable, and to have the consent of the people; yet it will
not answer in practice, nor retain their approbation upon trial. "All plans of
government (says HUME) which suppose great reformation in the manners of
mankind, are merely imaginary."

The fabricators of Independency have too much influence; to be entrusted in
such ardous and important concerns. This reason alone, were sufficient at
present, to deter us from altering the Constitution. It would be as
inconsistent in our leaders in this hour of danger to form a government; as it
were for a Colonel forming his battalion in the face of an enemy, to stop to
write an essay on war.

This author's Quixotic system, is really an insult to our understanding; it is
infinitely inferior to HUME'S idea of a perfect Common Wealth; which
notwithstanding his acknowleged greatness of genius, is still reprehensible. It
is not our business to examine, in what manner this author's associates,
acquired their knowledge in national affairs; but we may predict, that his
scheme of independency would soon, very soon give way to a government imposed
on us, by some Cromwell of our armies. Nor is this sentiment unnatural, if we
are attentive to constant experience, and human nature. The sublime
MONTESQUIEU, so aptly quoted by the Congress, unhappily corroborates our
doctrine, "from (says he) a manner of thinking that prevails amongst mankind.
They set a higher value upon courage than timorousness, on activity than
prudence, on strength than counsel. Hence, the army will ever despise a senate,
and respect their own officers. They will naturally slight the order sent them
by a body of men whom they look upon as cowards, and therefore unworthy to
command them, so that as soon as the army depends on the legislative body, it
becomes a military one;" and if the contrary has ever happened, it has been
owing to some extraordinary circumstances, such as Holland being able to drown
her garrisons, and the Venetians having it in their power to compel their
troops to obedience by the vicinity of the European armies. Resources to which
we forever must be strangers. If independence takes place, the New England men
by their consequence therein; will assume a superiority, impatiently to be born
by the other Colonies.

Notwithstanding our Author's fine words about toleration: Ye sons of peace and
true christianity; believe me, it were folly supreme, madness, to expect
angelic toleration from New England, where she has constantly been detested,
persecuted and execrated. Even in vain would our Author; or our CROMWELL
cherish toleration; for the people of New England, not yet arrived in the
seventeenth or eighteenth century, would reprobate her. -- It is more than
probable to suppose, that the New England governments would have no objection
to an Agrarian law; nor is it unreasonable to suppose, that such division of
property would be very agreeable to the soldiers. Indeed their General could
not perhaps with safety to his existence as a General, refuse them so
reasonable a gratification, particularly, as he will have more than one
occasion for their services. Let us however admit that our General and troops,
contradicting the experience of ages; do not assume the sovereignty. Released
from foreign war; we would probably be plunged into all the misery of anarchy
and intestine war. Can we suppose that the people of the south, would submit to
have the seat of Empire at Philadelphia, or in New England; or that the people
oppressed by a change of government, contrasting their misery with their former
happy state, would not invite Britain to reassume the sovereignty.

A failure of commerce precludes the numerous tribe of planters, farmers and
others, from paying their debts contracted on the faith of peace and commerce.
They cannot, nor perhaps ought not to pay their debts. A war will ensue between
the creditors and their debtors, which will eventually end in a general sponge
or abolition of debts, which has more than once happened in other Sates on
occasions similar.

Ye respectable descendants of the planters from Holland and Swisserland; who
acknowledge, that your fathers have instructed you to felicitate yourselves in
existing under the benign British government. And have taught you to execrate
the Government of Holland and other popular states, where the unhappy people
unacquainted with trial by jury and other peculiar felicities of British
Subjects are, (to use the significant language of your fathers) under the
harrow of oppressive Demagogues. Do ye possess the wisdom to continue your
happiness by a well regulated connection with Britain?

Volumes were insufficient to describe the horror, misery and desolation,
awaiting the people at large in the siren form of American independence. In
short, I affirm that it would be most excellent policy in those who wish for
TRUE LIBERTY to submit by an advantageous reconciliation to the authority of
Great Britain; "to accomplish in the long run, what they cannot do by
hypocrisy, fraud and force in the short one." INDEPENDENCE AND SLAVERY ARE
SYNONYMOUS TERMS.

FINIS.
The following Publication by RATIONALIS, is Printed in this size, for the
convenience of those Gentlemen, who choose to bind it with other Pamphlets, in
an Octavo Volume.
The Republican Spirit is indeed at Bottom as ambitious as the Monarchical.
VOLTAIRE.
THE town has been lately amused with a new political pamphlet, entitled COMMON
SENSE.

This piece, though it has taken a popular name, and implies that the contents
are obvious, and adapted to the understandings of the bulk of the people is so
far from meriting the title it has assumed, that in my opinion it holds
principles equally inconsistent with learned and common Sense.

I know not the author, nor am I anxious to learn his name or character; for
the book, and not the writer of it, is to be the subject of my animadversions.

It Is the glory of a free country to enjoy a free press, and of this, that the
sentiments and opinions of the meanest, equally with those of the greatest, are
brought to view; for we know by frequent instances, that the rich and high born
are not the monopolizers of wisdom and virtue. -- On the contrary, these
qualities are oftener to be found among the middling class in every country,
who, being less dissipated and debauched than those who are usually called
their betters, apply themselves with more industry to the culture of their
understandings, and in reality become better acquainted with the true interests
of the society in which they live.

But to my great grief I have too often seen instances of persons in every
class of life, whose publications, at the same time they have reflected honor
on the parts and genius of the authors, have been so shamefully wanting in
candor as to attempt, by the cadence of words, and force of style, a total
perversion of the understanding.

The pamphlet in question seems to be plainly calculated to induce a belief of
three things.

1st. That the English form of government has no wisdom in it, and that it is
by no means so costructed as to produce the happiness of the people, which is
the end of all good government.

2d. That monarchy is a form of government inconsistent with the will of God.

3d. That now is the time to break off all connection with Great Britain, and
to declare an independence of the Colonies.

It must be obvious to every impartial eye, that the author reasons from the
abuses of, against the benefits derived from, the English constitution; and
after reciting these abuses concludes, very unfarily, that "it is incapable to
produce what it seems to promise." -- For if an argument of this sort is to be
received, it will prove perhaps rather more than the author would choose -- it
would even prove that the Jewish theocracy was quite as improper, and as
incapable to produce what it aimed at, as the reprobated English government. --
The records of sacred history inform us, that the law was given to the people
from God, and that the great Jehovah himself condescended to call them his
chosen people. He signally interposed in their behalf in bringing them out of
bondage, in preserving them from the rage of Pharoah's army, and seating them
in a land flowing with milk and honey, under his immediate govenment and laws,
"written with his own finger."

"And he will love thee and bless thee, and multiply thee: he will also bless
the fruit of thy womb and the fruit of thy land, thy corn and thy wine, and thy
oil; the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep, in the land which
he swear unto thy fathers to give thee". Deuteronomy. vii. 13.

"Thou shall be blessed above all people, there shall not be male or female
barren among you, or among your cattle." Deuteronomy. vii. 14.

But what effects did all these extraordinary favors and promises of the Deity
himself produce upon that wicked, perverse, stiff-necked people? Moses tells
them,

"From the day that thou did depart out of the land of Egypt until ye came
unto this place, ye have been rebellious against the Lord." Deuteronomy. ix. 7.

"You have been rebellious against the Lord from the day that I knew you."
Deuteronomy. ix. 24.

Profane as well as sacred history informs us of the inneffectuality of the
best governments and the wisest laws among a corrupt, degenerate people. It
does not regularly follow, that if the people are not happy under an excellent
form of civil polity, that the fault is in the government, it may be owing to
the corruption of the people, and this I take to be the case in Great Britain
at this day. When the British parliament is properly balanced, and each branch
of the legislature faithfully executes its duty, I think I am safe in affirming
there was never yet a form of government in the world so well calculated for
the happiness of a free people as this, and yet we are told by the author of
the pamphlet, that the "prejudice of Englishmen in favor of King, Lords and
Commons, arises as much or more from national pride than reason." The world has
already seen numberless instances of fine spun political theories, which, like
the quackeries of mountebank doctors, are to cure all the political evils to
which human nature is liable. -- But when the experiment is made, they become
astonished at the ill success of their boasted schemes -- they find a thousand
little passions and interests continually interfering with their designs, and
at length retire again to their closets, chagrined they had not thought it
necessary to study the great volume of human nature, before they ventured to
say what was the best for mankind.

The author, after venting his spleen against the English form of government,
comes next to consider the subject of monarchy and hereditary succession; in
treating which he plainly discovers the utmost prepossession in favor of a
republic. I shall not follow him through his scripture quotations, which he has
so carefully garbled to answer his purpose, but beg leave to oppose some
authorities to it.

The celebrated Trenchard, in No. 60, of Cato's Letters, says, "There is no
government now upon earth, which owes its formation or beginning to the
immediate revelation of God, or can derive its existence from such revelation:
It is certain, on the contrary, that the rise and institution, or variation of
government, from time to time, is within the memory of men or of histories; and
that every government which we know at this day in the world, was established
by the wisdom and force of mere men, and by the concurrence of causes evidently
human."

"Nor has God by any revelation nominated magistrates, showed the nature or
extent of their powers, or given a plan of civil polity for mankind."
(Hutcheson's Moral Philosophy. p. 272.)

There being no natural or divine law for any form of government, or that one
person rather than another should have the sovereign administration of affairs,
or have power over many thousand different families who are by nature all
equal, being of the same rank, promiscuously born to the same advantages of
nature, and to the use of the same common faculties, therefore mankind is at
liberty to choose what form of government they like".

"God's providence or permission suffered his own peculiar people the Jews to
be under diverse governments at diverse times; as first under patriarchs.
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc. then under judges, Othniel, Ehud and Gideon;
then under highpriests, Eli and Samuel; then under kings, Saul, David and the
rest; then under captains and high priests again, "as Zerobabel, Judas
Maccabeus, and his brethren; and the government was lastly taken from them, and
they brought under the power of Rome. And that God permits such magistrate or
magistrates as the community thinks fit to approve, is plain by the testimony
of Holy Scriptures; when God said to Solomon, "By me kings rule, even all the
judges of the earth." Prove. viii. 16.

"When the sons of Samuel were judges over Israel, they took bribes and
perverted judgment, therefore the elders of Israel desired Samuel to make them
a king; and though the elders are only mentioned to have asked a king of
Samuel, they seem to have been deputed from the whole congregation; for God
said unto Samuel, "Hearken to the voice of the people in all that they say unto
thee." I Sam. viii. 4, 7.

"And Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, and wrote it in a book,
and laid it up before the Lord. 1 Samuel x. 25. It Is plain the manner of the
kingdom signifies the constitution of the government, by which was meant the
conditions on which Saul was to be king, and they his subjects; for though God
had given him the crown, it was to rule the people according to justice and
laws."

"After the battle between Saul and the Ammonites, Samuel said to the people,
Come, let us go to Gi^gal; and there they made Saul king before the Lord. 1 Samuel xi. 1. 5, 6, 7. 14. 15. Now therefore behold the king, whom ye have
chosen, and behold the Lord has set a king over you." Sam. chap. 12. 13.

These latter quotations are taken from the great Lord Somers's book called the
"judgment of whole Kingdoms and Nations concerning the Rights of Kings and the
People." This nobleman was Lord High chancellor of England in King William's
reign, and was remarkable for his revolution-principles, great learning and
unshaken integrity, in public and private life.

It does therefore from the foregoing testimonies appear, that monarchy
(especially a limited one, such as that of England) is not inconsistent with
the Holy Scriptures, as is set forth in said pamphlet, but that it is as
pleasing to the Almighty, if agreeable to the people, as any other form of
government, even the author's beloved republic.

The writer next proceeds to inform his readers of the numerous wars and scenes
of blood acted in England under their kings, and asserts that "Monarchy and
succession have laid the world in blood and ashes. It Is a form of government
which the word of God bears testimony against, and blood will attend it." Here
are bold assertions indeed. To the latter part I have already endeavored to
make some reply, so far as he asserts it is contrary to the word of God; but
will the author's candor permit him to inform his reader of the infinite
distractions and mischiefs which have happened in the ancient and modern
republics -- Under this form there are always two parties, which divide the
whole body of the people, and an eternal warfare subsists between them for
power. The Contest is dreadful enough, but which soever party prevails, there
is no rod heavy enough, no sword sufficiently sharp, to punish those whom they
have subdued. -- It then becomes a many headed monster, a tyranny of many.

Let any man read with an unprejudiced eye the accounts which historians give
us of the famous Grecian Commonwealths, and I will venture to speak for him,
that he will not bestow great commendations on them -- The Athenians a wise and
polished people, very often banished their best citizens, from an apprehension
of their power -- a glorious reward for a virtuous citizen, who, as was the
case in more instances than one, had preserved his country from destruction. In
the latter times of the Carthaginian and Roman republics, what constant scenes
of blood and devastation does history present to us -- The multitude in a
perpetual ferment like the ocean in a storm -- In a storm did I say, -- like
the waters of the sea, agitated by a dreadful whirlwind, nothing but the fury
of one party encountering the rage of another. -- Every trace of humanity being
thus lost, men change their natures and become as fierce and savage as wolves
and tigers.

But let us descend nearer to modern times -- let us look for happiness and
security in the republic of Holland, so often mentioned, and so little known --
let us recollect the fate of the two brothers, Cornelius and John de Wit, Dutch
ministers, who were massacred by the people in the year 1672. Holland itself,
from being a republic, is become a downright aristocracy. Liberty did not
continue long in that country, notwithstanding the blood and treasure that were
expended to acquire it. The people, so far from being free, have had no voice
for many years past in the election of persons to represent them in the
States General, nor have they any thing to do in the forming of laws by which
they are to be governed. Whenever one of them dies, the vacancy is filled up
without any interference of the people, and this important change was made in
the state, because of the intolerable feuds and animosities which attended the
elections of representatives. Had they been to have chosen a king, what
dangerous and destructive tumults must it have produced. Founded on the woeful
experience of ages, it is now become a general fixed opinion, that hereditary
is preferable to elective monarchy, on account of the terrible disorders,
outrages and confusion which usually attend the election of a king; a pregnant
instance of which, in our times, is the kingdom of Poland.

In our own history, we see what was the effect of the much wished for
Commonwealth wealth after the death of the tyrant Charles -- it did not produce
liberty -- it presently ended in arbitrary power. The moment almost after the
reins of government fell from Charles's hands, Cromwell took them up, and
governed the nation with absolute sway.

I cannot agree with the author of the pamphlet in opinion, that this is the
time to declare an independence of the Colonies. This ought to be the dernier
resort of America. Let us not yet lose sight of the primary object of the
dispute, namely, a safe, honorable, and lasting reconciliation with Great
Britain, until we are under a necessity of doing it. If an advantageous
accommodation can be had, and a free constitution for this country be
established on mutual agreement and compact, 'twill be better and happier for
us. But if justice is still denied us, and we are to contend for liberty by
arms, we will meet them in the field, and try our manhood against them, even to
spilling the blood of every brave man we have. Should the ministry have
recourse to foreign aid, we may possibly follow their example; and, if it be
essential then to our safety to declare an Independence, I would willingly
embrace the necessity.

RATIONALIS.

FINIS.
EXTRACT from the second Letter to the People of Pennsylvania; being that part
of it which relates to INDEPENDENCY. By a WRITER under the Signature of CATO.
UPON the whole, it appears that this writer (Cassandra) is more an enemy to
the business on which the Commissioners are to be sent, than really
apprehensive for our virtue. He seems to have drank deep of the cup of
independency; to be inimical to whatever carries the appearance of peace; and
too ready to sacrifice the happiness of a great continent to his favorite
plan. Among such writers I pretend not to class myself; for I am bold to
declare, and hope yet to make it evident to every honest man, that the true
interest of America lies in reconciliation with Great Britain, upon
constitutional principles, and I can truly say, I wish it upon no other terms.

Why the many publications in favor of independency, with which our presses
have lately groaned, have passed hitherto unnoticed, I am not able to
determine. But there are certainly times when public affairs become so
interesting, that every man becomes a debtor to the community for his opinions,
either in speaking or writing. Perhaps it was thought best, where an appeal was
pretended to be made to the COMMON SENSE of this country, to leave the people
for a while to the free exercise of that good understanding which they are
known to possess. Those who made the appeal have little cause to triumph in its
success. Of this they seem sensible; and, like true quacks, are constantly
pestering us with their additional doses, till the stomachs of their patients
begin wholly to revolt. If little notice has yet been taken of the publications
concerning independence, it is neither owing to the popularity of the doctrine,
the unanswerable nature of the arguments, nor the fear of opposing them, as the
vanity of the authors would suggest. I am confident that nine-tenths of the
people of Pennsylvania yet abhor the doctrine.

If we look back to the origin of the present controversy, it will appear that
some among us at least, have been constantly enlarging their views, and
stretching them beyond their first bounds, till at length they have wholly
changed their ground. From the claim of Parliament to tax us, sprung the first
resistance on our part. Before that unjust claim was set on foot, not an
individual, not one of all the profound legislators with which this country
abounds, ever held out the idea of independence. We considered our connection
with Great Britain as our chief happiness -- we flourished, grew rich, and
populous, to a degree not to be paralleled in history. Let us then act the part
of skilful physicians, and wisely adapt the remedy to the evil.

Possibly some men may have harbored the idea of independence from the
beginning of this controversy. Indeed it was strongly suspected there were
individuals whose views tended that way; but as the scheme was not sufficiently
ripened, it was reckoned slanderous, inimical to America, and what not, to
intimate the least suspicion of this kind.

Nor have many weeks yet elapsed since the first open proposition for
independence was published to the world. -- By what men of consequence this
scheme is supported, of whether by any, may possibly be the subject of future
enquiry -- Certainly it has no countenance from the Congress, to whose
sentiments we look up with reverence. On the contrary, it is directly repugnant
to every declaration of that respectable body. It would be needless to quote
particular passages in proof of this, as they are to be met with in almost
every page of their proceedings. I will refer to a few only, viz. their
Resolves, March 5, 1775 -- their Declaration, July 6 -- heir Address to the
King, July 8 -- their Letter to the Lord Mayor of London -- and more especially
their Declaration for a fast, June 12 in which with the deepest marks of
sincerity they call upon all America to join with them in addressing the great
Governor of the World -- humbly beseeching him to avert the desolating
judgments with which we are threatened, to bless our rightful sovereign, etc.
-- that so America may soon behold a gracious interposition of Heaven for the
redress of her many grievances, the restoration of her invaded rights, and
reconciliation with the parent state, on terms constitutional and honorable to
both.

Will any one be so hardy as to say, that either the appointment or observation
of this solemn day was a mere mockery of Heaven and Earth, or even that any
American joined in it, who was not sincere? -- I trust not. But if multiplying
authorities were of any use, I might add the sentiments of our own
Representatives in assembly, expressed in the instructions to their Delegates;
the sentiments of Maryland in similar instructions; the Resolves of New Jersey
and New Hampshire; nor shall the much injured province of Massachusetts Bay be
left out of the catalogue; whose Provincial Congress, while yet bleeding with
the wounds received at Lexington, thus addressed the inhabitants of Great
Britain -- These are marks of ministerial vengeance against this Colony, but
they have not yet detached us from our royal Sovereign, etc. trusting that in a
constitutional connection with the mother country, we shall soon be a free and
happy people. These were the sentiments of the Colony of the Massachusetts,
signed by that great Martyr to Liberty, Dr. WARREN, and soon after sealed with
his blood.

The sentiments of sundry other Colonies might be shown to have corresponded
with these. -- But this letter has already reached its full length. I shall
take some future opportunity to examine the arguments which have been offered
to induce a change of these sentiments; and upon the whole I doubt not to make
it appear that independence is not the cause in which America is now engaged,
and is only the idol of those who with to subvert all order among us, and rise
on the ruins of their country!

CATO.
PHILADELPHIA, March 11th, 1776.
FINIS.
Great variety of New and Old Books are now felling by ROBERT BELL in Third
Street PHILADELPHIA: Among which are the following.
LE DROIT DE LA GUERRE ET DE LA PAIX. Par Grotius. Avec let Notes de Barbeyrac.
2 Tom. Astley's large and curious Collection of Voyages throughout the World,
with Cuts, 4 vols Beawes's Lex Mercatoria Rediviva Lock on the Human
Understanding Lock on the Epistles of St. Paul Omnia Divini Platonis Opera
Francisci Baconi Opera Omnia Anderson's Royal Genealogies from Adam to these
times Rapin's History of England, 2 vols History of England by Milton, Daniel,
Bacon, etc. 3 vols Universal History, with Cuts, 7 vols Whitby on the New
Testament 2 vols Bishop Hacket's 100 Sermons Miller's Gardener's Dictionary, 3
vols Baxter on the Human Soul, 3 vols Fielding's History of Tom Jones, 6 vols
in three Cook's New Voyage round the World, 2 vols Ainsworth's Dictionary Latin
and English Boyer's Dictionary, French and English Scapula's Greek Lexicon
Hedericus's Greek Lexicon Veneroni's Dictionary Italian and French, 2 vols
Minsheu's Dictionary Spanish and English Martin's New Principles of Navigation
and Geography Collins's Charts of the Coast of Great Britain Ferguson's
Astronomy, with Cuts Modern Travels, 4 vols Shakespeare's Works, a very early
Edition Jacob's Law Dictionary Burn's Justice of the Peace, 4 vols Blackstone's
Commentaries on the Laws, 5 vols Burgh's Political Disquisitions, 3 vols Lord
Chesterfield's Letters, 4 vols Leland's History of Ireland, 4 vols Goldsmith's
History of England, 4 vols Cullen's Lectures on the Materia Medica, containing
the very cream of Physic: Necessary for those Physicians who wish to arrive at
the top of their Profession --,Price Five Dollars. The Gentleman's Magazine, 19
Vols.
Just printed and published, at the desire of several Members of the Honorable
the Continental Congress, and some of the Military Officers of the Association,
and is now selling By ROBERT BELL, Printer in Third street, (Price Three
Dollars, two volumes, in neat bindings.)

THE MILITARY GUIDE FOR YOUNG OFFICERS, by THOMAS SIMES, Esquire. This work is a
large and valuable compilation from the most celebrated military writers --
Marshal Saxe -- General Bland -- King of Prussia -- Prince Ferdinand, etc etc.
Containing the experience of many brave heroes in critical situations, for the
use of young warriors; including an excellent military, historical and
explanatory DICTIONARY. To which is now added, extracts from a military essay,
containing reflections on the raising, arming, clothing and discipline of the
British infantry and cavalry. By Campbell Dalrymple, Esquire Lieutenant Colonel to
the King's own regiment of dragoons. The whole is illustrated with Eleven
Copper Plates.


