THE CHURCH's FLIGHT INTO THE WILDERNESS: AN ADDRESS ON THE TIMES. CONTAINING
Some very interesting and important OBSERVATIONS on SCRIPTURE PROPHECIES:
Showing, that sundry of them plainly relate to GREAT BRITAIN, and the AMERICAN
COLONIES; and are fulfilling in the present day. Delivered on a PUBLIC
OCCASION, January 17, 1776.

BY SAMUEL SHERWOOD, A. M.

Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins; and that ye
receive not of her plagues. Reward her, even as she rewarded you; and double
unto her double, according to her works. In the cup which she has filled, fill
to her double. Glorious things are spoken of Zion.
He that has an ear to hear, let him hear.
NEW YORK: Printed by S. LOUDON. M. DCC. LXXVI.

DEDICATION.
TO the Hon. JOHN HANCOCK, Esquire President of the Continental CONGRESS; and to
all the respectable MEMBERS of that most august ASSEMBLY. -- To the brave
GENERALS of our armies, and patriotic HEROES, who are spirited by Heaven to
exert their superior abilities in the most noble and generous manner, for the
defense of our distressed country, bleeding under the cruel and murderous hand
of unexampled tyranny and oppression; whom God in his providence, has raised up
to be his glorious instruments, to fulfill scripture-prophecies, in favor of
his church, and American liberty, to the confusion of all her enemies; the
ensuing discourse is most affectionately inscribed and dedicated, by their most
dutiful, devoted, and most obedient, humble Servant,

THE AUTHOR.

INTRODUCTION.
THE Author declares his abhorrence of a bigoted attachment to the low
singularities of a party, and professes to act on the benevolent and catholic
principles of the gospel; therefore hopes his readers will not conceive any
obnoxious idea from the word CHURCH, as he uses it in this discourse, nor
indulge or give way to jealousy and prejudice so far, as once to suspect, that
he means by this term, to point out any one denomination of Christians,
exclusive of all others -- as distinguished by their location and other
peculiarities. The church, in his sense of it, includes all the worthy
professors of christianity, who conduct themselves on their probation here, as
those that expect to be judged hereafter, by the great evangelical law of
liberty. He fully believes the Apostle, when he says, "where the spirit of the
Lord is, there is liberty;" and doubts not, but this spirit has been
plentifully poured out, not only in the New England colonies, but likewise on
his Episcopalian brethren in the Southern provinces, for whom he has the
highest esteem and affection, and would not for his right hand, speak or write
any thing that might give umbrage or just cause of offense to such worthy
patriots, so ardently engaged in the common cause, and using such vigorous,
spirited exertions for the defense and preservation of American liberty. -- He
is fully convinced of the absolute importance of uniting in the most cordial
friendship, as christian brethren and fellow-countrymen, in this glorious
contest and struggle, and fully sensible, that to give the ark a wrong touch in
this critical moment, might be of unspeakably dangerous consequence -- But,
however, apprehends no hazard or danger of being misguided by the scriptures of
truth, which consideration, amidst all his diffidence, has prevailed with him
to comply with the importunity of some of his friends, in consenting to this
publication. His earnest wish and daily prayer is, that all differences and
disputes may terminate in the firmest union and harmony of those colonies, and
that liberty inviolate, may be secured to every individual of every
denomination, so long as sun and moon shall endure.

APRIL 1, 1776.
AN ADDRESS, etc.
REVELATION xii. 14, 15, 16, 17. And to the woman were given two wings of a
great eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness, into her place; where she
is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the
serpent. And the serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flood, after the
woman; that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood. And the earth
helped the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up the flood
which the dragon cast out of his mouth. And the dragon was worth with the
woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the
commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.
THIS prophetic book is entitled, The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which he sent
and signified to his servant JOHN, by his angel; and which he received when in
a state of banishment, in the isle called Patmos, for the word of God, and the
testimony of Jesus Christ. It pleased the All-wise and Omniscient God, to give
to this his faithful servant, a very full and glorious vision of the things
which then were, or of the state of the church at that time; and of the things
which should be hereafter, or the then future state and condition of the
church, the seasons of its flourishing and prosperity, and of its declension;
its trials and sufferings to the end of the world. Which vision he was ordered
to write, for the instruction, support, and consolation of God's saints, in the
wars and conflicts they might have with their enemies, in every age and period
of time, till the old serpent, the great dragon should be entirely overcome,
and his kingdom completely destroyed. "And blessed is he that reads, and they
that hear the WORDS of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written
therein; for the time," that is, of their accomplishment, "is at hand." The
diligent and serious study of this sacred book ought not to be neglected and
despised, nor the things it contains be viewed as idle speculations, and vain
empty amusements; but every man is bound in duty, to attend to the things
contained herein, as to matters of great importance, with all the wisdom,
sobriety and reverence he is capable of. It may with propriety be styled, "The
sure word of prophecy." The apostle John was so highly favored, as to behold a
door opened in heaven; so near to which he was brought as to look in, and see
the glorious things transacted there, to confirm his says as to the truth of
these wonderful predictions and prophecies to be accomplished on earth. Chap.
iv. 1. and the first voice which he heard, was as of a trumpet talking with
him, which said, "Come up hither, and I will show thee things which must be
hereafter." Accordingly God discovered to him all the most remarkable events
that should befall his church, and the nations and kingdoms of the world, even
to the closing period when the angel should stand up and swear, that time
should be no more: Which things he was ordered to pen down in dark,
emblematical, and figurative language, the meaning of which, though it cannot be
fully comprehended in the present dark state of the church; yet may be so far
understood as to afford much support and encouragement to God's people in times
of their greatest distress and suffering, and tend to establish their belief of
the truth of this part of divine revelation, and of the ruling providence of
God which is constantly at work to fulfill and accomplish the events herein
predicted and foretold.

WITH a view to assist us in forming just conceptions of the nature and design
of these prophecies and predictions, and to lead us to a right improvement of
such providence of God by which they are fulfilled, I shall make two or three
observations, before I proceed directly to explain the passages that have been
read.

1. I WOULD observe with all judicious commentators and expositors that have
wrote on the subject, that Popery, or the reign and kingdom of the man of sin,
the old serpent, the dragon, its rise and progress, and its downfall and
overthrow, is the greatest, the most essential, and the most striking part of
this revelation of St. John. There has been a mortal enmity between the seed of
the woman, and the seed of the serpent, ever since the fall of man, and the
promise of a Savior for his recovery. The old serpent, who seduced man by his
temptations, to fall, has ever been using his subtility and malice to defeat
the purposes of divine grace, and to destroy Christ's kingdom on earth; and
has, in all ages of the world, been successful in stirring up agents and
instruments to accomplish this diabolical and hellish design. Among all his
crafty and subtle inventions, popery, which exalts the principal leaders and
abettors of it, high in the honors and emoluments of this world, seems most
cunningly devised, and best adapted to answer his purpose; and has proved the
most formidable engine of terror and cruelty to the true members of Christ's
church. And this has been the chief subject of prophecy since the coming of
Christ; and was foretold by some of the prophets under the Jewish dispensation.
And whatever difficulty and perplexity there may be in many of these dark,
mysterious passages, yet in this view, the application of most of them is
rendered easy and obvious. As popery has been the greatest enemy, and the
greatest corrupter of christianity, we may rationally conclude that more
prophecies relate to that, than to any other distant event.

BY carefully reading and studying the prophecies given forth by Daniel, by St.
Paul, and more fully by St. John, it will appear to be clearly and evidently
foretold, that such a power as that of the Pope of Rome should be exercised in
the Christian church, and should authorize and establish such doctrines and
practices as are publicly taught and embraced by the wicked, corrupt members of
that mother of harlots and abomination. The time also is signified when, and
how long it should prevail; and that at last, upon the expiration of this term,
it should be destroyed forevermore.

2. THIS popish mysterious leaven of iniquity and absurdity, by which the
Christian religion has been so awfully adulterated and corrupted, has not been
confined to the boundaries of the Roman empire, nor strictly to the territory
of the Pope's usurped authority and jurisdiction; but has spread in a greater
or less degree, among almost all the nations of the earth; especially amongst
the chief rulers, the princes and noblemen thereof. When this great whore of
Babylon, or papal Rome is described, Rev. xvii. 1. her bewitching, infatuating
enchantments are said to be such, that the kings of the earth have been
enticed, and inflamed in their wicked lusts, to that degree as to have
committed fornication with her; and the inhabitants of the earth have been made
drunk with the wine of her fornication or whoredom. They have been so far
corrupted and debauched by this mother of harlots, as to sacrifice every
dictate of religion and reason, and even common sense, to those alluring arts
with which she has been tempting them. The prophet Isaiah had long before this,
foretold, "That she should turn to her hire, and commit fornication with all
the kingdoms of the world, upon the face of the earth." Isaiah xxiii. 17.

WHEN the great red dragon, described, Revel. xii. having seven heads, and ten
horns, and seven crowns upon his heads, made his first public appearance, his
tail drew a third part of the stars of Heaven, and did cast them to the earth.
The apostle, under these symbolical characters and attributes of the great red
dragon, undoubtedly meant to point our Satan or the Devil with his agents and
instruments, who are acting the part of avowed enemies to the church of Christ;
and his drawing the stars of Heaven with his tail, must mean his subjecting the
princes and potentates of the earth, with great numbers of the clergy, to his
tyrannical influence and oppressive scheme of government. The prophets often
describe the persecuting enemies of the church, under this emblem and figure.
Psalm lxxiv. 13. "Thou breakest the heads of the dragons in the waters, etc."
And when God comes to destroy these enemies, he is said "to cut Rahab, and to
wound the dragon," Isaiah li. 9. see also Ezekial xxix. 3. "Thus says the Lord
God, behold, I am against thee Pharaoh, king of Egypt, the great dragon that
lies in the midst of his rivers, which has said, my river is mine own, and I
have made it for myself." When the frightful monster of a beast, in such
terrible array, is described, Rev. xiii. The dragon is said to give him his
power, and his seat, and great authority; and all the world wondered after the
beast; and said, "Who is like unto the beast? Who is able to make war with the
beast?" Which expressions denote the great extent of his power and dominion, as
well as the blind infatuation of his deluded subjects who made their boast of
it. It is added, "And power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and
nations, and all that dwell upon the earth, shall worship him, whose names are
not written in the book of life, of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world." Now, it can admit of no doubt, but that there are multitudes of this
character in other nations and kingdoms, besides papal Rome. This is further
evident from chap. xiv. 8. when the angel comes to proclaim the fall of
Babylon, the reason given why God thus proceeded in righteous vengeance and
wrath, is this, viz. "Because she made all nations drink of the wine of the
wrath of her fornication." Here Is was a kind of Circean cup, as one observes,
with poisoned liquor, to intoxicate and inflame mankind to spiritual
fornication. The prophet Jeremiah has assigned much the same reason for her
destruction, chap. li. 7. "Babylon has been a golden cup in the Lord's hand,
that made all the earth drunk; the nations has drunken of her wine, therefore
the nations are mad." When the sixth angel poured out his vial, Rev. xvi. Three
unclean spirits like frogs, are said to come out of the mouth of the dragon,
and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet,
which are said to be spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto
the kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of
the great day of God Almighty. These unclean spirits here compared to frogs, a
very low-lived, inferior kind of animals, who are peeping and croaking in the
dark holes and corners of the earth, most probably represent popish, Jesuitical
missioners, or the tools and emissaries in general, of anit-christian,
tyrannical power, who are the spirits of devils, and have free access to the
kings of the earth, and are said to be gone forth through the whole world, and
are industriously using all their most artful stratagems, and diabolical craft
and subtility, to impose upon mankind, and to engage them in the support and
defense of the kingdom of Satan, in opposition to the mighty host marshalled up
by the Lord Almighty, for the overthrow and destruction thereof. These
scripture prophecies and predictions that have now been cited, to which more
might be added, were it necessary, make it abundantly evident and manifest that
the antichristian, tyrannical scheme of popery, in one shape and form, and
another, was to have a very extensive spread and influence, not only through the
territories of papal Rome, but through all the nations and kingdoms of the world
in general, and that the kings and princes of the earth, as well as their
subjects, were to be much intoxicated and infatuated therewith; to the great
distress and perplexity of the true chuch of Christ, which, so far as I have
been able to observe, has not been suitably noticed and attended to by
expositors and divines that have wrote on the subject; the want of which has
occasioned much perplexity and obscurity in their comments on some passages,
which, in the right view of them, are full of significance and importance. For
instance, that passage in the xiii. chap. of this mysterious book, where the
image of the beast is spoken of, "I confess," says a great expositor, "I know
not what the image of the beast is, distinct from the beast itself." The reason
of which was, no doubt, his limiting and confining these prophecies to so
narrow a circle, as papal Rome. Every man of common sense, knows that the image
of a thing is something different from the thing itself. Therefore, to make
sense of the language here used, we must suppose that the apostle intended to
describe another persecuting tyrannical power, in some nation or kingdom of the
world, which was a lively figure and resemblance of that exercised at Rome, the
headquarters of tyranny and persecution See the appendix.
. Whether that persecuting power be intended, that has in years past, been so
cruelly and barbarously exercised in France, and other popish countries,
against the humble followers of Christ, to the massacre and destruction of so
many thousands of protestants In the war with the Albigenses and Waldenses,
there were destroyed of them, in France alone, one million,

From the first institution of the JESUITS, to the year 1450, that is, in
little more than thirty years, nine hundred thousand orthodox Christians, were
slain. In the Netherlands alone, the Duke of ALVA boasted, that within a few
years, he had dispatched to the amount of thirty six thousand souls; and those
all by the hand of the common executioner. In the space of scarce thirty years,
the INQUISITION destroyed, by various kinds of torments, a hundred and fifty
thousand christians. Besides these, an innumerable multitude have been
persecuted to death, throughout all Europe, by the cruel hand of tyranny and
persecution. As to the number that have been, and may yet be slain in America,
in the war and conflict with the beast, and the image of the beast, it cannot
yet be ascertained.


; or whether there be a reference to the corrupt system of tyranny and
oppression, that has of late been fabricated and adopted by the ministry and
parliament of Great Britain, which appears so favorable to popery and the
Roman catholic interest, aiming at the extension and establishment of it, and
so awfully threatens the civil and religious liberties of all sound
protestants; I cannot positively determine. But since the prophesies represent
this wicked scheme of antichristian tyranny, as having such an extensive and
universal spread over the earth, like Nebuchadnezzar's tree which reached unto
heaven, and the light thereof to all the ends of the earth, it need not appear
strange or shocking to us, to find that our own nation has been, in some
degree, infected and corrupted therewith, and that some of our princes and
chief rulers have had a criminal converse and familiarity with the old mother
of harlots; and been sipping of the golden cup of her fornication, so as to be
intoxicated, if not wholly drunk with her poisonous liquors. Before what is
called the reformation, the man of sin reigned triumphant in our
mother country, without much check or control; which reformation was not set
on foot on the purest principles of genuine christianity, nor carried to
perfection by King HENRY the Eighth, who is so celebrated as the author of it.
In the reign of Queen MARY, the doctrine and ceremonies of the catholic
religion were re-established, and the Pope's authority and jurisdiction
acknowledged in full; and a very cruel, severe persecution rigorously carried
on against the innocent, conscientious professors of the protestant religion;
and a most tragical scene of bloodshed and slaughter exhibited, as ever England
beheld.

IF we pass from this dark and bloody period of English history, and come down
to the reign of the STUART family, we shall find three or four of our kings
successively, seduced and infatuated by the enticing and bewitching
enchantments of the old whore of Babylon, to that degree, as to drink deep of
the intoxicating wine of her fornication, to the entire destruction of two of
them; and to the great distress of the nation in general. How far the present
ministry have walked in this enchanting road, and how fond they are of the kind
embraces of this old filthy harlot, the world will judge from their open
attempts to propagate and establish popery, that exotic plant, in these
northern regions; which is not a native of our benign soil, nor of our heavenly
Father's planting; and their gathering up of armies professedly Roman catholics
to dragoon us into slavery and bondage, or massacre and butcher us and our
families, and lay our pleasant country in desolation and ruin.

3. SINCE these prophecies and predictions, relating to the trials and
sufferings, the wars and conflicts of the church with her antichristian
enemies and adversaries, may be justly taken in such a large, extensive sense
and latitude; we may rationally conclude that many of them have reference to
the state of Christ's church, in this American quarter of the globe; and will
sooner or later, have their fulfillment and accomplishment among us. The
providence of God in first planting his church in this, then howling
wilderness, and in delivering and preserving of it to this day, are in a manner
unequalled, and marvelous; and are reckoned among the most glorious events that
are to be found in history, in these latter ages of the world. And there are
doubtless yet more glorious events in the womb of providence, which the present
commotion through the nation and land may (however unlikely in the view of some)
be the means of bringing to pass. There is no part of this terraqueous globe
better fitted and furnished in all essential articles and advantages, to make a
great and flourishing empire; no part of the earth, where learning, religion,
and liberty have flourished more for the time. And as to the rapid increase of
its inhabitants, and swift population, it cannot be paralleled in all history.
There is no part of the world where its inhabitants, through such a large
extent of territory, are under such bonds and obligations, from self-interest,
to keep in the strictest union and harmony together. They have every motive and
inducement to this, that can well be conceived of. And this union, by the
blessing of Heaven, is become as general, perfect and complete, as could well
be expected in such a corrupt disordered world as this in which we live.

THESE United Colonies have arisen to such a height as to become the object of
public attention through all Europe, and of envy to the mother from whence they
derived; whose unprovoked attack upon them in such a furious hostile manner,
threatening their entire ruin, is an event that will make such a black and dark
period in history, and does so deeply affect, not only the liberty of the
church here in the wilderness, but the protestant cause in general, through the
christian world, and is big with such consequences of glory or terror, that we
may conjecture at least, without a spirit of vanity and enthusiasm, that some
of those prophecies of St. John may, not unaptly, be applied to our case, and
receive their fulfillment in such providence as are passing over us.

I DO not mean to undertake a nice, exact calculation of the periods pointed
out in this prophetic book; nor to range through the history of the world for
events to find their accomplishment. I am of opinion, that the church of Christ
in every age, may find something in this book applicable to her case and
circumstances; and all such passages that are so, may lawfully be applied and
improved by us accordingly. There are many cases which happen, that bear a near
likeness and resemblance to each other, and which the same prophecy may well
suit, in the most material parts of it. It has pleased that God who exercises a
universal providence over all things, so to dispose and order events, that the
calamities and afflictions of the church, in some measure, run parallel one to
another; and all the former efforts of that tyrannical persecuting power,
called the beast, may be the types and figures, as it were, of his last and
general effort against the faithful witnesses of Christ, and the true members
of his church.

THESE preliminary observations may assist us in explaining and improving these
prophecies of St. John; particularly the passages that have been read, to the
consideration of which I now proceed.

VERSE 14. "And to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she
might fly into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished for a
time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent."

THE woman in this passage, is represented in verse 2. as in a pregnant state,
travailing in birth, and in violent pangs to be delivered, which is doubtless
designed as an emblem of the true church of Christ. She is elsewhere spoken of
as the spouse of Christ, who owns himself to be her head and husband. A woman,
we know, is the weaker sex, and looks to her husband for support and
protection. So the church has always been the weakest part of the world, in
herself considered, and had her dependence on Christ her head, for preservation
and safety in times of peril and danger. This woman, the church, being in such
a near relation to Christ, the brightness of the Father's glory, and express
image of his person, amidst all her own natural weakness and infirmity, has
never appeared contemptible; but the most glorious society that ever existed in
our world. She is the king's daughter, all glorious within. She is spoken of,
verse 1. as being clothed with the sun, and having the moon under her feet,
and upon her head a crown of twelve stars; which is a magnificent description
of her comeliness, beauty and luster. She is enlightened, invested and adorned
with the rays of Jesus Christ, the great Sun of righteousness, which makes her
form illustriously bright and majestic. She is in such a state of dignity and
triumph, as to have the moon, with all sublunary enjoyments and terrors, under
her feet. And on her head, to complete her glory, a crown of twelve stars, an
emblem of her being under the light and guidance of the twelve inspired
apostles, who had been improved as master builders under Christ, in laying the
foundation of this honorable society, and were such useful and distinguishing
ornaments to it. One would think that such a society as this, would have
nothing to fear from all the combined powers of earth and hell; and indeed,
they have not in reality, since stronger is he that is for them, than those
that are against them. However, they are not exempted from trials and
sufferings in this world. We find, when the great red dragon appeared with his
seven heads and ten horns, that frightful monster the devil instigated the
tyrannical persecuting powers of the earth, against this harmless and innocent
woman, the amiable spouse of Christ. He had impudence and boldness enough to
make an unprovoked attack upon her, which occasioned her to leave the imperial
and wealthy abodes of earthly grandeur and magnificence, the courts and palaces
of emperors and princes, and retired to some obscure, solitary condition, for
the sweets of liberty and peace. This furious attack of the great dragon on the
woman, was an event of such importance, as to produce war in Heaven between the
angels of light, and the angels of darkness. See verse 7. "Michael and his
angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought, and his angels." This
Michael was the tutelar angel and protector of the Jewish church. Daniel x. 12.
And he performs here the same office of champion for the Christian church.

He, and the good angels who are sent forth to minister to the heirs of
salvation, were the invisible agents on one side, as the devil and his evil
angels were on the other. The visible actors in the cause of christianity, were
believers, whether in a civil or ecclesiastical character, with the glorious
martyrs and confessors. And in support of the opposite side, were the
persecuting powers of the world, with the whole dark train of the artillery of
hell. In this great conflict and war, let it relate to what period of the
church it will, which I am not anxious to determine with mathematical
certainty; we find that those on the side of God and true religion, overcame
their formidable enemy, with all his confederate powers, by the blood of the
Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they loved not their lives unto
the death. They were of such a brave, heroic spirit, as to cheerfully expose
themselves to the greatest dangers in this glorious cause; and many of them
actually met death in the terrible conflict. But they fell, as one observes, to
rise, and triumph, and reign. The dragon being thus defeated and vanquished at
his headquarters, pagan or papal Rome: He takes a wider scope and range, through
the other nations and kingdoms of the earth. He was doubtless greatly enraged
at the ill success of his first encounter, and marshals up all his forces
abroad, and proceeds with violence, to persecute the woman which brought forth
the man-child. Upon this the woman has a second flight into a more distant and
solitary wilderness, "unto her place;" to prepare her for which, two wings of a
great eagle were given her, which is not mentioned in her first flight; and
probably she did not then need them. There seems an evident allusion here, to
what God said to the children of Israel, Exodus xix. 4. after their deliverance
from cruel oppressive slavery in Egypt, when encamped before Sinai, and on
their way to the good land of Canaan, "Ye have seen what I did unto the
Egyptians, and how I bore you on eagles wings, and brought you unto myself." He
was not conducting them from a land of liberty, peace, and tranquillity, into a
state of bondage, persecution and distress; but on the contrary, had wrought
out a very glorious deliverance for them, and set them free from the cruel hand
of tyranny and oppression, by executing his judgments in a most terrible and
awful manner, on the Egyptians, their enemies; and was now, by his kind
providence, leading them to the good land of Canaan, which he gave them by
promise, for an everlasting inheritance. Hence, as the trials and sufferings of
the Christian church were parallel in some measure, with those of the Jewish,
and there is a great similarity and likeness in the manner of God's dealings
with the one to the other; it must be evident, that expositors have been
mistaken, when they represent this flight of the woman into the wilderness, as
denoting the church's going into greater peril, danger and affliction, where
she was to be more violently distressed and persecuted, for a long time. The
word WILDERNESS might possibly suggest to their delicate, but inattentive
minds, this frightful and shocking idea. It is true, our fathers had the
difficulties of an uncultivated wilderness to encounter; but it soon, by the
blessing of Heaven on their labor and industry, became a pleasant field or
garden, and has been made to blossom like the rose. The passage, in its most
natural, genuine construction, contains as full and absolute a promise of this
land, to the Christian church, as ever was made to the Jewish, of the land of
Canaan. It is, in an appropriated sense, "her place;" where she is nourished,
from the face of the serpent. And the dealings of God in his providence, in
bringing his church from a state of oppression and persecution, into this good
land, are very parallel and similar to his dealings with the Israelites, in
delivering them from the tyrannical power of the haughty, cruel monarch of
Egypt, and conducting them to the good land of promise in Canaan. Thus, they
that wait on the Lord, shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with
wings, as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary, they shall walk and not
faint.

THUS the church, in this difficult, distressed season, whenever it happened,
was supported and carried, as it were, on eagles wings, to a distant remote
wilderness, for safety and protection. And what period or event is there in all
the history of her trials and persecutions, which these expressions more
exactly describe, and to which they can be applied with more truth and
propriety, than to the flight of our forefathers into this then howling
wilderness, which was a land not sown nor occupied by any ruling power on
earth, except by savages and wild beasts? It is an indisputable fact, that the
cruel hand of oppression, tyranny and persecution drove them out from their
pleasant seats and habitations, in the land of their nativity; and that the
purest principles of religion and liberty, led them to make the bold adventure
across the wide Atlantic ocean; for which they surely needed the two wings of
the great eagle, to speed their flight, and to shelter and cover them from
danger, while seeking a safe retreat from the relentless fury and shocking
cruelty of the persecuting dragon; and a secure abode for unadulterated
christianity, liberty and peace. It is remarked by the inspired penman of this
prophecy, and is worthy of notice, that when the woman fled into the
wilderness, she came INTO HER PLACE. This American quarter of the globe seemed
to be reserved in providence, as a fixed and settled habitation for God's
church, where she might have property of her own, and the right of rule and
government, so as not to be controlled and oppressed in her civil and religious
liberties, by the tyrannical and persecuting powers of the earth, represented
by the great red dragon. The church never before this, had prime occupancy, or
first possession of any part of this terraqueous globe, in any great extent of
territory. In all countries and kingdoms wherever Christianity had been
planted, before its introduction into this American wilderness, the ruling
powers in possession of the property, and right of jurisdiction and dominion,
were in opposition to this benevolent institution; and the church had to make
her way through the greatest possible difficulties and dangers. While thus in
an enemy's land, her persecutions and oppressions, her bloody trials and
sufferings furnish out the chief subject of her history from her beginning to
the present day, in other parts of the world, from which she is not wholly
exempted in this. However, her degree of peace and quiet rest has been greater
than she has ever known since she has had existance and being. When that God,
to whom the earth belongs, and the fullness thereof, brought his church into
this wilderness, as on eagles wings, by his kind, protecting providence, he
gave this good land to her, to be her own lot and inheritance for ever. He
planted her as a pleasant and choice vine; and drove out the Heathen before
her. He has tenderly nourished and cherished her in her infant state, and
protected and preserved her amidst innumerable dangers. He has done wonders in
his providence for our fathers; and for us their sinful posterity: They, and we
have many a time, stood still, and seen the salvation of the Lord. The woman,
the church of Christ, has such a gift and grant from Heaven, of this part of
God's world, for the quiet enjoyment of her liberties and privileges, civil and
religious, that no power on earth can have any right to invade, much less to
dispossess her of them. And every attempt of this kind to oppress and enslave
her; must be absolutely unrighteous, and a gross violation of justice and
truth. He that has all power in heaven and on earth, who will soon destroy the
man of sin, and all his confederate powers, by the spirit of his mouth, and
brightness of his coming, declares in this prophecy, that the "woman" shall be
nourished and preserved in her place here described, "from the face of the
serpent." The serpent spoken of, is the great dragon, called the Devil and
Satan; the chief directing agent in all the dark plots of tyranny, persecution
and oppression; from whose malignant rage, the church has a promise of future
protection. This old serpent shall never be permitted to show his deformed
face, much less to lift up his monstrous head, and frightful horns in this
place here given to the woman for a safe retreat and secure abode, "for a time,
and times, and half a time;" which probably means, "to the end of the world,"
or till all the times and periods spoken of in this prophetic book are
fulfilled and accomplished. I know that expositors take these expressions, "for
a time, and times, and half a time," to include only the period of one thousand
two hundred and sixty days, mentioned verse 6, and so understood the phrase
"for a time," to mean one prophetical year, and "times," to mean two years, and
"half a time," an half year; in the whole, three years and a half: But it seems
more natural, and more agreeable to the phraseology of scripture, as well as
the connection of these prophecies, in the events foretold, to interpret this
passage as signifying all future time indefinitely. Or, if we apply it to
distinct periods, the first expression, "for a time," I should think, might,
with great propriety, be taken for the time or period, that has already been
mentioned. This construction appears natural, and not in the least forced or
strained. Then the "times" will mean such times or periods as follow after the
fulfillment of the above; and the "half time," must signify the closing period,
when time is near run out, and just come to an end. Taking the passage in its
proper connection, and plainest and most obvious sense, we may well understand
it as containing a prophetic promise to the church, of safety and preservation,
during the period that had been described above, and through all succeeding
times, even to the end of the world. Not but what the old dragon, with his
black train of tyrannical persecuting powers, might greatly afflict and
distress her: Yet, with all his cunning, art, policy and power, shall never be
able to establish his enslaving doctrines, nor to erect his head and horns, to
exercise his usurped authority and uncontrouled dominion, as in papal Rome. We
may expect, however, that he will be putting forth most violent struggles and
efforts for this base, malignant purpose.

ONE objection of weight, I have against the current opinion of expositors, who
interpret the passage, "a time, and times, and half a time," to signify the
same period as the thousand two hundred and threescore days, is, that this is
dishonorable to the sacred writer, and shows that he rather meant to puzzle
and perplex his readers, than to enlighten and instruct them. I believe that
all will allow, that the language used in the 6th verse, is more plain and
intelligible, and has a more fixed and determinate meaning, than that in the
14th verse. Now, to suppose the same period of time, is described in the one,
as in the other, is to suppose, that the Apostle, after he had described a
thing in a plain, easy way to be understood, proceeds on to involve the same
subject in a cloud of mysticism, darkness and obscurity, which could not tend,
very much, to the improvement and edification of Christ's church. It is usual
with all good writers, as they advance on their subject, to elucidate and
illustrate their meaning more and more, to set it in a plainer and more
intelligible point of light. And this is, especially, the tone of all inspired
writers, and of St. John in particular. The light of revelation is like the
path of the just, shining brighter and brighter in every page, till we come to
the close of it.

BUT should my explanation of this passage, after all, be disputed, and the
time, times, and half time, allowed to include no more, altogether, than the
period of twelve hundred and sixty years, which I have taken to be included in
that expression only, "a time," yet it will not materially affect my scheme.
For, on the old plan of exposition, it is supposed, that after the expiration
of these twelve hundred and sixty years, the trials and sufferings of the
church will be chiefly over; and that a scene of great peace, prosperity and
happiness will open and commence. Hence, if the prophetic promise in the text,
extends no further than to that happy and blessed period, the church will
safely get through the long storm and tempest, raised by the dragon; and so, be
ready for a share in the blessings of that glorious and happy period to
succeed; during which, we need not be very anxious about her safety,
considering other precious promises that are made in her favor.

THE serpent is said, verse 15, "to cast out of his mouth, water, as a flood,
after the woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood."
This, perhaps, is one of the artifices, says a learned expositor, which these
enormous creatures make use of, "to beat down their prey," when flying from
them. The common signification of a flood is an inundation of water, etc. The
Psalmist sets forth extreme dangers, under the notion of a flood. Psalm lxix.
15. "Let not the water-flood overflow me." And the violent assaults, and subtle
temptations, and sudden incursions of the Devil and his instruments against the
church, are compared to a flood, Isaiah lix. 19. "When the enemy shall come in
like a flood, the spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him."
Which prophecy may refer to, and have its accomplishments in the present state
of the church, about which we are treating. The oppressive and persecuting
power here figuratively described, under the emblem of the serpent, which
occasioned the flight of the woman, the church, into this wilderness, whenever
it has prevailed, has been full of the most inveterate malice and envy against
her; and used every art and stratagem to extirpate and destroy her from the
earth. Hence, the flood which the serpent cast out of his mouth after the
woman, may very naturally and properly be interpreted to signify all the subtle
temptations, artful schemes, and machinations of our enemies and adversaries,
to ensnare and corrupt us, and to destroy our liberties and privileges, that we
might be embarrassed again under the old tyrant, the dragon, and patiently
submit to the iron yoke, and galling chains of cruel oppression and bondage;
which machinations and contrivances have been too many to be enumerated in a
short, concise discourse. Every one acquainted with the history of our country,
of the New England colonies in particular, must know, that there have been
floods issued from the mouth of the old serpent, after the woman, to effect her
destruction and overthrow. Whenever a spirit of despotism has run high, and a
lusting ambition after arbitrary power and lawless dominion has prevailed; when
the dragon dare venture to put on and wear his long horns; the woman in the
wilderness has felt the grievous distressing effects. At such seasons,
jesuitical emissaries, the tools of tyrannical power, have been employed to
corrupt her doctrines, and lead her into the belief of the darling doctrines of
arbitrary power, passive obedience and nonresistance; who, like the frogs that
issued out of the mouth of the false prophet, who are said to have the spirit
of devils, have been slyly creeping into all the holes and corners of the land,
and using their enchanting art and bewitching policy, to lead aside, the simple
and unwary, from the truth, to prepare them for the shackles of slavery and
bondage. Thousands and millions of money, have, at one time and another, been
expended for the purposes of bribery and corruption, to accomplish this
malignant design. Evil, wicked men have been entrusted with the chief command
in one province and another, where the door has been open, to act as tools of a
corrupt administration and tyrannical power, in forwarding and ripening their
deep-laid schemes, for the destruction of the woman. The colonies in America
will not soon forget the cruel and tyrannical administration of Sir Edmond
Andross, at Boston, and his evil designs against them in general; and Lord
Cornbury, at New York; the late insidious and traitorous conduct of Bernard and
Hutchinson, is still more fresh in every one's mind; and likewise of Gage,
Carlton, and Dunmore, who, by their base, perfidious and cruel behavior, have
rendered themselves universally odious and detestable to the American colonies.
In these and such like ways, not to mention the unrighteous statutes
restricting and interdicting our trade and commerce, the stamp act, etc. we
have had floods poured forth from the mouth of the serpent, which at length,
have brought on a civil war. The dragon finding his artful temptations on the
one hand, and his cruel menaces and threatenings on the other, ineffectual to
gain the woman to a compliance with his terms, has at length become wroth with
her, and brought over his troops and armies to make war with the remnant of her
seed. But, blessed be God! all his efforts and struggles have hitherto been
unsuccessful; for the earth helped the woman. Verse 16. "And the earth opened
her mouth, and swallowed up the flood which the dragon cast out of his mouth."

IF this is taken in the literal sense, to signify that gross terrestrial
element which sustains and nourishes us, it is strictly true; in which sense
some of the prophecies have been, and yet will, no doubt, be accomplished. The
earth has ever helped the woman since her arrival to these shores, with every
article necessary to her comfortable support. She has never wanted for
nourishing food, and good raiment; has never known the distresses arising from
scarcity of bread, pinching hunger and famine; has always, from the first
settlement and cultivation of the country, had things convenient for her, and,
as I trust, been contented with her lot and condition. The earth has, in a very
remarkable manner, through the blessing of Heaven, been profuse and liberal in
her precious fruits and productions, the year past, when the dragon has been
wroth with the woman, and using all possible schemes and contrivances to
distress her, and starve her into a compliance to his despotic and arbitrary
rule, by shutting up her ports and harbors, and interdicting her trade and
commerce, and cutting her off from all supplies from her fishery, a very useful
and necessary branch of her trade and livelihood, by which thousands were
maintained. I say, when the woman has, in these, and in such like ways, been
distressed, she has been helped in a very extraordinary way, by the earth. Our
crops of all kinds have been plentiful. Our fruit trees loaded with fruit, and
pressed down with their burdens. Our granaries are full. There is such an
uncommon plenty of all kinds of good provisions for man and beast, that some
inconsiderate persons are ready to esteem it rather a curse, than a blessing;
as we know not how to dispense with, or dispose of it. But not to enlarge here.

SHOULD we take the expression in a figurative sense, to mean the men of the
earth, and earthly powers, it may still, with truth and propriety be applied to
our present case. For as the oppressive measures pursued by the British
parliament, strike at our temporal interest and property, as well as our civil
and religious privileges, it will engage those of an earthly temper to exert
themselves in the present struggles; by which means the earth helps the
woman. And besides, the vast advantage of these American plantations, in point
of traffic and merchandise, to all such as trade in ships, will doubtless, if
the present system is pursued, engage the kingdoms of the world, and the
merchants of the earth, to espouse the cause of the colonies, to such purposes
as will, in their operation, greatly help the woman against the flood cast out
of the dragon's mouth.

AND not only the earth, but the God that made it, nourishes the woman in the
wilderness, amidst the most violent and cruel attempts of a tyrannical and
persecuting power, and has raised up persons of a martial, heroic spirit, and
endowed them with skill, courage and fortitude, to defend and protect his
church. The flood of the dragon that has been poured forth to the northward, in
the Quebec bill, for the establishment of popery, and other engines and
instruments that have been set to work, to bring the savages down upon us, to
our utter destruction, have been chiefly swallowed up by our late successful
enterprises against them; and the woman has received a great addition of
strength from this quarter, as a door is opened for breaking up the seat of the
dragon in Canada; and for bringing in the Heathen tribes, perhaps, the fullness
of the Gentiles, into firm league and friendship with her, for her future
defense and protection. So that instead of being carried away with this flood,
she stands on more firm ground, and is better established than ever. Should we
extend the meaning of the phrase, so as to take in other neighboring powers of
the earth, they have likewise helped the woman in her distresses and troubles,
by affording a competent supply of military instruments and warlike stores for
her defense and protection; when all possible precaution had been used by her
enemies, to deprive her of these useful articles, so necessary for
self-preservation; and these other powers seem so friendly disposed, that it is
highly probable, should the serpent continue to persecute and distress the
woman, that they will soon open their mouth, and swallow up the whole flood,
even all the fleets and armies which the dragon may cast out of his mouth.

THE probability or conjecture of neighboring nations continuing to help the
woman, the church, to that degree, as to swallow up all the floods, the serpent
may cast out of his mouth after her, is founded, not only on their present
friendly appearance, and the part which their interested views may lead them to
take in the present controversy, but on the sure word of prophecy. See Rev.
xvii. 16, 17. "And the ten horns which thou saw upon the beast, these shall
hate the whore; and shall make her desolate and naked; and shall eat her flesh,
and burn her with fire. For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will."
These ten horns, doubtless mean some of the kingdoms and princes of the earth,
that have, for a long time, been under the influence of the beast, the great
whore of Babylon, and had a great share with her, in the cruel and bloody work
of tyranny, persecution and oppression. But the time is coming, and perhaps
near at hand, when their league and friendship with her, will be dissolved and
broken; and their love turned into hatred and a spirit of revenge. They will
turn with warm zeal and violence against her; and use all their strength and
power for her destruction and overthrow. These shall hate the whore to a degree
beyond what they ever loved her, and shall make her desolate and naked. They
shall strip her of all her costly ornaments which they have lavished away upon
her, and effectually humble her insolence and pride, and expose her to public
shame and disgrace; in the heat of their indignation and zeal, shall eat her
very flesh, and burn her with fire. They will do the most thorough execution
upon this old harlot, by whom they had been so long infatuated and deceived;
and wholly break up the stupid schemes of idolatry, with all the monuments of
it, and bring the abettors and instruments of tyranny and persecution to their
condign punishment. This God will put into their hearts, by a strong and
powerful impression, to fulfill his will; and they shall agree in it, to perform
his purpose and design. This prediction or prophecy, it is thought by judicious
expositors, refers to the destruction of papal Rome, or to the demolishing of
the Popish hierarchy in general; and that the kings of France are pointed out,
as the principal instruments to effect it. They have, in years past,
contributed greatly to her growth and advancement; and done much at the cruel
work of persecution. It is not impossible, nor improbable, that the time is
coming, when their hearts will be turned against her, and be improved by
Heaven, as the principal authors of her overthrow and ruin. France has been
satiated with the blood of Protestants, and it is to be hoped, will never thirst
after it any more. She has already shown some tendency toward a reformation;
and therefore may be judged very likely to effect such a revolution. It appears
from verse 17, that the infatuation of Popish princes will be permitted by
divine providence, only for a certain limited period, till the words of God be
fulfilled. And then their minds shall be turned and their eyes opened; and they
shall ruin and destroy all oppressive, tyrannical combinations, more eagerly
than they established them. Should our honorable Continental CONGRESS, see
fit, in their great wisdom, at this difficult juncture, to open a free trade,
and correspond with that nation, in a way in which our threatened rights and
liberties might have such security and indemnification, as to be in no hazard
or danger of any future encroachment on them, the spirit of liberty might
spread and circulate with commerce; and from small sparks, kindle up into a
bright and inextinguishable flame, in that, and in other kingdoms of the earth;
and so hasten the fulfillment of this prophecy, in the entire destruction of the
beast, or man of sin, and in the complete and glorious salvation of God's
afflicted church.

THE dragon, in this situation, is represented as much embarrassed in his black
system of politics, in a state of great perplexity, and high paroxism of
passion. Verse 17. "He was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the
remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony
of Jesus Christ." Which may refer to the present war that is carrying on with
such heat and fury against us; which seems chiefly levelled against those who
most strictly and conscientiously adhere to the pure, uncorrupted doctrine and
worship of our pious forefathers; and have not been seduced nor perverted from
the right ways of the Lord, but still keep God's commandments, and have the
testimony of Jesus Christ, in his pure gospel. Amidst all our declensions and
backslidings, our divisions and heresies, our contentions and separations,
there remain yet in the land a godly remnant of the true seed of the woman, who
have not been enticed away to worship the beast, nor prevailed upon to receive
his mark; who have never apostatised nor departed from the faith and practice
of the church, as first planted in the wilderness; but have continued steadfast
and immovable amidst all the storms of temptation, and violent assaults of the
adversary. And these seem the principal objects which excite the wrath and
resentment of the dragon, and against which, the whole artillery of his
indignation and vengeance has been pointed and aimed. Who, though few in number,
yet with such other helps and advantages as they are furnished with, will
overcome by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony. Their
fidelity, courage and zeal is such, that should it come to a case of extremity,
they will not love their lives unto the death. But this part of the prophecy
will admit of a different interpretation, and as well suit the present times.

BY the "remnant of her seed," we may understand those worthy, true members of
the church, staunch friends to liberty and the protestant religion, who
remained still in the mother country, and did not come over with her when she
took her flight into this wilderness. There has, ever since the settlement of
these colonies, been numbers of pious, godly persons, on the other side of the
water, who have been friendly and well-disposed toward us, and have used all
their power and influence to promote our growth, our wealth and prosperity.
This remnant of the seed of the woman, since our troubles have begun in
America, have exerted themselves to their utmost in our favor, to divert the
impending storm of vengeance from lighting on us; have made most moving and
affecting speeches in parliament, on the subject; have published many useful
pieces in vindication of the colonies; and have been, to the last degree,
faithful in corresponding with their friends on this side of the Atlantic, to
inform of the intrigues and dark plots that were contriving against us. These
things, together with the disappointment, shame and disgrace that have attended
the enterprises of the dragon against us, have roused his wrath against them
likewise, which appears by a very severe and extraordinary proclamation,
published to forbid this correspondence between them and us, on the highest
penalty. And from the commotions that began to be raised among them therefore,
should this civil war continue, it is highly probable, that within the term of
another year, it may flame forth from the very bowels of the kingdom, where it
seems to be already kindling up, and where our brethren, which keep the
commandments of God, will unavoidably be distressed. But in the issue hereof,
it is to be hoped, that the dragon will be wholly consumed and destroyed; that
the seat and foundation of all tyranny, persecution and oppression, may be for
ever demolished; that the horns, whether civil or ecclesiastical, may be
knocked off from the beast, and his head receive a deadly wound, and his jaws
be effectually broken; that peace, liberty and righteousness might universally
prevail; that salvation and strength might come to Zion; and the kingdom of our
God, and the power of his Christ might be established to all the ends of the
earth.

IMPROVEMENT.
1. WE learn from what has been said, the true cause, as well as the deplorable
effects of all dissentions and violent commotions amidst the Christian states
and kingdoms of the world; which, like terrible earthquakes, to which they are
compared, often shake them from the center, and convulse them to death and
ruin. If we trace them up to their time, source, and origin, we shall presently
find, by the help of scripture light, they all proceed from the inveterate envy
and malice which the dragon has against the woman, and the war and contest he
is carrying on against her, and her seed. This is plainly held forth in these
prophecies of St. John, and is the grand subject of them. It has, from the
beginning, been the constant aim and design of the dragon, sometimes called the
beast, and the serpent, satan, and the devil, to erect a scheme of absolute
despotism and tyranny on earth, and involve all mankind in slavery and bondage;
and so prevent their having that liberty and freedom which the Son of God came
from heaven to procure for, and bestow on them; that he might keep them in a
state of servile subjection to himself. He has been, and still is the chief
counselor and directing agent in all the dark plots of oppression and
persecution against God's church, to effect her destruction; that his own
wicked scheme of tyranny might have a full establishment on earth, and bear
down all before it. And it is truly mavelous what success he has been
permitted to have in accomplishing this malignant design: How, not only men of
lower abilities and less discernment have been deluded and infatuated by him;
but many kings and chief rulers in church and state, of whom better things
might have been expected. Such, after they have been made drunk with the
intoxicating wine of his fornication and whoredom, have been his chief
instruments in this cruel and bloody work. They are of such dark complexion in
their counsels, and pursuing such black designs, that they are represented as
"ascending out of the bottomless pit, to make war against the faithful
witnesses and servants of Jesus Christ, and to kill them." And who can count up
the numbers that have been slain by them? Rivers of blood have been shed, at
one time and another, in this terrible war and conflict which the tyrannical,
persecuting powers of the earth have been instigated by Satan, to carry on
against the church of Christ. In the first beginning of the Christian
dispensation, ten persecutions followed successively one after another, while
the government of Rome was in the hands of pagan emperors.

IN this struggle between Paganism and Christianity, thousands of martyrs and
confessors were most cruelly and barbarously tormented, and put to death. These
horrid massacres of the saints may be emblematically, or figuratively
represented in the 6th chapter of this prophetic book, in the 9th verse of
which, the apostle is said to have seen under the altar, the souls of them that
were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held. And
after Rome became Christian, or rather Papal, and the man of sin made his
public appearance, the woman and her seed, the humble followers of Christ,
fared yet worse, and were more hardly and cruelly dealt with than ever, by
their persecuting enemies, who are inwardly galled in their consciences, and
said to be tormented at their pure doctrines, plain faithful remonstrances, and
exemplary lives. See chap. xi. 10. When this great red dragon was mounted on
high, with his seven heads and ten horns, the first object on which he
exercised his tyrannical and persecuting power, was the church, represented in
these prophecies by the woman and her seed. Hence, when she appeared pregnant,
ready to bring forth children, when the gospel began to have success, and new
converts were born, and added to the church, this dragon stood ready to seize
and devour them, like a hungry lion, eagerly waiting for his prey; and has
persecuted her with rage and fierceness, not only through the imperial populous
cities of Italy and Bohemia, France, Spain, and England, and through their
colonies and plantations, even to the uttermost ends of the earth. When she
took the wings of the great eagle, and, under the protecting providence of God
fled into the wilderness, he continued wroth with her, and poured forth floods
of his indignation and vengeance against her. "Woe to the inhabitants of the
earth, and of the sea," says the apostle, "for the devil is come down to them,
having great wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time." This
dragon, the great enemy of God, and of his church, whatever shape or form he
has assumed, whether that of the spotted leopard, with the feet of a bear, and
the mouth of a lion; whether his horns have been ten, or only two, like a lamb
or goat, giving life unto the image of the beast; yet he has in every
appearance, when he had opportunity, discovered the like fierceness and cruelty
of temper, thirsting for the blood of the saints. When his shape and form has
wore a milder aspect, he has yet spoke as a dragon; and when times would allow
of it, exercised all the power of the first beast, causing the earth, and them
that dwell therein, to worship him; giving forth tyrannical mandates and
decrees, that as many as would not worship the image of the beast, should be
killed: Gathering all into his service, both small and great, rich and poor,
free and bond, slaves and savages, catholics and barbarians, to accomplish at
any rate, his black and dark designs; passing the most vigorous acts, and
severe edicts against those who refused compliance; enacting by his omipotent
power, that they should not buy nor sell, nor carry on any trade or commerce by
land or sea. Now, the administration seems here described, that has for a
number of years, been so grievous and distressing to these colonies in America,
claiming an absolute power and authority to make laws, binding in all cases
whatever, without check or control from any; which has proceeded in the
exercise of this despotic, arbitrary power, to deprive one of them, of their
most essentail and chartered privileges; sent over fleets and armies to enforce
their cruel, tyrannical edicts, which have involved us in all the calamities
and horrors of a civil war; which have destroyed many useful lives, burnt two
of our flourishing towns, captured many of our vessels that fell in their way,
prohibited and destroyed our fishery and trade, forbidding us to buy or sell,
and taken in a hostile manner, in a way of piracy and robbery, our interest and
property, and threaten us with general destruction, for no other reason than
that we will not surrender our liberties, properties and privileges, and become
abject vassals and slaves to despotic and arbitrary power. I say, the
administration seems described, and appears to have many of the features, and
much of the temper and character of the image of the beast which the apostle
represents, which had two horns like a lamb, and spoke as a dragon. And the
language of our pusillanimous foes, and even their adherents amongst us, seems
plainly predicted, Rev. xiii. 4. "Who is like unto the beast? Who is able to
make war with him."

2. FROM what has been said, we see reason gratefully to acknowledge and adore
the kind, watchful providence of God, in preserving his church, the woman and
her seed, amidst the storms and tempests, the commotions and convulsions that
have been occasioned by the oppressive tyrannical powers of the earth. The
great dragon, her formidable enemy, notwithstanding his mighty strength and
power, cruelty and rage, has always been overcome by the blood of the Lamb, and
by the word of their testimony, in all her wars and conflicts with him; which,
instead of answering his design to crush and destroy her, have ever been
overruled by her all-wise benevolent king, to promote her growth and
advancement in the world. The church, though often surrounded by the flames of
persecution, like the burning bush which Moses beheld as a type and emblem of
it, yet has never been consumed. The gates of death and hell have never
prevailed against her. Christ has been with her from the beginning, agreeable
to his divine promise; and will so continue to the end of the world. The blood
of the faints and martyrs that has been shed, and flowed down like rivers and
seas, has been like seed planted for the church, and made it spread through a
wider compass, and grow faster in the world. All the combined policy of earth
and hell has not been able to overthrow and demolish this building of God, who
has established it, and will preserve it by his almighty power, till all the
purposes of his redeeming love and grace are accomplished in the complete
salvation of his chosen ones. It must be confessed, that the trials,
afflictions and distresses of the church have been very great; but these have
been as a purifying furnace, to cleanse her from dross and corruption, and to
make her shine brighter in all the graces and virtues of Christianity. Her
enemies and adversaries, in all their furious attacks and malicious encounters,
have never gained any considerable and lasting advantage to themselves; but
generally have come off with loss, disappointment and shame; and had their own
weapons, and the blows they have struck, retorted back on them, with redoubled
force and vengeance. God promises to give power to his faithful witnesses and
servants, "And if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth,
and devoureth their enemies. And if any man will hurt them, he must in this
manner be killed." Rev. ii. 3, 5. If the enemies of the church, in the wars
they set on foot, take any of her members captive, they themselves shall go
into captivity; and he that kills them with the sword, must be killed with
the sword: Agreeable to the great law of retaliation, which is wisely adopted
at this day, by the honorable Continental CONGRESS; and the execution of it in
full, is warranted and justified by this, and and other passages of sacred
writ. Those that have undertaken to distress and persecute the woman and her
seed, the faithful servants of Christ, have ever found the interprize dangerous
and ruinous to themselves. When the wicked persecuting tyrants of the earth,
appear to have great power and strength, some of a selfish and timorous turn of
mind, may inadvertantly think it safest to pay worship and allegiance to them,
and receive their mark, and seek shelter and protection under their wings, from
the impending storm: But they are most artfully deluded and mistaken. "The
same," says the apostle, Rev. xiv. 10. "shall drink of the wine of the wrath of
God, which is poured out without mixture, into the cup of his indignation. And
he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy
angels, and in the presence of the Lamb; and the smoke of their torment
ascends up for ever and ever, and they have no rest day nor night."

3. WE may, in a peculiar manner, notice the kind dealings of God in his
providence toward this branch of his church, that he has planted as a choice
vine, in this once howling wilderness. He brought her as on eagles wings from
the seat of oppression and persecution, "to her own place," has, of his
unmerited grace, bestowed liberties and privileges upon her, beyond what are
enjoyed in any other part of the world: He has nourished and protected her from
the face of the serpent, and preserved her from being carried away to
destruction, when great floods of his wrath and vengeance have been poured
forth after her. God has, in this American quarter of the globe, provided for
the woman and her seed, a fixed and lasting settlement and habitation, and
bestowed it upon her, to be her own property for ever As the church has such a
gift and grant of this good land, from that God to whom the earth belongs, and
the fullness thereof; the present war set on foot by the British ministry and
parliament, against her true and worthy members, the American sons of liberty,
to dispossess them hereof, is not only felonious and murderous, as styled by
the noble Lord Mayor of London, in his excellent speech on this subject; but
seems likewise a very bold and daring attack upon the sovereign prerogative of
that Being, who is the Great Lord Proprietor of all, to whom vengeance
belongs; who has already interposed in a very signal manner, to display his
awful vengeance against this wicked nefarious undertaking, by plunging four
thousand of these our malignant foes in the ocean, with an hundred and fifty
thousand pounds sterling of their property; by setting fire to two of their
ships with lightening from heaven; and by a late very sweeping storm on the
coasts of Great Britain, to an immense destruction of both men and shipping; by
which, and other remarkable providence in our favor, we have incontestible
evidence, that God Almighty, with all the powers of heaven, are on our side.
Great numbers of angels, no doubt, are encamping round our coast, for our
defense and protection. Michael stands ready, with all the artillery of heaven,
to encounter the dragon, and to vanquish this black host.
. In this just view of the distinguished favors of heaven toward our fathers,
and us their sinful posterity, while on the one hand, we see abundant cause for
thanksgiving and praise to our almighty preserver, and most gracious
benefactor; we may on the other hand see the greatest reason for the deepest
humiliation, repentance, and contrition of heart, for our vile abuse and
misimprovement of these privileges and favors. What an amazing low sense have
we had, of the worth of the uncommon gifts and bounties of heaven? How awfully
have they been slighted and undervalued by us? What astonishing stupidity,
ingratitude and unthankfulness has reigned in our hearts? How lukewarm and
indifferent have we been, in the most important concerns of religion? How
careless and unconcerned about the interest and welfare of the church of
Christ? How backward to come into fellowship and communion with her, and to
attend the rites and ordinances which distinguish (at least outwardly) God's
children from the profane wicked world? How does iniquity abound among us, and
the love of many wax cold? How has the gold become dim, the most fine gold
changed? What awful backslidings and declensions in this land, once dedicated
to the Lord as a mountain of holiness, and an habitation of righteousness,
liberty and peace? Surely the great head of the church, who knows our works,
must have not a few, but many things against us. We have, in a great measure,
lost that lively faith, zeal and brotherly love, so conspicuous in the temper
and conduct of our pious fore fathers, and added such a beauty and luster to
their characters. The true and noble spirit of primitive christianity is scarce
to be found among us; have lost our first love, the love of our espousals, and
kindness of our youth. Our churches decline in doctrine, worship and
discipline; and have had awful schisms and rents made in them. A spirit of
contention, division and separation has prevailed to the great wounding of the
church, and to the dishonor and shame of all the promoters and abettors
thereof. How have the Prophets, the faithful witnesses of Christ, been despised
and treated with contempt; while prophesying in sackcloth; and the woman, the
true church, in her plain dress of gospel purity and simplicity, been
ridiculed, and thought to have no beauty or comeliness in her? How eager have
many been, in their attention to lying deceivers, the frogs that have issued
out of the mouth of the false prophet; and charmed and captivated with their
croaking noise, full of discord and confusion? How has the beauty of this
pleasant land of Immanuel been defaced, and its glory spoiled by the little
foxes treading down our tender vines; and by the inroads of the wild boar of
the wilderness? These things are justly matter of deep and serious lamentation,
as they are doubtless the causes of the present calamities and judgments with
which we are visited.

4. As there still remains among us, a godly remnant that have not apostatized
from God, nor departed from the faith of the gospel; and as these prophecies on
which we have been treating, will, many of them, most probably have their
fulfillment in this land; there are yet solid grounds of hope and encouragement
for us, in this dark and gloomy day. Though we may, in God's righteous
providence, be sorely rebuked and chastised for our woeful apostacies,
declensions and backslidings; yet we have, I think, good reason to believe,
from the prophecies, so far as we are able to understand them, and from the
general plan of God's providence, so far as opened to view, in past and present
dispensations of it, that we shall not be wholly given up to desolation and
ruin. It is not likely nor probable, that God will revoke the grant he has made
of this land to his church. His gifts as well as calling are without
repentance. It does not appear probable, that a persecuting, oppressive and
tyrannical power, will ever be permitted to rear up its head and horns in it,
notwithstanding its present violent assaults and struggles. Liberty has been
planted here; and the more it is attacked, the more it grows and flourishes.
The time is coming and hastening on, when Babylon the great shall fall to rise
no more; when all wicked tyrants and oppressors shall be destroyed for ever.
These violent attacks upon the woman in the wilderness, may possibly be some of
the last efforts, and dying struggles of the man of sin. These commotions and
convulsions in the British empire, may be leading to the fulfillment of such
prophecies as relate to his downfall and overthrow, and to the future glory and
prosperity of Christ's church. It will soon be said and acknowledged, that the
kingdoms of this world, are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ.
The vials of God's wrath begin to be poured out on his enemies and adversaries;
and there is falling on them a noisome and grievous sore. And to such as have
shed the blood of saints and prophets, to them, blood will be given to drink;
for they are worthy. And they will gnaw their tongues of falsehood and deceit,
for pain; and have the cup of the wine of the fierceness of her wrath; and be
rewarded double. The Lamb shall overcome them, for he is Lord of Lords, and
King of Kings; and they that are with him, are called, and chosen, and
faithful. May the Lord shorten the days of tribulation, and appear in his
glory, to build up Zion; that his knowledge might cover the earth, as the
waters do the seas; that wars and tumults may cease through the world, and the
wolf and the lamb lie down together, and nothing hurt or destroy throughout his
holy mountain.

AMEN.
APPENDIX.
BY ANOTHER HAND.
IN the thirteenth chapter of Revelation, the apostle saw in vision, two beasts
coming up; which, as far as I am acquainted, expositors have generally
explained as a twofold figurative representation of the same event. But to me
it appears, that as the beasts were very diverse, the one from the other; so
very different events were figured out by them. It is said, verse 1. "And I
stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up out of the sea" i. e.
out of the church, "having seven heads, and ten horns," etc. And in the 11th
verse, it is said, "And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth," i.
e. of an earthly extract, springing up from very terrene, sensual motives, "and
he had two horns like a lamb, and he spoke as a dragon." This first beast here
described, has been well explained by expositors, and applied to the man of
sin, to the rise and establishment of popery. But this second beast, with equal
justice and propriety, may be considered as figurative of, and fulfilled in
what is called, King HENRY's reformation. Every one that is acquainted with the
personal character of that prince, cannot but be sensible, that the motives by
which he was influenced to separate from the church of Rome, were of a very
terrene, sensual, earthly nature; fitly described by the beast's coming up out
of the earth. "And he had two horns," civil and ecclesiastical power, "like a
lamb," with a more mild, benign and favorable aspect on the church, than the
first beast. King Henry, when he broke with the Pope, assumed the chief and
supreme authority in the British church, as well as nation; here decyphered by
the "two horns." And "he spoke as a dragon." Witness, the many hot and cruel
persecutions that have been carried on in the kingdom, since the reformation,
to the destruction of multitudes of the faithful servants of Jesus Christ.
Although Henry assumed headship in the church as well as state; yet it was a work
of time to get himself acknowledged and established in that character; in the
accomplishment of which, he may be said, "To do great wonders," etc. Verse 13,
14. "Saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an image to
the beast, which had the wound by a sword, and did live," i. e. the first
beast, the Pope.

THE apostle Paul, prophesied of the man of sin, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 4. and describes
him as one, "Who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or
is worshipped; so that he as God sits in the temple of God, showing himself
that he is God." Claiming to be the head of the church, and assuming supreme,
sovereign, absolute authority in it, is here pointed out as the grand, pecular,
and distinguishing mark and character of the man of sin; most clearly and
plainly fulfilled in the Pope. Consequently, headship and supremacy in the
church, must be the peculiar and distinguishing features of this image of the
first beast, which the second beast required to be made. And what can be a more
clear, plain and express fulfillment of this prophecy, than that supremacy in
the church, given to our kings, ever since the reformation, by the British
ecclesiastical constitution? Where can we find any thing in all history, that
bids so fair for an accomplishment of this emblematical prediction, in the
rising of the second beast? Nothing but a fond partiality, of applying every
thing that is bad, to the Pope, can, I conceive, prevent our embracing this
application of the prophecy.

"LET not those who are friends to the episcopal form of church government,
look upon themselves pointed at, by any thing I have here said. For real
episcopacy does not imply an alliance between church and state; nor necessarily
require an earthly head to the church; much less to invest the king with that
character, as every one must acknowledge who will plead for episcopacy as the
primitive form of the church, set up by the apostles. Because all the kings of
the earth, in their day, and for many years after, were so far from being
esteemed heads to the church, that they were not so much as members in it."

THE time prefixed for the continuance of the first beast, is "forty and two
months." See verse 5. But the number of the second beast is mentioned in the
18th verse. "Here is wisdom. Let him that has understanding count the number
of the beast: For it is the number of a man, and his number is six hundred
threescore and six." Expositors have, many of them, supposed that this number
intended the period from the time the apostle's receiving this vision, to the
rising of the first beast. But as this is the number of the second beast, if it
be applied in such a manner, it must be taken for that period between the rise
of the first, and of the second beast. But as the continuance of the first
beast was limited to forty two prophetic months, or a thousand two hundred and
seventy seven years; so this number six hundred sixty six, may denote the
duration of the second beast.

THE END.

