OBSERVATIONS ON THE NATURE OF CIVIL LIBERTY, THE PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENT, AND
THE JUSTICE and POLICY OF THE WAR with AMERICA.

To which is added An APPENDIX, Containing a STATE of the NATIONAL DEBT, an
Estimate of the Money drawn from the Public by the Taxes, and an Account of the
National Income and Expenditure since the last War.

Heu miseri cives! non Hostem, inimicaque castra,
-- Vestras Spes uritis.
VIRG. By RICHARD PRICE, D.D. F.R.S.

LONDON Printed 1776. BOSTON, Reprinted and Sold by T. and J. FLEET.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IN the following Observations. I have taken that liberty of examining public
measures, which, happily for this kingdom, every person in it enjoys. They
contain the sentiments of a private and unconnected man; for which, should
there be any thing wrong in them, he alone is answerable.

After all that has been written on the dispute with America, no reader can
expect to be informed, in this publication, of much that he has not before
known. Perhaps, however, he may find in it some new matter; and if he should,
it will be chiefly in the Observations on the Nature of Civil Liberty, and the
Policy of the War with America; and in the Appendix.

OBSERVATIONS, etc.
OUR Colonies in NORTH America appear to be now determined to do and suffer
every thing, under the persuasion, that GREAT BRITAIN is attempting to rob them
of that Liberty to which every member of society, and all civil communities,
have a natural and unalienable right. The question, therefore, whether this is
a reasonable persuasion, is highly interesting, and deserves the most careful
attention of every Englishman who values Liberty, and wishes to avoid staining
himself with the guilt of invading it. But it is impossible to judge properly
of this question without correct ideas of Liberty in general; and of the
nature, limits, and principles of Civil Liberty in particular. -- The following
observations on this subject appear to me important, as well as just; and I
cannot make myself easy without offering them to the public at the present
period, big with events of the last consequence to this kingdom. I do this with
reluctance and pain, urged by strong feelings, but at the same time checked by
the consciousness that I am likely to deliver sentiments not favorable to the
present measures of that government, under which I live, and to which I am a
constant and zealous well-wisher. Such, however, are my present sentiments and
views, that this is a consideration of inferior moment with me; and, as I hope
never to go beyond the bounds of decent discussion and expostulation, I flatter
myself, that I shall be able to avoid giving any person just cause of offense.

The observations with which I shall begin, are of a more general and
abstracted nature; but being, in my opinion, of particular consequence; and
necessary to introduce what I have principally in view, I hope they will be
patiently read and considered.

SECTION I. Of the Nature of Liberty in General.
IN order to obtain a more distinct and accurate view of the nature of Liberty
as such, it will be useful to consider it under the four following general
divisions.

First, Physical Liberty. -- Secondly, Moral Liberty. -- Thirdly, Religious
Liberty. -- And Fourthly, Civil Liberty. -- These heads comprehend under them
all the different kinds of Liberty. And I have placed Civil Liberty last,
because I mean to apply to it all I shall say of the other kinds of Liberty.

By PHYSICAL LIBERTY I mean that principle of Spontaneity, or
Self-determination, which constitutes us Agents; or which gives us a command
over our actions, rendering them properly ours, and not effects of the
operation of any foreign cause. -- MORAL LIBERTY is the power of following, in
all circumstances, our sense of right and wrong; or of acting in conformity to
our reflecting and moral principles, without being controuled by any contrary
principles. -- RELIGIOUS LIBERTY signifies the power of exercising, without
molestation, that mode of religion which we think best; or of making the
decisions of our own consciences, respecting religious truth, the rule of our
conduct, and not any of the decisions of others. -- In like manner, CIVIL
LIBERTY is the power of a Civil Society or State to govern itself by its own
discretion; or by laws of its own making, without being subject to any foreign
discretion, or to the impositions of any extraneous will or power.

It should be observed, that, according to these definitions of the different
kinds of liberty, there is one general idea, that runs through them all; I
mean, the idea of Self-direction, or Self government. -- Did our volitions
originate not with ourselves, but with some cause over which we have no power;
or were we under a necessity of always following some will different from our
own, we should want PHYSICAL LIBERTY.

In like manner; he whose perceptions of moral obligation are controuled by his
passions has lost his Moral Liberty; and the most common language applied to
him is, that he wants Self-government.

He likewise who, in religion, cannot govern himself by his convictions of
religious duty, but is obliged to receive formularies of faith, and to practice
modes of worship imposed upon him by others, wants Religious Liberty. -- And
the Community also that is governed, not by itself, but by some will
independent of it, and over which it has no control, wants Civil Liberty.

In all these cases there is a force which stands opposed to the agent's own
will; and which, as far as it operates, produces Servitude. -- In the first
case, this force is incompatible with the very idea of voluntary motion; and
the subject of it is a mere passive instrument which never acts, but is always
acted upon. -- In the second case; this force is the influence of passion
getting the better of reason; or the brute overpowering and conquering the will
of the man. -- In the third case; it is Human Authority in religion requiring
conformity to particular modes of faith and worship, and superseding private
judgment. -- And in the last case, it is any will distinct from that of the
Majority of a Community, which claims a power of making laws for it, and
disposing of its property.

This it is, I think, that marks the limit, or that lays the line between
Liberty and Slavery. As far as, in any instance, the operation of any cause
comes in to restrain the power of Self-government, so far Slavery is
introduced: Nor do I think that a preciser idea than this of Liberty and
Slavery can be formed.

I cannot help wishing I could here fix my reader's attention, and engage him
to consider carefully the dignity of that blessing to which we give the name of
LIBERTY, according to the representation now made of it. There is not a word in
the whole compass of language which expresses so much of what is important and
excellent. It is, in every view of it, a blessing truly sacred and invaluable.
-- Without Physical Liberty, man would be a machine acted upon by mechanical
springs, having no principle of motion in himself or command over events; and,
therefore incapable of all merit and demerit. -- Without Moral Liberty he is a
wicked and detestable being, subject to the tyranny of base lusts, and the
sport of every vile appetite. -- And without Religious and Civil Liberty he is
a poor and abject animal, without rights, without property, and without a
conscience, bending his neck to the yoke, and crouching to the will of every
silly creature who has the insolence to pretend to authority over him. --
Nothing, therefore, can be of so much consequence to us as Liberty. It is the
foundation of all honor, and the chief privilege and glory of our natures.

In fixing our ideas on the subject of Liberty it is of particular use to take
such an enlarged view of it as I have now given. But the immediate object of
the present enquiry being Civil Liberty, I will confine to it all the
subsequent observations.

SECTION II. Of Civil Liberty and the Principles of Government.
FROM what has been said, it is obvious, that all civil government, as far as
it can be denominated free, is the creature of the people. It originates with
them. It is conducted under their direction; and has in view nothing but their
happiness. All its different forms are no more than so many different modes in
which they choose to direct their affairs, and to secure the quiet enjoyment of
their rights. -- In every free state every man is his own legislator. -- All
taxes are free gifts for public services. -- All laws are particular provisions
or regulations established by COMMON CONSENT for gaining protection and safety.
-- And all Magistrates are Trustees or Deputies for carrying these regulations
into execution.

Liberty, therefore, is too imperfectly defined when it is said to be "a
Government by LAWS, and not by MEN." If the laws are made by one man, or a
junto of men in a state, and not by COMMON CONSENT, a government by them does
not differ from Slavery. In this case it would be a contradiction in terms to
say that the state governs itself.

From hence it is obvious that Civil Liberty, in its most perfect degree, can
be enjoyed only in small states, where every member is capable of giving his
suffrage in person, and of being chosen into public offices. When a state
becomes so numerous, or when the different parts of it are removed to such
distances from one another, as to render this impracticable, a diminution of
Liberty necessarily arises. There are, however, in these circumstances, methods
by which such near approaches may be made to perfect Liberty as shall answer
all the purposes of government, and at the same time secure every right of
human nature.

Though all the members of a state should not be capable of giving their
suffrages on public measures, individually and personally, they may do this by
the appointment of Substitutes or Representatives. They may entrust the powers
of legislation, subject to such restrictions as they shall think necessary,
with any number of Delegates; and whatever can be done by such delegates,
within the limits of their trust, may be considered as done by the united voice
and counsel of the community. -- In this method a free government may be
established in a large state; and it is conceiveable that by regulations of
this kind, any number of states might be subjected to a scheme of government,
that would exclude the desolations of war, and produce universal peace and
order.

Let us think here of what may be practicable in this way with respect to
Europe in particular. -- While it continues divided, as it is at present, into
a great number of independent kingdoms, whose interests are continually
clashing, it is impossible but that disputes will often arise which must end in
war and carnage. It would be no remedy to this evil to make one of these states
supreme over the rest; and to give it an absolute plenitude of power to
superintend and control them. This would be to subject all the states to the
arbitrary discretion of one, and to establish an ignominious slavery not
possible to be long endured. It would, therefore, be a remedy worse than the
disease; nor is it possible it should be approved by any mind that has not lost
every idea of Civil Liberty. On the contrary. -- Let every state, with respect
to all its internal concerns, be continued independent of all the rest; and let
a general confederacy be formed by the appointment of a SENATE consisting of
Representatives from all the different states. Let this SENATE possess the
power of managing all the common concerns of the united states, and of judging
and deciding between them, as a common Arbiter or Umpire, in all disputes;
having, at the same time, under its direction, the common force of the states
to support its decisions. -- In these circumstances, each separate state would
be secure against the interference of foreign power in its private concerns,
and, therefore, would possess Liberty; and at the same time it would be secure
against all oppression and insult from every neighboring state. -- Thus might
the scattered force and abilities of a whole continent be gathered into one
point; all litigations settled as they rose; universal peace preserved; and
nation prevented from any more lifting up a sword against nation.

I have observed, that though, in a great state, all the individuals that
compose it cannot be admitted to an immediate participation in the powers of
legislation and government, yet they may participate in these powers by a
delegation of them to a body of representatives. -- In this case it is evident
that the state will be still free or self-governed; and that it will be more or
less so in proportion as it is more or less fairly and adequately represented.
If the persons to whom the trust of government is committed hold their places
for short terms; if they are chosen by the unbiassed voices of a majority of
the state, and subject to their instructions; Liberty will be enjoyed in its
highest degree. But if they are chosen for long terms by a part only of the
state; and if during that term they are subject to no control from their
constituents; the very idea of Liberty will be lost, and the power of choosing
constituents becomes nothing but a power, lodged in a few, to choose, at certain
periods, a body of Masters for themselves and for the rest of the Community.
And if a state is so sunk that the body of its representatives are elected by a
handful of the In Great Britain, consisting of near six millions of
inhabitants, 5723 persons, most of them the lowest of the people, elect one
half of the House of Commons; and 364 votes choose a ninth part. This may be
seen distinctly made out in the Political Disquisitions, Vol. I. Book 2. C. 4.
a work full of important and useful instruction.
meanest persons in it, whose votes are always paid for; and if also, there is
a higher will on which even these mock representatives themselves depend, and
that directs their voices: In these circumstances, it will be an abuse of
language to say that the state possesses Liberty. Private men, indeed, might be
allowed the exercise of Liberty; as they might also under the most despotic
government; but it would be an indulgence or connivance derived from the spirit
of the times, or from an accidental mildness in the administration. And, rather
than be governed in such a manner, it would perhaps be better to be governed by
the will of one man without any representation: For a representation so
degenerated could answer no other end than to mislead and deceive, by
disguising slavery, and keeping up a form of Liberty when the reality was lost.

Within the limits now mentioned, Liberty may be enjoyed in every possible
degree; from that which is complete and perfect, to that whch is merely
nominal; according as the people have more or less of a share in government,
and of a controuling power over the persons by whom it is administered.

In general, to be free is to be guided by one's own will; and to be guided by
the will of another is the characteristic of Servitude. This is particularly
applicable to Political Liberty. That state, I have observed, is free, which is
guided by its own will; or, (which comes to the same) by the will of an
assembly of representatives appointed by itself and accountable to itself. And
every state that is not so governed; or in which a body of men representing the
people make not an essential part of the Legislature, is in slavery. -- In
order to form the most perfect constitution of government, there may be the
best reasons for joining to such a body of representatives, an Hereditary
Council, consisting of men of the first rank in the state, with a Supreme
executive Magistrate at the head of all. This will form useful checks in a
legislature; and contribute to give it vigor, union, and dispatch, without
infringing liberty: for, as long as that part of a government which represents
the people is a fair representation; and also has a negative on all public
measures, together with the sole power of imposing taxes and originating
supplies; the essentials of liberty will be preserved. -- We make it our boast
in this country, that this is our own constitution. I will not say with how
much reason.

Of such Liberty as I have now described, it is impossible that there should be
an excess. Government is an institution for the benefit of the people governed,
which they have power to model as they please; and to say, that they can have
too much of this power is to say, that there ought to be a power in the state
superior to that which gives it being, and from which all jurisdiction in it is
derived. -- Licentiousness, which has been commonly mentioned, as an extreme of
liberty, is indeed its opposite. It is government by the will of rapacious
individuals, in opposition to the will of the community, made known and
declared in the laws. A free state, at the same time that it is free itself,
makes all its members free by excluding licentiousness, and guarding their
persons and property and good name against insult. It is the end of all just
government, at the same time that it secures the liberty of the public against
foreign injury, to secure the liberty of the individual against private injury.
I do not, therefore, think it strictly just to say, that it belongs to the
nature of government to entrench on private liberty. It ought never to do this,
except as far as the exercise of private liberty encroaches on the liberties of
others. That is, it is licentiousness it restrains, and liberty itself only
when used to destroy liberty.

It appears from hence, that licentiousness and despotism are more nearly
allied than is commonly imagined. They are both alike inconsistent with
liberty, and the true end of government; nor is there any other difference
between them, than that the one is the licentiousness of great men, and the
other the licentiousness of little men; or that, by the one, the persons and
property of a people are subject to outrage and invasion from a King, or a
lawless body of Grandees; and that, by the other, they are subject to the like
outrage from a lawless mob. -- In avoiding one of these evils, mankind have
often run into the other. But all well-constituted governments guard equally
against both. Indeed of the two, the last is, on several accounts, the least to
be dreaded, and has done the least mischief. It may be truly said, that if
licentiousness has destroyed its thousands, despotism has destroyed its
millions. The former, having little power, and no system to support it,
necessarily finds its own remedy; and a people soon get out of the tumult and
anarchy attending it. But a despotism, wearing the form of government, and
being armed with its force, is an evil not to be conquered without dreadful
struggles. It goes on from age to age, debasing the human faculties, levelling
all distinctions, and preying on the rights and blessings of society. -- It
deserves to be added, that in a state disturbed by licentiousness, there is an
animation which is favorable to the human mind, and which puts it upon
exerting its powers. But in a state habituated to a despotism, all is still and
torpid. A dark and savage tyranny stifles every effort of genius; and the mind
loses all its spirit and dignity.

Before I proceed to what I have farther in view, I will observe, that the
account now given of the principles of public Liberty, and the nature of an
equal and free government, shows what judgment we should form of that
OMNIPOTENCE, which, it has been said, must belong to every government as such.
Great stress has been laid on this, but most unreasonably. -- Government, as
has been before observed is, in the very nature of it, a TRUST; and all its
powers a DELEGATION for gaining particular ends. This trust may be misapplied
and abused. It may be employed to defeat the very ends for which it was
instituted; and to subvert the very rights which it ought to protect. -- A
PARLIAMENT, for instance, consisting of a body of representatives chosen for a
limited period, to make laws, and to grant money for public services, would
forfeit its authority by making itself perpetual, or even prolonging its own
duration; by nominating its own members; by accepting bribes; or subjecting
itself to any kind of foreign influence. This would convert a Parliament into a
conclave or junto of self-created tools; and a state that has lost its regard
to its own rights, so far as to submit to such a breach of trust in its rulers,
is enslaved. -- Nothing, therefore, can be more absurd than the doctrine which
some have taught, with respect to the omnipotence of parliaments. They possess
no power beyond the limits of the trust for the execution of which they were
formed. If they contradict this trust, they betray their constituents, and
dissolve themselves. All delegated power must be subordinate and limited. -- If
omnipotence can, with any sense, be ascribed to a legislature, it must be
lodged where all legislative authority originates; that is, in the PEOPLE. For
their sakes government is instituted; and their's is the only real omnipotence.

I am sensible, that all I have been saying would be very absurd, were the
opinions just which some have maintained concerning the origin of government.
According to these opinions, government is not the creature of the people, or
the result of a convention between them and their rulers: But there are certain
men who possess in themselves, independently of the will of the people, a right
of governing them, which they derive from the Deity. This doctrine has been
abundantly refuted by many See among others Mr. Lock on Government, and Mr.
Priestley's Essay on the first Principles of Government.
excellent writers. It is a doctrine which avowedly subverts Civil Liberty; and
which represents mankind as a body of vassals, formed to descend like cattle
from one set of owners to another, who have an absolute dominion over them. It
is a wonder, that those who view their species in a light so humiliating,
should ever be able to think of themselves without regret and shame. The
intention of these observations is not to oppose such sentiments; but, taking
for granted the reasonableness of Civil Liberty, to show wherein it consists,
and what distinguishes it from its contrary. -- And in considering this
subject, as it has been now treated, it is unavoidable to reflect on the
excellency of a free government, and its tendency to exalt the nature of man.
-- Every member of a free state, having his property secure, and knowing
himself his own governor, possesses a consciousness of dignity in himself, and
feels incitements to emulation and improvement, to which the miserable slaves
of arbitrary power must be utter strangers. In such a state all the springs of
action have room to operate, and the mind is stimulated to the noblest
exertions. See Dr. Priestley on Government, page 68, 69, etc.
-- But to be obliged, from our birth, to look up to a creature no better than
ourselves as the master of our fortunes; and to receive his will as our law --
What can be more humiliating? What elevated ideas can enter a mind in such a
situation? -- Agreeably to this remark; the subjects of free states have, in
all ages, been most distinguished for genius and knowledge. Liberty is the soil
where the arts and sciences have flourished; and the more free a state has
been, the more have the powers of the human mind been drawn forth into action,
and the greater number of brave men has it produced. With what luster do the
ancient free states of Greece shine in the annals of the world? How different
is that country now, under the Great Turk? The difference between a country
inhabited by men, and by brutes, is not greater.

These are reflections which should be constantly present to every mind in this
country. -- As Moral Liberty is the prime blessing of man in his private
capacity, so is Civil Liberty in his public capacity. There is nothing that
requires more to be watched than power. There is nothing that ought to be
opposed with a more determined resolution than its encroachments. Sleep in a
State, as Montesquieu says, is always followed by slavery.

The people of this kingdom were once warmed by such sentiments as those. Many
a sycophant of power have they sacrificed. Often have they fought and bled in
the cause of Liberty. But that time seems to be going. The fair inheritance of
Liberty left us by our ancestors many of us are not unwilling to resign. And
abandoned venality, the inseparable companion of dissipation and extravagance,
has poisoned the springs of public virtue among us: And should any events ever
arise that should render the opposition necessary that took place in the times
of King Charles the First, and James the Second, I am afraid all that is
valuable to us would be lost. The terror of the standing army, the danger of
the public funds, and the all-corrupting influence of the treasury, would
deaden all zeal, and produce general acquiescence and servility.

SECT. III. Of the Authority of one Country over another.
FROM the nature and principles of Civil Liberty, as they have been now
explained, it is an immediate and necessary inference that no one community can
have any power over the property or legislation of another community, that is
not incorporated with it by a just and adequate representation. -- Then only,
it has been shown, is a State free, when it is governed by its own will. But a
country that is subject to the legislature of another country, in which it has
no voice, and over which it has no control, cannot be said to be governed by
its own will. Such a country therefore, is in a state of slavery. And it
deserves to be particularly considered, that such a slavery is worse, on
several accounts, than any slavery of private men to one another, or of
kingdoms to despots within themselves. -- Between one state and another, there
is none of that fellow-feeling that takes place between persons in private
life. Being detached bodies that never see one another, and residing perhaps in
different quarters of the globe, the state that governs cannot be a witness to
the sufferings occasioned by its oppressions; or a competent judge of the
circumstances and abilities of the people who are governed. They must also have
in a great degree separate interests; and the more the one is loaded, the more
the other may be eased. The infamy likewise of oppression, being in such
circumstances shared among a multitude, is not likely to be much felt or
regarded. -- On all these accounts there is, in the case of one country
subjugated to another, little or nothing to check rapacity; and the most
flagrant injustice and cruelty may be practiced without remorse or pity. -- I
will add, that it is particularly difficult to shake off a tyranny of this
kind. A single despot, if the people are unanimous and resolute, may be soon
subdued. But a despotic state is not easily subdued; and a people subject to it
cannot emancipate themselves without entering into a dreadful, and, perhaps,
very unequal contest.

I cannot help observing farther, that the slavery of a people to internal
despots may be qualified and limited; but I don't see what can limit the
authority of one state over another. The exercise of power in this case can
have no other measure than discretion; and, therefore, must be indefinite and
absolute.

Once more. It should be considered that the government of one country by
another, can only be supported by a military force; and, without such a
support, must be destitute of all weight and efficacy.

This will be best explained by putting the following case. -- There is, let us
suppose, in a province subject to the sovereignty of a distant state, a
subordinate legislature, consisting of an Assembly chosen by the people; a
Council chosen by that Assembly; and a Governor appointed by the Sovereign
State, and paid by the Province. There are, likewise, judges and other
officers, appointed and paid in the same manner, for administering justice
agreeably to the laws, by the verdicts of juries fairly and indiscriminately
chosen. -- This forms a constitution seemingly free, by giving the people a
share in their own government, and some check on their rulers. But, while there
is a higher legislative power, to the control of which such a constitution is
subject, it does not itself possess Liberty, and therefore, cannot be of any
use as a security to Liberty; nor is it possible that it should be of long
duration. Laws offensive to the Province will be enacted by the Sovereign
State. The legislature of the Province will remonstrate against them. The
magistrates will not execute them. Juries will not convict upon them; and
consequently, like the Pope's Bulls which once governed Europe, they will
become nothing but forms and empty sounds, to which no regard will be shown. --
In order to remedy this evil, and to give efficiency to its government, the
supreme state will naturally be led to withdraw the Governor, the Council, and
the Judges The independency of the Judges we esteem in this country one of our
greatest privileges. -- Before the revolution they generally, I believe, held
their places during pleasure. King William gave them their places during good
behavior. At the accession of the present Royal Family their places were given
them during good behavior, in consequence of the Act of Settlement, 12 and 13
W. III. c. 2. But an opinion having been entertained by some, that though their
commissions were made under the Act of Settlement to continue, during good
behavior, yet that they determined on the demise of the Crown; it was enacted
by a statute made in the first year of his present Majesty, Chap. ^3. That the
commissions of Judges for the time being shall be, continue, and remain in full
force, during their good behavior, notwithstanding the demise of his Majesty,
or of any of his Heirs and Successors; with a proviso, that it may be lawful
for his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, to remove any Judge upon the address
of both Houses of Parliament. And by the same Statute their salaries are
secured to them during the continuance of their commissions: His Majesty,
according to the preamble of the Statute, having been pleased to declare from
the Throne to both Houses of Parliament, That he looked upon the Independency
and uprightousness of Judges, as essential to the impartial administration of
Justice, as one of the best securities to the Rights and Liberties of his
loving Subjects, and as most conducive to the honor of his Crown.

A worthy friend and able Lawyer has supplied me with this note. It affords,
when contrasted with that dependence of the Judges which has been thought
reasonable in America, a sad specimen of the different manner in which a
kingdom may think proper to govern itself, and the provinces subject to it.


from the control of the Province, by making them entirely dependent on itself
for their pay and continuance in office, as well as for their appointment. It
will also alter the mode of choosing Juries on purpose to bring them more under
its influence: And in some cases, under the pretense of the impossibility of
gaining an impartial trial where government is resisted, it will perhaps
ordain, that offenders shall be removed from the Province to be tried within
its own territories: And it may even go so far in this kind of policy, as to
endeavor to prevent the effects of discontents, by forbidding all meetings and
associations of the people, except at such times, and for such particular
purposes, as shall be permitted them.

Thus will such a Province be exactly in the same state that Britain would be
in, were our first executive Magistrate, our House of Lords, and our Judges,
nothing but the instruments of a foreign democratical power; were our Juries
nominated by that power; or were we liable to be transported to a distant
country to be tried for offenses committed here; and restrained from calling
any meetings, consulting about any grievances, or associating for any purposes,
except when leave should be given us by a Lord Lieutenant or Viceroy.

It is certain that this is a state of oppression which no country could
endure, and to which it would be vain to expect that any people should submit
an hour without an armed force to compel them.

The late transactions in Massachusetts Bay are a perfect exemplification of
what I have now said. The government of Great Britain in that Province has gone
on exactly in the train I have described; till at last it became necessary to
station troops there, not amenable to the civil power; and all terminated in a
government by the SWORD. And such, if a people are not sunk below the character
of men, will be the issue of all governments in similar circumstances.

It may be asked -- Are there not causes by which one state may acquire a
rightful authority over another, though not consolidated by an adequate
Representation? -- I answer that there are no such causes. -- All the causes to
which such an effect can be ascribed are CONQUEST, COMPACT, or OBLIGATIONS
CONFERRED.

Much has been said of the right of conquest; and history contains little more
than accounts of kingdoms reduced by it under the dominion of other kingdoms,
and of the havoc it has made among mankind. But the authority derived from
hence, being founded on violence, is never rightful. The Roman Republic was
nothing but a faction against the general liberties of the world; and had no
more right to give law to the Provinces subject to it, than thieves have to the
property they seize, or to the houses into which they break. -- Even in the
case of a just war undertaken by one people to defend itself against the
oppressions of another people, conquest gives only a right to an
indemnification for the injury which occasioned the war, and a reasonable
security against future injury.

Neither can any state acquire such an authority over other states in virtue of
any compacts or cessions. This is a case in which compacts are not binding.
Civil Liberty is, in this respect, on the same footing with Religious Liberty.
As no people can lawfully surrender their Religious Liberty, by giving up their
right of judging for themselves in religion, or by allowing any human beings to
prescribe to them what faith they shall embrace, or what mode of worship they
shall practice; so neither can any civil societies lawfully surrender their
Civil Liberty, by giving up to any extraneous jurisdiction their power of
legislating for themselves and disposing of their property. Such a cession,
being inconsistent with the unalienable rights of human nature, would either
not bind at all; or bind only the individuals who made it. This is a blessing
which no one generation of men can give up for another; and which, when lost, a
people have always a right to resume. -- Had our ancestors in this country been
so mad as to have subjected themselves to any foreign Community, we could not
have been under any obligation to continue in such a state. And all the nations
now in the world who, in consequence of the tameness and folly of their
predecessors, are subject to arbitrary power, have a right to emancipate
themselves as soon as they can.

If neither conquest nor compact can give such an authority, much less can any
favors received, or any services performed by one state for another. -- Let
the favor received be what it will, Liberty is too dear a price for it. A
state that has been obliged is not, therefore, bound to be enslaved. It ought,
if possible, to make an adequate return for the services done to it; but to
suppose that it ought to give up the power of governing itself, and the
disposal of its property, would be to suppose, that, in order to show its
gratitude, it ought to part with the power of ever afterward exercising
gratitude. -- How much has been done by this kingdom for Hanover? But no one
will say that on this account, we have a right to make the laws of Hanover; or
even to draw a single penny from it without its own consent.

After what has been said it will, I am afraid, be trifling to apply the
preceding arguments to the case of different communities, which are considered
a different parts of the same Empire. But there are reasons which render it
necessary for me to be explicit in making this application.

What I mean here is just to point out the difference of situation between
communities forming and Empire; and particular bodies or classes of men forming
different parts of a Kingdom. Different communities forming an Empire have no
connexions, which produce a necessary reciprocation of interests between them.
They inhabit different districts, and are governed by different legislatures.
-- On the contrary. The different classes of men within a kingdom are all
placed on the same ground. Their concerns and interests are the same; and what
is done to one part must affect all -- These are situations totally different;
and a constitution of government that may be consistent with Liberty in one of
them, may be entirely inconsistent with it in the other. It is, however,
certain that, even in the last of these situations, no one part ought to govern
the rest. In order to a fair and equal government, there ought to be a fair and
equal representation of all that are governed; and as far as this is wanting in
any government, it deviates from the principles of Liberty, and becomes unjust
and oppressive. -- But in the circumstances of different communities, all this
holds with unspeakably more force. The government of a part in this case
becomes complete tyranny, and subjection to it becomes complete slavery.

But ought there not, it is asked, to exist somewhere in an Empire a supreme
legislative authority over the whole; or a power to control and bind all the
different states of which it consists. -- This enquiry has been already
answered. The truth is, that such a supreme controuling power ought to exist no
where except in such a SENATE or body of delegates as that described in page 7;
and that the authority or supremacy of even this Senate ought to be limited to
the common concerns of the Empire. -- I think I have proved that the
fundamental principles of Liberty necessarily require this.

In a word. An Empire is a collection of states or communities united by some
common bond or tie. If these states have each of them free constitutions of
government, and, with respect to taxation and internal legislation, are
independent of the other states, but united by compacts or alliances, or
subjection to a Great Council, representing the whole, or to one monarch
entrusted with the supreme executive power: In these circumstances, the Empire
will be an Empire of Freemen. -- If, on the contrary, like the different
provinces subject to the Grand Seignior, none of the states possess any
independent legislative authority; but are all subject to an absolute monarch,
whose will is their law; then is the Empire an Empire of Slaves. -- If one of
the states is free, but governs by its will all the other states; then is the
Empire, like that of the Romans in the times of the republic, an Empire
consisting of one state free, and the rest in slavery: Nor does it make any
more difference in this case, that the governing state is itself free, than it
does in the case of a kingdom subject to a despot, that this despot is himself
free. I have before observed, that this only makes the slavery worse. There is,
in the one case, a chance, that in the quick succession of despots, a good one
will sometimes arise. But bodies of men continue the same; and have generally
proved the most unrelenting of all tyrants.

A great writer, before Montesquieu's Spirit of Laws, Vol. 1, Book 11. C. xix.
quoted, observes of the Roman Empire, that while Liberty was at the center,
tyranny prevailed in the distant provinces; that such as were free under it
were extremely so, while those who were slaves groaned under the extremity of
slavery; and that the same events that destroyed the liberty of the former,
gave liberty to the latter.

The liberty of the Romans, therefore, was only an additional calamity to the
provinces governed by them; and though it might have been said of the Citizens
of Rome, that they were the "freest members of any civil society in the known
world;" yet of the Subjects of Rome, it must have been said, that they were the
completest slaves in the known world. -- How remarkable is it, that this very
people, once the freest of mankind, but at the same time the most proud and
tyrannical, should become at last the most contemptible and abject slaves that
ever existed?

PART II.
IN the foregoing disquisitions, I have, from one leading principle, deduced a
number of consequences, that seem to me incapable of being disputed. I have
meant that they should be applied to the great question between this kingdom
and the Colonies which has occasioned the present war with them.

It is impossible, but my readers must have been all along making this
application; and if they still think, that the claims of this kingdom are
reconcilable to the principles of true liberty and legitimate government, I am
afraid, that nothing I shall farther say will have any effect on their
judgments. I wish, however, they would have the patience and candor to go with
me, and grant me a hearing some time longer.

Though clearly decided in my own judgment on this subject, I am inclined to
make great allowances for the different judgments of others. We have been so
used to speak of the Colonies as our Colonies, and to think of them as in a
state of subordination to us, and as holding their existence in America only
for our use, that it is no wonder the prejudices of many are alarmed, when they
find a different doctrine maintained. The meanest person among us is disposed
to look upon himself* as having a body of subjects in America; and to be
offended at the denial of his right to make laws for them, though perhaps he
does not know what color they are of, or what language they talk. -- Such are
the natural prejudices of this country. -- But the time is coming, I hope, when
the unreasonableness of them will be seen; and more just sentiments prevail.

Before I proceed, I beg it may be attended to, that I have chosen to try this
question by the general principle of Civil Liberty; and not by the practice of
former times; or by the Charters granted the Colonies. -- The arguments for
them, drawn from these last topics, appear to me greatly to outweigh the
arguments against them. But I wish to have this question brought to a higher
test, and surer issue. The question with all liberal enquirers ought to be, not
what jurisdiction over them Precedents, Statutes, and Charters give, but that
reason and equity, and the rights of humanity give. -- This is, in truth, a
question which no kingdom has ever before had occasion to agitate. The case of
a free country branching itself out in the manner Britain has done, and sending
to a distant world colonies which have there, from small beginnings, and under
free legislatures of their own, increased, and formed a body of powerful
states, likely soon to become superior to the parent state. -- This is a case
which is new in the history of mankind; and it is extremely improper to judge
of it by the rules of any narrow and partial policy; or to consider it on any
other ground than the general one of reason and justice. -- Those who will be
candid enough to judge on this ground, and who can divest themselves of
national prejudices, will not, I fancy, remain long unsatisfied. -- But alas!
Matters are gone too far. The dispute probably must be settled another way; and
the sword alone, I am afraid, is now to determine what the rights of Britain
and America are. -- Shocking situation! -- Detested be the measures which have
brought us into it: And, if we are endeavoring to enforce injustice, cursed
will be the war. -- A retreat, however, is not yet impracticable. The duty we
owe our gracious sovereign obliges us to rely on his disposition to stay the
sword, and to promote the happiness of all the different parts of the Empire at
the head of which he is placed. With some hopes, therefore, that it may not be
too late to reason on this subject, I will, in the following Sections, enquire
what the war with America is in the following respects.

1. In respect of Justice. 2. The Principles of the Constitution. 3. In respect
of Policy and Humanity. 4. The Honor of the kingdom. And lastly, The
Probability of succeeding in it.
SECTION I. Of the Justice of the War with America.
THE enquiry, whether the war with the Colonies is a just war, will be be best
determined by stating the power over them, which it is the end of the war to
maintain: And this connot be better done, than in the words of an act of
Parliament, made on purpose to define it. That act, it is well known, declares,
That this kingdom has power, and of right ought to have power to make laws and
statutes to bind the Colonies, and people of America, in all cases whatever. --
Dreadful power indeed! I defy any one to express slavery in stronger language.
It is the same as declaring "that we have a right to do with them what we
please." -- I will not waste my time by applying to such a claim any of the
preceding arguments. If my reader does not feel more in this case, than words
can express, all reasoning must be vain.

But, probably, most persons will be for using milder language; and for saying
no more than, that the united legislatures of England and Scotland have of
right power to tax the Colonies, and a supremacy of legislation over America.
-- But this comes to the same. If it means any thing, it means, that the
property, and the legislations of the Colonies, are subject to the absolute
discretion of Great Britain, and ought of right to be so. The nature of the
thing admits of no limitation. The Colonies can never be admitted to be judges,
how far the authority over them in these cases shall extend. This would be to
destroy it entirely, -- If any part of their property is subject to our
discretion, the whole must be so. If we have a right to interfere at all in
their internal legislations, we have a right to interfere as far as we think
proper. -- It is self-evident, that this leaves them nothing they can call
their own. -- And what is it that can give to any people such a supremacy over
another people? -- I have already examined the principal answers which have
been given to this enquiry. But it will not be amiss in this place to go over
some of them again.

It has been urged, that such a right must be lodged somewhere, "in order to
preserve the UNITY of the British Empire."

Pleas of this sort have, in all ages, been used to justify tyranny. -- They
have in RELIGION given rise to numberless oppressive claims, and slavish
Hierarchies. And in the Romish Communion particularly, it is well known, that
the POPE claims the title and powers of the supreme head on earth of the
Christian church, in order to preserve its UNITY. -- With respect to the
British Empire, nothing can be more preposterous than to endeavor to maintain
its unity, by setting up such a method of establishing unity, which, like the
similar method in religion, can produce nothing but mischief. -- The truth is,
that a common relation to one supreme executive head; an exchange of kind
offices; ties of interest and affection, and compacts, are sufficient to give
the British Empire all the unity that is necessary. But if not -- If, in order
to preserve its Unity, one half of it must be enslaved to the other half, let
it, in the name of God, want Unity.

Much has been said of "the Superiority of the British State." But what gives
us our superiority? -- Is it our Wealth? -- This never confers real dignity. On
the contrary: Its effect is always to debase, intoxicate, and corrupt. -- Is it
the numbers of our people? The Colonies will soon be equal to us in number. --
Is it our Knowledge and Virtue? They are probably equally knowing, and more
virtuous. There are names among them that will not stoop to any names among the
philosophers and politicians of this island.

"But we are the PARENT STATE." -- These are the magic words which have
fascinated and misled us. -- The English came from Germany. Does that give the
German states a right to tax us? -- Children, having no property, and being
incapable of guiding themselves, the author of nature has committed the care of
them to their parents, and subjected them to their absolute authority. But
there is a period when, having acquired property, and a capacity of judging for
themselves, they become independent agents; and when, for this reason, the
authority of their parents ceases, and becomes nothing but the respect and
influence due to benefactors. Supposing, therefore, that the order of nature in
establishing the relation between parents and children, ought to have been the
rule of our conduct to the Colonies, we should have been gradually relaxing our
authority as they grew up. But like mad parents, we have done the contrary;
and, at the very time when our authority should have been most relaxed, we have
carried it to the greatest extent, and exercised it with the greatest rigor.
No wonder then, that they have turned upon us; and obliged us to remember that
they are not children.

But we have, it is said, protected them, and run deeply in debt on their
account. -- The full answer to this has been already given (p. 16, 17.) Will
any one say, that all we have done for them has not been more on our own
account, This is particularly true of the bounties granted on some American
commodities (as pitch, tar, indigo, etc.) when imported into Britain; for it is
well known, that the end of granting them was, to get those commodities cheaper
from the Colonies and in return for our manufactures, which we used to get from
Russia and other foreign countries. And this is expressed in the preambles of
the laws which grant these bounties. See the Appeal to the Justice, etc. page
21, third edition. It is, therefore, strange that Doctor TUCKER and others,
should have insisted so much upon these bounties as favors and indulgences to
the Colonies, -- But it is still more strange, that the same representation
should have been made of the compensations granted them for doing more during
the last war in assisting us than could have been reasonably expected; and also
of the sums we have spent in maintaining troops among them without their
consent; and in opposition to their wishes. -- See a Pamphlet, entitled "The
rightt of Great Britain asserted against the claims of America."
than on theirs? -- But suppose the contrary. Have they done nothing for us?
Have they made no compensation for the protection they have received? Have they
not helped us to pay our taxes, to support our poor, and to bear the burden of
our debts, by taking from us, at our own price, all the commodities with which
we can supply them? -- Have they not, for our advantage, submitted to many
restraints in acquiring property? Must they likewise resign to us the disposal
of that property? -- Has not their exclusive trade with us been for many years
one of the chief sources of our national wealth and power? -- In all our wars
have they not fought by our side, and contributed much to our success? In the
last war particularly, it is well known, that they ran themselves deeply in
debt; and that the parliament thought it necessary to grant them considerable
sums annually as compensations for going beyond their abilities in assisting
us. And in this course would they have continued for many future years;
perhaps, for ever. -- In short, were an accurate account stated, it is by no
means certain which side would appear to be most indebted. When asked as
freemen, they have hitherto seldom discovered any reluctance in giving. But, in
obedience to a demand, and with the bayonet at their breasts, they will give us
nothing but blood.

It is farther said, "that the land on which they settled was ours." -- But how
came it to be ours? If sailing along a coast can give a right to a country,
then might the people of Japan become, as soon as they please, the proprietors
of Britain. Nothing can be more chimerical than property founded on such a
reason. If the land on which the Colonies first settled had any proprietors,
they were the natives. The greatest part of it they bought of the natives. They
have since cleared and cultivated it; and, without any help from us, converted
a wilderness into fruitful and pleasent fields. It is, therefore, now on a
double account their property; and no power on earth can have any right to
disturb them in the possession of it, or to take from them without their
consent, any part of its produce.

But let it be granted, that, the land was ours. Did they not settle upon it
under the faith of charters which promised them the enjoyment of all the rights
of Englishmen; and allowed them to tax themselves, and to be governed by
legislatures of their own, similar to ours? These charters were given them by
an authority, which at the time was thought competent; and they have been
rendered sacred by an acquiescence on our part for more than a century. Can it
be wondered at, that the Colonies should revolt, when they found their Charters
violated; and an attempt made to force INNOVATIONS upon them by famine and the
sword? -- But I lay no stress on charters. They derive their rights from a
higher source. It is inconsistent with common sense to imagine, that any people
would ever think of settling in a distant country, on any such condition, as
that the people from whom they withdrew, should forever be masters of their
property, and have power to subject them to any modes of government they
pleased. And had there been express stipulations to this purpose in all the
charters of the colonies, they would, in my opinion, be no more bound by them,
than if it had been stipulated with them, that they should go naked, or expose
themselves to the incursion of wolves and tigers.

The defective state of the representation of this kingdom has been farther
pleaded to prove our right to tax America. We submit to a parliament that does
not represent us, and therefore they ought. -- How strange an argument is this?
It is saying we want liberty; and therefore, they ought to want it. -- Suppose
it true, that they are indeed contending for a better constitution of
government, and more liberty than we enjoy. Ought this to make us angry? -- Who
is there that does not see the danger to which this country is exposed? -- Is
it generous, because we are in a sink, to endeavor to draw them into it? Ought
we not rather to wish earnestly, that there may at least be ONE FREE COUNTRY
left upon earth, to which we may fly, when venality, luxury, and vice have
completed the ruin of liberty here?

It is, however, by no means true, that America has no more right to be
exempted from taxation by the British parliament, than Britain itself. -- Here,
all freeholders, and burgesses in boroughs, are represented. There, not one
Freeholder, or any other person, is represented. -- Here, the aids granted by
the represented part of the kingdom must be proportionably paid by themselves;
and the laws they make for others, they at the same time make for themselves.
There, the aids they would grant would not be paid, but received, by
themselves; and the laws they made would be made for others only. -- In short,
the relation of one country to another country, whose representatives have the
power of taxing it (and of appropriating the money raised by the taxes) is much
the same with the relation of a country to a single despot, or a body of
despots, within itself, invested with the like power. In both cases, the people
taxed and those who tax have separate interests; nor can there be any thing to
check oppression, besides either the abilities of the people taxed, or the
humanity of the taxers. -- But indeed I can never hope to convince that person
of any thing, who does not see an essential difference It gives me pleasure to
find, that the author of the Remarks on the Principal Acts of the 13 th
Parliament of Great Britain, etc. acknowledges this difference. -- It has,
however, been at the same time mortifying to me to find so able a writer
adopting such principles of government, as are contained in this work.
According to him, a people have no property or rights, except such as their
Civil governors are pleased not to take from them. Taxes, therefore, he
asserts, are (...), sense the gifts, much less the free gifts of the people.
See p. 58, and ^^1.
between the two cases now mentioned; or between the circumstances of
individuals, and classes of men, making parts of a community imperfectly
represented in the legislature that represents it; and the circumstances of a
whole community, in a distant world, not at all represented.

But enough has been said by others on this point; nor is it possible for me to
throw any new light upon it. To finish, therefore, what I meant to offer under
this head, I must beg that the following considerations may be particularly
attended to.

The question now between us and the Colonies is, Whether, in respect of
taxation and internal legislation, they are bound to be subject to the
jurisdiction of this kingdom: Or, in other words, Whether the British
parliament has or has not of right, a power to dispose of their property, and
to model as it pleases their governments? -- To this supremacy over them, we
say, we are entitled; and in order to maintain it, we have begun the present
war. -- Let me here enquire,

1 st. Whether, if we have now this supremacy, we shall not be equally entitled
to it in any future time? -- They are now but little short of half our number.
To this number they have grown, from a small body of original settlers, by a
very rapid increase. The probability is, that they will go on to increase; and
that, in 50 or 60 years, they will be double our number; See Observations on
Reversionary Payments, page 207, etc.
and form a mighty Empire, consisting of a variety of states, all equal or
superior to ourselves in all the arts and accomplishments, which give dignity
and happiness to human life. In that period, will they be still bound to
acknowledge that supremacy over them which we now claim? Can there be any
person who will assert this; or whose mind does not revolt at the idea of a
vast continent, holding all that is valuable to it, at the discretion of a
handful of people on the other side the Atlantic? -- But if, at that period,
this would be unreasonable; what makes it otherwise now? -- Draw the line, if
you can. -- But there is still a greater difficulty.

Britain is now, I will suppose, the seat of Liberty and virtue, and its
legislature consists of a body of able and independent men, who govern with
wisdom and justice. The time may come when all will be reversed: When its
excellent constitution of government will be subverted: When pressed by debts
and taxes, it will be greedy to draw to itself an increase of revenue from
every distant Province, in order to ease its own burdens: When the influence
of the Crown, strengthened by luxury and an universal profligacy of manners,
will have tainted every heart, broken down every fence of Liberty, and rendered
us a nation of tame and contented vassals: When a general Election will be
nothing but a general Auction of Boroughs: And when the PARLIAMENT, the Grand
Council of the nation, and once the faithful guardian of the state, and a
terror to evil ministers, will be degenerated into a body of Sycophants,
dependent and venal, always ready to confirm any measures; and little more than
a public court for registering royal edicts. -- Such, it is possible, may, some
time or other, be the state of Great Britain. -- What will, at that period, be
the duty of the Colonies? Will they be still bound to unconditional submission?
Must they always continue an appendage to our government! and follow it
implicitly through every change that can happen to it? -- Wretched condition,
indeed, of millions of freemen as good as ourselves -- Will you say that we now
govern equitably; and that there is no danger of any such revolution? -- Would
to God this were true. -- But will you not always say the same? Who shall judge
whether we govern equitably or not? -- Can you give the Colonies any security
that such a period will never come? -- Once more.

If we have indeed that power which we claim over the legislations and internal
rights of the Colonies, may we not, whenever we please, subject them to the
arbitrary power of the crown? -- I do not mean that this would be a
disadvantageous change: For I have before observed, that if a people are to be
subject to an external power over which they have no command, it is better that
power should be lodged in the hands of one man than of a multitude. But many
persons think otherwise; and such ought to consider that, if this would be a
calamity, the condition of the Colonies must be deplorable. -- "A government by
King, Lords, and Commons, (it has been said) is the perfection of government;"
and so it is, when the Commons are a just representation of the people; and
when also, it is not extended to any distant people, or communities, not
represented. But if this is the best, a government by a king only must be the
worst; and every claim implying a right to establish such a government among
any people must be unjust and cruel. -- It is self-evident, that by claiming a
right to alter the constitution of the Colonies, according to our discretion,
we claim this power: And it is a power that we have thought fit to exercise in
one of our Colonies; and that we have attempted to exercise in another. --
Canada, according to the late extension of its limits, is a country almost as
large as half Europe; and it may possibly come in time to be filled with
British subjects. The Quebec act makes the king of Great Britain a despot over
all that country. -- In the Province of Massachusetts Bay the same thing has
been attempted and begun.

The act for BETTER regulating their government, passed at the same time with
the Quebec act, gives the king the right of appointing and removing at his
pleasure, the members of one part of the legislature; alters the mode of
choosing juries, on purpose to bring it more under the influence of the king;
and takes away from the province the power of calling any meetings of the
people without the king's consent. See page 15.
-- The judges, likewise, have been made dependent on the king, for their
nomination and pay, and continuance in office. -- If all this is no more than
we have a right to do; may we not go on to abolish the house of
representatives, to destroy all trials by juries, and to give up the province
absolutely and totally to the will of the king? -- May we not even establish
popery in the province, as has been lately done in Canada, leaving the support
of protestantism to the king's discretion? -- Can there be any Englishman who,
were it his own case, would not sooner lose his heart's blood than yield to
claims so pregnant with evils, and destructive to every thing that can
distinguish a Freeman from a Slave.

I will take this opportunity to add, that what I have now said, suggests a
consideration that demonstrates, on how different a footing the Colonies are
with respect to our government, from particular bodies of men within the
kingdom, who happen not to be represented. Here, it is impossible that the
represented part should subject the unrepresented part to arbitrary power,
without including themselves. But in the Colonies it is not impossible. We know
that it has been done.

SECT. II. Whether the War with America is justified by the Principles of the
Constitution.
I HAVE proposed, in the next place, to examine the war with the Colonies by
the principles of the constitution. -- I know, that it is common to say that we
are now maintaining the constitution in America. If this means that we are
endeavoring to establish our own constitution of government there; it is by no
means true; nor, were it true, would it be right. They have chartered
governments of their own with which they are pleased; and which, if any power
on earth may change without their consent, that power may likewise, if it
thinks proper, deliver them over to the Grand Seignior. -- Suppose the Colonies
of France and Spain had, by compacts, enjoyed for near a century and a half,
free governments open to all the world, and under which they had grown and
flourished; what should we think of those kingdoms, were they to attempt to
destroy their governments, and to force upon them their own mode of government?
Should we not applaud any zeal they discovered in repelling such an injury? --
But the truth is, in the present instance, that we are not maintaining but
violating our own constitution in America. The essence of our constitution
consists in its independency. There is in this case no difference between
subjection and annihilation. Did, therefore, the Colonies possess governments
perfectly the same with ours, the attempt to subject them to ours would be an
attempt to ruin them. A free government loses its nature from the moment it
becomes liable to be commanded or altered by any superior power.

But I intended here principally to make the following observation. The
fundamental principle of our government is, "The right of a people to give and
grant their own money." -- It is of no consequence, in this case, whether we
enjoy this right in a proper manner or not. Most certainly we do not. It is,
however, the principle on which our government, as a free government, is
founded. The spirit of the constitution gives it us; and, however imperfectly
enjoyed, we glory in it as our first and greatest blessing. It was an attempt
to encroach upon this right, in a trifling instance, that produced the civil
war in the reign of Charles the first. -- Ought not our brethren in America to
enjoy this right as well as ourselves? Do the principles of the constitution
give it us, but deny it to them? Or can we, with any decency, pretend that when
we give to the king their money, we give him our own? The author of Taxation no
Tyranny will undoubtedly assert this without hesitation, for in page 69 he
compares our present situation with respect to the Colonies to that of the
ancient Scythians, who, upon returning from a war, found themselves shut out of
their own HOUSES by their SLAVES.
-- What difference does it make, that in the time of Charles the First the
attempt to take away this right was made by one man; but that, in the case of
America, it is made by a body of men?

In a word. This is a war undertaken not only against the principles of our own
constitution; but on purpose to destroy other similar constitutions in America?
and to substitute in their room a military force. See page 14, 15. -- It is,
therefore, a gross and flagrant violation of the constitution.

SECT. III. Of the Policy of the War with America.
IN writing the present Section, I have entered upon a subject of the last
importance, on which much has been said by other writers with great force, and
in the ablest manner. See particularly, a speech intended to have been spoken
on the bill for altering the Charter of the Colony of Massachusett's Bay; the
Considerations on the Measures carrying on with respect to the British
Colonies; and the Two Appeals to the Justice and Interests of the People.
But I am not willing to omit any topic which I think of great importance,
merely because it has already been discussed: And, with respect to this in
particular, it will, I believe, be found that some of the observations on which
I shall insist, have not been sufficiently attended to.

The object of this war has been often enough declared to be "maintaining the
supremacy of this country over the colonies." I have already enquired how far
reason and justice, the principles of Liberty, and the rights of humanity,
entitle us to this superemacy. Setting aside, therefore, now, all
considerations of this kind, I would observe, that this supremacy is to be
maintained, either merely for it is own sake, or for the sake of some public
interest connected with it and dependent upon it. -- If for its own sake; the
only object of the war is the extension of dominion; and its only motive is the
lust of power. -- All government, even within a state, becomes tyrannical, as
far as it is a needless and wanton exercise of power; or is carried farther
than is absolutely necessary to preserve the peace and to secure the safety of
the state. This is what an excellent writer calls GOVERNING TOO MUCH; and its
effect must always be, weakening government by rendering it contemptible and
odious. -- Nothing can be of more importance, in governing distant provinces
and adjusting the clashing interests of different societies, than attention to
this remark. In these circumstances, it is particularly necessary to make a
sparing use of power. -- Happy would it have been for Great Britain, had this
been remembered by those who have lately conducted its affairs. But our policy
has been of another kind. At a period when our policy should have been most
concealed, it has been brought most in view; and, by a progression of violent
measures, every one of which has increased distress, we have given the world
reason to conclude, that we are acquainted with no other method of governing
than by force. -- What a shocking mistake? -- If our object is power, we should
have known better how to use it; and our rulers should have considered, that
freemen will always revolt at the sight of a naked sword; and that the
complicated affairs of a great kingdom, holding in subordination to it a
multitude of distant communities, all jealous of their rights, and warmed with
spirits as high as our own, require not only the most skilful, but the most
cautious and tender management. The consequences of a different management we
are now feeling, We see ourselves driven among rocks, and in danger of being
lost.

There are the following reasons which seem to make it too probable, that the
present contest with America is a contest for power only, I have heard it said
by a person in one of the first departments of the state, that the present
contest is for DOMINION on the side of the colonies, as well as on ours: And so
it is, indeed; but with this essential difference. We are struggling for
dominion over OTHERS. They are struggling for SELF dominion* The noblest of all
blessings.
abstracted from all the advantages connected with it.

1 st. There is a love of power for it own sake inherent in human nature; and
it cannot be uncharitable to suppose that the nation in general, and the
cabinet in particular, are too likely to be influenced by it. What can be more
flattering than to look across the Atlantic, and to see in the boundless
continent of America, increasing MILLIONS whom we have a right to order as we
please, who hold their property at our disposal, and who have no other law than
our will. With what complacency have we been used to talk of them as OUR
subjects? -- Is it not the interruption they now give to this pleasure: Is it
not the opposition they make to our pride; and not any injury they have done
us, that is the secret spring of our present animosity against them? -- I wish
all in this kingdom would examine themselves carefully on this point. Perhaps,
they might find, that they have not known what spirit they are of. -- Perhaps
they would become sensible, that it was a spirit of domination, more than a
regard to the true interest of this country, that lately led so many of them,
with such savage folly, to address the throne for the slaughter of their
brethren in America, if they will not submit to them; and to make offers of
their lives and fortunes for that purpose. -- Indeed, I am persuaded, that,
where pride and the lust of dominion exterminated from every heart among us,
and the humility of Christians infused in their room, this quarrel would be
soon ended.

2 dly. Another reason for believing that this is a contest for power only is,
that our ministers have frequently declared, that their object is not to draw a
revenue from America; and that many of those who are warmest for continuing it,
represent the American trade as of no great consequence.

But what deserves particular consideration here is, that this is a contest
from which no advantage can possibly be derived, -- Not a revenue: For the
provinces of America, when desolated, will afford no revenue; or if it should,
the expense of subduing them and keeping them in subjection will much exceed
that revenue. -- Not any of the advantages of trade: For it is a folly, next to
insanity, to think trade can be promoted by impoverishing our customers, and
fixing in their minds an everlasting abhorrence of us. -- It remains,
therefore, that this war can have no other object than the extension of power.
-- Miserable reflection! -- To sheath our swords in the bowels of our brethren,
and spread misery and ruin among a happy people, for no other end than to
oblige them to acknowledge our supremacy. How horrid! -- This is the cursed
ambition that led a Caesar and an Alexander, and many other mad conquerors, to
attack peaceful communities, and to lay waste the earth.

But a worse principle than even this, influences some among us. Pride and the
love of dominion are principles hateful enough; but blind resentment and the
desire of revenge are infernal principles; and these, I am afraid, have no
small share at present in guiding our public conduct. -- One cannot help indeed
being astonished at the virulence, with which some speak on the present
occasion against the Colonies. -- For, what have they done? -- Have they
crossed the ocean and invaded us? Have they attempted to take from us the
fruits of our labor, and to overturn that form of government which we hold so
sacred? -- This cannot be pretended. -- On the contrary. This is what we have
done to them. -- We have transported ourselves to their peaceful retreats, and
employed our fleets and armies to stop up their ports, to destroy their
commerce, to seize their effects and to burn their towns. Would we but let them
alone, and suffer them to enjoy in security their property and governments,
instead of disturbing us, they would thank and bless us. And yet it is WE WHO
imagine ourselves ill-used. -- The truth is, we expected to find them a
cowardly rabble who would lie quietly at our feet, and they have disappointed
us. They have risen in their own defense, and repelled force by force. They
deny the plenitude of our power over them; and insist on being treated as free
communities -- It is THIS that has provoked us; and kindled our governors into
rage.

I hope I shall not be here understood to intimate, that all who promote this
war are actuated by these principles. Some, I doubt not, are influenced by no
other principle, than a regard to what they think the authority of this country
over its Colonies, and to the unity and indivisibility of the British Empire. I
wish such could be engaged to enter thoroughly into the enquiry, which has been
the subject of the first part of this pamphlet; and to consider, particularly,
how different a thing maintaining the authority of government within a state is
from maintaining the authority of one people over another, already happy in the
enjoyment of a government of their own. I wish farther they would consider,
that the desire of maintaining authority is warrantable, only so far as it is
the means of promoting some end, and doing some good; and that, before we
resolve to spread famine and fire through a country in order to make it
acknowledge our authority, we ought to be assured that great advantages will
arise not only to ourselves but to the country we wish to conquer. -- That from
the present contest no advantage to ourselves can arise, has been already
shown, and will presently be shown more at large. -- That no advantage to the
Colonies can arise from it, need not, I hope, be shown. It has however been
asserted, that even their good is intended by this war. Many of us are
persuaded, that they will be much happier under our government, than under any
government of their own; and that their liberties will be safer when held for
them by us, than when trusted in their own hands. -- How kind is it thus to
take upon us the trouble of judging for them what is most for their happiness?
Nothing can be kinder, except the resolution we have formed to extirminate
them, if they will not submit to our judgment. -- What strange language have I
sometimes heard? By an armed force we are now endeavoring to destroy the laws
and governments of America; and yet I have heard it said, that we are
endeavoring to support law and government there. We are insisting upon our
right to levy contributions upon them; and to maintain this right, we are
bringing upon them all the miseries a people can endure; and yet it is
asserted; that we mean nothing but their security and happiness.

But I have wandered a little from the point I intended principally to insist
upon in this section, which is, the folly, in respect of policy, of the
measures which have brought on this contest; and its pernicious and fatal
tendency.

The following observations will, I believe abundantly prove this.

1 st. There are points which are likely always to suffer by discussion. Of
this kind are most points of authority and prerogative; and the best policy is
to avoid, as much as possible, giving any occasion for calling them into
question.

The Colonies were at the beginning of this reign in the habit of acknowledging
our authority, and of allowing us as much power over them as our interest
required; and more, in some instances, than we could reasonably claim. This
habit they would have retained; and had we, instead of imposing new burdens
upon them, and increasing their restraints, studied to promote their commerce,
and to grant them new Indulgences, they would have been always growing more
attached to us. Luxury, and, together with it, their dependence upon us, and
our influence This has been our policy with respect to the people of Ireland;
and the consequence is, that we now see their parliament as obedient as we can
wish.
in their assemblies, would have increased, till in time perhaps they would
become as corrupt as ourselves; and we might have succeeded to our wishes in
establishing our authority over them. -- But, happily for them, we have chosen
a different course. By exertions of authority which have alarmed them, they
have been put upon examining into the grounds of all our claims, and forced to
give up their luxuries, and to seek all their resources within themselves: And
the issue is likely to prove the loss of all our authority over them, and of
all the advantages connected with it. So little do men in power sometimes know
how to preserve power; and so remarkably does the desire of extending dominion
sometimes destroy it. -- Mankind are naturally disposed to continue in
subjection to that mode of government, be it what it will, under which they
have been born and educated. Nothing rouses them into resistance but gross
abuses, or some particular oppressions out of the road to which they have been
used. And he who will examine the history of the world will find, there has
generally been more reason for complaining that they have been too patient,
than that they have been turbulent and rebellious.

Our governors, ever since I can remember, have been jealous, that the
Colonies, some time or other, would throw off their dependence. This jealousy
was not founded on any of their acts or declarations. They have always, while
at peace with us, disclaimed any such design; and they have continued to
disclaim it since they have been at war with us. I have reason, indeed, to
believe, that independency is, even at this moment, generally dreaded among
them as a calamity to which they are in danger of being driven, in order to
avoid a greater. -- The jealousy I have mentioned was, however, natural; and
betrayed a secret opinion, that the subjection in which they were held was more
than we could expect them always to endure. In such circumstances, all possible
care should have been taken to give them no reason for discontent; and to
preserve them in subjection, by keeping in that line of conduct to which custom
had reconciled them, or at least never deviating from it, except with great
caution; and particularly, by avoiding all direct attacks on their property and
legislations. Had we done this, the different interests of so many states
scattered over a vast continent, joined to our own prudence and moderation,
would have enabled us to maintain them in dependence for ages to come. -- But
instead of this, how have we acted? -- It is in truth too evident, that our
whole conduct, instead of being directed by that sound policy and foresight
which in such circumstances were absolutely necessary, has been nothing (to say
the best of it) but a series of the blindest rigor followed by retractation;
of violence followed by concession; of mistake, weakness and inconsistency. --
A recital of a few facts, within every body's recollection, will fully prove
this.

In the 6th of George the Second, an act was passed for imposing certain duties
on all foreign spirits, molasses and sugars imported into the plantations. In
this act, the duties imposed are said to be GIVEN and GRANTED by the Parliament
to the King; and this is the first American act in which these words have been
used. But notwithstanding this, as the act had the appearance of being only a
regulation of trade, the colonies submitted to it; and a small direct revenue
was drawn by it from them. -- In the 4th of the present reign, many alterations
were made in this act, with the declared purpose of making provision for
raising a revenue in America. This alarmed the Colonies; and produced
discontents and remonstrances, which might have convinced our rulers that this
was tender ground, on which it became them to tread very gently. -- There is,
however, no reason to doubt but in time they would have sunk into a quiet
submission to this revenue act, as being at worst only the exercise of a power
which then they seem not to have thought much of contesting; I mean, the power
of taxing them EXTERNALLY. -- But before they had time to cool, a worse
provocation was given them; and the STAMP ACT was passed. This being an attempt
to tax them INTERNALLY; and a direct artack on their property, by a power which
would not suffer itself to be questioned; which eased itself by loading them;
and to which it was impossible to fix any bounds; they were thrown at once,
from one end of the continent to the other, into resistance and rage. --
Government, dreading the consequences, gave way; and the Parliament (upon a
change of ministry) repealed the Stamp Act, without requiring from them any
recognition of its authority, or doing any more to preserve its dignity, than
asserting, by the declaratory law, that it was possessed of full power and
authority to make laws to bind them in all cases whatever. -- Upon this, peace
was restored; and, had no farther attempts of the same kind been made, they
would undoubtedly have suffered us (as the people of Ireland have done) to
enjoy our declaratory law. They would have recovered their former habits of
subjection; and our connection with them might have continued an increasing
source of our wealth and glory. -- But the spirit of despotism and avarice
always blind and restless, soon broke forth again. The scheme for drawing a
revenue from America, by parliamentary taxation, was resumed; and in a little
more than a year after the repeal of the Stamp Act, when all was peace, a third
act was passed, imposing duties payable in America on tea, paper, glass,
painters colors, etc. -- This, as might have been expected, revived all the
former heats; and the Empire was a second time threatened with the most
dangerous commotions. -- Government receded again; and the Parliament (under
another change of ministry) repealed all the obnoxious duties, EXCEPT that upon
tea. This exception was made in order to maintain a show of dignity. But it
was, in reality, sacrificing safety to pride; and leaving a splinter in the
wound to produce a gangrene. -- For some time, however, this relaxation
answered its intended purposes. Our commercial intercourse with the Colonies
was again recovered; and they avoided nothing but that tea which we had
excepted in our repeal. In this state would things have remained, and even tea
would perhaps in time have been gradually admitted, had not the evil genius of
Britain stepped forth once more to embroil the Empire.

The East India company having fallen under difficulties, partly in consequence
of the loss of the American market for tea, a scheme was formed for assisting
them by an attempt to recover that market. With this view an act was passed to
enable them to export their tea to America free of all duties here, and subject
only to 3d. per pound duty, payable in America. By this expedient they were
enabled to offer it at a low price; and it was expected the consequence would
prove that the Colonies would be tempted by it; a precedent gained for taxing
them, and at the same time the company relieved. Ships were, therefore, fitted
out; and large cargoes sent. The snare was too gross to escape the notice of
the Colonies. They saw it, and spurned at it. They refused to admit the tea;
and at BOSTON some persons in disguise buried it in the sea. -- Had our
governors in this case satisfied themselves with requiring a compensation from
the province for the damage done, there is no doubt but it would have been
granted. Or had they proceeded no farther in the infliction of punishment, than
stopping up the port and destroying the trade of Boston, till compensation was
made, the province might possibly have submitted, and a sufficient saving would
have been gained for the honor of the nation. But having hitherto proceeded
without wisdom, they observed now no bounds in their resentment. To the Boston
port bill was added a bill which destroyed the chartered government of the
province; a bill which withdrew from the jurisdiction of the province, persons
who in particular cases should commit murder; and the Quebec bill. At the same
time a strong body of troops was stationed as Boston to enforce obedience to
these bills.

See the Appendix.
All who knew any thing of the temper of the Colonies saw that the effect of
all sudden accumulation of vengeance, would probably be not intimidating but
exasperating them, and driving them into a general revolt. But our ministers
had different apprehensions. They believed that the male contents in the Colony
of Massachusett's were a small party, headed by a few factious men; that the
majority of the people would take the side of government, as soon as they saw a
force among them capable of supporting them; that, at worst, the Colonies in
general would never make a common cause with the province; and that, the issue
would prove, in a few months, order, tranquillity, and submission. -- Every one
of these apprehensions was falsified by the event that followed.

When the bills I have mentioned came to be carried into execution, the whole
Province was thrown into confusion. Their courts of justice were shut up, and
all government was dissolved. The commander in chief found it necessary to
fortify himself in BOSTON; and the other Colonies immediately resolved to make
a common cause with this Colony.

So strangely misinformed were our ministers, that this was all a surprise upon
them. They took fright, therefore; and once more made an effort to retreat; but
indeed the most ungracious one that can be well imagined. A proposal was sent
to the Colonies, called Conciliatory; and the substance of which was, that if
any of them would raise such sums as should be demanded of them by taxing
themselves, the Parliament would forbear to tax them. -- It will be scarcely
believed, hereafter, that such a proposal could be thought conciliatory. It was
only telling them; if you will tax yourselves BY OUR ORDER, we will save
ourselves the trouble of taxing you. -- They received the proposal as an
insult; and rejected it with disdain.

At the time this concession was transmitted to America, open hostilities were
not begun. In the sword our ministers thought they had still a resource which
would immediately settle all disputes. They considered the people of New
England as nothing but a mob, who would be soon routed and forced into
obedience. It was even believed, that a few thousands of our army might march
through all America, and make all quiet wherever they went. Under this
conviction our ministers did not dread urging the Province of
Massachusett's-Bay into rebellion, by ordering their army to seize their
stores, and to take up some of their leading men. -- The attempt was made. --
The people fled immediately to arms, and repelled the attack. -- A considerable
part of the flower of the British army has been destroyed. -- Some of our best
Generals, and the bravest of our troops, are now disgracefully and miserably
imprisoned in Boston. -- A horrid civil war is commenced: -- And the empire is
distracted and convulsed.

Can it be possible to think with patience of the policy that has brought us
into these circumstances? Did ever Heaven punish the vices of a people more
severely by darkening their counsels? How great would be our happiness could we
now recall former times, and return to the policy of the last reigns? -- But
those times are gone. -- I will, however, beg leave for a few moments to look
back to them; and to compare the ground we have left with that on which we find
ourselves. This must be done with deep regret; but it forms a necessary part of
my present design.

In those times our Colonies, foregoing every advantage which they might derive
from trading with foreign nations, consented to send only to us whatever it was
for our interest to receive from them; and to receive only from us whatever it
was for our interest to send to them. They gave up the power of making
sumptuary laws, and exposed themselves to all the evils of an increasing and
wasteful luxury, because we were benefited by vending among them the materials
of it. The iron with which providence had blessed their country, they were
required by laws, in which they acquiesced, to transport hither, that our
people might be maintained by working it for them into nails, ploughs, axes,
etc. And, in several instances, even one Colony was not allowed to supply any
neighboring Colonies with commodities, which could be conveyed to them from
hence. -- But they yielded much farther. They consented that we should have the
appointment of one branch of their legislature. By recognizing as their King, a
King resident among us and under our influence, they gave us a negative on all
their laws. By allowing an appeal to us in their civil disputes, they gave us
likewise the ultimate determination of all civil causes among them. -- In
short. They allowed us every power we could desire, except that of taxing them,
and interfering in their internal legislations: And they had admitted
precedents which, even in these instances, gave us no inconsiderable authority
over them. By purchasing our goods they paid our taxes; and, by allowing us to
regulate their trade in any manner we thought most for our advantage, they
enriched our merchants, and helped us to bear our growing burdens. They fought
our battles with us. They gloried in their relation to us. All their gains
centered among us; and they always spoke of this country and looked to it as
their home.

Such was the state of things. -- What is it now?

Not contented with a degree of power, sufficient to satisfy any reasonable
ambition, we have attempted to extend it. -- Not contented with drawing from
them a large revenue indirectly, we have endeavored to procure one directly by
an authoritative seizure; and, in order to gain a pepper-corn in this way, have
chosen to hazard millions, acquired by the peaceable intercourse of trade. --
Vile policy! What a scourge is government so conducted? -- Had we never
deserted our old ground: Had we nourished and favored America, with a view to
commerce, instead of considering it as a country to be governed: Had we, like a
liberal and wise people, rejoiced to see a multitude of free states branched
forth from ourselves, all enjoying independent legislatures similar to our own:
Had we aimed at binding them to us only by the ties of affection and interest;
and contented ourselves with a moderate power rendered durable by being lenient
and friendly, an umpire in their differences, an aid to them in improving their
own free governments, and their common bulwark against the assaults of foreign
enemies: Had this, I say, been our policy and temper; there is nothing so great
or happy that we might not have expected. With their increase our strength
would have increased. A growing surplus in the revenue might have been gained,
which* invariably applied to the gradual discharge of the national debt, would
have delivered us from the ruin with which it threatens us. The Liberty of
America might have preserved our Liberty; and, under the direction of a patriot
king or wise minister, proved the means of restoring to us our almost lost
constitution. Perhaps, in time, we might also have been brought to see the
necessity of carefully watching and restricting our paper-credit* And thus we
might have regained safety; and, in union with our Colonies, have been more
than a match for every enemy, and risen to a situation of honor and dignity
never before known amongst mankind. -- But I am forgetting myself. -- Our
Colonies are likely to be lost for ever. Their love is turned into hatred; and
their respect for our government into resentment and abhorrence. -- We shall
see more distinctly what a calamity this is, and the observations I have now
made will be confirmed, by attending to the following facts.

Our American Colonies, particularly the Northern ones, have been for some time
in the very happiest state of society; or, in that middle state of
civilization, between its first rude and its last refined and corrupt state.
Old countries consist, generally, of three classes of people; a GENTRY; a
YEOMANRY; and a PEASANTRY. The Colonies consist only of a body of YEOMANRY
Excepting the Negroes in the Southern Colonies, who probably will now either
soon become extinct, or have their condition changed into that of Freemen. --
It is not the fault of the Colonies that they have among them so many of these
unhappy people. They have made laws to prohibit the importation of them; but
these laws have always had a negative put upon them here, because of their
tendency to hurt our Negro trade.
supported by agriculture, and all independent, and nearly upon a level; in
consequence of which, joined to a boundless extent of country, the means of
subsistence are procured without difficulty, and the temptations to wickedness
are so inconsiderable, that executions In the Province of Massachusett's Bay
there has not been, I am informed, more than one execution these 18 years.
are seldom known among them. From hence arises an encouragement to population
so great, that in some of the Colonies they double their own number in fifteen
years; in others, in eighteen years; and in all, taken one with another, in
twenty-five years. -- Such an increase was, I believe, never before known. It
demonstrates that they must live at their ease; and be free from those cares,
oppressions, and diseases which depopulate and ravage luxurious states.

With the population of the Colonies has increased their trade; but much faster
on account of the gradual introduction of luxury among them. -- In 1723 the
exports to Pennsylvania were 16,000 l. -- In 1742 they were 75,295 l. -- In
1757 they were increased to 268,426 l. and in 1773 to half a million.

The exports to all the Colonies in 1744 were 640,114 l. -- In 1758, they were
increased to 1,832,948 l. and in 1773, to three millions. Mr. Burke (in his
excellent and admirable Speech on moving his resolutions for conciliation with
the Colonies. P. 9. etc.) has shown, that our trade to the Colonies, including
that to Africa and the West Indies, was in 1772 nearly equal to the trade which
we carried on with the whole world at the beginning of this Century.
And the probability is, that, had it not been for the discontents among the
Colonies since the year 1764, our trade with them would have been this year
double to what it was in 1773; and that in a few years more, it would not have
been possible for the whole kingdom, though consisting only of manufacturers,
to supply the American demand.

This trade, it should be considered, was not only thus an increasing trade;
but it was a trade in which we had no rivals; a trade certain, constant, and
uninterrupted; and which, by the shipping employed in it, and the naval stores
supplied by it, contributed greatly to the support of that navy which is our
chief national strength. -- Viewed in these lights it was an object unspeakably
important. But it will appear still more so if we view it in its connexions and
dependencies. It is well known, that our trade with Africa and the West Indies
cannot easily subsist without it. And, upon the whole, it is undeniable, that
it has been one of the main springs of our opulence and splendor; and that we
have, in a great measure, been indebted to it for our ability to bear a debt so
much heavier, than that which, fifty years ago, the wisest men thought would
sink us.

This inestimable prize, and all the advantages connected with America, we are
now throwing away. Experience alone can show what calamities must follow. It
will indeed be astonishing if this kingdom can bear such a loss without
dreadful consequences. -- These consequences have been amply represented by
others; and it is needless to enter into any account of them -- At the time we
shall be feeling them -- The Empire dismembered; the blood of thousands shed in
an unrighteous quarrel; our strength exhausted; our merchants breaking; our
manufacturers starving; our debts increasing; the revenue sinking; the funds
tottering; and all the miseries of a public bankruptcy impending -- At such a
crisis should our natural enemies, eager for our ruin, seize the opportunity --
The apprehension is too distressing. -- Let us view this subject in another
light.

On this occasion, particular attention should be given to the present SINGULAR
situation of this kingdom. This is a circumstance of the utmost importance; and
as I am afraid it is not much considered, I will beg leave to give a distinct
account of it.

At the REVOLUTION, the specie of the kingdom amounted according to See Dr.
Davenant's works, collected and revised by Sir Charles Whitworth, Vol. 1. Page
363, etc. 443. etc.
Davenant's account, to eighteen millions and a half. -- From the ACCESSION to
the year 1772, there were coined at the mint, near 29 millions of gold; and in
ten years only of this time, or from January 1759 to January 1769, there were
coined eight millions and a half. See Considerations on Money, Bullion, etc.
Page 2 and 11.
But it has appeared lately, that the gold specie now left in the kingdom is no
more than about twelve millions and a half. -- Not so much as half a million of
Silver specie has been coined these sixty years; and it cannot be supposed,
that the quantity of it now in circulation exceeds two or three millions. The
whole specie of the kingdom, therefore, is probably at this time about Or
nearly the same that it was in Cromwell's time. See Dr. Davenant's works, Vol.
1. Page 365.
fourteen or fifteen millions. Of this several millions must be hoarded at the
Bank. -- Our circulating specie, therefore, appears to be greatly decreased.
But our wealth, or the quantity of money in the kingdom, is greatly increased.
This is paper to a vast amount, issued in almost every corner of the kingdom;
and, particularly, by the BANK of ENGLAND. While this paper maintains its
credit it answers all the purposes of specie, and is in all respects the same
with money.

Specie represents some real value in goods or commodities. On the contrary;
paper represents immediately nothing but specie. It is a promise or obligation,
which the emitter brings himself under to pay a given sum in coin; and it owes
its currency to the credit of the emitter; or to an opinion that he is able to
make good his engagement; and that the sum specified may be received upon being
demanded. -- Paper, therefore, represents coin; and coin represents real value.
That is, the one is a sign of wealth. The other is the sign of that sign. --
But farther. Coin is an universal sign of wealth, and will procure it every
where. It will bear any alarm, and stand any shock. -- On the contrary. Paper,
owing its currency to opinion, has only a local and imaginary value. It can
stand no shock. It is destroyed by the approach of danger; or even the
suspicion of danger.

In short. Coin is the basis of our paper-credit; and were it either all
destroyed, or were only the quantity of it reduced beyond a certain limit, the
paper circulation of the kingdom would sink at once. But, were our paper
destroyed, the coin would not only remain, but rise in value, in proportion to
the quantity of paper destroyed.

From this account it follows, that as far as, in any circumstances, specie is
not to be procured in exchange for paper, it represents nothing, and is worth
nothing. -- The specie of this kingdom is inconsiderable, compared with the
amount of the paper circulating in it. This is generally believed; and,
therefore, it is natural to enquire how its currency is supported. -- The
answer is easy. It is supported in the same manner with all other bubbles. Were
all to demand specie in exchange for their notes, payment could not be made;
but, at the same time that this is known, every one trusts, that no alarm
producing such a demand will happen, while he holds the paper he is possessed
of; and that if it should happen, he will stand a chance for being first paid;
and this makes him easy. And it also makes all with whom he traffics easy. --
But let any events happen which threaten danger; and every one will become
diffident. A run will take place, and a bankruptcy follow.

This is an account of what has often happened in private credit. And it is
also an account of what will (if no change of measures takes place) happen some
time or other in public credit. The description I have given of our
paper-circulation implies, that nothing can be more delicate or hazardous. It
is an immense fabric, with its head in the clouds, that is continually
trembling with every adverse blast and every fluctuation of trade; and which,
like the baseless fabric of a vision, may in a moment vanish, and leave no
wreck behind. -- The destruction of a few books at the Bank; an improvement in
the art of forgery; the landing of a body of French troops on our coasts;
insurrections threatening a revolution in government; or any events that should
produce a general panic, however groundless, would at once annihilate it, and
leave us without any other medium of traffic, than a quantity of specie
scarcely equal in amount to the money now drawn from the public by the taxes.
It would, therefore, become impossible to pay the taxes. The revenue would
fail. Near one hundred and forty millions of property would be destroyed. The
whole frame of government would fall to pieces; and a state of nature would
take place. -- What a dreadful situation? It has never had a parallel among
mankind; except at one time in France after the establishment of the Royal
Missisippi Bank. In 1720 this Bank broke; See Sir James Steuart's Enquiry into
the Principles of political Economy, Vol. II. Book 4. Chap. 32.
and, after involving for some time the whole kingdom in a golden dream, spread
through it in one day, desolation and ruin. -- The distress attending such an
event, in this free country, would be greater than it was in France. Happily
for that kingdom, they have shot this gulf. Paper-credit has never since
recovered itself there; and their circulating cash consists now all of solid
coin, amounting, I am informed, to no less a sum than fifteen hundred millions
of Livres; or near sixty seven millions of pounds sterling. -- This gives them
unspeakable advantages; and, joined to that quick reduction of their debts
which is inseparable Their debts consist chiefly of money raised by annuities
on lives, short annuities, anticipations of taxes for short terms, etc. During
the whole last war they added to their perpetual annuities only 12 millions
sterling, according to Sir James Steuart's account; whereas we added to these
annuities near 60 millions. In consequence therefore of the nature of their
debts, as well as of the management they are now using for hastening the
reduction of them, they must in a few years, if peace continues, be freed from
most of their encumbrances; while we probably (if no event comes soon that will
unburthen us at once) shall continue with them all upon us.
from their nature, places them on a ground of safety which we have reason to
admire and envy.

These are subjects on which I should have chosen to be silent, did I not think
it necessary, that this country should be apprized and warned of the danger
which threatens it. This danger is created chiefly by the national debt. High
taxes are necessary to support a great public debt; and a large supply of cash
is necessary to support high taxes. This cash we owe to our paper; and, in
proportion to our paper, must be the productiveness of our taxes. -- King
William's wars drained the kingdom of its specie. This sunk the revenue, and
distressed government. In 1694 the BANK was established; and the kingdom was
provided with a substitute for specie. The taxes became again productive. The
revenue rose; and government was relieved. -- Ever since that period our paper
and taxes have been increasing together, and supporting one another; and one
reason, undoubtedly, of the late increase in the productiveness of our taxes
has been the increase of our paper.

Was there no public debt, there would be no occasion for half the present
taxes. Our paper-circulation might be reduced. The balance of trade would turn
in our favor. Specie would flow in upon us. The quantity of property destroyed
by a failure of paper-credit (should it in such circumstances happen) would be
140 millions less; and, therefore, the shock attending it would be tolerable.
But, in the present state of things, whenever any calamity or panic shall
produce such a failure, the shock attending it will be intolerable. -- May
heaven soon raise up for us some great statesman who shall see these things;
and enter into effectual measures, if not now too late, for extricating and
preserving us.

Public banks are, undoubtedly, attended with great conveniences. But they
also do great harm; and if their emissions are not restrained, and conducted
with great wisdom, they may prove the most pernicious of all institutions; not
only, by substituting fictitious for real wealth; by increasing luxury; by
raising the prices of provisions; by concealing an unfavourable balance of
trade; and by rendering a kingdom incapable of bearing any internal tumults or
external attacks, without the danger of a dreadful convulsion: But,
particularly, by becoming instruments in the hands of ministers of state to
increase their influence, to lessen their dependence on the people, and to keep
up a delusive show of public prosperity, when perhaps, ruin may be near. There
is, in truth, nothing that a government may not do with such a mine at its
command as a public Bank, while it can maintain its credit; nor, therefore, is
there any thing more likely to be IMPROPERLY and DANGEROUSLY used. -- But to
return to what may be more applicable to our state at present.

Among the causes that may produce a failure of paper-credit, there are two
which the present quarrel with America calls upon us particularly to consider.
-- The first is, An unfavorable balance of trade. This, in proportion to the
degree in which it takes place, must turn the course of foreign exchange
against us; raise the price of bullion; and carry off our specie. The danger to
which this would expose us is obvious; and it has been much increased by the
new coinage of the gold specie which begun in 1772. Before this coinage, the
greatest part of our gold coin being light, but the same in currency, as if it
had been heavy, always remained in the kingdom. But, being now full weight,
whenever a wrong balance of foreign trade alters the course of exchange, and
gold in coin becomes of less value than in bullion, there is reason to fear,
that it will be melted down in such great quantities, and exported so fast, as
in a little time to leave none behind; Mr. Lowndes in the dispute between him
and Mr. Lock, contended for a reduction of the standard silver. One of his
reasons was, that it would render the silver-coin more commensurate to the
wants of the nation; and CHECK HAZARDOUS PAPER-CREDIT. -- Mr. CONDUIT* Sir
ISAAC NEWTON's successor in the mint, has proposed, in direct contradiction to
the laws now in being, that all the bullion imported into the kingdom should be
carried into the mint to be coined; and only coin allowed to be exported. "The
height," he says, of paper-credit is the strongest argument for trying this and
every other method that is likely to increase the coinage. For whilst
Paper-credit does in a great measure the business of money at home, Merchants
and Bankers are not under a necessity, as they were formerly, of coining a
quantity of specie for their home trade; and as Paper-credit brings money to
the Merchants to be exported, the money may go away insensibly, and NOT BE
MISSED TILL IT BE TOO LATE: And where Paper-credit is large and increasing, if
the money be exported and the coinage decrease, THAT CREDIT MAY SINK AT ONCE;
for want of a proportionable quantity of Specie, which alone can support it in
a time of distress. -- See Mr. Conduit's Observations on the state of our Gold
and Silver Coins in 1730* Page 36 to 46.
the consequence of which must prove, that the whole superstructure of
paper-credit, now supported by it, will break down. -- The only remedy, in such
circumstances, is an increase of coinage at the mint. But this will operate too
slowly; and by raising the price of bullion, will only increase the evil. -- It
is the Bank that at such a time must be the immediate sufferer: For it is from
thence that those who want coin for any purpose will always draw it.

For many years before 1772, the price of gold in bullion had been, from 2 to 3
or 4 per cent, higher than in coin. This was a temptation to melt down and
export the coin, which could not be resisted. Hence arose a demand for it on
the BANK; and, consequently, the necessity of purchasing bullion at a loss for
a new coinage. But the more coin the Bank procured in this way, the lower its
price became in comparison with that of bullion, and the faster it vanished;
and, consequently, the more necessary it became to coin again, and the greater
loss fell upon the Bank. -- Had things continued much longer in this train, the
consequences might have proved very serious. I am by no means sufficiently
informed to be able to assign the causes which produced the change that
happened in 1772. But, without doubt, the state of things that took place
before that year must be expected to return. The fluctuations of trade, in its
best state, render this unavoidable. But the contest with our Colonies has a
tendency to bring it on soon; and to increase unspeakably the distress
attending it.

All know that the balance of trade with them is greatly in our favor;
According to the accounts of the exports to, and imports from the
North-American Colonies, laid before Parliament; the balance in our favor
appears to have been, for 11 years before 1774, near a million and a half
annually.
and that this balance is paid partly by direct remittances of bullion; and
partly by circuitous remittances through Spain, Portugal, Italy, etc. which
diminish the balance against us with these countries. -- During the last year
they have been employed in paying their debts, without adding to them; and
their exportations and remittances for that purpose have contributed to render
the general balance of trade more favorable to us, and, also, (in conjunction
with the late operations of the Bank) to keep up our funds. These remittances
are now ceased; and a year of two will determine, if this contest goes on, how
far we can sustain such a loss without suffering the consequences I have
described.

The second event, ruinous to our paper-circulation, which may arise from our
rupture with America, is a deficiency in the revenue. As a failure of our paper
would destroy the revenue, so a failure of the revenue, or any considerable
diminution of it, would destroy our paper. The BANK is the support of our
paper; and the support of the BANK is the credit of government. Its principal
securities, are a capital of near eleven millions lent to government; and money
continually advanced to a vast amount on the Land Tax, Sinking-fund,
Exchequer-bills, Navy-bills, etc. Should, therefore, deficiencies in the
revenue bring government under any difficulties, all these securities would
lose their value, and the Bank and Government, and all private and public
credit, would fall together. -- Let any one here imagine, what would probably
follow, were it but suspected by the public in general, that the taxes were so
fallen, as not to produce enough to pay the interest of the public debts,
besides bearing the ordinary expenses of the nation; and that, in order to
supply the deficiency and to hide the calamity, it had been necessary in any
one year to anticipate the taxes, and to borrow of the Bank. -- In such
circumstances I can scarcely doubt, but an alarm would spread of the most
dangerous tendency. -- The next foreign war, should it prove half as expensive
as the last, will probably occasion such a deficiency; and bring our affairs to
that crisis toward which they have been long tending. -- But the war with
America has a greater tendency to do this; and the reason is, that it affects
our resources more; and is attended more with the danger of internal
disturbances.

Some have made the proportion of our trade depending on North America to be
near ONE HALF. A moderate computation makes it a THIRD. See the substance of
the evidence on the petition presented by the West India Planters and Merchants
to the House of Commons, as it was introduced to the BAR, and summed up by Mr.
GLOVER.
Let it, however be supposed to be only a FOURTH. I will venture to say, this
is a proportion of our foreign trade, the loss of which, when it comes to be
felt, will be found insupportable. -- In the article of Tobacco alone it will
cause a deduction from the Customs of at least 300,000 l. per ann. The annual
average of the payments into the Exchequer, on account of the duties on
tobacco, was for five years, from 1770 to 1774, 219, 117 l. exclusive of the
payments from Scotland. -- Near one half of the tobacco trade is carried on
from Scotland; and above four fifths of the tobacco imported is afterward
exported to France Germany and other countries. From France alone it brings
annually into the Kingdom, I am informed, about 150,000 l. in money.

In 1775, being, alas! the parting year, the duties on tobacco in ENGLAND
brought into the Exchequer no less a sum than 298, ^92 l.


including the duties paid on foreign commodities purchased by the exportation
of tobacco. Let the whole deduction from the revenue be supposed to be only
half a million. This alone is more than the kingdom can at present bear,
without having recourse to additional taxes in order to defray the common and
necessary expenses of peace. But to this must be added a deduction from the
produce of the Excises, in consequence of the increase of the poor, of the
difficulties of our merchants and manufacturers, of less national wealth, and a
retrenchment of luxury. There is no possibility of knowing to what these
deductions may amount. When the evils producing them begin, they will proceed
rapidly; and they may end in a general wreck before we are aware of any danger.

In order to give a clearer view of this subject, I will in an Appendix, state
particularly the national expenditure and income for ten years, from 1764 to
1774. From that account it will appear, that the money drawn every year from
the public by the taxes, falls but little short of a sum equal to the whole
specie of the kingdom; and that, notwithstanding the late increase in the
productiveness of the taxes, the whole surplus of the national income has not
exceeded 320,000 l. per ann. This is a surplus so inconsiderable as to be
scarcely sufficient to guard against the deficiencies arising from the common
fluctuations of foreign trade, and of home consumption. It is NOTHING when
considered as the only fund we have for paying off a debt of near 140 millions.
-- Had we continued in a state of profound peace, it could not have admitted of
any diminution. What then must follow, when one of the most profitable branches
of our trade is destroyed; When a THIRD of the Empire is lost; when an addition
of many millions is made to the public debt; and when, at the same time,
perhaps, some millions are taken away from the revenue? -- I shudder at the
prospect. -- A KINGDOM, ON AN EDGE SO PERILOUS, SHOULD THINK OF NOTHING BUT A
RETREAT.

SECT. IV. Of the Honor of the Nation, as affected by the War with America.
ONE of the pleas for continuing the contest with America is, That our honor is
engaged; and that we cannot recede without the most humiliating concessions.

With respect to this, it is proper to observe, that a distinction should be
made between the nation and its rulers. It is melancholy that there should be
ever any reason for making such a distinction. A government is, or ought to be,
nothing but an institution for collecting and for carrying into execution the
will of the people. But so far is this from being in general the fact, that the
measures of government, and the sense of the people, are sometimes in direct
opposition to one another; nor does it often happen that any certain conclusion
can be drawn from the one to the other. -- I will not pretend to determine,
whether, in the present instance, the dishonor attending a retreat would
belong to the nation at large, or only to the persons in power who guide its
affairs. Let it be granted, though, probably far from true, that the majority
of the kingdom favor the present measures. No good argument could be drawn
from hence against receding. The disgrace to which a kingdom must submit by
making concessions, is nothing to that of being the aggressors in an
unrighteous quarrel; and dignity, in such circumstances, consists in retracting
freely, speedily, and magnanimously. -- For, (to adopt, on this occasion, words
which I have heard applied to this very purpose, in a great assembly, by a peer
to whom this kingdom has often looked as its deliverer, and whose ill state of
health at this awful moment of public danger every friend to Britain must
deplore) to adopt, I say, the words of this great man -- RECTITUDE IS DIGNITY.
OPPRESSION ONLY IS MEANNESS; AND JUSTICE, HONOR.

I will add, that PRUDENCE, no less than HONOR, requires us to retract. For
the time may come when, if it is not done voluntarily, we may be obliged to do
it; and find ourselves under a necessity of granting that to our distresses,
which we now deny to equity and humanity, and the prayers of America. The
possibility of this appears plainly from the preceding pages; and should it
happen, it will bring upon us disgrace indeed, disgrace greater than the worst
rancour can wish to see accumulated on a kingdom already too much dishonored.
-- Let the reader think here what we are doing. -- A nation, once the protector
of Liberty in distant countries, and the scourge of tyranny, changed into an
enemy to Liberty, and engaged in endeavoring to reduce to servitude its own
brethren. -- A great and enlightened nation, not content with a controuling
power over millions of people which gave it every reasonable advantage,
insisting upon such a supremacy over them as would leave them nothing they
could call their own, and carrying desolation and death among them for
disputing it. -- What can be more ignominious? -- How have we felt for the
brave Corsicans, in their struggle with the Genoese, and afterward with the
French government? Did GENOA or FRANCE want more than an absolute command over
their property and legislations; or the power of binding them in all cases
whatsoever? -- The Corsicans had been subject to the Genoese; but finding it
difficult to keep them in subjection, they CEDED them to the French. -- All
such cessions of one people to another are disgraceful to human nature. But if
our claims are just, may not we also, if we please, CEDE the Colonies to
France? -- There is, in truth, no other difference between these two cases than
that the Corsicans were not descended from the people who governed them, but
that the Americans are.

There are some who seem to be sensible, that the authority of one country over
another, cannot be distinguished from the servitude of one country to another;
and that unless different communities, as well as different parts of the same
community, are united by an equal representation, all such authority is
inconsistent with the principles of Civil Liberty. But they except the case of
the Colonies and Great Britain; because the Colonies are communities which
branched forth from, and which, therefore, as they think, belong to Britain.
Had the colonies been communities of foreigners, over whom we wanted to acquire
dominion, or even to extend a dominion before acquired, they are ready to admit
that their resistance would have been just. -- In my opinion, this is the same
with saying, that the Colonies ought to be worse off than the rest of mankind,
because they are our own Brethren.

Again. The United Provinces of Holland were once subject to the Spanish
monarchy; but, provoked by the violation of their charters; by levies of money,
without their consent; by the introduction of Spanish troops among them by
innovations in their ancient modes of government; and the rejection of their
petitions, they were driven to that resistance which we and all the world have
ever since admired; and which has given birth to one of the greatest and
happiest Republics that ever existed. -- Let any one read also, the history of
the war which the Athenians, from a thirst of Empire, made on the Syracusans in
Sicily, a people derived from the same origin with them; and let him, if he
can, avoid rejoicing in the defeat of the Athenians.

Let him, likewise, read the account of the social war among the Romans. The
allied states of Italy had fought the battles of Rome, and contributed by their
valor and treasure to its conquests and grandeur. They claimed, therefore, the
rights of Roman citizens, and a share with them in legislation. The Romans,
disdaining to make those their fellow-citizens, whom they had always looked
upon as their subjects, would not comply; and a war followed, which ended in
the ruin of the Roman Republic. The feelings of every Briton in this case must
force him to approve the conduct of the Allies, and to condemn the proud and
ungrateful Romans.

But not only is the present contest with America thus disgraceful to us,
because inconsistent with our own feelings in similar cases; but also because
condemned our own practice in former times. The Colonies are persuaded that
they are fighting for Liberty. We see them sacrificing to this persuasion every
private advantage. If mistaken, and though guilty of irregularities, they
should be pardoned by a people whose ancestors have given them so many examples
of similar conduct. ENGLAND should venerate the attachment to Liberty amidst
all its excesses; and, instead of indignation or scorn, it would be most
becoming them, in the present instance, to declare their applause, and to say
to the Colonies -- We excuse your mistakes. We admire your spirit. It is the
Spirit that has more than once saved ourselves. We aspire to no dominion over
you. We understand the rights of men too well to think of taking from you the
inestimable privileges of governing yourselves; and, instead of employing our
power for any such purpose, we offer it to you as a friendly and guardian
power, to be a mediator in your quarrels; a protection against your enemies;
and an aid to you in establishing a plan of Liberty that shall make you great
and happy. In return, we ask nothing but your gratitude and your commerce.

This would be a language worthy of a brave and enlightened nation. But alas!
it often happens in the Political World as it does in Religion, that the people
who cry out most vehemently for Liberty to themselves are the most unwilling to
grant it to others.

One of the most violent enemies of the Colonies has pronounced them "all Mr.
Locke's disciples." -- Glorious title! -- How shameful is it to make war
against them for that reason?

But farther. This war is disgraceful on account of the persuation which led to
it, and under which it has been undertaken. The general cry was last winter,
that the people of NEW ENGLAND were a body of cowards, who would at once be
tumbled into submission by a hostile look from our troops. In this light were
they held up to public derision in both Houses of Parliament; and it was this
persuasion that, probably, induced a Nobleman of the first weight in the state
to recommend, at the passing of the Boston Port Bill, coercive measures;
hinting at the same time, that the appearance of hostilities would be
sufficient, and that all would be soon over, SINE CLADE. -- Indeed no one can
doubt, but that had it been believed some time ago, the people of America were
brave, more care would have been taken not to provoke them.

Again. The manner in which this war has been hitherto conducted, renders it
still more disgraceful. -- English valor being thought insufficient to subdue
the Colonies, the law and religion of France were established in Canada, on
purpose to obtain the power of bringing upon them from thence an army of French
Papists. The wild Indians and their own Slaves have been instigated to attack
them; and attempts have been made to gain the assistance of a large body of
Russians. -- With like views, German troops have been hired; and the defense of
our Forts and Garrisons trusted in their hands.

These are measures which need no comment. The last of them, in particular,
having been carried into execution without the consent of parliament, threatens
us with imminent danger; and shows that we are in the way to lose even the
Forms of the constitution -- If, indeed, our ministers can, at any time,
without leave, not only send away the national troops, but introduce foreign
troops in their room, we lie entirely at mercy; and we have every thing to
dread.

SECT. V. Of the Probability of Succeeding in the War with America.
LET us next consider how far there is a possibility of succeeding in the
present war.

Our own people, being unwilling to enlist, and the attempts to procure armies
of Russians, Indians, and Canadians, having miscarried; the utmost force we can
employ, including foreigners, does not exceed, if I am rightly informed, 30,000
effective men. Let it, however, be called 40,000. This is the force that is to
conquer half a million at least A quarter of the inhabitants of every country
are fighting men. -- If, therefore, the Colonies consist only of two millions
of inhabitants, the number of fighting men in them will be half a million.
of determined men fighting on their own ground, within sight of their houses
and families, and for that sacred blessing of Liberty, without which man is a
beast, and government a curse. All history proves, that in such a situation, a
handful is a match for millions.

In the Netherlands, a few states thus circumstanced, withstood, for thirty
years, the whole force of the Spanish monarchy, when at its zenith; and at last
humbled its pride, and emancipated themselves from its tyranny. -- The citizens
of SYRACUSE also, thus circumstanced, withstood the whole power of the
Athenians, and almost ruined them. -- The same happened in the contest between
the house of Austria, and the cantons See the Appendix to Dr. Zubly's Sermon,
preached at the opening of the Provincial Congress of Georgia.
of Switzerland. -- There is in this case an infinite difference between
attacking and being attacked; between fighting to destroy, and fighting to
preserve, or acquire Liberty. -- Were we, therefore, capable of employing a
land force against America equal to its own, there would be little probability
of success. But to think of conquering that whole continent with 30,000 or
40,000 men to be transported across the Atlantic, and fed from hence, and
incapable of being recruited after any defeat -- This is indeed a folly so
great, that language does not afford a name for it.

With respect to our naval force, could it sail at land as it does at sea, much
might be done with it; but as that is impossible, little or nothing can be done
with it, which will not hurt ourselves more than the Colonists. -- Such of
their maritime towns as they cannot guard against our fleets, and have not been
already destroyed, they are determined either to give up to our resentment, or
NEW YORK has been long deserted by the greatest part of the inhabitants; and
they are determined to burn it themselves, rather than suffer us to burn it.
destroy themselves: The consequence of which will be, that these towns will be
rebuilt in safer situations; and that we shall lose some of the principal
pledges by which we have hitherto held them in subjection. -- As to their
trade; having all the necessaries and the chief conveniences of life within
themselves, they have no dependence upon it; and the loss of it will do them
unspeakable good, by preserving them from the evils of luxury and the
temptations of wealth; and keeping them in that state of virtuous simplicity
which is the greatest happiness. I know that I am now speaking the sense of
some of the wisest men in America. It has been long their wish that Britain
would shut up all their ports. They will rejoice, particularly, in the last
restraining act. It might have happened, that the people would have grown weary
of their agreements not to export or import. But this act will oblige them to
keep these agreements; and confirm their unanimity and zeal. It will also
furnish them with a reason for confiscating the estates of all the friends of
our government among them, and for employing their sailors, who would have been
otherwise idle, in making reprisals on British property. Their ships, before
useless, and consisting of many hundreds, will be turned into ships of war; and
all that attention, which they have hitherto confined to trade, will be
employed in fitting out a naval force for their own defense; and thus the way
will be prepared for their becoming, much sooner than they would otherwise have
been, a great maritime power. This act of parliament, therefore, crowns the
folly of all our late measures. -- None who know me, can believe me to be
disposed to superstition. Perhaps, however, I am not in the present instance,
free from this weakness. -- I fancy I see in these measures something that
cannot be accounted for merely by human ignorance. I am inclined to think, that
the hand of Providence is in them working to bring about some great ends. --
But this leads me to one consideration more, which I cannot help offering to
the public, and which appears to me in the highest degree important.

In this hour of tremendous danger, it would become us to turn our thoughts to
Heaven. This is what our brethren in the Colonies are doing. From one end of
North America to the other, they are FASTING and PRAYING. But what are we
doing? -- Shocking thought! we are ridiculing them as Fanatics, and scoffing at
religion. -- We are running wild after pleasure, and forgetting every thing
serious and decent at Masquerades. -- We are gambling in gaming-houses;
trafficking for Boroughs; perjuring ourselves at Elections; and selling
ourselves for places. -- Which side then is Providence likely to favor?

In America we see a number of rising states in the vigor of youth, inspired
by the noblest of all passions, the passion for being; free; and animated by
piety. -- Here we see an old state, great indeed, but inflated and irreligious;
enervated by luxury; encumbered with debts; and hanging by a thread. -- Can any
one look without pain to the issue? May we not expect calamities that shall
recover to reflection (perhaps to devotion) our Libertines and Atheists?

Is our cause such as gives us reason to ask God to bless it? -- Can we in the
face of Heaven declare, that we are not the aggressors in this war; and that we
mean by it, not to acquire or even preserve dominion for its own sake; not
conquest, or Empire, or the gratification of resentment; but solely to deliver
ourselves from oppression; to gain reparation for injury; and to defend
ourselves against men who would plunder or kill us? -- Remember, reader,
whoever thou art, that there are no other just causes of war; and that blood
spilled, with any other views, must some time or other be accounted for. -- But
not to expose myself by saying more in this way, I will now beg leave to
recapitulate some of the arguments I have used; and to deliver the feelings of
my heart in a brief, but earnest address to my countrymen.

I am hearing it continually urged -- Are they not our subjects. -- The plain
answer is, they are not your subjects. The people of America are no more the
subjects of the people of Britain* than the people of Yorkshire are the
subjects of tne people of Middlesex. They are your Fellow Subjects.

"But we are taxed; and why should not they be taxed?" -- You are taxed by
yourselves. They insist on the same privilege. -- They are taxed to support
their own governments; and they help also to pay your taxes by purchasing your
manufactures, and giving you a monopoly of their trade. Must they maintain two
governments? Must, they submit to be triple taxed? -- Has your moderation in
taxing yourselves, been such as encourages them to trust you with the power of
taxing them?

"But they will not obey the Parliament and the Laws." -- Say rather, they will
not obey your parliament and your laws. Their reason is: They have no voice in
your parliament. They have no share in making I have no other notion of
slavery, but being bound by a law to which I do not consent. See the case of
Ireland's being bound by acts of Parliament in England, stated by William
Molyneux, Esquire Dublin. -- In arguing against the authority of Communities, and
all people not incorporated, over one another; I have confined my views to
taxation and internal legislation. Mr. Molyneux carried his views much farther;
and denied the right of England to make any laws even to regulate the trade of
Ireland. He was the intimate friend of Mr. Lock; and writ his book in School,
soon after the publication of Mr. Locke's Treatise on Government.

What I have said, in Part 1st. Sect. 3d, of subjecting a number of states to a
general council representing them all, I suppose every one must consider as
entirely theoretical; and not a proposal of any thing I wish may take place
under the British Empire


your laws. -- "Neither have most of us." -- Then you so far want Liberty; and
your language is, " We are not free, Why will they be free?" -- But many of you
have a voice in parliament: None of them have. All your freehold land is
represented: But not a foot of their land is represented: At worst, therefore,
you can be only enslaved partially. -- They would be enslaved totally. -- They
are governed by parliaments chosen by themselves, and by legislatures similar
to yours. Why will you disturb them in the enjoyment of a blessing so
invaluable? Is it reasonable to insist, that your discretion alone shall be
their law; that they shall have no constitutions of government, except such as
your parliament shall be pleased to leave them? -- What is your parliament? --
Powerful indeed and respectable: But is there not a growing intercourse between
it and the court?, Does it awe ministers of state as it once did? -- Instead of
contending for a controuling power over the governments of America, should, you
not think more of watching and reforming your own? -- Suppose the worst.
Suppose, in opposition to all their own declarations, that the Colonists are
now aiming at independence. -- "If they can subsist without you;" is it to be
wondered at? Did there ever exist a community, or even an individual, that
would not do the same? -- "If they cannot subsist without you;" let them alone.
They will soon come back. -- "If you cannot subsist without them;" reclaim them
by Some persons, convinced of the folly as well as barbarity of attempting to
keep the Colonies by slaughtering them, have very humanely proposed giving them
up. But the highest authority has informed us, with great reason, That they are
too important to be given up. -- Dr. TUCKE^ has insisted on the depopulation,
produced by migrations from this country to the Colonies, as a reason for this
measure. But, unless the kingdom is made a prison to its inhabitants, these
migrations cannot be prevented; nor do I think that they have any great
tendency to produce depopulation. When a number of people quit a country, there
is more employment and greater plenty of the means of subsistence left for
those who remain; and the vacancy is soon filled up. The grand causes of
depopulation are, not migrations, or even famines and plagues, or any other
temporary evils; but the permanent and slowly working evils of debauchery,
luxury, high taxes, and oppression.
kindness; engage them by moderation and equity. It is madness to resolve to
butcher them. This will make them detest and avoid you forever. Freemen are not
to be governed by force; or dragooned into compliance. If capable of bearing to
be so treated, it is a disgrace to be connected with them.

"If they can subsist without you; and also you without them," the attempt to
subjugate them by confiscating their effects, burning their towns, and ravaging
their territories, is a wanton exertion of cruel ambition, which however common
it has been among mankind, deserves to be called by harder names than I choose
to apply to it. -- Suppose such an attempt was to be succeeded: Would it not be
a fatal preparation for subduing yourselves? Would not the disposal of American
places, and the distribution of an American revenue, render that influence of
the crown irresistible, which has already stabbed your liberties?

Turn your eyes to India: There more has been done than is now attempted in
America. There ENGLISHMEN, actuated by the love of plunder and the spirit of
conquest, have depopulated whole kingdoms, and ruined millions of innocent
people by the most infamous oppression and rapacity. -- The justice of the
nation has slept over these enormities. Will the justice of heaven sleep? Are
we not now execrated on both sides of the globe?

With respect to the Colonists; it would be folly to pretend they are
faultless. They were running fast into our vices. But this quarrel gives them a
salutary check: And it may be permitted on purpose to favor them, and in them
the rest of mankind; by making way for the establishment, in an extensive
country possessed of every advantage, a plan of government, and a growing power
that shall astonish the world, and under which every subject of human enquiry
shall be open to free discussion, and the friends to Liberty, in every quarter
of the globe, find a safe retreat from civil and spiritual tyranny. -- I hope
therefore, our brethren in America will forgive their enemies. It is certain
that they know not what they are doing.

CONCLUSION.
HAVING said so much of the war with America, and particularly of the danger
with which it threatens us, it may be expected that I should propose some
method of escaping from this danger and of restoring this once happy Empire to
a state of peace and security. -- Various plans of pacification have been
proposed; and some of them by persons so distinguished by their rank and merit,
as to be above my applause. But till there is more of a disposition to attend
to such plans; they cannot, I am afraid, be of any great service. And there is
too much reason to apprehend, that nothing but calamity will bring us to
repentance and wisdom. -- In order, however, to complete my design in these
observations, I will take the liberty to lay before the public the following
sketch of one of the plans just referred to, as it was opened before the
holidays to the house of Lords by the Earl of Shelburne; who while he held the
seals of the Southern Department, with the business of the Colonies annexed,
possessed their confidence, without ever compromising the authority of this
country; a confidence which discovered itself by peace among themselves, and
duty and submission to the Mother Country. I hope I shall not take an
unwarrantable liberty, if, on this occasion, I use his Lordship's own words, as
nearly as I have been able to collect them.

Meet the Colonies on their own ground, in the last petition from the Congress
to the king. The surest, as well as the most dignified mode of proceeding for
this country. -- Suspend all hostilities -- Repeal the acts which immediately
distress America, namely, the last restraining act, -- the charter act, -- the
act for the more impartial administration of justice; -- and the Quebec act. --
All the other acts (the custom-house act, the post office act, etc.) leave to a
temperate revisal. -- There will be found much matter which both countries may
wish repealed. Some which can never be given up, the principle being that
regulation of trade for the common good of the Empire, which forms our
Palladium. Other matter which is fair subject of mutual accommodation. --
Prescribe the most explicit acknowledgment of your right of regulating commerce
in its most extensive sense; if the petition and other public acts of the
Colonies have not already, by their declarations and acknowledgments, left it
upon a sufficiently secure foundation. -- Besides the power of regulating the
general commerce of the Empire, something further might be expected; provided a
due and tender regard were had to the means and abilities of the several
provinces, as well as to those fundamental, unalienable rights of Englishmen,
which no father can surrender on the part of his son, no representer on the
part of his elector, no generation on the part of the succeeding one; the right
of judging not only of the mode of raising, but the quantum, and the
appropriation of such aids as they shall grant. -- To be more explicit; the
debt of England, without entering into invidious distinctions how it came to be
contracted, might be acknowledged the debt of every individual part of the
whole Empire, Asia, as well as America, included. -- Provided, that full
security were held forth to them, that such free aids, together with the
Sinking Fund (Great Britain contributing her superior share) should not be left
as the privy purse of the minister, but be unalienably appropriated to the
original intention of that fund, the discharge of the debt; -- and that by an
honest application of the whole fund, the taxes might in time be lessened, and
the price of our manufactures consequently reduced, so that every contributory
part might feel the returning benefit -- always supposing the laws of trade
duly observed and enforced.

The time was, I am confident -- and perhaps is, when these points might be
obtained upon the easy, the constitutional, and, therefore, the indispensible
terms of an exemption from parliamentary taxation, and an admission of the
sacredness of their charters; instead of sacrificing their good humor, their
affection, their effectual aids, and the act of NAVIGATION itself, (which you
are now in the direct road to do) for a commercial quit-rent, See the
Resolutions on the Nova Scotia petition reported to the House of Commons,
November 29, 1775, by Lord North, Lord George German, etc. and a bill ordered
to be brought in upon the said Resolutions. -- There is indeed, as Lord
Shelburne has hinted, something very astonishing in these Resolutions. They
offer a relaxation of the authority of this country, in points to which the
Colonies have always consented, and by which we are great gainers; at the same
time, that, with a rigor which hazards the Empire, we are maintaining its
authority in points to which they will never consent; and by which nothing can
be gained.
or a barren metaphysical chimaera. -- How long these ends may continue
attainable, no man can tell. -- But if no words are to be relied on except such
as make against the Colonies -- If nothing is acceptable, except what is
attainable by force; it only remains to apply, what has been so often remarked
of unhappy periods, -- Quos deus vult, etc.

These are sentiments and proposals of the last importance; and I am very happy
in being able to give them to the public from so respectable an authority, as
that of the distinguished Peer I have mentioned; to whom, I know, this kingdom,
as well as America, is much indebted for his zeal to promote those grand public
points on which the preservation of Liberty among us depends; and for the firm
opposition which, jointly with many others (Noblemen and Commoners of the first
character and abilities,) he has made to the present measures.

Had such a plan as that now proposed been adopted a few months ago, I have
little doubt but that a pacification would have taken place, on terms highly
advantageous to this kingdom. -- In particular. It is probable, that the
Colonies would have consented to grant an annual supply, which, increased by a
saving of the money now spent in maintaining troops among them, and by
contributions which might have been gained from other parts of the Empire,
would have formed a fund considerable enough, if unalienably applied, See the
Appendix.
to redeem the greatest part of the public debt; in consequence of which,
agreeable to Lord Shelburne's ideas, some of our worst taxes might be taken
off, and the Colonies would receive our manufactures cheaper; our
paper-currency might be restrained; our whole force would be free to meet at
any time foreign danger; the influence of the Crown would be reduced; our
Parliament would become more independent; and the kingdom might, perhaps, (...)
to a situation of permanent safety and prosperity.

To conclude. -- An important revolution in affairs of this kingdom seems to be
approaching. If ruin is not to be our lot, all that has been lately done must
be undone, and new measures adopted. At that period, an opportunity (never
perhaps to be recovered, if lost) will offer itself for serving essentially
this country, as well as America; by putting the national debt into a fixed
course of payment; by subjecting to new regulations, the administration of the
finances; and establishing measures for exterminating corruption and restoring
the constitution -- For my own part; if this is not to be the consequence of
any future changes in the ministry, and the system of corruption, lately so
much improved, is to go on; I think it totally indifferent to the kingdom who
are in, or who are out of power.

APPENDIX.
Amount of the National Debt at Midsummer, 1775.
Principal. Interest. The amount of the capitals at the Bank, South Sea and
India Houses, was (in January 1775) 125,056,454 l. See the particulars in an
account by R. Helm, at the Stock Exchange, corrected for January 5th, 1775.
Deduct 424,500 l. Consolidated Annuities, 246,300 l. Reduced; 161,650 l. Old S.
S. Annuities, and 43,350 l. Annuities 1751, making in all a million of the 3
per cents, paid off in 1775; and the remainder will be L. 124,056,454 L.
4,317,870 Annuities for 99, 96, and 89 years, granted in King William's time.
Supposing 18 years to come of these Annuities, their value will be (reckoning
interest at 3 per cent.) 13 years purchase, or nearly 1,801,179 136,453
Annuities for lives, with benefit of survivorship, in King William's time,
supposed worth four years purchase. -- N. B. The benefit of survivorship is to
be continued till the Annuities are reduced to Seven; and they are not yet
reduced to this number 30,268 7,567 Annuities on lives, with benefit of
survivorship, granted Anno 1765, -- valued at 20 years purchase 10,800 540
Annuities for two or three lives granted in 1693. Also Annuities on single
lives 1745, 1746, 1747. The original amount of these annuities, taken all
together, was near 130,000 l. They are now reduced by deaths to about 80,000 l.
I have valued them at 10 years purchase 800,000 80,000 Total L. 126,698,701
4,542,430

Principal. Interest. Brought over -- L. 126,698,701 L. 4,542,430 Long annuity
for 99 years 1761 -- The value of this annuity is in the ALLEY about 25 years
purchase; but the remaining term is really worth 27 years purchase -- 6,702,750
248,250 UNFUNDED DEBT, consisting of Exchequer Bills (1,250,000 l.) Navy debt
(1,850,000 l.) and Civil List debt, supposed 500,000 l. The interest is
reckoned at no more than 2 per cent. 3,600,000 90,000 Total of the National
debt in 1775 137,001,451 4,880,680

I have given the Navy Debt as it was about a year ago. It must be now greatly
increased. -- The Civil List Debt has been given by guess. It is generally
acknowledged not to be less than the sum I have specified; and it is also
expected, that the Civil List income will be raised to 900,000 l. per annum. --
In 1769 the sum of 513,511 l. was granted by parliament toward discharging the
arrears and debts then due on the Civil List.

By an act of the first of George II. the Civil List was made up 800,000 l.
whenever, in any year, the duties and revenues appropriated to it fell short of
that sum. The clear produce of these duties for 33 years, or from Midsummer
1727, to Midsummer 1760, was, according to a particular account in my
possession, 26,182,981 l. 17s. 6d. or 795,242 l. per ann. They fell short,
therefore, talking one year with another, more than they exceeded, -- In 1747,
they had been deficient for seven years together; and the whole deficiency
amounted to 456,733 l. 16 s. -- which, in conformity to the act I have
mentioned, was made good to his majesty out of the supplies for that year. --
In 1729 also, 117.000 l. was granted out of the supplies for the like reason.
-- This is all the money, received by his late majesty from parliament, toward
supporting his household and the dignity of his civil government; or 810,749 per
ann. -- I have thought proper to state this matter so particularly here;
because accounts grossly wrong have been given of it.

The amount of the National Debt, it has appeared, was last year 137 millions.
-- The great deficiencies of last year, added to the extraordinary expenses of
the present year, will increase this debt considerably. -- Drawing out,
embodying, and maintaining the militia in the last war, cost the nation near
half a million per ann. -- We cannot reckon upon a less expense in doing this
now. Add to it, pay for foreign troops, and all the extraordinary expenses of
our increased Navy and Army, transport service, recruiting service, ordnance,
etc. and it will be evident that the whole expense of this unhappy year must be
enormous. -- But I expect that care will be taken to hide it, by funding as
little as possible, and that for this reason it will not be known in its full
magnitude, till it comes to appear another year under the articles of Navy
debt, extraordinaries of the army, transport bills, ordnance debentures, etc.
making up a vast unfunded debt which may bear down all public credit.

State of the NATIONAL ACCOUNT in 1775.
ANNUAL INCOME.
CUSTOMS in ENGLAND, being the medium of the payments into the Exchequer, for 3
years, ending in 1773 L. 2,528,275 Amount of the EXCISES in ENGLAND, including
the malt tax, being the medium of 3 years ending in 1773 4.649,892 Land Tax at
3s. 1.300,000 SALT DUTIES, being the medium of the years 1765 and 1766 218,739
Duties on Stamps, Cards, Dice, Advertisements, Bonds, Leases, Indentures,
Newspapers, Almanacks etc. 280,788 Duties on houses and windows, being the
medium of 3 years ending in 1771 385,369 Post Office, Seizures, Wine Licenses,
Hackney-Coaches, These branches of the revenue produced in 1754, 210,243 l. I
do not know how much they have produced lately; but I believe I have estimated
them at the (...).
Tenths of the Clergy, etc. 250,000 EXCISES in SCOTLAND, being the medium of 3
years ending in 1773 95,229 CUSTOMS in SCOTLAND, being the medium of 3 years
ending in 1773 68,369 Inland taxes in SCOTLAND, deduction of 6d. in the pound
on all Pensions, Salaries, etc. casual revenues, such as the duties on
Gum-Senega, American revenue, sale of lands in the ceded Islands, etc. -- These
are little articles, and I have supposed them to amount to as much as will make
the whole revenue ten millions per ann. though it is almost certain they cannot
produce so much 223,339 Total L. 10,000,000
The anuual medium of the payments into the Exchequer from the CUSTOMS in
ENGLAND, for the last five years, has been ^,521,769 l. -- In 1774 this payment
was 2,547,717 l. -- In 1775, it was 2,476,302 l. -- The produce of the CUSTOMS,
therefore, has been given rather too high.

The produce of the EXCISES in England has been higher in 1772 and 1775 than in
any other two years; but the average of any three successive years, or of all
the five years since 1770, will not differ much from the sum I have given. --
In 1754, or the year before the last war, the CUSTOMS produced only 1,558,254
l. -- The Excises produced 2,819,702 l. -- And the whole revenue, exclusive of
the Land Tax at 2s. was 7,097,617 l.

ANNUAL EXPENDITURE.
Interest on the National Debt in 1775, L 4,880,680 Peace establishment for the
Navy and Army, including all miscellaneous and incidental expenses 3,700,000
Annual increase of the Navy and Civil List Debts 350,000 Civil List 800,000
9,730,680 SURPLUS of the Revenue 269,320 L 10,000,000,
The estimate for the peace establishment, including miscellaneous expenses,
amounted in 1775 to 3,703,476 l. -- In 1774 it amounted to 3,804,452 l.
exclusive of 250,000 l. raised by Exchequer Bills, toward defraying the
expense of calling in the gold coin. And the medium for eleven years, from
1765, has been nearly 3,700,000 l. -- According to the accounts which I have
collected, the expense of the peace establishiment, (including miscellaneous
expepces) was in 1765, 1766, and 1767, 3,540,000 l. per ann. -- In 1768, 1769,
and, 1770, it was 3,354,000 l. per ann. -- In 1771, 1772, 1773, 1774, and 1775,
the average has been nearly four millions per ann. exclusive of the expense of
calling in the coin.

The parliament votes for the sea service 4 l. per month per man, including
wages, wear and tear, victuals and ordnance. This allowance is insufficient,
and falls short every year more or less, in proportion to the number of men
voted. From hence, in a great measure, arises that annual increase of the navy
debt, mentioned in the third article of the National Expenditure. This increase
in 1772 and 1773 was 669,9966 l. or 335,000 l. per ann. The number of men voted
in those two years, was 10,000. I have supposed them reduced to 16,000, and the
annual increase of the Navy debt to be only 250.000 l. -- Add 100,000 l. for
the annual increase of the Civil List Debt (see page 64) and the total will be
350,000 l.

A Second Method of DEDUCING the SURPLUS of the REVENUE.
UNAPPROPRIATED REVENUE.
NETT PRODUCE of the Sinking Fund, for the last five years, including casual
surplusses, reckoned from Lady Day to Lady day; being the annual medium, after
deducing from it about 45,000 l. always carried to it from the supplies, in
order to replace so much taken from it every year to make good a deficiency in
a Fund established in 1758. L 2,610,759 Nett annual produce of Land Tax at 3s.
militia doducted: and of the Malt Tax 1,800,000
(N. B. These two taxes in 1773. brought in only 1,665,475 l.)

There are same casual Receipts, not included in the Sinking Fund, such as
duties on Gum Senega, American Revenue, etc. But they are so uncertain and
inconsiderable that it is scarcely proper to give them as a part of the
permanent Revenue.

Add however on this account 50,000 Total of unappropriated The greatest part
of this Revenue is borrowed of the Bank, and spent before it comes into the
Exchequer, It is, therefore, in reality, so much debt constantly due to the
Bank, for which interest it paid.
Revenue L 4,460,759
Produce of the SINKING FUND, reckoned from Lady Day to Lady Day.
1770 2,486,836 1771 2,553,505 1772 2,683,831 1773 2,823,150 1774 2,731,476
In 1775 the sinking Fund was taken for 2.900,000 l. including an extraordinary
charge of 100,000 l. on the Aggregate Fund. If there has been a deficiency, it
is a debt contracted last year, which must be added to other debts (referred to
in Page 64) arising from deficiencies in the provision made for the expenses of
last year. This provision amounted to 3.703,476 l; but it is said to have
fallen short above a million.

ANNUAL EXPENDITURE.
Peace Establishment, including the annual increase of the Navy and Civil List
Debts (see the former account) L. 4050,000 Interest at 2 of 3.600,000l.
unfunded debt, which must be paid out of the unappropriated Revenue 90,000
Total 4.140,000 SURPLUS 320,759 Annual income L 4.460,759
These two methods of deducing the Surplus of the Revenue confirm one another,
as nearly as could have been expected. They cannot agree exactly, unless the
mean produce of the Sinking Fund, and of all the taxes, are taken for the same
years, and from the same quarter in every year.

There is a third method of proving that the permanent surplus of the revenue
cannot exceed the sum now stated.

I have learnt from the highest authority, that the national debt about a year
ago, had been diminished near 9 millions and a half since the peace in 1763;
including a million of the 3 per cents discharged last year. -- The money
employed in making this reduction, must have been derived from the surplus of
the ordinary and stated revenue, added to the extraordinary receipts. These
extraordinary receipts have consisted of the following articles. -- 1. The Land
Tax at 4s. in the pound in 1764, 1765, and. 1771; or 1s. in the pound
extraordinary for three years, making 1.300,000 -- 2. The profits of Nine
Lotteries, making (at 150,000 l. each lottery) 1.350,000l. -- 3. A contribution
of 400,000l. per ann. from the India company for five years, making 2.000,000l.
-- 4.110,000 l. paid by the Bank in 1764 for the privilege of exclusive
banking. Also the money paid by France for maintaining their prisoners; and the
money arising from the sale of French prizes, taken before the declaration of
war; from saving on particular grants At the end of the war, etc. etc. --
which, all together, The Author of the Present State of the Nation, published
in 1768, makes all these extraordinary Receipts to amount to above two millions
and a half. But the greatest part of them were applied to satisfy German
claims, and some other debts, not properly included in the current national
expenditure.
I will suppose a million. Add 3.300.000 l. arising from a surplus of 300,000
l. for eleven years; and the total will be 8.950,000 l. which is a sum more
than sufficient for discharging 9 millions and a half of the public debt.

Sketch of an Account of the Money drawn from the Public by the Taxes.
Nett Revenue L. 10,000,000 EXPENSE of collecting the EXCISES in ENGLAND, being
the average of the years 1767 and 1768, when their produce was 4,531,075 l. per
ann. -- 6 per cent. of the gross produce 297,887 EXPENSE of collecting the
Excises in SCOTLAND, being the medium of the years 1772 and 1773, and the
difference between the gross and nett produce -- 31 per cent of the gross
produce 43,254 EXPENSE of collecting the CUSTOMS in ENGLAND, being the average
of 1771 and 1772; bounties included -- 15 per cent. of the gross produce,
exclusive of the drawbacks and over-entries -- 468,^03 N. B. The bounties for
1771 were 202,840 l. for 1772, 172,468 l. For 1772, 285,764 l. or 10 per cent
nearly. PERQUISITES, etc. to Custom house officers, etc. supposed to be 250,000
EXPENSE of collecting the Salt duties in ENGLAND, 10 per cent. 27,000 Bounties
on fish exported 18,000 EXPENSE of collecting the duties on Stamps, Cards,
Advertisements, etc. 5 per cent. 18,000 EXPENSE of collecting the Land Tax at
3s. -- 2^ per cent. of the nominal produce 43,300 Total L. 11.160,34^
It must be seen, that this account is imperfect, It is, however sufficient to
prove, that the whole money raised DIRECTLY by the taxes, exceeds considerably
ELEVEN MILLIONS. But as the increased price of one commodity has a tendency to
raise the price of other commodities; and as also dealers generally add more
than the value of a tax to the price of a commodity, besides charging interest
for the money they advance on the taxes; for these reasons, it seems certain,
that the taxes have an INDIRECT effect of great consequence; and that a larger
sum is drawn by them from the public, than their gross produce. -- It is
farther to be considered, that many of the persons who are now supported by
collecting the taxes would have supported themselves by commerce or
agriculture; and, therefore, instead of taking away from the public stock,
would have been employed in increasing it. -- Some have reckoned that on all
these accounts the expense of the taxes is doubled; but this must be
extravagant. Let us suppose a quarter only added; and it will follow, that the
money drawn from the public by the taxes (exclusive of those which maintain the
poor) is near 14 millions per ann; a sum almost equal to the whole specie of
the kingdom; which, therefore, had we no paper currency, would be totally
inadequate to the wants of the kingdom.

Without all doubt such a state of things, in a great commercial nation, is
most dangerous, and frightful; but it admits of no remedy, while the public
debt continues what it is. -- With a view, therefore, to the quick reduction of
this debt, I will throw away, after, all I have said on this subject on former
occasions, the following proposals. -- It has appeared, that, supposing the
taxes not to become less productive, and the current national expense to
continue the same that it had been for ten years before 1775, a surplus may be
expected in the revenue of about 300,000 l. per ann. -- With a surplus so
trifling, nothing can be done; but it might be increased, first of all; By
keeping the LAND TAX for the future at 4s. in the pound. -- As rents have been
almost doubled, this will not be much more to the present proprietors of land,
than 2s. in the pound was formerly. It Is, therefore, equitable; and it will add
to the national income near 450,000 l.

Secondly. All the money now spent in maintaining troops in America might be
saved. -- The Colonies are able to defend themselves. They wish to be allowed
to do it. Should they ever want the aid of our troops, they will certainly be
very willing to pay us for them. Indeed I am of opinion, they will never be
willing to make pence with us, without stipulating that we shall withdraw our
troops from them. Were there any external power that claimed and exercised a
right of stationing troops in this country, without our consent, we should
certainly think ourselves entirely undone. -- I will estimate this saving at no
more than 200,000 l. per ann.

Thirdly I do not see why the peace-establishment might not be reduced to what
it was, at an average, in 1768, 1769 and 177O. This would produce a saving of
350,000 l. per ann. -- I might here propose reducing the peace-establishment
for the Navy to what it always was before the last war, or from 16,000 to
10,000 men. But it would be infinitely better to reduce the ARMY; and this
might produce a farther saving of great consequence. -- But waving this, I
shall only mention,

Fourthly, That contributions might be obtained from North America and other
parts of the British Empire, on the principles stated, from the EARL of
SHELBURNE'S authority, in page 60. -- I will estimate this at no more than
300,000 l. per ann. -- Add the Surplus now in our possession; and the total
will be 1.600,000. -- In the Introduction to the third edition of the Treatise
on Reversionary Payments, I have explained a method of paying off with a
sinking Fund of a million per ann. At the time of writing the introduction here
referred to, about three year ago, I thought, or rather hoped, that the surplus
of the revenue might be taken at 900 000 l. per ann. But it must be considered,
that the nation was then in possession of a contribution of 400,000 l. per ann.
from the Lodia Company, which has been since lost, -- See the Additional
Preface to the 2nd Edition of the Appeal to the Public on the Subject of the
National Debt.
a hundred millions of the national debt in forty years. What then might not be
done with such a Fund as this?

In five years 18.986,300l. will fall from an interest of 4 per cent. to 3 per
cent. -- Also, 4.500,000 l. 3 per cent. 1758, will fall, in six years, to an
interest of 3 per cent. -- The long Annuities granted in King WILLIAM'S time,
amounting to 136,453 l. will, in 18 years, become mostly extinct; as will also
the greater part of the Life Annuities specified in page 63. -- All these
savings amount to more than 400,000 l. per ann. And, were they to be added to
the fund as they fall in, its operations would be so much accelerated, that in
a few years we should see this country above all its difficulties. -- Still
more might be done by striking off unnccessary places and pensions; by giving
up all the means of corruption; by reducing the pay of the great officers of
state; and simplifying the taxes -- A minister who appeared determined to carry
into execution such a system, would soon gain the confidence of the public;
endear himself to all honest men; and in time come to be blessed as the Savior
of his country. -- But what am I doing? -- We have no such happy period before
us. -- Our ministers are active in pursuing measures which must increase our
burdens. A horrid civil war is begun; and it may soon leave us nothing to be
anxious about.

FINIS.

