THE DISEASES INCIDENT TO ARMIES.

WITH THE METHOD of CURE.

Translated from the ORIGINAL of BARON VAN SWIETEN, Physician to their IMPERIAL
MAJESTY'S.

To which are Added; The NATURE and TREATMENT, of GUNSHOT WOUNDS.

BY JOHN RANBY, Esquire; SURGEON GENERAL TO THE BRITISH ARMY.

Likewise, SOME BRIEF DIRECTIONS, TO BE OBSERVED BY SEA SURGEONS IN ENGAGEMENTS.

Also, PREVENTATIVES of the SCURVY at SEA.

BY WILLIAM NORTHCOTE, SURGEON, MANY YEARS IN THE SEA-SERVICE.

Published, for the Use of Military, and Naval Surgeon IN AMERICA.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed, and Sold, by R. BELL, in Third-Street. MDCCLXXVI.

THE AMERICAN EDITOR, TO THE PUBLIC.
A GENTLEMAN of the Faculty in the City of PHILADELPHIA, who was one of the
Surgeons, in the Military Service last War; and who is desirous of affording
every help in his power, toward a successful termination of the present
AMERICAN Measures, for the Defense of LIBERTY. Being of opinion, that the
Publication of the following excellent Tracts will be attended with the most
salutary influences, in the preservation of the lives of many of those valuable
Citizens of AMERICA, who, as Soldiers and Sailors, are now contending for the
mighty Prize of FREEDOM: And would at the same Time, communicate worth and
dignity to the Military and Naval Practitioners in the Art of Healing, was
generously pleased to bestow, and recommend it to the notice of the Editor, who
humbly apprehends, that the interest of the Public, will be truly served in
their purchasing, as well as his private interest in selling, and by such
favors which reciprocally gratify, the obligations are, at the same time,
settled and continued.

Lately Printed, and now Selling by ROBERT BELL, in Third Street, PHILADELPHIA.
(Price Five Dollars.)

LECTURES ON THE MATERIA MEDICA, AS DELIVERED By WILLIAM CULLEN, M. D.
Professor of MEDICINE in the University OF EDINBURGH.

Now Published by Permission of the AUTHOR, And with many CORRECTIONS from the
Collation of different MANUSCRIPTS by the EDITORS.

N. B. The whole of the European Editor's EMENDANDA, which they inserted at the
end, is carefully inserted at each proper place, throughout the body of the
Work, in this American Edition.

MEMORANDUM.

This excellent Work, contains the very cream of Physic, and is absolutely
necessary for all American Physicians, who wish to arrive at the top of their
Profession.

THE PREFACE TO THE DISEASES INCIDENT TO ARMIES.
THE great and frequent inconveniences attending a military life, are of such a
nature, as to make the greatest havoc even among the most robust
constitutions. It is not, therefore surprising, that an Army is seldom or ever
without a great number of sick.

NEVERTHELESS, it has been observed, that the distempers mostly prevalent among
the Troops are not in number very considerable.

WE have, for this reason, thought it sufficient to speak of those, whose
attacks the soldier is most subject to, to describe them in such a manner, as
they may be distinguished from one another by certain signs; and at the same
time to give an account of such symptoms as characterise the decrease or
increase of each disorder; and lastly, to specify the medicines proper for the
cure of the sick, and the diet they are to observe.

IT will be perceived, that, in our little Essay on this subject, it was
equally necessary to be short, and to endeavor to avoid being obscure.

THIS Work, however, no wise regards the Physicians, who, masters of their art,
and in daily practice, stand in no need of the assistance of these first
elements.

BUT it often happens, in an army, that the number of sick is so great, and
they are dispersed in so many different places, that it is impossible the
physicians should go every where, and give their attendance to each individual.
In such cases, necessity obliges the sick to be entrusted to persons who cannot
be expected to have the same knowledge with those of the profession.

FOR the use of such practitioners, not sufficiently instructed, this small
Tract is designed, that, by the signs exactly described, they may understand
the nature of the distemper, the conduct they are to observe, and the remedies
proper to be administered.

AT the end are inserted the RECIPES or prescriptions referred to in the course
of the Work. They are rendered as simple as possible, and preference given to
those medicines that are easiest to be procured, and easiest to be prepared.

IT may not be amiss to premise some observations, by means of which, sickness
may in some degree be prevented, and the health of the soldier preserved. We
are sensible, that, in time of war, it is not always possible to observe
exactly all what we are going to say; but it cannot but be of use to know what
is most advantageous, that it may be put in practice, at least when
circumstances permit.

First. The soldier fresh listed, and torn at once from his family, no sooner
loses sight of his village, but he becomes melancholy; and though a robust
husbandman, finds himself scarce able to bear the fatigues and inconveniences
of a military life. It were to be wished, that he could be used, little by
little, to this new kind of life; but in the mean time nothing is better, than
to procure him all kinds of amusement and diversion.

Second. GARDEN stuff and fresh greens are a wholesome nourishment for the
soldier; ripe fruits are equally good, and never hurt but by their abuse; but
unripe and acrid fruits are very hurtful. The use of garden stuff and fruit
prevents the scurvy, and even cures those already attacked with it.

Third. THE choice of water is essential: If there is none to be found
absolutely pure, the preference is to be given to that least loaded with
heterogeneous parts. There is an easy way to distinguish water that is pure,
from that which is less so, by means of oleum tartari per deliquium. If you let
fall a few drops of this in a glass of water, if not pure, it becomes instantly
thick, and milky, whilst the same operation produces only a small cloud in that
which is more pure.

RIVER water should not be drawn near the banks; that which is in the middle of
the stream is always best.

SOMETIMES, indeed, Troops are reduced to the sad necessity of drinking bad
water; in which case it may be much corrected, by mixing a certain quantity of
vinegar. Six ounces, mixed with three quarts of water, will render the drink
even more agreeable.

THE water may also be rendered less hurtful by steeping in it some pieces of
the root of the calamus aromaticus. This root is found every where, especially
in marshy places, where commonly the water is worst.

Fourth. THE soldier ought to be well clothed and covered; his shoes of a thick
and strong leather. and the thread they are sewed with well covered with wax:
if all the seams could be well waxed the water would be prevented from
penetrating.

Fifth. CAMPS ought to be pitched on a dry spot, as much as possible. That
which appears such is sometimes quite the reverse, because the waters are but
at a little distance below the surface. It is, however, very easy to know that,
by digging the ground, or even merely by examining the wells of the
neighboring villages

IF the water is high in the wells, the soil is damp,; if the water is low, the
soil is dry.

IT would likewise be proper to avoid the neighborhood of thick forests; they
prevent the wind from penetrating, and render the air of the circumjacent parts
damp and close.

BUT if there is a necessity of encamping in a damp ground, the soldiers must
have their straw changed oftener than usual. The officers will be much benefited
by spreading a waxed cloth under their bed.

IN times of rain, the tighter the tents are extended, the less it penetrates:
small trenches dug round the tents contribute to the dryness of the spot where
the soldier lies, because they receive the water that falls from above.

Sixth. WHEN an army remains long in the same camp, the unwholesome effluvia
from so many bodies always occasion sickness, unless there happen to be violent
and frequent winds. These exahalations are mostly to be feared in a hot and
moist air. The changes of camps on this account, contribute much to the health
of the soldier, more especially when the bloody flux prevails. Hence arises one
reason the more for avoiding the neighborhood of thick forests, which prevent
the free passage of the winds.

Seventh. NOTHING is more prejudicial to the soldier, when heated with work,
than to strip, expose himself to the cool air, and greedily drink cold water,
and especially well-water, which commonly is very much so. River water is less
hurtful, as the rays of the Sun, to which it is constantly exposed, prevent its
being so cold.

Eighth. CARE must be taken, during the great heats, that the soldier on duty
should remain exposed to the heat of the Sun as little as possible, and that he
avoid sleeping there. The cuirassiers, especially, when once their cuirass is
thoroughly heated, are those who suffer most by the sun.

Ninth. NEATNESS connot be too much insisted on. Let soldiers frequently wash
their hands, their face, and their feet; and, if the season permits, let them
bathe as much as possible in running water.

Tenth. GREAT care ought to be taken not to lodge many men together in a small
space; and if it cannot be avoided, let the air be at least renewed as often as
it can, whether those who lodge together are in health or sickness; for from
hence arise the most dangerous, and even the contagious distempers.

Eleventh. THE bread ought to be well baked, and made of good and pure flour;
for it is certain, that very dangerous distempers are occasioned by musty or
spoiled bread.

THE CONTENTS.
PREFACE by way of INTRODUCTION, Of COUGHS, Page 14 Of a Sore THROAT, Page 14
Of the PLEURISY, Page 19 Of a PERIPNEUMONY, 27 Of the RHEUMATISM, and RHEUMATIC
PAINS, 39 Of Intermitting FEVERS, 44 Of Spring INTERMITTENTS, 46 Of Autumnal
INTERMITTENTS, 51 Of Quartan FEVERS, 55 Of the JAUNDICE, 56 Of the DROPSY, 58
Of VOMITING, 64 Of the COLERA MORBUS, 65 Of a DIARRHOEA, 67 Of the DYSENTERY,
68 Of an Inflammation of the INTESTINES, 73 Of the PHRENZY, 77 Of the
Haemorrhage of the NOSE, 80 Of a continued FEVER, 82 Of the SCURVY, 89 Of the
GANGRENE, 94 Of the LUES VENEREA, 94 Of the ITCH, 99 Of WORMS, 102 RECIPES or
PRESCRIPTIONS, 104
Extracts from NORTHCOTE, RANBY, and LIND, On the following Subjects.
Of WOUNDS of the VEINS, ARTERIES, NERVES, and TENDONS, with observations. 115
Of GUNSHOT WOUNDS, their Nature and treatment; with observations. 117
DIRECTIONS for SURGEONS, previous to, and in ENGAGEMENTS. 129 PREVENTATIVES of
the SCURVY at SEA. 138 RULES for preserving HEALTH, in WARM and COLD CLIMATES..
151
OF THE DISEASES OF THE ARMY.
IF the troops encamp in the spring, especially early in the season, there will
infallibly be many sick. The Diseases, that principally prevail at that time,
are, very troublesome Coughs, sore Throats, Pleurisies, Peripneumonies, and
Rheumatisms.

THESE Distempers, though not contagious, do not admit of much motion in the
Patients, wherefore it should be endeavored to have the Hospitals nigh hand,
and, if the state of the Distemper requires it, to bleed the Patient, before he
be moved, the delay of which may produce very troublesome consequences.

SOMETIMES also intermitting Fevers prevail during this season, but they
generally are less obstinate than those that happen in Autumn. In Spring they
are commonly Tertians, or Quotidians, but seldom Quartans, unless in those
subjects, who have been before attacked during the Winter, and in whom,
properly speaking, they are only Relapses.

COUGHS.
COUGHS are more troublesome than dangerous: but if they continue any of time,
and are neglected, they sometimes degenerate into a Phthisis Pulmonalis.

LET the Patient make use of the receipt No. 1. for his common drink, and drink
it lukewarm; it will be of service to add a fourth part of new milk.

THE Patient must abstain from wine, from salt and acid food. Rice, and barley
broth, and new milk, with the yolk of an egg, will be sufficient nourishment.

IF the Cough becomes too violent and troublesome, so as to prevent the Patient
from sleeping, he may take the prescription No 2.

IF the Cough is attended with a Fever, bleeding will be necessary to prevent
an Inflammation, which is then to be apprehended.

WHEN the Cough diminishes, and the excretions, which before were without
consistence, become thick, and are easily expectorated, the distemper is at an
end.

SORE THROAT.
IF the action either of swallowing or respiration suffer an impediment,
attended with sensible pain, and the cause is in the neck, or throat, the
disorder is called a sore Throat, ( Angina.)

It is a very dangerous distemper, and sometimes even mortal; it is known to be
so, when respiration is greatly impeded, the voice extremely sharpened, and the
anxiety very considerable. A large bleeding is immediately requisite, and
cupping glasses are to be applied, around and on the nape of the neck, which
often give instant relief: the drink No. 1. must be kept constantly in the
mouth warm; and the poultice No. 3. applied, and continued hot on the neck,
night and day.

IF the Patient can swallow, let him take every hour a cupfull of the drink No.
1. made hot, with the addition of twenty grains of purified nitre to each pint.
If the redness appears on the neck or breast, the Patient often recovers.
Otherwise this Disease is frequently mortal; but it is not common. The
following species is much more frequent.

ONE of the tonsils, grows red, swelled, and painful, and the pain commonly
extends itself to the internal part of the ear of the diseased side. In a day
or two, the Disease attacks the gland of the other side, while the swelling
disappears from that which was first affected. Sometimes the pulse is hard and
quickened, and sometimes not at all

IN the first case, the urine appears of a deeper color than it is in health;
bleeding is then necessary; and if the redness, swelling of the throat, and
difficulty of breathing do not give way, it will be proper to repeat it.

IN the second case, viz. if the pulse is natural, there is no necessity for
bleeding, unless the Patient be of a replete habit.

THE nourishment must be restrained to light broth, to which may be added rice
or barley cream.

LET the Patient take a tea-cup of the drink No. 4. every hour, warm, unless he
sleeps: and let him often keep in his mouth some of the medicated tea, No 5.
warm, with which he is also to gargle his throat.

NEXT day let him be purged with the draught No. 6. which, if the disorder does
not abate, he may take it again after two days, continuing, in the mean time,
the use of No. 4. and No. 5. till he can swallow freely, and the redness has
disappeared from the inside of the throat.

IF the disorder has continued too long, before relief was applied, or the
inflammation is too considerable, (to give way,) suppuration will ensue.

THAT there will be a suppuration is known, by the swelling and redness in the
throat continuing above three days, without any abatement. In this case, the
Patient is to keep continually in his mouth some of the decoction No. 7. warm,
which likewise may be lightly injected into his throat.

THE cataplasm No. 8. is to be applied, and kept night and day round about his
throat.

If the swelling of the throat then begins to grow soft, the abscess will soon
burst: if there appear a little spot elevated and white, the concealed lancet
(pharyngotomus) may with all safety be used, to give, by this means, a freer
issue to the pus.

The abscess being either broke of itself or opened by the lancet, the
gargarism No. 9. must be frequently used, and the cure will soon be completed.

WHEN it happens that the swelling prevents deglutition entirely, a glister of
twelve ounces of new milk and six ounces of barley water is to be administered
every four hours, which the Patient must retain as long as he possibly can. By
this means he may be sustained till the abscess breaks.

THERE is still another species of sore throat, which, in the beginning, is
easily cured, but by neglect degenerates into a sort of mortification, and
corrodes all the parts attacked, causing at the same time a most horrible
stench.

THERE appears on the tonsils, on the palate, on both sides of the interior
part of the mouth, or within the lips, one or several white spots, sometimes
yellowish, and even brown, according as the disorder is more or less violent.
The places round these spots are much inflamed and painful. It sometimes
happens that the patient has no fever; and the swelling is never so
considerable in this case, as in the before described sore throat.

THE last species generally goes off pretty soon, by rubbing every two hours
lightly the parts affected with a pencil dipped in the mixture No. 10. and
using for a gargarism a simple infusion of elder flowers. It is proper the
Patient should drink some cups of the same infusion about four times a day.

It is to be observed, that the said spots increase very suddenly, when the
stench of the mouth is great: in that case, the quantity of sp. sal. mar. must
be augmented, to stop the progress of this evil.

The PLEURISY.
THE Pleurisy is known by a sharp pain, and stitches, felt in the breast, and
attended with a fever.

THIS pain is increased by inspiration, and lessened by exspiration, and by
holding the breath; the pulse is generally hard, as in all acute and
inflammatory diseases: in violent Pleurisies the pain is sometimes so sharp,
that the Patient scarce dares to draw his breath, the face grows lived, and he
feels himself just suffocating; in this state the pulse is small and low.

The Cough is almost continual, but interrupted by the violent pain: in some
cases, this Cough is dry, without any excretion; in others it is, from the
beginning, attended with excretions; less danger is to be apprehended in the
last case than in the first.

THOUGH the sides of the breast are most commonly attacked in this distemper, yet
the anterior and posterior parts may be equally affected.

IF the pain is most sensibly felt externally, and chiefly upon touching the
part, the disorder is commonly named a false Pleurisy, and is to be treated as
follows:

BLEEDING is the first and chief remedy: let twelve ounces of blood, or even
more, if the subject is replete and robust, be taken from the arm, on the side
where the pain is. While the vein is open, let the patient respire strongly,
and cough. Bleeding commonly lessens the pain, and sometimes carries it off
altogether.

SOME hours after the bleeding, the glyster No. 11. ought to be given.

FLANNELS dipped in the fomentation No. 12, are to be constantly applied to the
place where the pain is felt; and as it would be troublesome to apply this
topic during the night, a plaster of Labdanum, spread on leather or linen, may
be applied in its room.

IN the morning this plaster must be taken off, the part rubbed with the ung.
altheae and the medicine No. 12. Let the patient take every half hour, if he be
awake, a spoonful of the mixture No. 13. and drink after it a warm cupfull of
the decoction No. 1. to each pint of which one ounce of honey should be added.

IT often happens, that the pain, which after bleeding was much lessened, or
quite ceased, returns with as much violence as at first: in this case a second
bleeding is necessary, but commonly not so large as the first, which always
ought to be very copious: if after this the pain still returns very sensibly,
you must bleed a third time, and sometimes even a fourth, according to the
violence of the distemper.

IT must, however, be observed, that slight remains of pain, and such as but
little impede respiration, do not require fresh bleedings: the Patient might by
them be too much weakened, and rendered languid a long time after.

BLEEDING, therefore, must only be repeated in those cases where the pain is
violent enough to obstruct the breath considerably; the velocity of the pulse,
increased commonly at the same time, shows the necessity for this evacuation.

IT is a good sign, when the pain changes its place, and affects the clavicles,
the shoulder-blades, the shoulders and back; and that this new pain requires no
bleeding. These changes generally happen about the sixth day: it is then
sufficient to chafe the parts in pain lightly, and then anoint them with the
ung. alth.

LET the nourishment be light, and consist of thin broth, roasted apples, and
well fermented bread: the decoction No. 1. or plain barley water with one
fourth of new milk, may serve for common drink. If the belly be constipated,
the glyster No. 11. may be repeated.

As soon as respiration grows easier, and the pain is considerably diminished,
it will be sufficient to give every two hours a spoonful of No. 13. with a
cupfull of the decoction No. 1. warm after it.

BUT if, notwithstanding several bleedings, the pain continues, without any
sensible diminution; and above all, if the rattling of the breast, and want of
expectoration show the lungs to be filling, a blister is to be applied to each
calf of the leg.

A sharp blister applied on the painful part has often been attended with very
good effects, even when repeated bleedings had procured no cessation of the
pain of the side.

CARE must be taken in this, as well as in all inflammatory distempers, that
the Patient be not kept too hot, and that the air be often renewed.

WHEN the illness begins to grow milder, by the use of the above medicines,
fresh symptoms will appear, which show the morbific matter is concocted, and
ready to be expelled.

GREAT care must then be taken, not to prevent its course, but, on the
contrary, to facilitate it by all the means that art can suggest.

BLEEDING piles are of service; a white, reddish, or sometimes a brownish
sediment in the urine is a favorable symptom: to encourage its continuance,
the sick must drink plentifully.

IF in the progress of the distemper, after the symptoms grow milder, the
excrements are yellow, and bilious, it is a good sign; but at the beginning it
affords but a bad prognostic.

IN general this disease is carried off by expectoration, especially if the
excretions are plentiful and diminish the pleuritic pain, and above all, if
they are ripe and resemble pus. Sometimes they are glewy, tenacious, and
sanguineous; but there is nothing to fear from them, if the pain abates, the
fever diminishes, and respiration becomes more free. Be cautious, however, not
to repeat the bleeding, which, under these circumstances, must be prejudicial.
Sometimes the excretions are yellowish, and mixed with streaks of blood, and
this also is a favorable sign.

LASTLY, it may be laid down as a general rule, that expectoration is to be
esteemed a happy symptom; whenever the excretions are thrown off with ease,
they diminish the pain and fever, and render the respiration easier.

IN such a state of the expectoration, the mixture No. 13. must be laid aside,
and the linctus No. 14. substituted in its place; two spoonfuls of which are to
be given once in an hour, and leisurely swallowed, with a cup of the decoction
No. 1, warm after it.

IF the expectoration does not continue, but suddenly stops, and there comes on
a rattling in the breast, attended with anxiety, the danger is very great;
blisters on the legs must be applied immediately, the powder No. 15. be given
every four hours, and the warm decoction No. 1. sweetened with a little honey,
be drank plentifully, till the spitting comes on again, and the breast is
relieved.

THERE comes on sometimes, but not often, a painful swelling behind the ears,
or on the thighs, which pain is followed by a diminution of that of the breast:
in this case, the immediate use of the cataplasm No. 8. or such like, is
necessary, to ripen the swelling, which is to be opened with a lancet, as soon
as it comes to a head, and be dressed afterward as an ulcer.

THE violence of the distemper may be so great, that the most efficacious
remedies are insufficient to overcome it, and to expel the morbific matter. In
this case, suppuration, which is always dangerous, comes on, and most commonly
the illness degenerates into a consumption, unless means be found to evacuate
the already formed pus.

THAT this is the state of the case, may be known by the following symptoms.

THE pain is stubborn, and yet less violent than at the beginning: it is
attended with a dry cough, or with unripe excretions; there is a continual
quickness of the pulse, which increases toward night, or whenever the patient
takes any nourishment; the cheeks and lips become red; he has frequent
shiverings and night-sweats; the urine is frothy and pale, and he soon becomes
extremely weak and lean. The abscess, formed in the lungs, is sometimes
evacuated by excretions; when they begin to appear, and are purulent, the
infusion No. 16. sweetened with a little honey, is to be given every hour:
broths, in which fresh chervil, lettuce, and parsley roots, are boiled, may
serve for nourishment; and for drink, barley water, with a fourth part of new
milk, both to be continued till the purulent matter is quite evacuated.

BUT this does not always happen; the pus is often formed in a bag; and in that
case it must be attempted to draw out this collection of matter.

A SMALL plaster applied, and made to stick closely to the most painful place,
will be very proper in the beginning of the illness; because if the Pleurisy
should degenerate into an abscess, the collection of matter will point toward
that place.

WHEN an Abscess is known to be formed, by the signs that have been described,
the marked place is to be corroded by a light caustic; and when open, care must
be taken to keep up the suppuration. In such a case, there is reason to hope,
as the resistance is the least at this place, that the matter collected will
take its course, and be discharged by it; for these collections are often
lodged between the Pleura and the adjacent parts.

FOR the same reason, a seton on the spot is successfully used; and the pus has
often been seen to discharge through such a passage procured by art.

IF the matter contained in the abscess cannot be drawn to the external parts,
it will occasion a swelling of the Pleura toward the cavity of the breast;
whereby the lungs will be oppressed, the anxiety daily increase, the Pleura
burst, all the symptoms suddenly disappear, but come on again soon, and the pus
fall into the cavity of the breast.

UNDER these circumstances, no other method can be used but the Paracenthesis,
to discharge the breast from the pus there lodged, and prevent a mortal
consumption.

DURING this last trial; the use of the medicine No. 16. is to be continued.
If, during the course of the distemper, the patient can get no sleep, a pint of
the emulsion No. 17. is to be administered, to which may occasionally be added
an ounce of the syrup of white poppies, or more if necessary.

PERIPNEUMONY.
THIS Distemper is, properly speaking, an inflammation of the lungs: it is
dangerous, and even more so than the Pleurisy itself, which sometimes
degenerates into a P^ripneumony, when the patient is forced, by excess of pain,
to keep in his breath.

A DIFFICULTY of breathing, the load and oppression of the breast, and an acute
and continual Fever, indicate a Peripneumony. In this distemper the patient
feels no pain; or if he does complain of any, it is of such a dull one as
distinguishes the Peripneumony from the Pleurisy; which last, in inspiration,
gives the patient a very acute pain.

THE pulse is not so hard in the disease we are now describing, as in the
Pleurisy and other inflammatory distempers; but, on the contrary, it generally
found much softer.

IF the Peripneumony is violent, there immediately comes on a great weakness,
the pulse becomes small, soft, unequal; the respiration is short, frequent,
difficult, and accompanied with a continual cough; the patient cannot lie down
for fear of suffocation, but is obliged to sit upright in his bed; his face,
eyes, tongue, and lips, become red and inflamed: these symptoms are followed by
an insupportable anxiety, and soon after by a delirium, and death.

ALL the signs, therefore, that we have recited, give us a very bad prognostic.

A GREATER hardness in the pulse, a less difficulty in breathing, more ease in
lying down, less redness and swelling in the face, the eyes, and the lips, are,
on the contrary, favorable symptoms.

THIS distemper requires immediate help, for very soon it brings the patient
into evident danger.

YOU must begin by a large bleeding in the arm, and repeat it in the same
manner as in a Pleurisy, if the anxiety and difficulty of breathing do not
diminish. If the blood, when drawn, remains fluid and thin, and scarce
coagulates at all, and if after the bleeding the respiration is not freer, it
is a bad sign, which indicates, that the thicker parts are retained in the
lungs, and the thinner only discharged. In this case, a fresh bleeding would
produce no effect, and only evacuate that part of the blood which is least
thick, and could still have made its way through the lungs.

SOME hours after the bleeding, it will be proper to give the glyster No. 11.
Fomentations, ointments, and plasters, may be applied to the breast, but it
must not be expected that these sort of things will be attended with as good
success as in the Pleurisy.

It will be better to apply frequently to the patient's mouth and nostrils, a
linen or sponge soaked in warm water, the vapors of which may, together with
the air, enter by inspiration into the lungs.

THE diet ought, as in the Pleurisy, to be extremely light, and the broths
still thinner.

Let the common drink be the decoction No. 1. or barley-water; but instead of
mixing milk with it, add to each pint half an ounce of pure honey.

WHILE the patient is awake, let him take every half hour a spoonful of No. 13.
and drink after it a warm cup of the decoction No. 1.

IF, on the use of these medicines, the anxiety diminishes, the respiration
becomes freer, the Fever less violent, the pulse more vigorous and equal, the
tongue moist, and every part of the body, even to the extremities, of an equal
heat; if, above all, the skin is moist and soft, we may hope for the best, and
nothing more is required than a continuance of the same means, as the
inflammation of the lungs is beginning to be resolved, and gradually to decline.

BUT things seldom take this turn, unless the distemper is not violent, the
solid parts are supple, and relief has been applied from the beginning. It
oftener happens, that the matter of this Disease is evacuated by expectoration.

The spitting must, therefore, be carefully attended to; and it is a very bad
sign, when at the same time the patient does not expectorate at all, and has a
difficulty to breathe, with a rattling in his throat. The spittings are good,
if discharged speedily, copiously, and easily. They should be of a proper
consistence; sometimes they appear yellow, and streaked with a little blood;
which ought to give no uneasiness, for excretions of this sort are always good,
and grow white in time.

THE effect they produce is remarkable, by the diminution of anxiety, the
freedom of respiration, and the alteration in the pulse, which grows stronger
and fuller.

LET the patient, at that time, take two tea-spoonfuls of the linctus No. 14.
and after swallowing them softly, drink a cup of the warm decoction No. 1.

NOTHING more is to be done under these circumstances; and bleeding, purging,
or exciting sweats, would be detrimental.

WE ought chiefly to guard against the cold air, and cold drinks, for either
the one or the other will stop the expectoration, and thereby throw the patient
into imminent danger.

IF a suppression of the spitting should happen, and the anxiety be followed by
the rattling of the throat, blisters are to be applied to the legs, the powder
No. 15. is to be given every four hours, and the same decoction No. 1. be used
as was ordered for the Pleurisy. The patient is also to inspire by the mouth
and nostrils the vapor of warm water.

It sometimes happens, that, during the course of the distemper, the patient
voids by stool a yellow and bilious matter, and is relieved by it. This is also
a favorable sign, as has been observed, in speaking of the Pleurisy.

A LARGE and thick sediment in the urine, at first red, afterward turning
white, is likewise a good symptom. When this happens, the patient must drink
plentifully as in the Pleurisy. Nevertheless, it rarely happens that the cause
of the evil is discharged merely by urine; the spitting, which generally comes
on about the same time, contributes greatly to the entire cure.

WHEN the patient, by the means of these evacuations, begins to find his breast
disengaged, he may have his broth somewhat stronger; but he should constantly
take but little at a time and often, that the lungs may not afresh be
overcharged by a chyle, both too crude and too copious. Sometimes a plentiful
bleeding of the nose gives relief to the patient; but this seldom happens.

IF none of the evacuations here described are observed within the space of a
fortnight, if the Fever continues pretty strong, and the Cough dry; if the heat
extends to the extremities of the body; if the pulse is quick, soft, and
wavering; if a difficulty of breathing and shiverings accompany these symptoms;
if the cheeks and lips are red, the thirst great, and, lastly, the Fever
stronger toward night, it is certain that the inflammation is turning to an
Abscess.

THE indications of an Abscess already formed in the lungs, besides the
symptoms already described, are as follow: A dry continual obstinate cough,
which increases when the sick moves, or takes any nourishment; he can only lie
on the affected side, without its being possible for him to lie on the other;
he has periodically a little continued Fever, which augments whenever he eats,
drinks, or stirs, and is attended with a redness of the lips and cheeks; he has
no appetite, but a violent thirst, and complains of night-sweats, especially of
the head, and the upper part of the breast; the urine is spumous, he is greatly
emaciated, and extremely weak.

WHILE the Abscess remains whole, the purulent tumor increases more and more;
it presses upon those parts of the lungs which as yet are found; it obstructs
the respiration, and, after the most terrible anxieties, suffocates the patient.

IT is therefore essential, that the Abscess should break, and be maturated, in
order that the pus be evacuated. But it may happen to break in such a manner,
as to disperse the matter into the breast, and occasion an Empyema, which
almost always proves mortal. This is known to be the case, by the sudden
diminution of all the symptoms, sometimes attended with slight faintings, and
the total suppression of purulent spittings. It is because the Abscess is in
effect burst, that the symptoms proceeding from the distention of the purulent
bag immediately cease; but the matter spread in the cavity of the breast,
growing every day more copious, and more acrid, soon occasions new symptoms,
worse than the preceding ones.

THE Paracenthesis is the only means of help lest; but as the ulcer has already
corroded the substance of the lungs, the success will be very doubtful: and
even though the pus is evacuated, the sick person generally dies after the
operation.

MUCH more is it to be wished, that the Abscess may break in such a manner, as
to let the pus fall into the bronchi or air vessels of the lungs, that so it
may be evacuated by spitting.

WHEN this happens, it is to be feared, lest the bronchi be totally filled and
stopped by the quantity of pus spreading itself instantly, and all at once, and
occasioning thereby a suffocation: but if the pus that falls in these vessels
can still be discharged, the patient often recovers, though the purulent
consumption is always to be apprehended.

THE following are the principal, succors which art has found out to forward
the opening of the Abscess into the bronchi, and the evacuation of the pus by
expectoration.

As soon as the symptoms of an Abscess, as described above, are perceived, let
the sick inspire continually by the mouth and nostrils the vapor of warm
water, to soften and relax the parts.

LET him take fatter broth, and in larger quantity than before, that the
stomach being filled, the descent of the diaphragm may be more difficult, and
the Abscess more compressed. The patient must be excited to cough, by applying
warm vinegar to his nostrils, or to cry with a loud voice. This may procure a
chance of breaking the Abscess, which, if the strength of the sick person can
bear it, may be still forwarded by giving him an airing in a carriage, on a
rough road, where he may be well shook.

AS it is impossible to know exactly the moment when the Abscess will break,
you must repeat, from time to time, the attempts here described.

IF, when the Abscess is broke, the excretions are purulent, white, and smooth;
if the fever disappears, or diminishes considerably; if the appetite returns,
the thirst ceases, and, lastly, the excrements are solid and natural, there is
reason to hope that the sick will recover.

IF, on the contrary, the excretions are stained of different colors, with a
bad smell; if the fever does not cease, or, having ceased, returns again; if
the thirst remains, and the appetite does not increase, it is to be feared the
patient will sink under it.

WHEN the Abscess of the lungs discharges itself by means of purulent
excretions, a little rice, or oats boiled in milk, affords an excellent
nourishment; but care must be taken, that the sick take not too much at once,
but little and often.

THE infusion No. 15. with a third part milk and a little honey, will be a
proper drink. He is to take thrice a day the powder No. 18. and as the lungs
have been fatigued by a continual cough during the day, some relaxation ought
to be procured in the night; wherefore let the patient take two pills No. 19.

IF he is somewhat costive, it is not amiss, but if he remains so several days,
the glyster No. 11. is to be given. If the excretions diminish little by
little, appetite comes on, strength increases, and the patient gets rid of his
fever, a quick cure may be expected.

WHEN the excretions are considerably lessened, the powder No. 18. and infusion
No. 16. are no more to be used; instead of which, three small spoonfuls of the
linctus No. 20. and after it three cups of the infusion No. 21. may be taken
thrice a day.

IF, notwithstanding this, the cough returns stronger toward night, the
patient may continue to take the pills No. 19. which otherwise are also to be
lest off.

IF, after the Abscess in the lungs has begun to be evacuated by excretion,
this evacuation should suddenly stop, an extreme anxiety succeeds, together
with a rattling in the breast, and the sick is in very imminent danger. This
accident is commonly caused by the imprudent admission of cold air, or by some
violent emotion of the mind, as anger, fear, or such like.

A SPEEDY relief must be given, by causing the patient to inspire the vapor of
warm water, both by the mouth and nostrils, making him drink freely of the warm
infusion No. 16. and giving him every four hours the powder No. 13. until the
breast be disengaged, and expectoration comes on again; after which the use of
the powder is to be discontinued.

IT will be of service to apply blisters to the calves of the legs, as has been
recommended in the Pleurisy.

WHEN the purulent matter is resorbed by the veins, it sometimes occasions a
sudden deposit of matter in other parts of the body, and there causes an
abscess, viz. about the ears, the arms, or thighs. The load of the breast
ceases at the same time; and the same remedies are to be used, and the same
rules observed, as in the case of an Abscess after a Pleurisy.

AS the inflammations of the external parts may degenerate into schirrous
hardnesses, the same accident is to be feared in inflammations of the internal
parts: for after a Peripneumony, there sometimes remains in the lungs a
schirrous and callous hardness, in which case there is almost always an
adhesion to the Pleura. Respiration continues in that case difficult for the
rest of life, attended with a little cough, chiefly after meals, and after
exercise; and there is no appearance of any of the indications of an Abscess we
have been describing. This accident can rarely be got the better of; and the
little relief that may be afforded is scarce to be expected in a military life,
unless it be for the cavalry, by riding on horseback.

LASTLY, if the Peripneumony be so violent, that the remedies have no effect,
gangrene and death are the consequence. This is foreseen, when the patient
labors with intolerable anxiety, falling into extreme and sudden faintnesses,
with an unequal, feeble, and very quick pulse, and the excretions without
consistence, stinking and black. All these signs indicate a speedy and
inevitable death.

RHEUMATISM, and RHEUMATIC PAINS.
THE general cause of the Rheumatism is the sudden exposition of the body to
the cold after being considerably heated, either by work or the weather;
especially if a person, being overcome by the heat, throws off his clothes, and
rests himself in a damp and cold place,

THE soldier is most frequently liable to this disorder, when heated by
fatigue, and exposed to rain, he is obliged to wear his wet clothes, without
changing them.

THE cold nights, which in Spring and Autumn succeed very warm days, are also a
cause of the Rheumatism. This distemper begins with an universal shivering,
followed by heat, thirst, uneasiness and fever. After a day or two, and even
sometimes sooner, the patient feels a sharp pain, not confined to one place,
but moving from one limb to another, viz. at the wrists, the shoulders, the
knees; and so different parts of the body are in this manner successfully
affected; and the articulations, that are attacked, become red and swelled.

SOMETIMES, in this disorder, the tendinous expansions covering the muscles are
attacked, and occasion an excessive pain off the least motion of the part
affected. Sometimes the Fever ceases in a few days, though the pain continues.
In general, it is a very troublesome disorder, especially when it attacks the
loins, as the sick is then confined to a supine posture, without motion, and,
as it were, like a log. It often passes from the loins to the hips, or upper
joints of the thighs; where, if it remains long fixed, the cure becomes very
difficult.

WHEN the pain suddenly and often changes from place to place, it is to be
feared that the cause of the illness will be drove inwardly, and attack the
lungs or brain, which would be attended with the greatest danger. This accident
is discovered by a delirium, or a violent oppression of the breast, succeeding
a cessation of pain in the extremities.

THIS disease is seldom mortal; but the violence of the pains, and their
continuation upon an improper treatment, induce us to employ quick and
efficacious remedies. When the disorder is neglected, it often happens, that
the articulations are deprived of motion, and there remains for life an
incurable stiffness of the joint. (Anchylosis.)

THE method of treatment is as follows,

TAKE ten ounces of blood from the arm of the affected side.

LET flannels, imbibed in the warm fomentation No. 12. be constantly applied to
the part in pain.

THE diet ought to be light, consisting of small broth, with decoctions of
barley, oats, or rice, and with roasted apples.

FOR common drink, use the decoction No. 1. or barley-water with a fourth part
milk.

Two spoonfuls of the mixture No. 22. with a cupfull of the infusion No. 23.
warm, may be given every hour, unless the patient be asleep.

THE following day let him have the glyster No. 11. and constantly continue the
medicines No. 22. and 23.

IF the pain does not give way, and the Fever continues, the bleeding is to be
repeated the next day, the fomentation No. 12. and the medicines No. 22. and
23. are to be continued; after which, the following morning, let the patient
take the purge No. 6. omitting during this day the use of No. 22. and 23. and
taking at night the anodyne draught No. 24. Let him afterward continue two
days longer the use of No. 22. and 23. and on the third day repeat the purge
No. 6. and at night the draught No. 24.

BY this method, we commonly get the better of this disorder. If a good deal of
a brick colored sediment appears in the urine, attended with a general
breathing sweat, it is a good sign.

IT will then be sufficient to complete the cure, to keep the patient warm in
bed, and make him take the decoction No. 23.

BUT if, after the use of these remedies, the pain still continues, and the
part affected grows red, leeches are to be applied upon it.

SOMETIMES the Fever ceases, the patient appears recovered, but the pain still
roves from one joint to another: in this case, let the patient take half a
dram of Venice soap made into pills, morning, noon, and night, drinking after
it six ounces of the infusion No 23. made warm. He must be kept from the cold,
and the articulations lightly rubbed with a piece of dry flannel.

IT happens likewise sometimes, that the patient, though otherwise recovered, has
a fixed pain lest about the articulation of the hip. Apply in that case a
blister, about the size of a crown piece, upon the part for twelve hours, then
take it off, and pierce the bladder it has raised, that the lymph amassed may
flow out, and cure the wound by means of the plaster, called empl. alum
coctum.

EIGHT days after the place where the blister was applied is healed, apply
another, and proceed as before, and if the pain is then not entirely vanished,
this operation may be repeated four times. Observe, when you take off the
blister, only to pierce the vesicle, and not take the epidermis, for the place
thus made bare, would be extremely painful, and without any advance toward the
cure.

THOSE who have suffered of this disorder in Autumn, must take care, during the
following winter, not to expose themselves to the cold, and the injuries of the
season, for they would certainly have a relapse.

WHEN by the pain continuing long fixed in the same place, the affected
articulation begins to stiffen, let the part be twice a day held over the steam
of hot water, then well wiped with hot linen, lightly rubbed, and anointed with
ung. altheae.

INTERMITTING FEVERS.
A FEVER is known by a quickness of the pulse, usually attended with lassitude,
languor, weakness, thirst, and several other symptoms.

WHEN after a fit of several hours, it sensibly diminishes, with all its
symptoms, and at last absolutely ceases, but in such a manner as to return
again, it is called an Intermitting Fever.

THIS Fever has different appellations, according to the length of the interval
between the sits.

IF it returns every day, it is called a Quotidian; if there is a day between
each fit, it is called a Tertian; if the return is after two days free, it is
named a Quartan.

THE Intermitting Fever comes on with gaping, lassitude, debility, colds,
shiverings, tremblings, paleness of the extremities, anxieties, sickness, and
sometimes vomitting. The pulse is feeble and small and the thirst pretty great.
Heat succeeds after some time; it insensibly augments till it becomes extreme.
The body then grows red, the anxiety diminishes, the pulse is fuller and
stronger, the thirst excessive, and the patient complains of a violent headache,
and pain in all his limbs; lastly, a general sweat succeeds; all the described
symptoms diminish, and the patient often falls into a sleep, after which he
wakes without Fever, his pulse is natural, and there remains nothing but
lassitude, and weakness. Sometimes during the hot fit of the Fever; bilious
matters are thrown up with a perception of relief.

THE urine after the Fever, or during the sweat, is reddish and frothy; and as
soon as it is cold, there appears on the top a pelicle, adhering to the sides
of the vessel, at the bottom of which is deposed a sediment, in color
resembling pounded brick or bole ammoniac.

THIS appearance is, however, seldom observed in any other but autumnal
intermittent fevers, and it is more so after several paroxysms. In the spring
Intermittents, the urine is commonly less red, and rather yellowish, a cloud
forms in the middle, and it deposes a white sediment, which is a good symptom.

OF the two species of Intermitting Fevers we have just mentioned, the vernal
ones are easier cured than the autumnal ones, which are attended with more
troublesome symptoms.

THE Intermittents which prevail from February to July, are called Vernal; and
those that begin in the latter end of July, or beginning of August, and cease
at the end of January, or sometimes sooner, are called Autumnal Intermittents.

AFTER the long and violent heats of the summer, if the troops have been much
fatigued, there will be many Autumnal Fevers, and of the most dangerous kind,
especially if the military operations require camping in marshy places.

IN September and October the number of these Fevers is commonly very
considerable, but there is great hope to see that number diminish at the fall
of the leaf, especially if the winds blow any thing hard.

AS there is a great difference between the Spring and Autumn Fevers, and as
the method of treating them often differ much, we shall treat separately of
each.

SPRING INTERMITTENTS.
SPRING Intermittents are generally Tertians, very often of a kindly sort;
sometimes double Tertians, but seldomer than in Autumn.

WE call that Fever a double Tertian, where a fresh paroxysm comes on every
day, but the fit is generally slighter on the alternate days.

DURING the paroxysm, it will be sufficient to take a large quantity of any
diluting liquor, made agreeable to the palate, but always warm, since cold
draughts would be hurtful.

THE patient may therefore drink of the ptisan No. 25. keeping himself quiet
and in a moderate degree of heat.

THE fit most commonly goes off by an universal sweat, which must be kept up by
warm drink, but ought not to be rendered excessive by too much covering, or
other means that provoke heat.

JUST at this time, viz. on the going off of the fit, or as soon as it is over,
the patient must have a mess of broth with some lemon juice, or cream of tartar
in it, to make it acid.

THE intermediate days that are free from Fever, he may take food somewhat more
solid, viz. a little meat, provided the flesh be of young animals: beef will
not hurt, so it be but tender, but all sorts of fat are to be avoided.

NOTHING is to be eat near the time that the return of the paroxysm is
expected; the nourishment then taken would load the stomach during the fit, and
cause a bad digestion.

FOUR hours, however, before the fit, the patient may take some light broth. As
in spring Agues, the paroxysms commonly anticipate the time they should return
at, regard must be had thereto in the taking of nourishment.

IF the day the patient is without Fever be serene, it will be proper for him
to use a little exercise; but not to lassitude; he ought likewise to endeavor
to sleep rather more than usual.

IT is to be remarked, that those spring Agues often turn to inflammatory
disorders, especially in young and sanguine subjects: bleeding is therefore
proper, especially if the sick have a redness in the face, a violent headache,
or feel some pain on the side of the breast.

IF attended with frequent flatulent eruptions, if the tongue is charged, a
bitter taste in the mouth, or a light vertigo, it will be proper to give him an
emetic.

LET him take four hours before the return of the fit the powder No. 26. or No.
27. if of a weaker constitution, as soon as he shall have vomited, let him
drink warm water plentifully; he will soon throw it up, and vomit afresh; he
then must repeat his drinking, and go on in this manner till what is to be
thrown off his stomach, be diluted, and his vomiting made easy.

AFTER vomiting several times, the water drank commonly stays one hour: after
the vomiting has ceased, let the patient have the potion No. 24. and so wait
for the paroxysm, during which let him take the ptisan No. 25. observing the
rules before laid down.

IF he complains of pains cross his back, of grumbling or wind in his bowels,
if his belly is swelled or hard, he must be purged in the following manner.

EIGHT hours before the return of the fit, let him take the purge No. 28. and
six hours after he has taken it, that is, two hours before the fit, give him
the draught No. 24.

IF the symptoms, that gave occasion to the purge, or the vomit, continue,
these remedies may be repeated, which however is but seldom the case in spring
Fevers.

OBSERVE, that sometimes emetics do not evacuate only by vomit, but by stool
also, and that purges act likewise sometimes by vomit. There is nothing to be
feared when this happens, since the only object of these remedies is to
evacuate the stomach and intestines. After the bowels are thus cleansed, let
the patient take every two hours a spoonful of the mixture No. 29. drinking
after it a cup of camomile flower tea. This remedy must not be used in the
paroxysm, but only whilst the patient is without Fever, nor should he be waked
to take it.

THIS is the method of treating Spring Fevers: and there is seldom a necessity
for using the bark.

IF after the third or fourth paroxysm, ulcerated pustules break out about the
nose or lips, it is a good sign, and the fever quickly ceases: but this is not
so sure in Autumnal Fevers.

IT sometimes happens, though rarely, that after seven or eight fits, the Spring
Fever does not cease, nor even considerably diminish, and that, on the
contrary, the fit become longer and stronger. This is particularly the case,
where the patients are subject to sweat copiously, as soon as they are in bed.
Here the bark becomes necessary.

LET him take every three hours while the Fever is off, one of the powders No.
30. in some wine.

THIS method will soon complete the cure; and as in the spring the weather
grows better every day, there is but little fear of a relapse.

AUTUMNAL INTERMITTENTS.
THESE Fevers are more obstinate than those in the spring; and of these the
worst sort happen commonly after a very hot summer.

THEY are also harder to be known; for when they first begin, the fits are so
long, and the returns so frequent, that they seem continued Fevers, with little
or no intermission.

SOMETIMES the Fever abates a little, and then returns in a few hours, after a
light shivering. It is only when it begins to give way its character is first
known; it then appears that the disorder is a true intermittent. These Fevers,
which at first appear to be continued, often degenerate into Quartans.

SOMETIMES these Fevers, which in the beginning did intermit, after long and
redoubled paroxysms, are changed into dangerous continued Fevers.

THESE Fevers are always bilious; the stomach and intestines are filled with
putrid matter, which must be discharged without delay; to postpone it would be
detrimental.

LET the patient take the emetic No. 26. or 27, having regard, on this
occasion, to what has been said on the subject of intermitting Spring Fevers.

IF the skin of the face is tight and red, the eyes inflamed, and the heat
great and general throughout the body, a bleeding must precede the vomit.

ON the contrary, if the face is shrunk and pale, and the pulse not full,
bleeding would hurt, and must be refrained from.

THE vomit must be given in the intermission of the Fever; or if it does not
cease entirely, that instant is to be chosen when it is least violent.

SOMETIMES also, in an Autumnal Fever, it is necessary to repeat the vomit,
that is, when the nauseous sickness, the bitter taste of the mouth, and the
foulness of the tongue, continue.

THE day the patient takes no vomit, let him drink the decoction No. 25. adding
an ounce of the oxymel No. 31. to every pint of the decoction.

AFTER the first or second vomit, the powder No. 32. is to be taken every four
hours.

THIS method will commonly succeed in these Fevers; and if before, they were
continued, they will become intermittent, so that there will be a considerable
interval from one paroxysm to another, let the patient then take the mixture
No. 29. following the directions given under the head of Spring Intermittent.

THE food should likewise be the same as in these Fevers; broths made pleasant
with juice of lemon, or cream of tartar, roasted apples or pears, and well
fermented bread, ought to be the principal nourishment. When he begins to
recover a little more strength, you may add some flesh meat, either veal or
lamb: a little wine taken moderately to recruit his strength will do no harm.

BUT as in Autumn the days are continually growing colder, the recovering
patient must guard with care against the inclemency of the weather, otherwise a
relapse is much to be feared.

LET him also for a fortnight, on his recovery, take the quantity of a nutmeg
of the electuary No. 33. in the morning fasting, an hour before dinner, and an
hour after supper.

WHEN he has been a month without fever, give him the pills No. 34. in the
morning fasting; repeat them a second time in eight days, and a third time in
eight days more.

IF, after the use of the emetic, and other remedies here described, the fever
should still continue, without any diminution of the paroxysms, and if the
patient grows weaker, the use of the bark becomes necessary: this happens more
frequently in Autumnal, than in Spring fevers.

THE powders No. 30. must then be made use of, as in Spring fevers, and in a
fortnight be again repeated.

IF the eyes grow yellow, the sick feel great anxiety at the orifice of the
stomach, and the urine is icterical, you must then (unless the extreme weakness
of the patient forbid) leave off the use of the bark during the space of a
fortnight; instead of which, for some days give him two spoonfuls of the
mixture No. 35. every three hours, till these symptoms are abated: the fever
will return; but during this interval, the sick having recovered strength, will
better support it, and it soon will absolutely leave him.

IF the use of the bark in this case was obstinately pursued, it would bring on
some chronical and obstinate disorder. It must be observed, that when the fever
has been driven away by the bark, the pills No. 34. are not to be made use of,
for commonly they bring it on again.

IT sometimes happens, that these fevers are from the beginning attended with
the worst of symptoms, an unequal pulse, a cadaverous countenance, frequent
faintness, and cold sweats. In some subjects, these symptoms are attended with
a cardialgia, or violent pain of the stomach, and in others with a sleepy
heaviness, sometimes so profound that the patient can scarcely be waked.

IN this case the bark must be immediately given; for it is to be feared
another fit could not be bore. The prescription No. 30. may be used.

IF by this means the fever being suppressed, the face becomes of the color of
wax, and anxieties about the orifice of the stomach are complained of, let the
remedy No. 35. be used in the manner before explained.

QUARTAN FEVERS.
THE first thing to be observed is, that bleeding is scarcely ever proper in
these fevers.

LET the patient take the emetic No. 26. or 27. before the fit comes on,
following the method prescribed in the Spring Intermittents.

BEFORE the next paroxysm, give him the purge No. 28. and then the quantity of
a nutmeg of the electuary No. 36, which he must leave off while the fever fit
is on him.

IF, after eight fits, the fever does not diminish, and the patient grows weak,
he must take the powders of bark No. 30. observing what has been before said on
that subject.

EIGHT days after the fever has left him, the same powders No. 30. are to be
repeated, and a third and last time at the end of a fortnight, by which means
there will be no fear of a relapse.

IN the intermediate days of the paroxysms, the sick may be indulged with more
wine and a freer nourishment, in this sort of fever, than in any other.

THE JAUNDICE.
AFTER a Fever, that has continued for a length of time, and above all, after
an Autumnal Fever, sometimes the hypocondria remain hard and tense, either with
or without a dull pain; the patient feels after his meals an anxiety, which
sometimes is followed by vomitings; the white of the eyes grows yellowish; the
urine is tinged of an obscure yellow, and this color quickly spreads over the
superficies of the body.

THIS illness is also a common consequence of bad nourishment; and the soldier
is most subject to its attacks, when a scarcity of provisions has obliged him
to live on meats of difficult digestion.

LET the patient take every three hours four spoonfuls of the mixture No. 35.
drinking after it four ounces of the decoction No. 37. which may any where be
easily prepared.

NIGHT and morning let him have half a dram of Venice soap in pills, and his
right hypocondrium be rubbed with flannel every morning, for a quarter (...)
hour, while fasting.

THIS method, followed some days, generally renders the body open, and procures
relief; but it must be continued till the urine recovers its natural color,
and the yellowness disappears from the eyes and the skin.

IF the body is still costive after having used these medicines six days, you
must give the pills No. 34. in the morning, and all that day abstain from the
use of the other medicines, which must be resumed the following days.

EXERCISE is excellent in this distemper, above all in open air, if the weather
permits.

FARINACEOUS and glairy food is to be avoided, and broth wherein are boiled
chervil, sorrel, lettice, endive, or sweet succory, is proper to be used.

THE DROPSY.
WHEN the aqueous part of the blood is amassed together, and retained in any
cavity of the body greater or less, this disease is called a Dropsy.

THE denominations of it are different, according to the parts of the body
affected.

IF the water is detained in the adipose membrane, and thereby causes a general
swelling, it is called Anasarca. The swelling generally begins in the inferior
parts, and gains insensibly the whole body; the eyes are languid, the face and
body sallow, the urine in small quantity, and the patient never sweats. On
pressing the swelled part, it pits. The swelled parts, and chiefly the thighs
and feet, are always very cold.

IT is common enough in the Army for this disease to succeed Intermitting
Fevers of long duration, especially in autumn and winter. The soldier is also
subject to it, when after having suddenly drank a quantity of cold water, he
rests himself in a cold place: it is also frequently the consequence of a
considerable loss of blood, either from wounds, or bleedings too often repeated.

WHEN the Anasarca comes on after a long Intermittent Fever, evacuations are
not extremely necessary; but it is commonly cured by giving thrice a day, viz.
in the morning fasting, one hour before dinner, and one hour before supper, two
ounces of the prepared wine No. 38.

TO finish the cure, the patient must be kept warm, either by the natural heat
of the air, or by an artificial one; he ought to be well covered in the night,
keep to dry food, such as meat or fish roasted; his drink should be little and
pure, and as much exercise be used as his strength will admit of.

IT will be found useful to rub the swelled parts with warm flannels, as often
as you can. If the patient voids urine in larger quantity, and begins to sweat
in bed, and the swelled parts come down, it is a very favorable sign.

AFTER the swelling has disappeared, there remains such a relaxation in the
parts as threaten a relapse; this may be prevented by causing the patient to
wear his clothes straiter than usual, and rolling his legs and thighs with
bandages. Bodily exercise in the open air, and warm weather, does infinite good.

IN this manner generally the Anasarca that fucceeds Intermittent Fevers is
cured happily enough. But when this distemper proceeds from other causes, it
often is more obstinate, and requires large evacuations of the serous humor.
Many ways are tried to procure these evacuations, but experience shows the
remedy No. 39. to be sure and efficacious. The patient is to take a spoonful of
this in the morning; or if, as it sometimes does, it brings on a vomiting, only
half a spoonful. The most common effect is, however only a simple sickness.

THE urine after the use of this remedy comes away in large quantity, and
affords a considerable relief. It seldom purges; but if it should, does no harm.

THIS medicine is to be taken every day, till all the serosities are evacuated,
and the swelling of the body entirely come down. If the dose is not efficacious
enough in robust constitutions, it should be insensibly augmented till it
procures a large discharge by urine. When the patient is on the recovery, the
same regimen must be observed as has been just described.

SOMETIMES the extravasated lymph is accumulated in the lower belly, and the
quantity increases so much as to cause it to swell excessively. When so, by
pressing with one hand on one side of the belly, and striking on the other with
the other hand, the fluctuation is felt, and water is found to abound.

WHEN the distemper is recent, it is cured often enough only by the use of the
remedy No. 39. but if the flux of urine does not come on in some days, nor the
swelling of the belly diminish, haste must be made to draw off the water by the
puncture. The operation is safe, and sure enough; but if attempted when the
disease is more inveterate, it is less efficacious.

IT will be proper, as much as possible, to draw off all the water all together
at once; which may be done safely, by straitening the patient's belly with a
bandage, by little and little, and more and more, as the water runs off: the
faintings and other accidents will, by this means, be avoided.

AFTER the evacuation procured by the puncture, the belly must be bound tight
with rollers, and the patient observe the diet we have described above.

THE use of the remedy No. 38. will be very proper here. Sometimes the belly
swells again, and the puncture is then to be repeated.

AS it sometimes, though but rarely, happens, that the swelling of the belly is
caused only by wind, and not at all by a collection of lymph, the most
scrupulous attention must be used in observing what the case is, because in
this last the puncture is scarce ever of use, and, on the contrary, generally
accelerates death.

THIS last disease is called Tympanites, or Dropsy of the Belly.

1st. GENERALLY the belly is not so excessively swelled as in the Dropsy.

2d. THE belly appears elevated before, and depressed on the lateral parts.

3d. WHEN the belly is struck, the motion of water is not felt, but it gives a
sound somewhat resembling that of a drum.

4th. Though the sick lie on either of his sides, the form of the belly remains
the same, the skin of which is white, extended, and elastic.

5th. COSTIVENESS, and gripings about the navel, often precede this distemper.

6th. THE body of the patient is lighter than in a Dropsy of the Belly, where
the collection of water considerably augments the weight.

UPON the whole, this distemper is more dangerous than the other, and is often
mortal.

THE cure may be attempted in the following manner. Let the patient's belly be
rubbed with flannel, for a quarter of an hour at a time, twice a day; and after
each friction, let it be anointed with the liniment No. 40. and for several
days let him at night take the powder No. 41.

If the wind begin to pass by the anus, and the belly grows less, there is room
to hope a cure.

It happens sometimes, that the lymph collects in the cavity of the breast; and
it has been often observed, that soldiers are subject to this kind of Dropsy,
when, after having been heated by work, and all in a sweat, they suddenly
expose themselves to the cold, and greedily drink cold water.

This disease is known by the preceding causes, by the difficulty of breathing,
especially when the patient begins to sleep, and by a dry cough; he cannot lie
down, but is obliged to fit up in his bed, his body bent forwards, and has
commonly his feet swelled at the beginning of this distemper.

It is observed, that the breast is sometimes disengaged when the swellings of
the legs and thighs become very considerable; and that, on the contrary, the
bread becomes more oppressed, when this swelling suddenly disappears.

This sort of Dropsy, especially if not inveterate, is often successfully cured
by the use of the remedy No. 39.

If this does not answer, nothing remains but the puncture; but we find by
experience, that this is but a doubtful means, and not always attended with
success.

VOMITING.
OUR present inquiry does not regard those Vomitings that attend other
distempers, as Fevers, nephritic Cholics, etc. but only those occasioned by bad
food, and a loaded stomach.

The surest remedy, in this case, is to cause a large quantity of warm water to
be drank, to render the vomiting and evacuation of soul matter easier.

If after this there remains any nausea, or that the tongue be loaded by a
pituitous glairy matter, a light emetic, such as No. 27. should be given, and
the same regimen observed as prescribed in Intermittent Fevers.

WHEN the patient has done vomiting, let him take too spoonfuls every three
hours of the mixture No. 42. and on the evening of the day he takes his vomit,
let him have the draught No. 24.

COLERA MORBUS.
IT is a sudden and immoderate evacuation of the humors, both upwards and
downwards.

THOUGH this may happen, at all times of the year, in consequence of overcharging
the stomach, and a crapula; yet it is most frequent toward the end of the
summer, and beginning of the autumn. It is often occasioned in summer by eating
too much fruit, drinking putrid water, or a great quantity of new and sweet
wine, called Must.

THE violence of this disorder is such as to reduce the strongest man in a few
hours, and sometimes to carry him quite off in the space of twenty-four hours.

THE thirst is commonly violent, the anxiety great, the pulse quick, small, and
often unequal. The patient has cold sweats; his face is wan and cadaverous, and
his extremities cold.

THE thighs or hands are attacked with spasms, and sometimes both together; all
these symptoms are soon followed by convulsions, and by death, unless prevented
by the most speedy and efficacious remedies.

EVERY emetic and purge is to be avoided, for the most gentle are hurtful in
this case. The patient must be continually taking chicken or veal broth, made
so light as scarcely to have the taste of meat; or, instead of these, panada. A
glister of either of these drinks is likewise to be given, in order to
discharge all acrid and irritating matter from the intestines.

AFTER this method has been continued for three or four hours, a spoonful of
the mixture No. 43. is to be given every half quarter of an hour, till the
vomiting and looseness are either stopped, or considerably diminished.

WHEN the patient begins to be somewhat better, it will be sufficient for him
to take only every three hours a spoonful of the same medicine, till he has
taken it all.

THOUGH the vomiting and looseness should by this means be entirely stopped,
let the patient still continue, for four days, to take three spoonfuls of the
same remedy No. 43. every night and morning.

THE best food, on these occasions, is veal broth with rice in it, taken little
at a time, and often.

WHEN it happens that the sick lies long without help, and has had these
evacuations for several hours, and consequently is grown very weak, and
especially if he feels spasms in his thighs or hands, you must immediately
recur to the mixture No. 43. in the manner above described.

A DIARRHOEA
WHEN the stools are liquid, and more frequent than usual, the disorder is
called a Diarrrhoea.

The pains and gripings of the belly are not violent in this distemper; which
by this principally is distinguished from the Dysentery, which we shall treat
of afterward.

As the Diarrhoea sometimes serves for the evacuation of bad humors, it
follows, that it is not always hurtful, and that it may even be advantageous.

It is of service when it does not affect the strength, but, on the contrary,
renders the body more light and alert. On the other hand, it is hurtful when it
brings on langour and weakness.

The Diarrhoea, that at first appeared serviceable, may become detrimental, by
its too long duration, viz. if it lasts four or five days; for then the body is
worn out by too long a flux, the intestines excoriate, a lively pain of the
lower belly, with gripings, succeeds, and the Diarrhoea degenerates into a
Dysentery.

When the Diarrhoea requires any remedy, you may give the powder No. 44 and at
night the potion No. 24. Veal broth with rice, and millet boiled in milk to a
thickness, are proper food for the sick.

If the Diarrhoea does not stop in two days, the powder No. 44. and potion No.
24. must be repeated, and again in two days, if it should so long continue.

To avoid a relapse, let the patient, on his recovery, for four nights
successively, take the bolus No. 45.

Care must be taken that he be well covered and clothed, and guarded against
the injuries of cold air.

THE DYSENTERY.
A DIARRHOEA too long neglected often, degenerates into a Dysentery.

BUT it most commonly happens, that it is not preceded by that disorder; and in
the army it reigns during the heat of summer, and the beginning of autumn.

A FLUX of the belly, attended with violent gripings, and very painful
strainings for stool, is called a Dysentery.

THE stools are not always accompanied with blood, as several physicians have
pretended, who therefore have called this disorder the bloody flux.

NEVERTHELESS, the foecal matters are often reddish and bloody, especially if
the disorder has lasted any time.

THIS distemper chiefly prevails among the troops. The causes that produce it
are as follow:

THE bile grown acrid by the great heats and the fatigues of war; especially if
the soldier, when heated, suddenly exposes himself to cold air, or sleeps in
his clothes, soaked with rain: for which reason it is often brief in places,
where cold nights succeed to hot days.

STAGNATING, or marsh water for common drink.

MEAT, or fish, beginning to be tainted, musty bread, or bread made of musty
corn for food.

SURE and reiterated observations convince us, that summer fruits scarce ever
cause the Dysentery; but the excess of them may do hurt.

THIS distemper proceeding from the causes just described, soon infects a whole
army: the healthy soldiers are more especially infected by the putrid
exhalations of the foecal matters, if they use the same bog-houses as the sick.

THIS point must therefore be carefully attended to, when the Dysentery
prevails among the troops: it would be proper to dig deep trenches to serve for
necessaries for the sick soldiers, to cover several times in a day the foecal
matters with earth, and to have other trenches reserved altogether for those in
health.

TO change the camp often would also be a proper means to stop the progress of
this disorder; and by what has been said relative to the causes, it will appear
necessary to take all possible care to avoid them.

THE manner of treating the Dysentery is as follows:

IF the sick is of a sanguine habit, and has great heat all over his body, or
much Fever, he must lose eight or ten ounces of blood from the arm; but these
symptoms are rarely met with.

AS the Dysentery is seldom attended with a Fever, and then bleeding is of no
use, it will be sufficient to give the patient the powder No. 46. in wine.

AFTER the first vomiting occasioned by the powder, he must drink warm water
with a little honey in it; this will excite fresh vomiting; after which he is
still to be plied with warm water till he brings it up as clear as he drank it.

AFTER the patient shall have rested two hours from his last vomiting, you may
give him some small slices of toasted bread, soaked in four ounces of cold
wine; and to make it pleasant, a little cinnamon and sugar may be added. At
night let him take the pill No. 47.

THE same remedies are to be repeated next day; and if the disorder is not
entirely, or much abated, the third day again.

BUT if the distemper is considerably dimished, it will be proper to leave a
day's interval between the use of these remedies, before they are given a third
time.

EXPERIENCE has shown, that instead of the powder No. 46. that No. 48. with the
pill No. 47. at night, has been given with good success. This must also be
repeated three times, leaving the interval of one day, except the Dysentery
should stop sooner. If the remedy No. 48. be too weak for robust constitutions,
the dose may be increased to ten or twelve grains. After these evacuations, the
patient may, for several days, take at morning, noon, and night, one dram of
the electuary No. 49.

HIS drink must be two parts in three of barley or millet water, and one of new
milk; and this is to be used in large quantities.

FOR food, milk thickened with barley, oats, millet or rice, may be given; and
when the excessive stench of the stools is somewhat abated, meat broth
thickened with the same pulses.

BUT if the malignity or duration of the distemper should have, in a manner,
annihilated the strength of the patient, evacuating medicines must be laid
aside, as he is already but too weak.

THIS is known to be the case, by the violence of the gripings and strainings,
by the vacillating small pulse, by the pale countenance, by the nauseating all
food, and by an unextinguishable thirst.

LET the patient take every hour one ounce of the medicated wine No. 50. and
night and morning the pill No. 47.

AS the bad symptoms begin to disappear, and strength to come again, let the
powder No. 44. be taken in the morning, and in the evening, the Pill No. 47. to
be repeated thrice, with one day's interval, if the disorder be not over sooner.

FOR some days after, let the patient take one dram of the electuary No. 49.
thrice a day.

SOMETIMES the intestines having been excoriated, by the frequent passage of
acrid matters, the patient is very much incommoded with a continual inclination
to go to stool, though he avoids little or nothing: in this situation he is to
have the glyster No. 51. and to retain it as long as possible.

IF, after the evacuations, there should remain such like pains in the lower
belly, the patient would receive great relief, by swallowing, every day, an egg
boiled soft, with a little fresh butter.

INFLAMMATION of the INTESTINES.
AN INFLAMMATION of the INTESTINES, a very dangerous distemper, often arises
from the same causes as a Dysentery.

IT is discovered by a violent pain of the lower belly, which often increases
upon the touch; by the swelling of the belly, by vomitings, and by
constipation. These symptoms are attended, at the same time, with an acute and
continual Fever, and a violent heat: the pulse is hard, the urine clear, and of
a bright red, and there is a sudden prostration of strength.

IF the symptoms are violent, most commonly death is soon the consequence.
Before the patient expires, the pain ceases; but the extremities become cold
and livid, the face cadaverous, the pulse small, quick, and unequal. All these
are signs of approaching death; although the sick, and those about him, are apt
to draw an happy omen from the cessation of pain.

COPIOUS bleeding is immediately to be had recourse to, and repeated boldly if
the pains do not go off, or remit considerably; or if they return again.

LET the patient take the glyster No. 52. three or four times in a day.

HIS belly must be constantly fomented with flannels steeped in the fomentation
No. 12.

THE caul of an animal fresh killed sometimes produces a good effect.

LET the patient take every half hour a warm cup of No. 53.

IT is a good sign if the pulse becomes equal, and remains so, if the pain
diminishes, the sick break wind downward, and the glyster bring away with it
foecal matter.

SOMETIMES, notwithstanding several glysters, the belly remains obstinately
constipated: in this case the fumes of tobacco injected through the anus have
produced very good effects.

THE drink is to be warm barley water, and light broths the whole nourishment,
until three days after the disorder shall have entirely ceased.

AND even then it will be necessary to observe an exact diet for some time,
lest the Intestines, irritated anew by acrid food, occasion a relapse.

THIS distemper is indeed so violent, that if it does not quickly give way to
proper application, it degenerates immediately into a mortal gangrene. But, by
the careful use of the above recited remedies, one may hope to resolve the
Inflammation of the Intestines.

IF this method has begun to be used too late, if the distemper lasts, without
growing worse, three or four days, and a dead pain succeeds to the acute pain
of the lower belly; if at the same time the patient feels an unusual heaviness,
and has wandering shiverings all over his body, it is certain there is an
Abscess forming.

IN which case he must have the fomentation No. 12. constantly applied on his
belly during the day, and at night a plaster of labdanum.

IF the Abscess seems to be ready to pierce externally, which may be if the
Intestines adhere to the peritoneum, it must be opened to discharge the pus.
But this case seldom happens.

IF the Abscess breaks in the cavity of the lower belly, the consequence is
much to be feared, unless the matter can be drawn off directly, which is very
difficult to be done: nor is it easy to judge of the existence of this case,
because the quantity of matter from out of this Abscess is not considerable
enough to cause any remarkable swelling of the belly.

THE pus is more frequently evacuated by the anus: the glyster No. 52. repeated
several times, after suppuration is perfected, facilitates its course. By the
smoothing of the internal coat of the intestines the evacuation of the matter
becomes easier that way.

AFTER the pus is evacuated, whether alone or with the excrements, the patient
must drink plentifully of the decoction No. 16. sweetened with honey, and is to
take the powder No. 18. three times a day.

LET endive, lettice, chervil, or such like tender herbs, be boiled in broth
for his food; but it must be strained thro'a sieve, lest any thick substances
should collect into a mass in the intestines.

LET him continue this method for three days after the pus shall have ceased
passing through the anus; and by degrees he may return to his former way of
living.

PHRENZY.
A PHRENZY is a continued delirium, attended with an acute Fever. It is thereby
distinguished from the Delirium, which is sometimes observed in the height of
Intermitting Fevers, and which finishes with the fit.

AN extreme heat, and a violent inflammatory headache, commonly precede the
Phrenzy: the eyes and face are red; the patients, when asked questions, answer
with ferocity; they pluck the knap of their cover-lids.

THE more frequent causes of this distemper are, the violent heat of the sun,
to which the soldier is exposed, especially if bare headed, sleeping in that
condition, long watches, extreme emotions of anger, excess of wine, brandy, or
other spirituous liquors.

IN this distemper the pulse commonly is quick, and respiration strong, and not
frequent.

A Phrenzy is very dangerous, and often occasions sudden death, for it is a
true inflammation of the meninges, and sometimes even of the brain itself.

GREENISH vomitings, frequent spitting, shiverings, crude aqueous and pale
urine, convulsions, and no thirst, are bad signs: bleeding piles, a flux of the
belly, a copious haemorrhage of the nose, give relief to the patient.

PAIN of the breast, or of the lower parts, is good in this illness: a strong
cough coming on, sometimes also gives ease.

BLEEDING here is essentially necessary: it should be large, and chiefly in the
foot: if the Fever and heat continue, it must be repeated: and it will be
right, after the first bleeding of the foot, to open one of the jugulars.

THE bleedings must be repeated, till the extreme heat and the violence of the
Delirium are abated. While the patient does not sleep, he must take every hour
a cup of the remedy No. 54. warm.

FOR his common drink, the decoction No. 25. may be used, and night and morning
the glyster No. 11. be given.

IF the haemorrhoids swell, let leeches be applied.

IT will be proper to shave the patient's head, and to make him rinse his mouth
often with warm water: let a compress dipped in oxycrate, or vinegar, and
water, in equal quantities, be applied on his forehead: fresh and temperate air
is most proper for him, and he ought to be kept sitting upright in his bed,
with his head raised as much as possible.

IT would be also proper to make him rise twice a day, to set him in an arm
chair, and bathe his feet in warm water. After the night bathing, the paste No.
55. should be applied to the soles of his feet, and lie on till morning.

DURING the whole time of the illness, he must be confined to plain barley
water, or water gruel.

IF, after the use of these remedies, the Fever begins sensibly to grow less,
and the Delirium to wear off, but the patient can get no sleep, let him have
the emulsion No. 17. at night, with the addition of an ounce and a half of
syrup of white poppies.

BUT anodynes must be carefully avoided, while the illness continues in its
force.

AT the beginning of this dangerous distemper, all the remedies here recited
must be vigorously employed: but when the heat and Delirium are considerably
diminished, bleeding and glysters are no longer necessary, the drink No. 25.
will be sufficient, and the nourishment may be a little stronger.

NOTWITHSTANDING the diminution of the symptoms, it happens often enough, that
the Delirium does not entirely give way: but commonly it decreases insensibly,
especially if several times a day, and as much as his strength will permit, the
patient is made to sit up in an arm chair with his body upright,

HAEMORRHAGE of the NOSE.
AS Bleeding of the Nose is a pretty common symptom in ardent Fevers, almost
always giving relief, and sometimes even curing the distemper, it is easily
apprehended, that it must not be too lightly stopped.

BUT sometimes the Bleeding of the Nose is so violent, both in sick persons,
and in those who are in health, that bodily strength is so wasted, as to bring
on total faintings, so that even death may ensue.

IN this case, the too violent Haemorrhage must be stopped. To judge when this
ought to be done, requires a little attention to the following considerations.

WHILE the pulse keeps full, and the heat of the body is every where equal,
even to the extremities, and the lips and the face keep their red color, there
is no fear from the Haemorrhage, was it even violent.

BUT when the pulse begins to undulate, and the face and lips grow pale, it is
time to stop the bleeding.

THE means of stopping it are, applying bandages to the arms and thighs of the
patient, because the veins being thereby compressed, the reflux of the blood to
the heart is in less quantity. The Haemorrhage stopped, the bandages are not to
be loosened all at once, but successively one after another, in such a manner
as to leave the space of a quarter of an hour between the loosening of each
bandage.

IF, by the application of the bandages in the manner described, the
Haemorrhage (...) not stopped, or if it comes on again after taking them off,
the following meth^^^ to be used:

LET a tent of lint imbibed in the (...) No. 56. be put up that nostril from
which the blood came. If some lint dipped in the stiptic be wrapped round a
quill, it will be easily introduced up the nose: at first, for about half an
inch, it must be put up horizontally, then raising the quill insensibly, it is
to be pushed gently, and by this means the lint introduced as far as possible
without hurting the adjacent parts. Afterward, by gently compressing the
nostrils, the quill may be withdrawn, and the lint lest in the nose, where it
is to remain for a day or two, till it falls out of itself.

THE agaric of the oak is also an efficacious remedy for stopping the bleeding.
Some of the powder No. 57. may be blown through a quill into the parent's
nostrils.

A CONTINUED FEVER.
A FEVER, that lasts from the moment of the first access, without interruption,
to the end of the disease, is called a continued Fever.

THE principal causes of Fevers of this sort in an Army, are, excessive
fatigue, and extreme lassitude, which is its consequence, especially during the
heat of summer, if the soldier is under the necessity of enduring thirst, or
drink too much spiritous liquors.

FOR the most fluid and lightest parts of the blood being by these means lost;
what remains, grown more thick and acrid, is in a state to occasion great
disorders, and above all inflammatory ones, because the mass of humors so
thickened is now greatly disposed to inflammation.

WHEN a Fever of this sort produces a topical inflammation, the disease takes
its name from the part affected: for the Pleurisy, Peripneumony, Phrenzy, sore
Throat, ( Quinzy,) Inflammation of the intestines, are often preceded, and
always accompanied with a continued Fever.

BUT when it happens that some of the above recited causes occasion this Fever,
and that it affects no part in particular, it is called simply a Continued
Fever.

THIS Fever is known by the causes that precede it, by the vigor of the time
of life, and a hot and sanguine constitution, by a hard and quick pulse, and
chiefly by its extreme heat, which burns, as it were, the fingers of him who
touches it. The urine is red, thick, turbid, the tongue dry, the thirst great;
often an intolerable pain of the head, and an obstructed respiration.

THIS disease, always dangerous, is more or less so according to the violence
of the described symptoms.

LARGE bleedings are necessary in the beginning, which are to be repeated till
the great heat and dryness of the tongue begins to abate. Barley water is the
common and proper drink; but to every pint should be added an ounce of the
remedy No. 31. of which let him take largely; let there be given him every two
hours a cup of the decoction No. 54. and twice a day the glyster No. 11.

THIS method is to be continued till the decline of the distemper, which is
known by the diminution of heat, of the quickness of the pulse, and of thirst;
by the humidity of the mouth and tongue, by the urine being not so high
colored, and by the sediment it then deposes. The same regimen to be observed
as in the Pleurisy.

AS the disease grows milder, the decoction No. 25. will be sufficient for
common drink, and let the diet be gradually augmented till he is quite well.

IT is highly necessary to observe, that there is also another sort of
Continued Fever, without an inflammatory thickness of the blood, but rather
occasioned by a putrid dissolution of the humors. This last sort is much
worse, and more dangerous than the other, and very often this Fever proves
contagious.

THIS happens most frequently, when, during the great heats, the Army is
encamped in marshy places; for then they respire an air corrupted with bad
effluvia. This sort of Fever prevails also very much, where many men, even were
they healthy, are lodged together in a narrow space, where the air cannot be
renewed often enough. Ships of war and hospitals, where the sick and wounded
are much straitened, are frequently visited by these Fevers, especially if the
air cannot be refreshed often enough; because the air then to be respired is so
corrupted by the effluvia from the bodies, the stink of the excrements, and the
putridness of the gangrened parts, that it engenders a very bad, and truly
putrid Fever, which soon grows contagious. It is therefore sometimes called the
Jail or Hospital Fever. Its particular symptoms should be exactly described,
thereby to know this distemper.

IT begins by a shivering, followed by a heat, but not violent; soon after, the
shivering again, after which the heat, and so the shiverings and heat
alternately.

TOTAL loss of appetite, sleep disturbed, and without refreshment, a heavy pain
of the head, affecting especially the anterior part: the pulse is almost as in
a natural state: the skin is not always very dry: the sick languish on in this
manner some days, without being able to attend their business, yet without
being obliged to keep their bed. The tongue is seldom dry; it is more commonly
soft, moist, and covered with a sort of crust of yellowish green. The patient
dozes much, sleeps little, and seems quite absorbed in profound reveries; in
the progress of the illness, comes on a trembling of the hands, hardness of
hearing, and dimness of sight; the pulse begins to grow feeble, and the patient
is desirous of cordials and wine. Toward night, all the symptoms grow worse:
lastly, at different times during the course of this distemper, there appear
purple spots of an irregular figure.

THE following symptoms are considered as mortal: A sudden prostration of
strength, weakness of the sight: the posture of the sick, stretched on his
back, and drawing up his knees to him; reiterated efforts to get out of bed,
black aphthae, livid petechiae, and stripes also livid, resembling the blow of
a whip spread over the body; the flux of the belly, with lead colored or
blackish stools, weaken the patient more and more.

DEAFNESS is not a bad symptom in this distemper. Nay, it has been observed,
that patients on their recovery are apt to grow deaf, and that sometimes they
have an Abscess in the conduit of the ear.

BILIOUS stools, thick urine, a moist tongue, are good omens, especially if the
patient keep up his strength.

A NUMBER of little red pustules, or white and elevated miliary ones, are good,
if at the same time expectoration is easy, and the urine deposes a thick
sediment. Lastly, it is counted a good sign, when an easy sweat comes on, and
relieves the patient, or the parotids swell, or there appear white apthae.

AS the causes here recited indicate that all things tend to putrefaction, and
that the strength is extremely exhausted, bleeding can seldom be of use, unless
in replete habits, and that but once: for large bleedings abate the strength
immediately, and occasion a Delirium. It is very necessary that the air be
often renewed.

In case of a nausea, or weight felt about the region of the stomach, or that
the tongue be covered with a yellowish green crust, the patient must take the
emetic No. 27. and after the first effect of this powder, let him drink
plentifully of warm water, that he may vomit easy, which is to be repeated, as
has been said in the article of Intermittents.

THE evening after the emetic, let the patient take the bolus No. 58. and drink
after it six ounces of the whey No. 59. If milk cannot be procured, the
decoction No. 25. may be substituted in its room, observing to add two ounces
of wine, and half an ounce of oxymel, to every pin^. This whey, or decoction,
may serve for common drink, especially as the sick are fond of vinous and
comforting drinks, and that these drinks are suitable to this distemper.

LET him take every six hours the powder No. 60. with six ounces of the above
whey, or decoction.

DEATH, preceded by great anxiety and convulsions, is often the consequence of
extreme languors, when the purples disappear, or the miliary spots strike in:
in which case a spoonful of the mixture No. 61. is to be immediately given,
with three ounces of the whey or decoction No. 25. to be repeated every three
hours till he finds ease, and the purples appear again, or the miliary spots
rise; after which the same remedies are to be continued every four hours only.
If, in consequence of this method, an equal breathing sweat comes on through
the whole body, the patient finds great ease thereby. If the belly is
constipated, let the glyster No. 52. be given.

It is proper to discharge the patients from out of the hospital, as soon as
they begin to recover, that they may breathe a purer air; otherwise a relapse
is much to be feared, which is seldom or never got over.

THE SCURVY
THIS is a common distemper, and of difficult cure, more especially in sieges
and unhealthy places, where sometimes the troops are obliged to take up their
winter quarters.

IT begins by a numbness of the limbs, with an unusual lassitude of the whole
body: after walking, the limbs and muscles feel quite fatigued, and, as it
were, broken. In the increase of the distemper, respiration becomes short and
difficult; sometimes the thighs swell; at first the face is pale, then grows
brown, and the skin is stained with spots of different colors, the mouth
begins to smell, the teeth loosen in the sockets, the gums swell, itch, grow
painful, and bleed on the least touch; lastly, wandering pains affect different
parts of the body.

IN the progress of the distemper, the gums putrify and exhale an horrid
stench; the teeth grow yellow, then black and calious. Sometimes happen violent
haemorrhages; very bad conditioned ulcers break out, especially on the thighs;
the patient feels violent and painful shootings in all his limbs, which
increase in the night, and the body is covered with black spots. At this period
the distemper suddenly grows worse, Fevers come on of different kinds, every
thing grows quickly putrid, and mortal haemorrhages break out of the mouth, the
nose, or about the anus; the viscera putrify; and faintings succeed, which are
soon followed by death.

THIS distemper is frequent in winter quarters, from the following causes.

NOISOME vapors, arising from marshy, grounds and stagnating waters, inaction,
scarcity of greens and vegetables, drinking of corrupted and stagnating waters,
the use of salted and smoaked flesh and fish, and of cheese too old and acrid;
damp and low lodgings, and not being open to the course of the winds.

FEAR and sorrow also occasion this disorder, and increase it in those already
attacked with it. By that, and by bad food, it often makes such ravages in
besieged places.

EXPERIENCE shows, that the humors in this disease are not only putrid and
acrimonius, but also condensed.

THEREFORE, in the cure, care must be taken to attenuate the viscosity of the
humors, and to prevent or correct putrefaction.

WE, are to lend all the assistance of art to prevent, or avoid the causes of
this evil, and thereby preserve the soldier from the ravages of this distemper.

FIRST, by correcting the impure waters. This is done by mixing two ounces of
vinegar, and two ounces of brandy, to every pot of water. For want of these,
some slices of calamus aromaticus may be steeped in the water. This is a sort
of reed, very common, growing almost every where, in such low, marshy, and damp
grounds, as are most subject to the Scurvy.

STRONG purges, vomits, and bleeding, do no service in this distemper.

BUT as bad nourishment is one cause that produces the scurvy, the stomach and
intestines must be cleared, and evacuated, which is easily done, by gentle and
reiterated purges, such as No. 34. to be taken three times, with the interval
of a day between each.

THE food should be broth, with chervil, sorrel, spinach, lettice, endive,
succory, cabbage, especially red cabbage, young nettle buds and tops, or any
other sort of tender herbage, boiled in it; the preference to be given to those
easiest to come at.

FRUIT quite ripe, used moderately, always produces a good effect: but if
neither fruit nor greens can be procured, the patient must have his broth with
barley, oats, or rice; he may eat likewise a little veal, or fowl, but it must
be moderately.

AFTER the use of light purgatives, antiscorbutics will be proper, but which
are to be varied according to the different constitution of the patient.

IF he feels himself cold, his face pale, his legs swell, and his thirst is not
great, let him take two ounces, that is, about a tea-cup of the decoction No.
62. thrice a day.

IF he is hot, his pulse feverish, his thirst great, his breath bad, his gums
bleeding and half putrid, the decoction No. 62 is not so proper as No. 6^. to
the quantity of three ounces thrice a day.

RIPE fruits, and roasted apples and pears, easy to be procured, are also very
proper.

THE remedies are to be continued a great while. When the limbs move easier,
and the pain diminishes, the distemper grows better, and then exercise and good
food will be sufficient to complete the cure. To carry of all relics, it will
be proper, on recovery, to take fifty drops of the elixir No. 64. in wine and
water, equal quantities thrice a day.

ALTHOUGH it be certain, that when the distemper is at an end, the symptoms ought
likewise to cease; yet it is no less true, that after the scurvy, we often see
those who have been attacked by it subject to ulcers of the gums, lips, inside
of the cheeks, and of the palate, which soon spread, and corrode these parts,
and in a little time turn to a gangrene. These ulcers often deceive those who
do not rightly understand them: they appear in form of white or yellowish
spots, red, and inflamed round the border, and often very painful. A great
stench accompanies them, and the spittle, which comes in plenty, is also of a
bad smell. This evil requires an immediate remedy, otherwise all would soon be
infected with a gangrenous putrid humor, the teeth would fall out of the
sockets, the jaws would be affected, and entirely corrupted.

BUT this disorder is easily got the better of, by touching the parts lightly
and often in the day with a little lint dipped in the preparation No. 65.
Little compresses, imbued with the same, may also be applied between the gums
and lip, and renewed from time to time.

CARE must be taken not to rub the parts affected too much, as is the bad
custom of some, for the evil and pain is thereby augmented.

IF the stench is great, and the ulcers extend themselves rapidly, the quantity
of spirit of sea salt is to be augmented, till you get the better of the
gangrenous corruption.

THE GANGRENE.
AS mention has been made of the gangrane, it may be here proper to take
notice, that the bark taken internally is a most efficacious remedy for this
distemper, whatsoever part is attacked.

THE patient is to take every four hours one of the powders No. 30. till the
gangrene begins to separate from the sound parts, and a good suppuration comes
on: at which time it will be sufficient for him to take them twice a day till
the ulcer is mundified.

THE bark is equally proper, when the scorbutic ulcers of the inside of the
mouth threaten to gangrene.

LUES VENEREA.
VENEREAL disorders are always caused by contact, communicated by the infected
to, even, the soundest bodies.

THIS contagion produces many different disorders, which, according to the
different parts of the body where it fixes, go under different denominations.

SMALL ulcers appearing at the extremity of the penis, or on the prepuce, are
called venereal shancres: if the nervous papillae of the genital parts form
little elevations like warts, they are called venereal verrucae: if the
internal superficies of the urethra is affected, there arises a difficulty and
pain in making water, named a strangury, and a running of a yellowish,
greenish, or sometimes brownish matter; it is then called a gonorrhoea; if
swellings in the groins, buboes.

WHEN the virus having gained the blood circulates with the humors, wherever
it stops, it produces evils of different kinds, for instance, pustules, and
spots upon the skin, that sometimes degenerate into filthy crusts: ulcers in
the adipose membrane, not giving way in the least to such medicines as are
proper in other ulcers; which corroding the adjacent parts, leave profound and
frightful cicatrices: these ulcers no sooner disappear from one place, but they
quickly show themselves again in some neighboring part.

THE throat most frequently, and the roof of the mouth, are corroded little by
little by this distemper: there appears in these parts a spot, resembling
bacon; the voice becomes hoarse, the action of swallowing is attended with
pain, and the spot we spoke of gaining ground by little and little, destroys
all the soft parts, and at length attacks the bones of the palate and mouth;
which grow rotten and fall in, and leave for the rest of life a deformity, for
which there can be no remedy.

THIS distemper, especially if it is inveterate, attacks also the bones, and
causes swellings on them, which if lost, are called tophi or gummi; if hard,
nodes or venereal exostoses; whence ensue very bad caries, with intolerable
pain, worse in the night, the warmth of the bed increasing it; but rather
easier in the day.

WHEN the bones are corroded even to the marrow, the cure is extremely
difficult, and though cured in appearance, it often returns.

THIS distemper may be easily known by the described symptoms.

THE following is a safe method of treating it.

LET the patient take, night and morning, one spoonful of the medicine No. 66.
drinking after it a pint of barley water with a third of milk in it, using the
same for his common drink: if milk is difficult to get, the decoction No. 67.
may be substituted in its room.

THIS medicine gives no manner of trouble to the patients; to some it procures
some light stools, but this seldom; in others it works by urine and sweat. Its
use may be continued with the greatest safety till all the symptoms of the
disease have absolutely disappeared.

IF the weather is mild and temperate, the patient may go out; but in cold and
damp weather, it is better he should keep his room.

IF the medicine seems to act too slow in robust habits, or when the distemper
is inveterate, the dose may be augmented to a spoonful and a half: and if in
some days the symptoms do not diminish, two spoonfuls may be given every night
and morning, in all four spoonfuls a day.

THE time the patient is to continue the use of this medicine, cannot be
exactly limited: often, if the distemper is not very bad, the cure is performed
in three weeks; if inveterate, it takes up more time. But it may certainly be
used along while without the least inconvenience.

WHEN the ulcers cleanse, and cicatrize, when the rotten parts of the bone
separate and fall off, and when the tumors and nocturnal pains diminish, the
distemper gives way to the remedy.

AS to the regimen of the diet, let the patient have broths with barley, rice,
or oats, or tender greens, his flesh meat lean, milk diet, and ripe fruit.

FAT and smoaked or salted meat, especially bacon, are bad.

THE following remark is necessary to be attended to. Sometimes a salivation
comes on from the use of this medicine, but this is but seldom, and almost only
to those who have before made use of mercury, either internally or externally:
nevertheless, salivation not being necessary to the cure, the use of the
medicine No. 66. is to be left off immediately on the first signs of a spitting
coming on.

BUT the decoction No. 67. may be still continued.

THE signs of an approaching salivation are as follow.

THE gums begin to swell, to grow red, to itch, and become painful, and the
breath to smell ill. As soon as these symptoms are remarked, the use of the
remedy No. 66. must, as has been before said, be suspended: but if in eight or
ten days these symptoms disappear, and the patient is not cured, it may again
be used.

IF he has a gonorrhoea, he must drink plentifully of the decoction No. 67. to
take off the acrimony of the urine; he may bathe the penis thrice a day, for a
quarter of an hour at a time, in equal quantities of water and milk warm.

IF, by suppression of the gonnorrhoea, or from any other cause, a testicle
becomes swelled and painful, and the scrotum red; let him be bled immediately,
the fomentation No. 12. applied to the testicle, and let him drink plentifully
of the decoction No. 1. adding twenty grains of nitre to each pint. After the
redness, swelling, and Fever, which often attend swelled testicles, are
appeased, it will be proper to make use of the remedy No. 66.

IF venereal buboes grow hard, a plaster of galbanum is to be applied.

THE ITCH
IS a very troublesome distemper to armies, and immediately spreads by contact,
unless the affected soldiers are separated from those who are well.

THOUGH all the external parts of the body may be affected, yet the Itch most
commonly shows itself first on the hands, principally between the fingers:
first appears a pustule, or two, full of a sort of clear water, which itch
extremely: when these pustules are broke by scratching, the water that issues
out communicates the disorder to the neighboring parts. It is not easy in the
beginning to distinguish the Itch, unless one is well acquainted with this
disorder: but in its progress the pustules augment both in number and size; and
when opened by scratching, a disgustful crust is formed, and the evil gains the
superficies of the whole body.

HITHERTO the Itch has its seat between the epidermis and the skin; but if it
continues long, it makes way through the skin into the membrana adiposa, where
it forms small ulcers, commonly in great number. This sort of Itch is the
nastiest and worst, and at the same time extremely contagious.

IT is to be treated in the following manner.

THE body is to be kept clean, and linen often changed: if the season of the
year permit, they must bathe, and in waters impregnated with sulphur, if they
can: if they cannot, experience shows, that to bathe in running water will be
of service. The shirt, breeches, and stockings, are to be scented with
brimstone before they are put on: but this sumigation must be made in the open
air, lest the sulphurous vapors should do hurt, if taken in by respiration.

LET the patient take the purging powder No. 68. in the morning fasting, and
repeat it every eight days.

ON the intermediate days, let him take, morning, noon, and night, one of the
powders No. 69.

LET the parts affected be anointed every night with the ointment No. 70.

IF the Itch covers both the whole body and all the limbs, they must not all be
anointed together at once; but you may begin by the hands, and the arms;
continue the next day by the feet, legs, and thighs, and the third day the
body; the fourth day to begin again by the hands and arms, the fifth the feet,
etc. and so on to the entire cure.

WHEN the pustules are dry, the crusts fall, and the ulcers disappear and
return no more, the patient is well.

SOME spots will, indeed, remain on the skin, but these marks wear off
insensibly, and in time quite disappear.

THE patient must abstain from all manner of salt food during the cure.

WORMS.
SOLDIERS are frequently troubled with worms. Bad food, unwholesome water, and
other causes engender them. Vertigoes, nausea, sudden swellings of the lower
belly, especially after meals, the heartburn, grumbling in the bowels, and
troublesome itching of the nose, are indications of Worms. Some have a
voracious appetite, others lose it entirely: the face is pale, and funk.

BUT all the signs here described are not all found at the same time in each
patient; but the more of them are discovered, the more certainty we have of the
distemper.

BUT, after all, the most convincing sign is, when the sick void Worms, by
vomit or stool.

ALL the cure consists in expelling them out of the body, but this is not easy;
for Worms are found to stick, as it were, to the Intestines, since otherwise
they would come away with the excrements.

IT will, therefore, be proper, in order to get the better of them, for a
couple of days to give the patient somewhat, that by its smell may, in some
manner, infect the intestines; after which to give a a rough purge.

LET the patient take five grains of asa foetida in pills every three hours,
for two days.

THE third day let him have the purging powder No. 71. in the morning fasting,
taking after it a light broth, to be continued from time to time, till the
medicine has done working.

IF, after this process, the symptoms do not disappear, in eight days time the
whole must be repeated.

RECIPES REFERRED TO, IN THE FOREGOING TREATISE ON THE DISEASES OF ARMIES.
1. TAKE of the species for the pectoral decoction three ounces. Boil in a
sufficient quantity of water for half an hour, to strain three pounds.

2. Take of the mass for pil. cynogloss. eight grains. Make two pills for a
dose.

3. Take of the species for the emollient decoction six ounces. Boil in
sufficient water to the thickness of a cataplasm, adding toward the end
mustard seed bruised one ounce, for a poultice.

4. Take flower of elder one ounce. Let it just boil up in a sufficient
quantity of water in a close vessel: then digest warm for half an hour; strain
two pounds. To which add, rob of elder one ounce and a half, pure nitre forty
grains. Mix.

5. Take flower of elder, and red roses, of each half an ounce, pure nitre one
dram. Mix. Infuse a pugil of this in warm water for tea.

6. Take leaves of senna six drachms, water scurvy grass two drachms, agaric
one dram, tamarinds half an ounce. Boil for a quarter of an hour, in water
enough; strain two ounces, add syrup of rhubarb half an ounce. Mix for a
draught to be taken at once.

7. Take of the species for emollient decoction four ounces. Boil for half an
hour in water enough to strain three pounds.

8. Take of the residue after the straining of the last, at will, add meal of
lintseed, oil of lintseed, of each two ounces. Mix for a cataplasm.

9. Take flowers of red roses two pugils, agrimony one handful. Mix. Infuse
like a tea for a gargarism. Add a little honey.

10. Take honey of roses half an ounce, spirit of sea salt, twenty drops. Mix.

11. Take species for the emollient decoction two ounces. Boil in water
sufficient, for half an hour; strain one pound. Add simple oxymel two ounces,
pure nitre one dram. Mix for a glister.

12. Take species for emollient decoction three ounces. Boil an hour in water
sufficient; strain four pounds. Dissolve Venice soap two ounces. Mix for a
fomentation.

13. Take pure nitre one dram and a half, crabs claws two drachms, syrup of
wild poppies two ounces, barley water ten ounces. Mix.

14. Take oil of sweet almonds, or, instead thereof, best olive oil, two
ounces, one yolk of an egg; to them well beat up, add pure honey one ounce, Mix
for a linctus.

15. Take kermes mineral three grains, crabs claws twenty grains. Mix.

16. Take Paul's betony, agrimony, ground ivy, golden rod, of each equal parts.
Infuse in warm water for tea.

17. Take cucumber seed half an ounce, sweet almonds blanched No. 8. bitter
ditto No. 2. Mix with barley water one pound: strain for use, for an emulsion.

18. Take myrrh fifteen grains, crabs claws half a dram. Mix for a powder.

19. Take of the mass for pills of horehound six grains. Make two pills.

20. Take balsam capivi half a dram, a yolk of an egg. To them, well rubbed
in a glass mortar, add pure honey one ounce. Mix.

21. Take coltsfoot, scabious, tops of St. John's wort, of each one handful;
powdered liquorish two ounces. Mix. Infuse for tea.

22. Take pure nitre one dram, crabs claws two drachms, syrup of marshmallows
one ounce, barley water ten ounces. Mix.

23. Take rasping of sassafrass two ounces, of the three saunders, of each two
drachms, powder of liquorish one ounce. Mix. Infuse for tea.

24. Take liquid laudanum of Sydenham, fifteen drops, syrup of diacodium half
an ounce, barley water one ounce. Mix for a draught.

25. Take of the species for the antefebrile decoction three ounces. Boil for
half an hour, in a close vessel, in sufficient water; strain four pounds for
use.

26. Take tartar emetic fifteen grains, a powder for one dose.

27. Take root of ipecacuanha half a dram, a powder for one dose.

28. Take powder of carnachini forty grains.

29. Take sal. polychrest two drachms, tartar of vitriol one dram, syrup of
five opening roots two ounces, barley water half a pound, distilled water of
lemon peel two ounces. Mix.

30. Take finely powdered bark one ounce, to be equally divided into twelve
papers.

31. Take purified honey three pound, best wine vinegar, one pound. Mix.

32. Take cream of tartar forty grains, sal. polychrest twenty grains. Mix.
Several of these doses to be given as occasion may require.

33. Take theriaca diatessarion, conserve of wormwood, of each one ounce. Mix.

34. Take pill. rufii thirty grains. Make seven pills.

35. Take oxymel of squills two ounces, sal. polychrest two drachms,
vitriolated tartar one dram, common water eight ounces, spirit of mint half
an ounce. Mix.

36. Take sal. polychrest two drachms, tartar of vitriol one dram, theriaca
diatessar. three ounces, syrup of five opening roots, enough to make an
electuary.

37. Take dog grass half a pound, dandelion, with leaves and all, four ounces.
Cut and bruise them, and boil in a sufficient quantity of common water, or whey
if conveniently to be had, for half an hour; strain by strongly pressing two
pounds. Add pure honey three ounces. Mix.

38. Take tops of common wormwood two ounces, roots of calamus aromaticus,
gentian, imperatory, of each one ounce, bay berries one ounce and a half,
juniper berries three ounces, wild carrot feed one ounce. Cut, bruise, mix.
Infuse warm in a close vase, in, either good wine of mead, eight pounds, for
twenty four hours.

39. Take squills fresh half an ounce. Infuse in good wine two pounds.

40. Take camphor one dram. Dissolve, by rubbing it with oil of sweet almonds
one ounce, in a mortar.

41. Take distilled oil of anniseed gutt. 4^ white sugar forty grains, powdered
rhubarb fifteen grains. Mix for a powder.

42. Take distilled water of mint eight ounces, spirit of mint half an ounce.
Mix.

43. Take distilled cinnamon water one ounce, barley water half a pound, pure
opium three grains, crabs claws one dram and a half, syrup of white poppies
half an ounce. Mix.

44. Take best rhubarb one dram, citrine myrabalans half a dram. Mix for a
powder.

45. Take Venice treacle one dram, for a bolus.

46. Take ipecacuanha forty grains in a powder.

47. Take crude opium one grain in a pill.

48. Take waxed glass of antimony eight grains in powder.

49. Take bole ammoniac six drachms, gumm. arabic. one dram, Venice treacle
one ounce and a half, syrup of wild poppies, enough to make an electuary.

50. Take good wine half a pound, barley water one pound and a half, cinnamon
water one ounce, white sugar six drachms. Mix.

51. Take pure turpentine two drachms, one yolk of an egg. To them, well mixed,
add Venice treacle half an ounce, pure milk five ounces. Mix for a glyster.

52. Take species for emollient decoction two ounces. Boil in water enough for
half an hour; strain ten ounces, add lintseed oil two ounces. Mix for a glyster.

53. Take leaves of marshmallows two handfuls, roots of ditto one ounce,
bruised lintseed two drachms. Boil half an hour in water enough to strain three
pounds. Add, pure nitre one dram, pure honey three ounces. Mix.

54. Take tamarinds three ounces. Boil a quarter of an hour in water enough to
strain three pounds. Add, pure nitre one dram, honey two ounces. Mix.

55. Take meal of mustard seed one ounce, lintseed one ounce and a half, beans
one ounce, common salt two drachms, vinegar enough to make a paste, to be
applied to the soles of the feet.

56. Take white vitriol one dram, common water one ounce. Mix.

57. Take agaric of the oak, powder it:

58. Take Venice treacle one dram, salt of hartshorn ten grains. Mix for a
bolus.

59. Take new milk two pounds, generous white wine four ounces. Boil for an
instant; strain the whey from the curd for use.

60. Take Virginia serpentine root, contrayerva root, of each ten grains, bark
half a dram, camphor four grains. Mix for a powder.

61. Take camphor one dram. Dissolve, by rubbing in a mortar, and dropping on
spirits of wine rectified, twenty drops. Add, white dry sugar two ounces, rub
them well together, pour on white wine vinegar ten ounces. Mix. Keep in a well
stopped glass vase for use.

62. Take horseradish root, fresh gathered and sliced thin, four ounces,
leaves of scurvy grass fresh gathered, marsh trefoil, of each two handfuls;
sage, one handful. Cut, mix; infuse in generous wine six pounds, in a close
vessel, with a gentle heat, for twenty-four hours; strain for use.

63. Take root of sharp pointed dock, polypody of the oak, of each half an
ounce, chrystals of tartar three drachms. Boil for half an hour in milk three
pounds; strain: Add, honey, one ounce and a half. Mix

64 Take spirit of scurvy grass two ounces, elixir proprietatis Paracelsi one
ounce. Mix.

65 Take spirit of sea salt one dram, honey of roses one ounce and a half,
common water five ounces. Mix.

66. Take corrosive sublimate twelve grains, rectified malt spirit two pounds.
Keep in a clean glass vial, till the mercury has voluntarily dissolved.

67. Take root of marshmallows two ounces. Boil in a sufficient quantity of
water for an hour, adding near the end powdered liquorish one ounce. Strain
four pounds.

68 Take scammony fifteen grains, fine sugar ten grains, Ethiops mineral twenty
grains, diaphoretic antimony twenty grains. Mix for a powder.

69. Take flower of sulphur thirty grains, Ethiops mineral ten grains. Mix for
21 doses.

70. Take Ethiops mineral one ounce, hogs lard three ounces. Mix for an
ointment.

71. Take Turbith mineral five grains, root of jalap forty grains, finest white
sugar twenty grains. Mix; rub to a very fine powder in a glass mortar.

END OF THE RECIPES.
EXTRACTS FROM THE MARINE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC AND SURGERY.

WITH SOME BRIEF DIRECTIONS TO BE OBSERVED BY SEA-SURGEONS IN ENGAGEMENTS, etc.

BY WILLIAM NORTHCOTE, SURGEON, MANY YEARS IN THE SEA-SERVICE.

Including, The NATURE and TREATMENT, of GUNSHOT WOUNDS.

BY JOHN RANBY, Esquire; SURGEON GENERAL TO THE BRITISH ARMY.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed, and Sold, by R. BELL, in Third-Street. MDCCLXXVI.

OF WOUNDS OF THE VEINS, ARTERIES, NERVES, AND TENDONS, WITH OBSERVATIONS.
IN Wounds of the Veins, the blood flows with a smooth even stream, of a gross
consistence and dark color; and is ordinarily restrained by the common methods,
such as dry lint, styptics, etc.

If an Artery is wounded, the blood flows impetuously and per saltum, and is of
a florid color; to suppress which, if the orifice be accessible, make a
ligature on the Artery with a crooked needle and waxed thread, which is the
surest and best method: but the haemorrhage may be suppressed by the torniquet,
till the ligature can be made. If it be not accessible, and the Artery runs
along the side of a bone, apply a suitable bandage, compresses, or bolsters. It
is not necessary to compress it so much as totally to preclude the accession of
any blood, but only to impede its efflux, and retain the thrombus, so as to
grow to the sides of the divided arterial coats. It requires great judgment,
however, not to let the compression be too small, to prevent an Aneurism. But
if the wounded artery lies within a bone which prevents its lateral
compression, the only means remaining is to apply dry lint, and retain it
forcibly against the divided orifice. Neither styptics nor cauteries should
ever be used to suppress an haemorrhage when ligature or compression can take
place.

If a large Nerve be totally divided, at first it causes excruciating pain and
inflammation by contracting and stretching the other branches communicating
with it; afterward the part becomes paralytic, and either fades by an atrophy,
or is consumed by a mortification. For the arteries being no longer able to
propel their contained fluids, for want of the Nerves which supply their coats,
the humors are accumulated, stagnate, corrupt, and mortify the part. But if the
Nerve (or even a Tendon) be only half divided, there follows a continual and
slow laceration, a spreading inflammation, excruciating pain, fever, delirium,
convulsions, etc. with a gleet, or thick serous discharge; which symptoms are
in proportion more violent as the Nerve is more distended or stretched.

In order to the cure, if the Nerve lie covered, under the skin and membrana
adiposa, dilate the Wound, that the medicaments may penetrate to the part.
Dress with bals. peruv. warm (dropped in) a pledget of soft digestive, and an
emollient poultice, with a proper bandage to take off the distention. Wounds of
the Tendons and Ligaments are to be dressed after the same manner, only the
applications should be more drying.

In the use of these, if the patient feel the heat of the topics moderate, then
they are rightly fitted: if the part itch and smart, and the aperture become
wider, the topics are stronger than they ought to be.

OF GUNSHOT WOUNDS, THEIR NATURE AND TREATMENT, WITH OBSERVATIONS.
"GUNSHOT Wounds, of all others, are more complicate, and much more difficult
of cure than an incised Wound, even with lots of substance: because here the
fibers and vessels being lacerated, their juices extravasated, and their
texture destroyed, a large digestion or suppuration is necessary to remove the
injured parts, before the Wound can be incarned and healed; and hence also the
symptoms of inflammation, pain, etc. are commonly more violent in Contused
Wounds."

"They are more or less dangerous, according to their extent, and the part in
which they are seated. Those which extend into the bones, viscera, or joints,
are of the worse kind; and especially when any of the wadding, cloths, or
splinters are carried into the part together with the ball; for the
consequences, in these cases, must be inflammations, gangrenes, caries, etc.
which make an amputation necessary. But Gunshot Wounds in the cranium are
above all the most malignant and fatal; though even here we have often
surprising instances of cures made by art and the efforts of nature, when the
case has appeared to be desperate."

"The following method is extracted from Mr. Ranby's excellent Treatise on
Gunshot Wounds, whose penetrating judgment, and great experience in such
cases, must be universally acknowledged."

"The first intention, in regard of accidents caused by a musket or pistol
ball, is, if possible, to extract the ball, or any other extraneous body that
may be lodged in the wounded part. And whenever these casualties are attended
with a great effusion of blood, from the rupture of some considerable arterial
vessel, it will be absolutely necessary, with all imaginable dispatch, to
restrain the bleeding by taking up the artery with the needle; and, at the same
time, to be particularly careful that your held proves no way elusive. There is
no depending on any applications, however styptic, on these occasions."

"In order to get at the ball, or any other foreign matter that infests the
wound, I would advise probing or poking to be used as sparingly as possible;
having constantly experienced, through the whole course of my attendance in
these cases, that such a method is highly detrimental to the patient: and,
indeed, where probing is necessary, I would always prefer the finger as the
best and truest probe."

"If a ball, or any other body happens to be lodged near the orifice, or is
found by the touch to lie under the skin, though at some distance from the
mouth of the Wound; in the first case it is requisite immediately to remove
such extraneous matter; and, on the other occasion, to cut upon it, and take it
out. But when it is sunk deep, and lies absolutely beyond the reach of the
finger, I could never bring myself to thrust those long forceps the Lord knows
where, with scarce any probability of success."

"A great number of instances have occurred to me, where balls have been
quietly lodged in the body; till, after many years, they have worked themselves
a passage toward the surface, and were consequently very easily extracted. In
case the wound be occasioned by a musket or pistol shot, and consequently but
small, it will be necessary to dilate it immediately: yet, I think, in Wounds
near a joint, or in very membranous or tendinous parts, the knife, as well as
forceps, should be put under some restraint; nor any more opening made, than
what is absolutely requisite for the free discharge of the matter lodged
within."

"Wounds in the joints are always dangerous, let them proceed from whatever
cause, whether a bullet, or any cutting instrument; and membranous or tendinous
parts must undoubtedly suffer from their being thus exposed to the very
sensible impressions of the air. I could produce many instances of balls going
through muscular parts, and the Wounds being healed with very little trouble.
And I have known Wounds of the skull from a broad-sword (both tables having
been cut through, and a considerable piece loosened) which were suffered to
bleed for several hours, and did well; nor were attended, at least very seldom,
with any feverish complaint; which was probably owing to the great quantity of
blood lost immediately after the parts had been injured. If the ball has gone
quite through, both orifices are to be widened (if in a part where it can be
done with safety) and particular care is to be taken to preserve both openings,
that especially which is the most depending. No tents are to be made use of,
where there is any possibility of avoiding them; and I would, in general,
recommend light, easy dressings, with a slight, moderate bandage, just
sufficient to keep them on the part. Thin flannel is what I would prefer, in
case it can be got."

"Where the wounded person has not suffered any great loss of blood, it will be
advisable to open a vein immediately, and take from the arm a very large
quantity, and to repeat bleeding, as circumstances may require, the second, and
even the third day. This timely precaution will prevent a god deal of pain and
inflammation, forward the digestion, and contribute toward obviating a long
train of complicated symptoms, that are wont otherwise to interrupt the cure,
miserably harrass the poor patient, and too often endanger his life."

"For the first twelve days it will be proper to observe a cooling regimen,
both in respect of medicines and diet: and as, in circumstances of this kind,
it is necessary that the body should by all means be open, a stool should be
every day procured, either by emollient clysters, or some gentle laxative.
Whatever application is of a hot, spiritous nature, I find remarkably injurious
on these occasions, and what no wounded part can in any degree bear."

"Let the first dressing be with lint, dry, or moistened with a little oil, and
a very light bandage; the next with a digestive warmed, and over it the bread
and milk poultice, mixed with a sufficient quantity of oil to keep it moist:
and, where there is a great tension, and the Wound large, a fomentation. This
course is to be continued till the sore is clean; and then it is to be healed
according to art."

"This method will commonly promote a constant, easy perspiration, abate the
pain, very much facilitate the digestion, and remove all danger of any
approaching inflammation. What induces me to moisten the lint with oil, is the
ease that is procured to a Contused Wound from such an application, in
comparison with one of an absorbent, drying disposition; which, instead of
giving free liberty to the sanious blood to discharge itself, and consequently
preventing an inflammation by unloading the part, would possibly obstruct the
mouths of the capillary vessels, and hinder nature from getting rid of that
encumbrance, which she endeavors to throw off."

"Should an inflammation seize any part, through the lodgment of a bullet, or
any other foreign body, that could with safety have been more immediately
extracted; all attempts for dislodging such extraneous matter should be
postponed, till the swelling has in some measure subsided, and the inflammatory
disposition of the fibers is nearly vanished: unless the ball, or other
extraneous body, lies at no great distance from the orifice; and there is, on
that account, a certainty of removing this encumbrance, without any material
trouble to the patient."

"If a Wound be of such a desperate nature, as to require amputation (which is
often the case, when it happens in any particular joint) it would certainly be
of consequence to perform the operation immediately as soon as the patient is
brought down; lest by delaying it an inflammation, which one may very
reasonably expect, should obstruct a work that ought rarely to be entered upon
during the continuance of so calamitous a circumstance as that of a smart
engagement. The neglecting this critical juncture of taking off a limb
frequently reduces the patient to so low a state, and subjects the blood and
juices to such an alteration, as must unavoidably render the subsequent
operation, if not entirely unsuccessful, at least exceedingly dubious. And in
Wounds even where no amputation is required, it is equally advisable not to
defer me care necessary to be taken of them; lest, by the parts being exposed
to the air; there might arise a series of very dangerous symptoms."

"Wounds that border on any considerable artery are very apt to bleed afresh
upon motion, or a return of a free circulation of the blood into the part which
was interrupted at first by the violence of the injury offered it; and this is
almost always the the case, when the slough begins to separate: for which
reason one should never attempt to remove it by force; but wait, with patience,
till there be a perfect separation of this slough; nor be in the leastwise
shocked at the accident of arteries thus opening themselves, which a very
moderate experience will convince one to be almost inevitable. The patient
frequently gives warning of what is coming upon him, by complaining of a great
weight and fullness in the limbs, which are ever accompanied with more or less
pulsation in them: an infallible prognostic of the consequences. Let the Wound
afflict whatsoever part, if these complaints attend it, I instantly enjoin
bleeding and the bark."

"I have known several instances of persons losing their lives from the
starting of an artery before the surgeon could reach them; particularly where
there has preceded an amputation. And I dare affirm, the quantity of blood lost
in some cases, which I have observed to kill, has not amounted to twelve
ounces; which I do not know how to account for otherwise, than by the drain
which had been made from the mass of blood both before and during the
operation; whence a sudden gush, though of so moderate a portion of blood,
after the great quantity already lost, gives a check to the circulation, and
causes immediate death."

"This reflection, I think, ought to be a lesson to every practitioner, to be
particularly intent on the faithful discharge of his duty in regard of tying
the vessels. Repeated bleedings in the beginning draw after them many
advantages: they generally prevent, and always lessen, any feverish attacks,
and seldom fail to obviate imposthumations."

"The body must ever be kept in a laxative state; and, when pain puts it on the
rack, immediate recourse must be had to the sovereign and almost divine powers
of opium; next to this I likewise add the bark, a medicine which no human
eloquence can extol with panegyric proportioned to its inestimable virtues. Of
such incomparable benefit is it to mankind! I have known it procure rest, if
given in large doses, when even opium had been taken without any manner of
effect."

"In all large Wounds, especially those made by a cannon ball, there is
constantly a great laceration of the membranes, and parts endowed with an
exquisite sensation. These are ever attended with an excruciating pain, and a
discharge of a gleety matter; which, if not restrained, proves often of the
last consequence."

"In this unhappy state, the bark, given in doses of a dram each, and
repeated every three hours (or oftener, if the stomach will bear it)
surprisingly repairs the breach made in the constitution by these terrible
accidents. Elixir of vitriol taken three times a day, in a glass of water, I
find to be of singular benefit, and to prove a very good assistant to the
virtues of the bark. And if the body be costive, to each dose of the bark I add
four or five grains of rhubarb, till that inconvenience is remedied. Should the
bark run off by more than four or five successive stools, I take care to check
this effect of it by ordering two or three drops of laudanum, or two spoonfuls
of the diascordium mixture along with it, every time it is given".

"Where the sore discharges a considerable quantity of gleety matter, is
flabby, looks pale and glossy (which appearances are ever consequent to a loss
of substance) the bark continually relieves the pain that is predominant in
this case, thickens the matter, lessens its quantity, and quite changes the
complexion of the Wound."

"It is very common in cachectic and scorbutic constitutions (which latter too
much abounds in seafaring people, especially in long voyages) for a sore, the
first eight or ten days after taking off the limb, to promise all imaginable
success: from which time it frequently begins to gleet prodigiously, looks
pale, glossy, and flabby; and this gleeting, if not checked, soon proves
mortal. In exigencies of this kind, the bark hardly ever fails to procure
relief, and works an apparent change in a very short space of time; sometimes
in twelve hours."

From what has been here said by Mr. Ranby, it is evident that the bark is one
of the best remedies in contracting the vessels, and restoring their due action
upon the blood, when too great a quantity of that necessary fluid has been lost
by a profuse haemorrhage, provided the wounded vessels are previously closed
up, or well secured from a return of the haemorrhage.

It also not only secures the most tender solids and small vessels from being
dissolved by the acrimony of any matter absorbed, and returned into the whole
mass of blood, from large Wounds or latent abscesses; but it likewise preserves
the texture of the blood itself from being too much broken, or rendered too
watery from the same cause, which would otherwise inevitably produce a fatal
and colliquative hectic. But where there is too great a fullness, or too great a
strength and contractile force of the solids, and an inflammatory tenacity or
siziness in the blood, it may occasion obstructions, pains, inflammations, and
their consequences, unless it be timely laid aside upon the appearance of such
effects.

SOME BRIEF DIRECTIONS PREVIOUS TO, AND IN ENGAGEMENTS, etc.
THE value of an able surgeon, and the necessity of his assistance, never more
plainly appears than in dangerous wounds received in an engagement or battle;
where many brave men must unavoidably perish from loss of blood and other
causes, unless restored and snatched, as it were, from the jaws of death by the
skill of their surgeon. And no doubt, the better opinion the officers and men
conceive of their surgeon, the more spirits they have for the action; being
confident, the wounds, etc. they may chance to receive will be properly
treated, and their lives (if possible) preserved. Therefore a surgeon of a man
of war should have every thing needful, in a sufficient quantity, always by him
in readiness (but more particularly in time of war) placed in some kind of box
or drawer by themselves. His capital instruments should be constantly kept
clean, bright, and in good order. His apparatus should consist of several
tourniquets (of which Petit's screw tourniquet is the most convenient, as the
patient can easily manage it himself, after it is fixed) crooked needles of all
sizes, threaded with proper flat ligatures, in proportion to the needle; a
large quantity of scraped (short) lint, some mixed with flour in a bowl; double
and single headed rollers (or bandages) of all breadths and lengths, in good
store; for slight wounds and contusions, those made of bunting (the fly-part of
an old ensign) will be sufficient; but for cases of more consequence, such as
amputations, fractures, dislocations, etc. the linen rollers must be used. He
ought to be furnished with common needles and thread, with pins in plenty;
pledgets of tow, of what sizes he pleases; after they are made, they may be wet
with water, or oxycrate, on the same board, and dried either by the galley-fire
or in the sun. By this means he may the better lay them together (in a drawer
or box) without intangling, and they are both much better and readier to
spread, when wanted, with any cerate, ointment, or liniment.

Splints of all sizes must also be at hand, and when used armed with tow, or
old linen cloth; likewise bolsters, or compresses of cloth, or coarse tow; but
these may be readily made as occasion requires. To the above add yards of
incle, or strong tape, to secure your splints in fractures, and for other uses.
By this method a surgeon will always be provided against every accident which
may befall his Crew.

When the enemy is in sight, and you are like to come to an action, as soon as
all hands are called to quarters (if your cockpit is not sufficiently large)
you must desire the first lieutenant, with the captain's permission, to order
the carpenters to lay a platform for your wounded men; if the cables will not
be wanted, in one of the cable tires, or otherwise in the after-hold, by
clearing of all manner of lumber out of the way. On the top of a smooth and
even tire cask, let there be deals or planks laid close together, over them an
old sail, and upon that some seamen's bedding from the purser's store-room (for
which you are to have the captain's order, if he will not otherwise deliver
them) ready made up, and laid one by another to place your wounded men on after
they are dressed, that they may lie quiet without being disturbed.

If the ship be small, and there is no cockpit, or such as you have not room
to perform your operations in, you must, as near the after hatchway as is
convenient, have some cask removed out (if there be not height enough for you
to stand upright on the platform) that you may have a place of eight, ten, or
twelve feet square, to receive and dress your wounded men, and from thence to
hand them to their beds: on one side of this place let there be fixed a chest
of a proper height if you have no other convenient seat) to perform your
operations upon; and on another just by (or table) lay all your apparatus, such
as your capital instruments, needles, ligatures, lint, flour in a bowl,
styptic, bandages, splints, compresses, pledgets spread with yellow basilicon,
or some other proper digestive; thread, tape, tow, pins, new and old linen
cloth, a bucket of water to put your spunges in, another empty to receive the
blood in your operations; a dry swab or two to dry the platform when necessary;
a water-cask full of water near at hand, with one head knocked in, in readiness
for dipping out occasionally as it may be wanted. You must also have near you
your ung. basil. -- e gum. elem. -- sambucin; ol. lin. -- olivar. c. --
terebinth; bals. terebinth, tinct. styp. -- thaebaic; sp. c. c. per se. -- vol.
aromat. -- lavend. c. Wine, punch, or grog, and vinegar in plenty.

A number of large candies should be immediately lighted, as soon as the
engagement begins, not forgetting to have your mates and assistants properly
instructed in what part they are to act, that every one may know his station,
and what he has to to prevent confusion in time of action. Here it is necessary
to observe, that the surgeon should always take peculiar care to desire the
first officer to quarter a sufficient number of hands with him in the cockpit,
that he may want no assistance in the day of battle, however bloody the
engagement may be.

All things being ordered, and placed as above in readiness, and the surgeon's
and purser's cabin beds made up, to receive the captain, or any of his
commission officers, who may chance to be wounded; if you have any sick on
board, that cannot stand to their quarters, let them be put down with their
hammock and bedding into the hold, fore cockpit, or sheet cable tier, out of
the way before the action begins; but be sure to keep your platform entirely
for the wounded men. Let one of your mates or assistants go to them
now-and-then to see how they are; or else order one of the stoutest of the
convalescents to come to you at times, if he is able, and acquaint you if any
of them are worse, and in case of faintness, to give them a little cordial,
which he should have by him for that purpose.

When the action is begun, if more than one wounded is brought down at a time,
always first take care of him who is in the most immediate danger; but
otherwise dress them as they come, without distinction: if any is brought down
with a limb off, or a violent haemorrhage, and you happen to be in the midst of
an amputation, or other capital operation, and cannot that instant attend,
order your mate or assistant (for the present) immediately to six a tourniquet
on the part, to restrain the flux of blood from being fatal to the patient, and
do what else you may think necessary, till you have finished the operation you
were about, and laid the patient in bed.

Never encourage those to stay below (after their wounds, etc. are dressed) who
have been but little hurt, but insist on their going up again to their
quarters, otherwise threaten to report them when the engagement is over. I have
many times known cowardly lubbers come tumbling down the ladder with most
violent groans and complaints, though at the same time they have received
little or no hurt; and all I could do or say would not prevail on them to make
a second trial of their courage, nor go up again till the action was all over.
Nay, I have been told (by those quartered at the same gun) that some
dastardly-fellows have actually put their feet, or stood in the way of the
carriage, on purpose to be hurt, that they might have a plausible pretense for
going down to the doctor; which I must own I have great reason to believe,
having sometimes met with such contusions in the legs and feet, occasioned
(according to their own confession) by the carriage, but at the same time so
slight as was scarce worth mentioning; though sometimes very violent, at other
times there was scarce any injury or contusion to be perceived, notwithstanding
the most grievous complaints of pain and uneasiness.

When you are entering on any capital operation, you should use your utmost
endeavors to encourage the patient (if he is sensible) by promising him, in
the softest terms, to treat him tenderly, and to finish with the utmost
expedition; and indeed you should use expedition but not hurry: you should not
make more haste than the case requires, nor cut less than is necessary, or
leave any mischief unremedied; for the neglecting this critical juncture of
taking off a limb, frequently reduces the patient to so low a state, and
subjects the blood and juices to such an alteration, as must unavoidably render
the subsequent operation, if not entirely unsuccessful, at least exceedingly
dubious. Therefore, if a wound be of such a desperate nature as to require
amputation (which is often the case in sea engagements) it is certainly of
consequence to perform the operation immediately as soon as the man is brought
down: and in wounds, even where no amputation is required, it is equally
advisable not to defer the care necessary to be taken of them.

In regard to the wounded, you should act in all respects as if you were
entirely unaffected by their groans and complaints; but at the same time I
would have you behave with such caution, as not to proceed rashly or cruelly,
and be particularly careful to avoid unnecessary pain.

When the action is all over, you are then to go round your patients, and
examine if the wounds have bled any thing considerably since they were dressed;
and if the haemorrhage still continues, remove the dressings very gently and
carefully, and apply fresh ones.

It is not improper here to remark that the tourniquets should still remain on
those patients, who have had their limbs amputated or shot off; that they may
be always in readiness, in case of a fresh haemorrhage; and in case there be no
assistant present when it happens, the patient should be instructed himself how
to tighten it, if he feels the wound bleeding, before help can be procured. You
are likewise to see that their wounded limbs, etc. lie easy, and as they ought;
and that the patients are supported with proper diet and medicines suitable to
the symptomatic fever, etc. as mentioned under the various heads in Northcote's
Marine Surgeon,

As soon as possible after the engagement is ended, and your wounded are all
taken proper care of, acquaint the captain how many there are wounded, and the
nature of their wounds, if they are like to prove mortal, etc. And desire he
will please to order cradles forthwith to be made, as many as you think
necessary, wherein your wounded men must be placed, with their bedding, in a
proper birth by themselves. The cradles are first to be well cleated, and
secured to the deck and sides of the ship, placed so, as that you may easily go
between to dress the people.

As soon as the ship arrives in a harbor, the sick and wounded must be
immediately sent on shore, where their cures will be perfected in a much
shorter time than it is possible on board in an insalubrious air, and on such
diet only as the ship affords.

It is necessary the surgeon of the ship should give a more particular account
of patients sent to an hospital, than is the common practice in the navy, of
merely filling up a sick ticket with the general name of a disease, etc. He
ought to acquaint the surgeon, or his assistant at the hospital, of the
peculiar constitution of the patients, the manner they have been treated from
first to last, the symptoms, etc. that have occurred; and what ever other
circumstances he should be informed of, in order to enable him to perform a
more speedy cure.

PREVENTATIVES OF THE SCURVY AT SEA, etc.
THE best method of preventing the Scurvy at Sea is a liberal use of acids
(particularly those of vegetables) and to avoid eating the ships salt
provisions as much as possible, to use friction daily, either with a
flesh-brush or coarse cloth. Proper exercise, dry linen, and cleanliness, not a
little contribute to health.

It appears from many repeated experiments of Dr. Lind, and a number of
Surgeons in the royal navy, that of all acids, oranges and lemons have the best
effect in preventing and curing the Scurvy (the latter I shall here omit
mentioning, it being already laid down in the Marine Surgeon, Vol. II. Chap.
VIII. Sect. VI. Art. Scurvy, to which the reader is referred). Oranges, in my
opinion, are better than lemons, for by these Lord Anson's people were so
speedily and surprizingly recovered at the island of Tinian. It is certain,
when they are properly and sufficiently used, they are an infallible cure in
every stage and species of the Scurvy, if there is any degree of natural
strength left; and where a diarrhoea, lientery, or dysentery are not joined to
the other symptoms. Some are apt to think tamarinds, vinegar, spirit of salt,
elixir of vitriol, and other acids of the same kind, will do as well; but
experience (that best of masters) plainly shows the contrary; and though acids
agree in certain properties, they differ widely in others. Whenever these
fruits are given without success, you may be fully assured the disease is not
the Scurvy; for in the real genuine Scurvy they were never yet known to fail.
However it is necessary also to observe that fresh vegetables of all kind prove
a great relief to scorbutic patients when set on shore.

But as oranges and lemons are apt to spoil in keeping, there is now to be had
an excellent quintessence of these fruits, which may be very advantageously
used as a succedaneum, being but little inferior to the recent juice.

When you are in countries where oranges and lemons grow spontaneously, and can
be procured in great plenty at a small expense, I shall here show how to bring
their juices, by a very easy method, into a small quantity without prejudice to
their virtues.

Let the juice of these fruits be well cleared from the pulp, and depurated by
standing some time; after which it may be poured off from the gross sediment:
let it then be poured into any clean open vessel of china or stone ware, which
should be wider at the top than at the bottom, that it may evaporate more
readily. A china basin or punch bowl is most proper on account of the form. Put
this into a pan of water over a clear fire; let the water come almost to boil,
and continue nearly in that state, with the bowl full of juice in the middle of
it, till the juice is found of the consistence of a thick syrup when cold. The
slower the evaporation of the juice is, the better; that is, it ought to
continue twelve or fourteen hours over the fire: when it is cold it is to be
corked up in a bottle for use.

Two dozen of good oranges, weighing five pounds four ounces, will yield one
pound nine ounces and a half depurated juice; and when evaporated there will
remain five ounces of extract, which in bulk will be equal to less than three
ounces of water: so that twelve dozen of oranges or lemons may be put into a
quart bottle, and preserved good several years. When this is mixed with water,
and made into punch, few are able to distinguish it from the fresh juice mixed
up in the same manner.

However, when the fresh fruit can be had, the fragrancy of the peel may
contribute somewhat to the cure of the Scurvy; and when these are wanting, the
same thing may be obtained from a few drops of their chemical essence, or the
aromatic oil contained in their rinds; and if a small quantity of this be added
to the extract, it will give it the smell and fragrancy of the fresh fruit in
great perfection: or rather add a little of the outer peel to the extract, a
little before it is taken off the fire, and then the nicest taste will not be
able to distinguish the difference between the fresh fruit and this. The
virtues of this extract, thus made, lie in so small a compass, that a quart
bottle full will serve one man at sea several years. In making of it there is
little or nothing flies off but the water.

It will likewise be of great use to all seafaring people to have always with
them, bullace, sloes, wild-plums, hips, elderberries, goose-berries, and the
like, preserved in bottles, in the same manner as the pastry-cooks keep the
latter. Cabbage, French beans, etc. may be preserved by putting them in clean
dry stone pots or jars, with a layer of salt at the bottom, then a thin layer
of the vegetable covered with salt, and so alternately till the pot is full;
then the whole must be pressed down with a weight, and its mouth quite stopped
with a cork or timber plug, well pitched over, that no air or moisture may
enter: thus the vegetable may be kept fresh and green for a whole year.

At the time of using, the salt is to be washed off with warm water. This is
the manner by which they preserve that never-failing remedy Greenland
scurvy grass. Every common sailor should also lay in a stock of onions and
mustard, for they are a great preservative at sea. The Dutch sailors are
preserved from the Scurvy by pickled cabbage. It must be observed, likewise,
that a soup of boiled cabbage and onions will cure an adventitious Scurvy in
its first stage, either at land or sea, in any part of the world; and what will
cure will prevent.

Salt provisions should always be eaten with plenty of vinegar, mustard, and
onions, but as little of the meat as possible, especially when the Scurvy
begins to make its appearance in the ship. Those who have been weakened by long
illness should be more particularly guarded against the Scurvy, by living on
boiled biscuit, with a few drops of the quintessence or extract of lemons or
oranges, and a spoonful of wine; as also oatmeal and rice gruels, flummery,
stewed barley, with raisins or currants, sago, and wine, etc. But more
particularly pickled green cabbage or beans, as before mentioned, and small
onions boiled with the portable soup made weak. Most of their food ought to be
acidulated with orange and lemon juice, their quintessence or extract.

The inspissated juice of turnips (a thing very easily and cheaply procured) is
on excellent kind of ingredient in soup for sea use. The water-dock
(hydrolapathum) the berries mentioned above, and crab apples; also apples,
pears, or any other fruit, either preserved with coarse sugar (by being boiled
in it) or else brought to a rob or extract, by boiling their expressed juices,
etc. as already laid down for that of lemons and oranges, by which means it may
be kept good through the longest voyages. Apples, pears, etc. when well chosen,
and well packed in dry tight casks, will keep very good for two or three
months; or they may otherwise be cut in slices, and put upon strings in dry
weather, by which they will be dried without losing their flavor or taste;
they are then to be carefully stowed in very dry boxes, and aired sometimes to
prevent their mouldering or being damaged.

Good wine may be made by fermenting the beforementioned extracts with water
and sugar; bullace and sloes are preferable to any other (oranges and lemons
excepted) being a noble antiseptic astringent.

Poor people that winter in Greenland, under vast disadvantages in point of air
and diet, preserve themselves from the Scurvy by spruce beer.

The common beer brewed for the use of ships should be imbittered with
wormwood, chamomile flowers, or even gentian, rather than by means of hops; and
by the former it will keep longer than with the latter, without acquiring any
bad property, and have full as agreeable a taste; but it should be plentifully
impregnated with those ingredients.

The shrub black spruce of America makes a most wholesome drink, and affords a
balsam superior to most turpentines; it is of the fir kind. A simple decoction
of the tops, cones, leaves, or even of the green bark, or wood of these, is an
excellent antiscorbutic; but perhaps it is much more so when fermented, as in
making spruce beer, which may be brewed fresh every two or three days. It is to
be made by pouring boiling water on the tops, cones, leaves, bark, or wood of
the spruce, or any other fir, dried or green; the latter may be easily carried
in bags at sea: but when these cannot be had, a little turpentine or wormwood
may be substituted; which ever be used, it is then to be fermented by the
addition of a proper quantity of molasses, which, by its diaphoretic quality,
makes it a more suitable medicine.

Again, when spruce cannot be had, the common fir-tops used for fuel in the
ship should be first boiled in water, and then the decoction be fermented with
molasses; to which may be added a small quantity of wormwood and root of
horseradish (when it can be got); the fresher it is drank the better. When
other things are wanting, tar-water may be fermented in the same manner.

A drink may also be brewed the same way from the sassafras chips, or from the
branches or berries of the juniper plant: for if the benefit is supposed to
depend (as it certainly does) upon the fermentative quality, or to be derived
from an acescent, antiseptic, corroborative, and balsamic virtue in the remedy,
what is more liberally endowed with these qualities than these substances I
have mentioned?

Besides fresh and preserved fruits, vegetables, and the drinks above
mentioned, fermented liquors of all sorts are good, but more particularly
cider; among these are included many wines of every kind; or the juices of
fruits (already taken notice of) may be fermented with ale, etc.

The late very learned and justly celebrated Doctor Huxham says, "Let all
ships, that are to proceed on a long cruise or voyage, be supplied with a
sufficient quantity of sound generous cider; the rougher, provided it is
perfectly sound, the better."

If apples are found of such vast service in the Scurvy, surely the juice of
them, when become a vinous liquor, cannot but be very salutary, and seems
exceedingly well adapted, as a common drink, to correct by its acidity the
alcalescent, putrefying quality of bad, corrupted provisions. This cider should
be at least three months old before it is served in, and quite fine; if it be
too new, and foul, it is apt to give severe colics: it should be racked off
(once at least) from its gross ley into good and sweet vessels, which will
contribute to its becoming fine, and prevent it from growing ropy, in which
state it is good for nothing: but if some of it should turn to vinegar, which
may frequently happen, it will still be very serviceable; but it is found, when
well managed, to keep good and sound even to the Indies. Every sailor should
have at least a pint of cider a day, besides beer and water.

The prize wines, which are commonly low and thin, and very frequently spoil by
keeping, might be distributed among the ship's company (especially in want of
cider) to very good purpose.

The ventilators should be constantly worked, once a day at least; and the
decks frequently washed or sprinkled with vinegar. In case of stinking water,
lemon juice, elixir of vitriol, or vinegar should always be mixed with it,
which will render it much less unwholesome. A small dram of garlic brandy, or
the tincture of bark, taken in the mornings fasting, and when going on the
night watch, is a great preservation. See the next Chapter on the Preservation
of Health, etc.

Cream of tartar, being the essential vegetable salt of wine, is a very proper
succedaneum when fruit is wanting; and orange or lemon peel (or its essence)
will greatly improve the flavor: besides cream of tartar is the most grateful
of all acids, substituted in the room of the juice of lemons and oranges, and
best adapted to the constitution of mariners: it is also the cheapest; for an
allowance of the eighth part of an ounce a day will not cost the government
much more than one shilling yearly for each man, or eighteen pence at most. Two
pounds and a half of cream of tartar will be sufficient to acidulate an
hogshead of water; this, with rum and sugar, will become a salutary composition
of a cooling, strengthening, antiseptic, and diuretic nature; for there is
nothing more represses the inflammatory and intoxicating power of spirits than
acids. Such a liquor would prove infinitely more whoelsome than the grog,
wherewith the navy is commonly served when spirits are used, both in the East
and West Indies, and elsewhere.

The officers and men (that can afford it) should always carry to sea a very
considerable quantity of pickles of different kinds, particularly onions; and
preserves and extracts of all acid fruits, such as sloes, bullace, damsons,
etc. They must all be properly preserved in glass bottles or stone jars well
tied over; glazed earthen vessels are very dangerous either for preserves or
pickles.

Allowing cider, etc. to the fleet, indeed, may be deemed a very expensive
project; but where the lives of so many brave and useful people are in the
case, I think (as Dr. Huxham very humanely observed) the cost should by no
means come into competition with the advantage that may be received from it.
The Romans constantly carried with them vinegar and wine in their fleets and
armies, and the common soldier and sailor daily partook of both; nay, they were
at many other considerable expenses to preserve the health of their armies,
etc. New, if that glorious prudent people thought the life of a Roman soldier
so valuable, and were at such expense to preserve it, why should not we have as
much regard to that of a British sailor, who is altogether as brave, and as
useful to the Common wealth?

It is necessary here also to remark, that the usual method of impressing
seamen on their return from long and tedious voyages, void of necessaries,
chagrined at not seeing their friends and families, and most commonly in a bad
state of health, and not allowed time and opportunity to recover it, has been
the bane of thousands: and I most heartily wish, for the honor of the nation
and the good of the public, that a method of manning our fleet could be found
out more consistent with common humanity and British liberty; and likewise to
have it served with more wholesome provision, better beer, and a sufficient
quantity of sound generous cider on board every ship, to be used at discretion,
and as necessity required; from the foregoing remarks it is evident what
advantages would accrue from it.

RULES FOR PRESERVING HEALTH, IN WARM, AND COLD CLIMATES, BY DOCTOR LIND, and
SURGEON NORTHCOTE.
HEAT itself is not so prejudicial to Health as is generally imagined; but when
joined to moisture it is remarked, that it occasions the most fatal distempers
in all warm climates.

When a ship rides at anchor near marshy ground or swamps, and the wind blows
directly from thence in hot weather, the gun ports ought to be kept shut; and
if she rides with her head to the wind, a thick smoke sail should be constantly
kept up to the foremast, to carry up the smoke of the galley, and prevent its
coming aft over the ship: at such times the men should be injoined to smoke
tobacco, and the ship should often be fumigated with it, as well as with pitch
and tar; the method of procuring tobacco to be so used, without any additional
expense to the government, is, instead of burning the great quantities every
year seized by the costom-house and excise-officers, to order it to be
preserved, and sent to the dock yards to supply the ships destined for foreign
voyages; it may be either added to the boatswain's or carpenter's stores, in
such large quantities as may be thought convenient for the above use of
fumigating: to prevent abuse, it should never be used without the captain's
order, and always issued out by weight; it would likewise be proper that
sentinels should attend the burning it to prevent embezzlement, which
precaution in my opinion would be of infinite advantage on many occasions, and
a much more prudent way than the present method of consuming it, without the
least benefit accruing to any individual.

Boats crews and men employed on shore, being most exposed to the open air,
should be often relieved, and never suffered to sleep on shore, not even in
tents or otherwise, if to be avoided; but should always be obliged to return
and lie aboard at night: but when this cannot be complied with, and men are
obliged to remain on shore, their tents should be very close, and erected on
the dryest spot they can find, that is, upon dry sand, gravel, or chalk, near
the sea shore. The negroes, and some of the Indians on the coast of Guinea,
both of whom sleep on the ground, have constantly a fire producing a little
smoke burning in the huts where they sleep, which corrects the moisture of the
night, and renders the damp of the earth less noxious; therefore if your tent
is made on the grass, and at a distance from the seashore, it will be necessary
to observe the same rule: the door of the tent should be toward the sea, and
the back part secured by double canvas. All old forsaken houses, caves, and
such like places, should be well purified with large fires; the men should
never sleep on the ground, but in their hammocks, and be very well covered;
every morning and evening they should take a dram of the spirituous tincture of
the bark: likewise the officers and men, when on shore, should be allowed a
more plentiful, but not immoderate use of vinous liquors.

Dr. LIND says, that people coming first from a cold into a hot climate, are
apt to have plethoric symptoms (which in general I have found to be the case in
many southern voyages, with some few exceptions) a pain of the head, giddiness,
a sense of the weight, and fullness of the breast, and some are apt to be seized
with ardent fevers and diarrhoeas.

All practitioners have observed, that new comers into warm climates are at
first liable to fevers tending to the ardent kind, and are very subject to
fevers of the remitting and intermitting kind, which are the endemics of all
warm countries at certain seasons of the year; and after some time they are apt
to fall into fluxes, the yellow-fever, and oath diseases depending on a
putrescent state of the juices.

Nothing has been found to be more productive of diseases in those warm
climates, than indulging freely in the use of spirits and other strong
fermented liquors, lying on the ground, being exposed to damps and dews, and
working hard, or using violent exercise in the heat of the day.

The most dangerous diseases in intemperate climates, and voyages to the
southward, proceed from a continuance of hot, moist, close weather, or from
heavy rains, common at some seasons of the year between the Tropics; at first a
few of the men are seized with the bloody flux, which is succeeded by a
malignant fever of the remitting or intermitting kind, but most commonly it is
like a double tertian: this is epidemic between the Tropics, and is the
autumnal fever of all hot countries; the safety of the patient entirely depends
on the fever's intermitting, or at least on its remitting so much as to allow
an opportunity of throwing in the bark, which is the only sovereign remedy in
these sort of malignant fevers, though they put on different appearances.

The bark might be made extremely palatable by infusing it in spirits with
orange peel, and the billious fever and the bloody flux might be prevented by
it: four ounces of bark and two ounces of dried orange peel will be sufficient
for a gallon of spirits; and two ounces may be allowed each man a day when
there is an apprehension of these malignant diseases: it will be best to take
half in the morning on an empty stomach, and the other half when they are
called out to their night watch.

The bark is an excellent medicine for sailors on many accounts, it being the
greatest antiseptic taken inwardly of any yet discovered; but as it is a very
expensive drug in England, it is not to be supposed that ships will carry such
a quantity of it as to be of common benefit to the whole crew: though this may
unhappily be the case for the poor seamen, yet they may be supplied at the
cheapest rate with a medicine of nearly equal goodness and efficacy from our
own soil, and if prudently employed, the scurvy, that maritime pestilence, will
seldom or never make its alarming appearance among a ship's crew on long and
dangerous voyages, proper care with regard to cleanliness and provisions being
observed; the medicine here recommended to their use is the fine bark of the
English oak, which is easily preserved, and may be conveniently taken in the
quantity of a dram at a time, occasionally in powder, extract, decoction, or
tincture. In intermittents (for poor people) it has been frequently used with
success.

It is necessary to observe, that in sultry climates, or during hot weather in
all places subject to great rains, where the country is overrun by thickets,
shrubs, or woods, especially if there are marshes or stagnating waters in the
neighborhood (which are exceedingly pernicious to the health of all Europeans)
the malignant diseases abovementioned may justly be dreaded: the fens and
marshes even in England are bad for strangers.

The ship should never lie so near the shore, as that the mountains (if there
be any) may intercept the sea breezes (or in the sea term, she should never be
land locked); the same precautions are necessary in places, either during or
soon after the rainy season: in hot climates wind-sails in in the daytime
should constantly be kept up, and at sea in the night likewise; the ventilators
should be continually worked, and the lower deck ports kept open, when the
weather will permit, from sun rising to sunset; the decks must be kept clean
scraped and washed, but the latter never after sunset. When sickness begins on
board a ship, the sick should immediately be removed as much as conveniently
may be from the sound; the sick-birth should be as airy as possible, without
exposing the sick to catch cold, and always kept as clean as may be; the
sentinels over the sick should constantly empty and wash the buckets which the
sick make use of every watch.

The ship (particularly a new one) should be every day fumigated with the
steams of tar or pitch, and in wet, damp weather, fires often lighted between
decks, with proper sentinels over them to prevent any danger.

To boil vinegar between decks or in the hold fills the whole cavity of the
hull with a vapor that is salutary and antiseptic to a very great degree; and
this may perhaps be the best way of using vinegar to prevent a corruption of
the air, or the spreading of diseases; fumes of tobacco (as already mentioned)
may be employed to the same purpose with good success.

The clothes of the sick and the sick birth ought particularly to be fumigated;
their foul clothes should always be instantly sprinkled with vinegar, or tied
to a rope and plunged into the sea, to wash them from all seeds of contagion;
vinegar should also be dispersed plentifully every where through the ship,
cloths dipped in it hung up in all parts, and fresh vinegar frequently sprinkled
upon them, to keep the vapor of it continually afloat, but especially the sick
birth ought to be daily well washed with vinegar.

The use of cold bathing-tubs under the fore castle, and bathing in the sea
early in the morning, have been found extremely beneficial in hot countries,
for this practice not only braces up the fibers, and contributes to health but
cleanliness likewise, and promotes perspiration; but then the people should not
stay too long in the water, nor go in when overheated with work or liquor, nor
when the stomach is full, or there is an eruption with a prickly heat on the
skin. Diarrhoeas and other complaints, the effects of great heat, have been
cured by bathing, and their returns prevented.

Wine is the best of all cordials in the decline of fevers, (provided it is
sound and good) and is a much better restorative than rum, or any other spirits
however mixed or prepared; it is likewise an excellent means to prevent
infection; some casks of Madeira Wine (which keeps good in all climates) should
be preserved for the use of the sick in these voyages.

The swallowing large draughts of undiluted spirits has always the most fatal
consequences in every climate; but when they are converted into punch, they
become very salutary, preventing diseases which arise from hot and moist
weather, and the tendency to corruption in the animal fluids, which is
constantly induced thereby; as cleanliness alone greatly contributes to health,
it may not be amiss to propose, that when at sea, the seamen and marines should
be mustered when the separate watches are called every Sunday, and pass in
review by the officer of the watch, and those that are then dirty, having a
foul shirt, trousers, etc. shall have their allowance of liquor, whether beer,
wine, or grog, stopped for that day (by the captains order); for the second
offense to stand in the pillory on the quarter deck, and for the third, to
receive a dozen lashes at the gangway: the same notice might be taken of their
hammocks, when the captain thinks proper to have them examined; by this method
the people would always be wholesome and clean, and consequently much
healthier, for in every ship, there are a number of dirty lubbers, particularly
among the waste guard and marines; and the cooks mates and his attendants are
generally as bad as any.

I shall here only mention that when men are seized with inflammatory symptoms
on entering into warm climates, they may be blooded freely; afterward they do
not easily bear such copious evacuations, but rather require to have them made
in smaller quantities, and very early and frequent, as it flammations make a
rapid progress in warm countries.

Doctor Lind says, many practitioners disapprove of bleeding in those countries
which lie under the torrid zone, on a supposition that the blood is too much
dissolved, but he thinks (very justly) that this rule will admit of many
exceptions, and that sailors being strong and exposed to greater vicissitudes
of heat and cold, and more excesses and other accidents, bear freer bleeding in
general than any other set of people. After some time the diseases in these
warm climates tend to the putrid kind, and then must be treated as such.

In warm climates the ships are generally most healthy at sea, where the air is
dry and serene, and the heat moderated by refreshing breezes.

RULES FOR PRESERVING HEALTH, IN COLD CLIMATES.
IN northern climates and ^hannel cruizing, though the cold is intense, yet if
the air is pure and dry and the men are well clothed, there are few diseases;
but when the weather is unsettled, cloudy, wet and rainy, the usual
consequences are colds, attended with feverish and inflammatory symptoms, and
especially rheumatic, pleuritic, and peripneumonic complaints, these iast
require plentiful evacuations, but chiefly bleeding, which, when timely and
freely used, will prevent consumptions and chronic rheumatisms.

When the men are almost constantly wet and chill from bad weather, and undergo
an uncommon degree of fatigue, it will be proper to let them have the following
mixture, viz. a pint of small beer, and a quartern of brandy sweetened with
molasses, to which may be added as much vinegar as will render the mixture
palatable; or, instead of the last, cream of tartar; this the Russians call
ashbetten. Dry beds and clothing are most necessary articles; for it is
observable that the most naked ragged fellows are principally attacked with
winter diseases.

The scurvy is a disease common in the winter and spring; the method to prevent
which is already laid down in the preceding section, and to which the reader is
referred.

Dr. Lind says, the most proper cordial dram a sailor can use in the winter is
garlic brandy, for a small quantity of it, not only warms the stomach, but
keeps the breast, kidneys, and skin free from obstructions; but neither this
nor any other dram should be given to a man almost chilled to death with cold,
having his limbs quite benumbed, and their extremities frost bit (as it is
called); for, in this case, it has often proved fatal; but he should be
immediately put into a warm bed, and have some warm gruel, sage tea, or some
such diluting liquor, given him; after which a dram may be allowed, when it
will prove less dangerous, and more beneficial.

A very remarkable case to this purpose is related by Hildanus, viz. a man was
found quite stiff and frozen all over; he was put into cold water, and
immediately the icy spicula were discharged from all parts of his body, so that
he seemed covered with an icy crust; he was then put into a warm bed, took a
cordial draught, and a plentiful sweat followed; after which he recovered with
the loss of the last joints of his fingers and toes. De Gang aena, chap. XIII.

People who are benumbed with cold in frosty weather, ought never to be brought
immediately near a fire; for that has been found either to cause immediate
death, or gangrenes of the extremities. Any kind of fruit frozen, when put
immediately to the fire, will turn soft and rot; but if put into cold water, it
throws out the icy spicula, and recovers so as to be almost as good as before,
which, proves the above method used with the man to be right.

In cold rainy weather, tea made with sage, sassafras, or a few roasted juniper
berries, with the addition of a little garlic brandy, will be very beneficial;
likewise a man will never be so liable to catch cold when he is wet upon the
deck, and uses exercise, as when he is below in his wet clothes, or sleep^ in
them, or in a damp bed; when he goes upon deck he should eat a bit of biscuit,
and drink a little ashbetten, and then the weather will probably have but
little power to alter his health for the worse.

When a sailor happens to be dead drunk, his head should be raised, and a
sponge dipped in vinegar should be held to his nose; and if he can drink, he
should have warm water mixed with vinegar; bleeding will likewise be proper,
and a gentle emetic which operates speedily, such as the oxymel. scillitic. sal
vitriol. etc.

Likewise dipping the feet in cold water will take off the pressure from the
brain; and solutive clysters will abate the distension; it is but too well
known how many people lose their lives by excessive drinking, and spirituous
liquors; the same treatment will be useful after a large dose of opium.

These methods here laid down (chiefly taken from Doctor Lind) but partly from
others, I have practiced for many years in the royal navy; and with the
blessing of God it has in general been attended with great success; for which
reason I can the more strongly recommend it; if it be true, as was published in
December 1760, taken as is supposed from returns made to the House of Commons,
that of 185,000 men, raised for the sea-service during the late war, above
130,000 perished by diseases; and that two thirds of this number may be safely
charged to the account of diseases that take their rise from putrefaction;
surely every motive of policy and humanity should excite men to endeavor at
finding out somewhat to check that fatal and destructive diathesis; for if
seamen could be preserved free from it other kinds of diseases would seldom
endanger them.

FINIS.
Philadelphia, May 6th, 1776.

Shortly will be Published by ROBERT BELL, in Third Street, A NEW EDITION OF
PLAIN CONCISE PRACTICAL REMARKS, ON THE TREATMENT OF WOUNDS AND FRACTURES; TO
which is Added, An APPENDIX, ON CAMP AND MILITARY HOSPITALS; PRINCIPALLY
Designed, for the Use of young Military and Naval Surgeons in NORTH AMERICA.

By JOHN JONES, M. D. Professor of Surgery, in King's College, New York.

N. B. At said Bell's next door to St. Paul's Church in Third Street
Philadelphia; Are now selling. SIMES's MILITARY GUIDE, two volumes, in neat
bindings, price three dollars; Also, great variety of new and old BOOKS;
Likewise, all the newest political Pamphlets; Either for, or against,
INDEPENDENCY.


