EXTRACT OF A SERMON Preached at the South Church in BOSTON, November 27, 1746.
By the Rev. Mr. THOMAS PRINCE, Occasioned by the surprising Appearance of
Divine Providence for NORTH AMERICA.

In the destruction of the French fleet and army, sent to Chebucktah the
preceding summer: And reprinted at this time with a view to encourage and
animate the PEOPLE of GOD to put their TRUST in HIM, and to call upon HIS NAME,
under the severe and (...) distr^ses;es now taking place in BOSTON and
CHARLESTOWN; by the rigorous execution of The late ACT of the BRITISH
PARLIAMENT, CALLED THE BOSTON PORT-BILL.

Psalm cxiv.17. The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his
works.

Isaiah (...) 22. It is he that sits upon the circle of the Earth and all
the inhabitants thereof are as Grasshoppers.

Psalm (...) 1^. The Lord sits upon the floods, yea, the Lord sits King
forever.

Psalm (...) The Lord reigns let the People both rejoice and tremble.

Isaiah xxvi.30. Come my people enter thou into thy chambers and shut thy
doors, etc.

Joel ii.15. Blow the trumpet in Zion; sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly,
etc.

Jonah iii 9. Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his
fierce anger?

Lam. (...).5. Remember O Lord, what is come upon us, Our necks are under
persecution.

WATERTOWN: Reprinted and sold by B. EDES, near the Bridge. 1776.

Reprinted again at this time, with the same views, viz. To encourage the
people of God to put their trust in Him, and to call upon His name; -- Now that
a most formidable British fleet and army are expected soon to arrive on these
coasts, (which with those already arrived) sent by Administration to spread
fire and blood through this devoted land.
Let not him that g^^deth on his harness, boast himself as he that putreth it
off.

I. Kings, xx.11. For, we have heard with our ears. O God! our fathers have
told us what work thou did in their days, in the times of old.

Psalm, xliv.i. The Lord is a man of war.

Exodus xi.111. Therefore, let no man's heart fail because of them.

I. Sam. xvii.32. But* Be of good courage, and let us play the men for one
people and for the cities of our GOD, and the Lord do that which seems him
good.

II. Sam x.12. Extract of a SERMON, etc.
EXODUS xiv.13. -- Stand still, and see the salvation of the LORD! --


II.] OUR more near and especial dangers in North America, -- in these
particulars. --

1. In the last winter and early spring, the French with the utmost app^e (...)
^itted out at Breast and Rochfort, the greatest and most powerful armament
against these Northern Colonies, that was ever sent into North America: Having
twenty men of war* a hundred transports, about eight thousand disciplined
tro^ps with veteran officers, and vast quantities of provision, powder, ^^ot,
arms, vannon, bombs and mortars, sufficient to take the strongest places.

2. They were all under one commander of figure, duke D' Anville; a nobleman of
ability, skill and courage; who came with resolution to exert himself to his
own honor* and to the glory of his king and nation, or die in the cause: And
the whole armament and all their officers, both naval and terrene being united
under him, had a natural tendency to prevent contention, and promote the
execution of every order.

3. They (...) they had the best plans and many skilful pilots with th^^, well
acquainted with all the coasts and harbors of Newfoundland, Cape Breton,
Nova Scotia, and N^^ England; in particular of L^uisbourgh, C^nso, Jebu^ta,
Annapolis, Casco Bay, Boston, etc.

4 They came with the very exciting motives, both of resentment, policy and
necessity. -- Of resentment; for our saving Annapolis and disapp^in^ing the
French invasion there in 1744; and for our taking Louisb^urgh destroying the
fishery, block^ng up the Bay of St. L^wrence, and taking their great man of
war, and their East India and South S^a ships, in 1745: -- Of policy, to
recover their lost fortified city and harbor of Louisbourgh, their lost
opportunity by their privatee^s thence to seize our vessels, their lost fishery
with the inf^^ite profits thence arising their lost fort and harbor of
Annapolis* their lost territory of Nova Scotia, and their lost reputation both
in Europe and America* especially among the Indian savages* And lastly of
Necessity, to save their Canada with all their settlement^ and trade, in North
America; and either by taking Cape-Breton* oblige us to come to a peace and
save their encroachments in the Netherlands; or by taking Annapolis oblige us
to return C^pe Breton and to save themselves from ignominious ^^a^h or ruin, in
case they return^^ without taking the one or the other.

5. That which rendered our case more dangerous was, that we were a long while
wholly ignorant of their designs against us* and when we had them hinted we
were easy with hearing that admiral Martin was bl^cking them up, first at Breast
and then at Rochfort, and that we had a powerful fleet of men of war and
transp^rts preparing at Portsmouth in England, to come on the expedition to
Canada.

6. At length they got out of Breast and sailed to Rochfort: On June 11 they
sailed from this last port* pass^d by admiral Martin's squadron unobserved, and
he could not find what way they were gone: Yea, while they were coming toward
us admiral Lestock, with his fleet at Portsmouth, sailed seven times from
England; and was as often drove back by contrary winds 'till Mid September, when
our enemies fleet was come to Nova Scotia, and the British-ministry judging it
too late in the year, diverted their enterprise.

7. In the mean time: while duke D' Anville's fleet is coming a fatal illness
sweeps away many of our New England soldiers a^ Cape Breton: And being now
without any help from England, or any where else; if GOD had given our foes a
speedy passage, and had brought them on in health to Lou^sbourgh; they had come
there with surprise: And with their showers of bombs from twenty five mortars.
and cannon sh^t from fifty brass field pieces, it seem^ highly probable, they
would soon have taken the place. And then Placentia and St. John's in
Newfoundland, with all their fish and vessels would have been as nothing to
them. All the French and Indians in Nova Scotia, and the neighboring places
would have joined them at once, and made them ten or twelve thousand strong,
besides their seamen; Annapolis would have been soon reduced, and then their
mighty and triumphant forces, both French and Indians* both by land and sea,
would have doubtless come quick all along our Eastern shores, carried all
before them like a sweeping deluge; and where they could be stopped, and whether
this town could have baffled them GOD only knows.

8. In the mean time we are this Summer exceedingly molested with our Indian
Ene^ies (...) about, both in the and the neighboring Provinces: Murdering our
men, women, children: carrying many into a barbarous captivity; breaking up
many houses and diverse villages and new towns, destroying cattle and fields of
corn; yea s^ven hundred French and Indians destroying a fort an hundred foot
square on ou^ western borders on August 19: Reducing us to such distresses as
have not been known in the present generation; And Sep. 2. we are informed,
that about two thousand French and Indians were assembled at Menis in Nova
Scotia, in order to besiege Annapolis.

9. Our trouble is yet increased by our surprising intelligence from the six
valiant nations of Mokaw^ Indians above our western borders, who had been our
constant friends from the beginning of these Colonies: -- That the French had
made them believe, they had taken an English letter, wherein they pretend we
wrote, We intended first to subdue Canada, and then destroy the Indian Nations,
the French in Canada being the only obstacles that hinder us: Which made most
dangerous impressions on them, raised their jealous^s began an alienation,
disposed them to j^in our Enemies, and was like to lead to fatal consequences.

10 All this while we were wholly ignorant of the French ^el coming toward us
-- till at the same time, viz* Sep. ^. we had a hint in a letter from Hall in
England* of June ^4. by a ship from Newcastle, that they were (...) ship days
before, but none knew whither; S^pt 9. (...) from Liverpool was the hint above
consumed (...) many in England thought them bound for No^th ^merica About a
week after we begin to he^r a ru^our of (...) number of ships seen near Cape
S^ble Shore; but when (...) French or English, we are at a loss to guess. About
a (...) after the rumor is confirmed; but wh^^ they are (...) uncertain, 'till
Sept. 28: And then by express from g^v^rnor Kn^wles and admiral Tow^nshend at
Lou^sbourg, we are informed they are the French ^rmada* were seventy sail when
they came from France; fourteen being s^ips o^ the line from fifty to seventy
four guns, two ^^re ships with eight thousand troops on board; standing for
Je^^cta or le Have* And by a vessel from Jamaica, that the four French men of
war which had escaped com^^do^e M^ch^l near Domingo, were designed to join them.

11. And lastly, about Mid September, eight ships of the line and about forty
others arrive at Jeb^cta, the port of their rendezvous, on the south eastern
shore of Nova Scotia, one of the finest harbors of the globe; i^, which the
British nation had utterly neglected for a course of thirty years from the
peace of Utrecht, to settle one inhabitant; and in the very way to interrupt
all our fishery, and even all the trade from Great Britain, Ireland,
Newfoundland and Cap^ Breton, to the colonies on the ^^ain, and from these to
them: There they water, wood, refresh, ca^een, re^it* thence take our ships,
strike surprise and terror through the countries round about them. And thence
deserting their design of attempting Louisbourg, they set sail with all their
power toward us.

And thus, in the room of our long looked for friend^ from England to go
against Canada, there are now coming on a powerful armament of resolute
enemies; and none to prevent them or defend us against them. We look for our
powerful friends, but our e^es fail us* and we look in vain. Our case seems
like that of David, Psalm ^42 and 3. We look on our right hand and behold; but
there is no man that knows us, refuge fai^s us, no man seems to ^are for our
souls: We cry unto thee, O Lord! Thou art our refuge and portion in the land of
the living! O attend to our Cry* for we are brought very low -- we ^^retch
forth our Hands to Thee! -- hear us speedily, O Lord: -- Cause us to hear thy
Loving Kindness in the Morning, for in Th^e do we trust -- Deliver us O LORD
from our Enemies* -- We flee to Thee to hide us! And we further cried as A^p^
in Psa^m 83: Keep not thou silence* O GOD! Hold (...) thy Peace and be not
still. O GOD! For so thine Ene^^^^ (...) a Tumult and they that hate Thee lift
up the (...)* They have taken crafty Cou^cil against thy People: ^hey have
said, "Come and let us cut them off from b^ing a People, that the Name of
New England may be no more in Remembrance." O our GOD, make them as Stubble
before the Wind: As the Fire burns the Woods, and as the Flame se^te^h the
Mountains on Fire* [as we often see in America] so pers^e them with thy
Tempest, and (...) afraid with thy Storm: Fill their Faces with Sh^me; th^^
they may seek thy Name, O LORD! [or if they will not seek it] let them be
confounded and troubled forever: That Men may know, that Thou, whose Name alone
is JEHOVAH, art the most High over all the Earth, etc.

This is Part of our late dangerous Circumstances: And now, stand still and see
the Salvation of the LORD!

On two Accounts in general, though widely different* both the last Year and
this have been as remarkable as any we have seen, since the happy Accession of
the Protestant House of Hanover to the British Crown: -- The last Year, 1745*
-- for GOD's succeeding our Enterprise in a wondrous Manner, and giving us Cape
Breton; -- and This, -- for his working wonderful Salvation for us, while we
could only stand still and see them with Admiration: -- Let this be ever the
Character of 1746.

While we knew nothing of Danger, GOD beheld it, and was working Salvation for
us. And when we had none to help in America, He even prevented our Friends in
Europe from coming to succor us; that we might see our Salvation was His Work
alone, and that the Glory belongs entirely to Him.

And here are the the following Things observable --

1. That our enemies fleet were detained so long in (...) ^arbours of France,
even to the 11th of June, though ready long before: Whereby a greater Foam was
prepared for scorbuti^al Weaknesses and A^ls, before they arrived at America*
whereby they also lost the cooler Weather and more easterly Winds of the
Spring, were kept for the Calms and Heat of the Summer, their Voyage must be
lengthened, and they could not come with quite so much Surpriz^ upon us.

2. That after their getting clear from the Coast of France, they should be led
to bear so far to the Southward: Whereby they not only went from the straite^
Course, but likewise into a more rari^ed Air and calmer Latitudes, which yet
further served to lengthen their Voyage: And whereby they also went into more
sultr^ Climates, even in the hottest Months of the Summer; the Air between
decks among so great a Number so closely stowed, must be more suffocating,
putrid and nauseous* and both further weaken, and breed Diseases.

3. That partly by these Means, partly by Calms, and partly by contrary Winds*
their Voyage was so lengthened out, even to ninety Days from Rockfort, that it
wa^ the 9th of September before the forwardest of them a^rived at Jebucta.

4. That by the Means above, and it may be others, GOD was pleased to ^^sit
them with such a mortal Si^kness^ that they owned, Th^rteen Hundred died at
Se^, and most of the rest were extremely weakened, wasted and dispirited.

5. That by terrible Storms they were likewise so dispersed in the midst of the
Ocean; that by Aug. 26. they had left but twelve ships of the line and forty
one others, besides five Prizes they happened to meet with.

6. That on Sept. 2. at one at Noon, when they came near the Shoals of the Is^e
of Sables, the most dangerous Place in all their Passage, and had but three
Days Sail to Jebucta; GOD was pleased to raise against them such a violent
Storm of Wind, which held all that Day and Night: Wherein one of their
Transports was lost on the Shoals; four Ships of the Li^^ and a Transport were
seen in great distress, and never heard of after, and the rest of the fleet had
like to have run on the shoals in that terrible night, and were wholly
dispersed: Or if they had been but three days earlier, they had got to Jebucta
before the storm.

7. The weather after the storm, was so very foggy for several days, that Duke
D'Anville, their Admiral and General was obliged to lie off and on, not
venturing to approach the Nova Scotia shore; that it was Sept. 12, before he
got, with but one more ship of the line, viz. his Vice Admiral, three more men
of war and five transports, into Jebucta^ There being but one of the fleet got
in three days before him and but three more in three days after him; his Rear
Admiral with ten of the line, and all the rest yet missing. And finding his few
ships so shattered, so many men dead, so many sickly, and no more of his fleet
come in; he sunk into discouragement, and Sept. 15, died; but in such a
condition, and so much swell^d, it was generally thought h^ poisoned himself,
and was buried without any ceremony. Upon which their government fell upon the
Council of war, their union was entirely broken, and their counsels grew
divided.

8. That though after the storm, the Rear Admiral with f^e more of the line,
and twenty seven more of the fleet, besides the prizes, discovered each other
and gathered together; yet the weather being foggy and thick, they did not
arrive at Jebucta until the day after Duke D'Anville died -- or their arrival
two days sooner might have revived his spirits, and saved his life: Though they
were so exceedingly shattered and fickly, they were forced to stay and loose
their fittest time for doing us mischief, until near the midst of October.

9. That upon the death of the Duke, the Vice Admiral Estou^nell, being the
chief commander, in consideration of the deplorable case they were in, proposed
to return to France to save the rest of the men: But the council of war
opposing and voting against him, he was on Sept. 19. in the morning, found in
his apartment fallen on his sword, and the next morning died also: Whereby the
chief command devolved on the R^ar Admiral Jonquire, who with the council of
war, resolved to attack some English place in these northern parts, before they
would think of re^ing. In the mean while, they landed their men to refresh
them: And yet their sickness so prevailed, that they owned there died eleven
hundred and thirty more at Jebucta, before they left it.

10. It was also very remarkable, that while the French were so generally very
sickly, and so many constantly dying, both aboard and ashore; our English
captives, though compassionately tending upon and helping them continually,
were so universally heal^hy and strong, that the poor sickly French could not
forbear to express their wonder: Our people taken captive by them being more
merciful to them than those of their own nation. And yet the sickness spread
among our enemy Indians in Nova Scotia, and it is said carried off near half
their number.

11. In the mean time our careful Governor sends out spies and gets
intelligence -- By the help of GOD removes the jealousies of the Mohawk
Indians, renews our ancient league of friendship with them, engages them on our
side against the French Canadians -- sends companies of soldiers, who listed
volunteers for Canada, to help defend Annopo^^; Admiral Warren sends his 50 gun
ship also: And then our Governor calls in most of the regiments of this
province, to defend our capital, who come in with wondrous cheerfulness: Sends
express to Governor Knowles, and Admiral Townsend, at Louisbourg, with the
London prints, informing of Admiral Lestock's waiting for a ^air wind in
England with eighteen ships of the line, to sail ^^ither: And Octo. 6, with
advice of his Majesty's council, and at the desire of the House of
Representatives, orders Thursday the 16th a day of Fasting and Prayer through
the Province on this great occasion.

12. About October 10, the French council at Jebucta being sensible that by
dispersing storm^ and wasting sickness, they are utterly disabled for
attempting Lo^isbourg, resolved to sail and take Annapolis. And if they had
staid but one week longer they would have had a season of suitable weather for
it. But a cruizer of their's having happily taken the express above for
Louis^ourg with the London prints, informing of Admiral Lestock's expected
coming, and the master of the vessel happily forgetting to (...) his order and
throw his packets overboard; they were carried into Jebucta, and opened on the
11th early in the morning in a council of war. Upon which, surprised in the
utmost hurry, they pull down all their ten^s, burn a ^ine of battle ship, with
a snow from Carolina, a vessel from Antigua, and some fishing schooners, embark
their soldiers; order two thousand French and Indians to march from Menis to
Annapolis: -- An^ October 13, with about forty fail, twenty engineers, and
thirty pilots from near Annapolis* they came out to go round Cape Sables, and
meet them there; having wrote to the court that they determined to keep the
seas until Nov. 15* N. S. if they could not get in sooner.

13. The next day, they seat three or four of their fleet, with their sick to
France: The distemper still increasing, our captives saw them throwing their
dead out of most of their s^ips into the sea, every day after they left
Jebucta, for three days they continued with them. October 15, near the Isle of
Sables, a second time came on a great and cold storm, which scattere^ them
again: Yet the next day, getting once more together; and persevering in their
purpose, they dismissed our captives, who that night left them lying by, and
saw them no more.

14. But the same day, viz. Thursday Octo. 16, is kept the day of general
Fasting and Prayer throughout the churches in this province, on this great
emergency. And that very night ensuing, the glorious GOD entirely baffled all
their purposes, and put a total end to their mischievous enterprise. He
mightily arose, and wrought a full salvation for us. He sent a more serious
storm of wind and rain and hail, than ever -- which held to the next day noon
-- which they could not stand before -- which so dispersed and broke them, they
could never get together again: And several ships were so crazy, and weakly
ha^ded, that it is apprehended by our dismiss^d captives, who were in the same
storm, that some were overset, some others foundered and sunk in the mighty
waters And the remaining men of war in view, so shattered and di^couraged, that
they determined for the West India Islands* and sent their No^a Scotia pilots
home, with orders to the French and Indian army who had marched to Annapolis,
to leave their ^nter^ and get away. The scattered remnants, it seems most
likely, are gone back to France, abased and confounded.

In fine. It is also remarkable, that two French frigates who privately came to
Jebucta in May or June to gather the French and Indians in all the neighboring
Countries, and raised their mighty Expectations; should ^ail from thence a
little before the fleet's arrival: -- That the four large men of war who
escaped Commodore Mitchel near Domingo, and sailed to the Gape Sable shore, in
full expectation of finding them; but surprised to hear nothing of them and in
growing late in the year, should sail away but a few days before the Duke's
arrival, and entirely miss them: -- And that a few days after the fleet sailed
from Jebucta, arrived there two more men of war from France, with absolute
orders to take Annapolis, and not presume to return without it: And being told
they were gone for the purpose, made haste after them: But arriving thither,
and instead of the triumphing fleet and army, the Menis pilots returning with
the dreadful tidings, and our men of war there going to attack them; confounded
also, they hastened away.

Thus, when on our solemn day of general Prayer we expressly cried to the LORD,
as in Psalm. lxviii.1.2. Let GOD arise, let his enemies be scattered; let them
that hate him flee before him: As smoke is driven away, so drive thou them
away: As wax melts before the fire. so let the (inveterate) wicked perish at
the presence of God! -- When notwithstanding all the displays of his anger
against them* he see them set upon mischief: -- And when he looked, and there
was none to help us, and he wondered there was none to uphold us: -- Then his
arm brought salvation to us, and his fury upheld him: He trod down our enemies
in his anger, he made them drunk in his fury, and he brought down their
strength to the earth Terrors took hold on them as Waters: -- A tempest bore
them away in the night -- The east wind carried them away and they departed:
And with a storm he hurled them out of their place.

The sorrows of death encompassed us, and the flood^ of ungodly men made us
afraid: In our distress we called upon the LORD, and cried to our GOD. He h^^rd
our voice out of his temple, and our cry came before him, even into his ears.
Then he bowed the Heaven^ and came down, and darkness was under his feet* H^
rode on a cherub, and did fly; yea, he did fly on the wings of the wind: He
made darkness his secret place; his pavilion round about him were dark waters
and thick clouds of the skies: Yea, he sent out his arrows and scattered them:
Then the channels of waters were seen, and the foundations of the world were
discovered; at thy rebuke, O LORD, at the blast of the breath of thy nostrils!

Before him went the pestilence, and burning coals of diseases went forth at
his feet: He stood and measured the earth; he beh^ld and drove asunder the
nations. I saw the Tents of Cushon in affliction, and the cu^tains of the land
of Midian did tremble. Was thy wrath against the sea, that thou did ride upon
thy horses? But thy chariots were salvation! The mountains saw thee and they
trembled: The overflowing of the water passed by: The deep uttered his voice,
and lift up his hands on high! Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy
people: Thou woundedst the head out of the house of the wicked: They came out
as a whirlwind to scatter us: Their rejoicing was to devour the poor: Thou
did walk through the sea with thine horses, through the heap of great waters!
When we heard, our belly trembled; our ^ips quivered at the noise, rottenness
entered into our bones; and we trembled in ourselves, that we might rest in the
day of trouble, when they were coming to the people, to invade us with their
troops

The French officers told one of our masters -- that when they came from
Rochfort, they were ninety seven sail, thirty of which were men of war: That
they had forty thousand arms with proportionable ammunition and blankets for
the Indians; and the master saw above a hundred chests of arms with a great
quantity of lead landed out of one ship of thirty guns which took him: That
there were seven thousand North American French and Indians to join them: That
upon their taking Annapolis, they expected righteo^ French ships of the line,
and seventy two Spanish men of war would be sent early in the spring to join
the fleet on these coasts; which was a matter generally believed and depended
upon among them: That they were resolved to destroy the frontier settlements of
the English Colonies, and had a great depend^nce on getting a strong footing on
this part of the North American Continent.

But how do the heathen ^age, and the people imagine a vain thing! The kings of
the earth ^et themselves, and the rulers take couns^l together. He that s^^s in
the Heavens has them in de^ision. He disappoints the devices of the crafty, so
that their hands cannot perform their enterprise: H^ takes the wise in their
own craftiness, and the counsel of the froward is carried he^d long. Yea, he
speaks to them in his wrath, and vexes them in his sore displeasure: He
breaks them in pieces as with a rod of iron: He dashes them in pieces like a
potter's vessel. But he saves the poor from the sword, from their mouth, and
from the hand of the mighty. Be wise therefore, O ye kings: Be instructed ye
judges of the earth: Serve the LORD with fe^r, and rejoice with trembling*
Submit to the SON of GOD; least he be angry, and ye perish: When his wrath is
kindled but a little, blessed are they that put their trust in him.

But we will sing to the LORD; for he has triumphed gloriously: He has thrown
our enemies into the sea. The LORD is our strength and song, and he is bec^me
our salvation: He is our GOD, and we will prepare him an habitation in the
highest room of our souls: our fathers GOD, and we will exalt him: The LORD is
a man of war, JEHOVAH is his name. Our enemies hosts he has brok^ in the sea:
With the blast of thy nostrils, the waters were gathered together; the floods
stood upright as an heap; Thou did blow with thy wind; the sea covered them,
they sank as lead in mighty waters.

But the LORD is our light and strength, our shield and our Salvation. We will
extol thee O God! For thou have lifted (...), and not made our fo^s to rejoice
over us. In our time of trouble, we cried to thee; and thou have sent from
Heaven and saved us from those who would have swallowed (...) have pu^ them to
shame that hated us. Thou h^^t (...) our mo^^ning into Dancing: Thou have put
off our sackloth, and girded us with gladness; that our glory may sing praise
to thee and not be silent: O LORD our GOD; We will give thanks to thee, and
praise thy name forever.

Yea, we will praise thee, O LORD among the people: We will sing to thee among
the nations. Be thou exalted, O GOD above the Heavens: Let thy glory be above
all the earth* Sing unto GOD ye kingdoms of the earth: O sing praises unto the
Lord; -- to him that rides upon the Heavens of Heavens; ascribe ye strength
unto him: His excellency is over Israel, his strength is in the clouds. Let the
Heavens and earth praise him, the seas, and every thing that moves therein: Let
the sea roar, and the fullness thereof: Let the fl^ods clap their hands: Let the
hills be joyful together before the LORD; for he comes to judge the Earth;
with righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people with equity.

SINCE the above was sent to the press, GOD has in a most surprising manner
displayed his Divine Sovereignty in delivering the capital of the Colony out of
the hands of our enemies.

This is the Lord's doing, and it is wondrous in our eyes.

Thine arm, O Lord! is become glorious in power.

Not unto us, not unto us O Lord! but to thy name be the glory.

May the Inhabitants of Boston, sing in the ways of the Lord, and glorify his
name; -- while the Inhabitants of Charlestown are waiting and hoping for that
relief from their Country, which shall enable them to re-build their town.

March 20, 1776.

