EXTRACTS FROM THE JOURNALS OF THE PROVINCIAL CONGRESS OF SOUTH CAROLINA. Held
at Charlestown, February 1st, 1776.

PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE CONGRESS.

SOUTH CAROLINA: CHARLESTOWN, Printed by PETER TIMOTHY, M,DCC,LXXVI.

At the Second Session of the Second PROVINCIAL CONGRESS of South Carolina,
begun and holden at Charlestown, on Thursday the 1st of February, 1776.
The Honorable Captain WILLIAM-HENRY DRAYTON, as President, Having taken the
Chair, AND the bad weather having prevented the attendance of a sufficient
number of members to proceed upon business, Mr. President adjourned the
Congress to ten o'clock tomorrow morning.

In CONGRESS. FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 2, 1776.
The Congress met according to adjournment.

The resolution of a Committee for a district between Broad and Enoree rivers,
appointing John Thomas, jun. Esquire to be an additional representative for that
district, being presented, as a return, and read:

RESOLVED, That, upon examining the said resolution, it appears, that the said
John Thomas, jun. has not been so elected, as to entitle him to a seat in the
present Congress.

ORDERED, That the Committee for the lower district in the Fork between Broad
and Saludy rivers, not having yet returned any members to represent the same in
the present Congress, do cause three members to be elected, in the usual form
and manner, and after due notice given, as enjoined by a resolution of this
Congress of the 29th of November last.

The Honorable Henry Middleton and John Rutledge, Esqrs. two of the Delegates
of this colony to the Continental Congress, being lately returned from
Philadelphia, and being in their places as members of this Congress, presented
a manuscript copy of the journals of the present session of the Continental
Congress.

RESOLVED, That the journals of the present session of the Continental
Congress, presented by the Hon. Mr. Middleton and Mr. Rutledge, be read in this
Congress.

And the journals of the Continental Congress were read accordingly, from the
10th day of May 1775, to the 29th day of June following, inclusive.

RESOLVED, That this Congress do sit, to do business, from nine o'clock in the
morning to three in the afternoon, every day.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 3, 1776.
The Congress met,

And yesterday's journal was read.

Mr. Harrington having delivered in a special return, of this date, addressed
to the President of the Congress, which was read, and is as follows:

SIR,
CLAUDIUS PEGUES, Esquire one of the six deputies duly elected to represent the
parish of St. David in Congress, signified by letter, addressed to the
Committee of the said parish, that he declined serving the said parish in
Congress: He delivered the letter to me, to lay before the Committee, who were
not to meet till the 19th of last month; and as the Congress were to sit on the
1st instant, I, as churchwarden, and not recollecting the resolve of the last
Congress relative to elections, advertised the 23d of January, as a day of
election for a deputy to Congress, instead of Mr. Pegues, when it appeared that
William-Henry Mills had a majority of votes, of which I acquainted him by
letter.

I am, Sir, Your most obedient humble Servant, HENRY-WILLIAM HARRINGTON.
Charlestown, February 2, 1776.

RESOLVED, That a member of Congress cannot resign his seat, during the
continuance of the Congress in which he took his seat as a member; and
therefore as Claudius Pegues, Esquire could not decline his seat in the present
Congress, the election of William-Henry Mills, Esquire as a member of Congress, in
the room of Claudius Pegues, Esquire was null and void.

ORDERED, That for the more expeditious publication of the proceedings of
Congress, Col. Laurens, Mr. Be, and Mr. Thomas Heyward, jun. be a Committee to
extract from the journals, and send to the press from day to day, such parts
thereof as are proper to be made public; and to cause a sufficient number of
copies to be printed for the use of the members.

Col. Laurens, President of the Council of Safety, reported, That a packet of
very interesting intelligence, had this morning been received by that Board, by
express from Philadelphia, which they were ready to lay before the Congress, if
it should be their pleasure.

ORDERED, That the contents of the said packet be immediately laid before the
Congress and read.

The following were accordingly read, viz.

Letter from the Delegates of this colony in the Continental Congress, dated
Philadelphia, January 2, 1776 -- enclosing the following copies of intercepted
letters, certified by Charles Thomson, Secretary to the said Congress:

From Lord William Campbell, Governor of this colony, to General Gage, in
Boston, dated Rebellion-Road, September 20, 1775.

From John Moultrie, Esquire Lieutenant Governor of East-Florida, to Col. James
Grant, in Boston, dated St. Augustine, October 4, 1775.

From Frederick-George Mulcaster, Esquire Engineer at St. Augustine, to Col. Grant,
containing a draught of this harbor, and plan of this town, with references
and remarks, dated St. Augustine, October 3, 1775.

Two from John Stuart, Esquire the King's Superintendant of Indian affairs in the
Southern district of North America* both addressed to General Gage, and dated
St. Augustine, October 3, 1775 -- one of them enclosing copy of a talk from the
Cherokee Indians, to Alexander Cameron, Esquire one of Mr. Stuart 's Deputies,
delivered at Chote, August 8, 1775.

From Major Jonathan Furlong, to General Gage, dated St. Augustine, October 5,
1775.

Extract from Patrick Tonyn, Esquire Governor of East-Florida, to General Gage,
dated St. Augustine, Sept. 14, 1775.

Extract from Frederick-George Mulcaster, Esquire to Colonel Grant, dated St.
Augustine, Sept. 29, 1775.

The originals having been taken, by Captain Manley, of the Continental armed
scooner Lee, within a few hours sail of Boston, in a sloop that was, at the
same time, conveying Moses Kirkland to General Gage, after having first carried
him to Lord Dunmore, in Virginia.

RESOLVED, That it is expedient and necessary, that the lady and daughter of
John Stuart, Esquire be restrained from absenting themselves from his house in
Charlestown.

ORDERED, That proper guards be immediately placed, and continued, about the
house of the said John Stuart, to prevent such absenting; and that Col.
Moultrie do place guards accordingly.

ORDERED, That Capt. William Cattle, and Capt. Benjamin Huger, two members of
this Congress, do wait on Mrs. Stuart, previous to the placing guards as
aforesaid, and acquaint her of the order.

RESOLVED, That no property whatever of the Hon. John Stuart, the King's
Superintendant of Indian affairs for the Southern district of North America, or
of his brother Henry Stuart, lying or being in any parish or district within
this colony, be removed from thence upon any pretense.

ORDERED, That the Committees in such parishes or districts repectively, where
such property may be, do take the most effectual measures to prevent any
removal thereof.

ORDERED, That Col. Powell, and Col. Richardson, be desired to make inquiry
what men from their respective regiments of militia, and from such other
country militia as are now in town, are willing to engage to remain here on pay
for a given time.

ORDERED, That the Secretary do now proceed in reading the journals of the
Continental Congress.

And the said journals were read accordingly to the 19th of July, 1775,
inclusive.

Adjourned to Monday nine o'clock.

In CONGRESS. MONDAY, FEBRUARY 5, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of Saturday was read.

Capt. Benjamin Huger reported, that he, with Capt. Cattle, had on Saturday,
agreeable to order, waited on Mrs. Stuart, and her daughter Mrs. Fenwicke, and
acquainted them with the order of Congress respecting their persons. That Mr.
Fenwicke requested, it might be represented to the Congress, that as his wife
was in an ill state of health, and required air and exercise, he might have
permission to remove her into the country; and that he would be answerable for
her appearance at any time, agreeable to the order of Congress or Council of
Safety: And that Mrs. Stuart also requested of the Congress, permission to
accompany her daughter to John's Island.

RESOLVED, That Mr. Fenwicke have leave to take his wife into the country; he
being answerable, that she shall not depart the colony, and for her appearance
at any time, agreeable to the order of Congress or Council of Safety.

ORDERED, That no person whatever be suffered to visit Mrs. Stuart, without
leave from Col. Moultrie, or the commanding officer for the time being,
signified by an introduction by an officer appointed by him for that purpose:
And that if Mrs. Stuart shall at any time have occasion to go abroad, with the
permission of Col. Moultrie, or the commanding officer for the time being, she
shall do so, attended by an officer to be appointed for that purpose.

ORDERED, That the Secretary do proceed in reading the journals of the
Continental Congress,

And the said journals were read accordingly, to the 18th day of October last,
inclusive.

Col. Powell, and Col. Richardson, reported, That having made some inquiry,
they were of opinion, that one hundred and fifty men from each of their
regiments, may be induced to remain in Charlestown for the term of one month
ensuing, provided proper care be taken of their horses.

ORDERED, That a return be made, as soon as may be, of all the country militia
now in Charlestown.

The following letter was written to the Committees of the parishes of St.
Bartholomew and St. Helena, and of Charlestown respectively:

By Authority of Congress. To the Committee for the parish of
GENTLEMEN,
I Have the honor to transmit to you a resolution of Congress, respecting the
estates and property of John Stuart and Henry Stuart; which without doubt you
will cause to be duly observed: And that you may be at no loss, in what manner
to proceed, I do also signify to you, that it is the sense of the Congress,
that, if you shall be of opinion you cannot prevent the removal of any part of
the property to be restrained, but by taking such part into your custody, you
ought, on the part of the public, to take such part into your custody, and to
acquaint the Congress or Council of Safety thereof.

I have the honor to be, Gentlemen, Your most humble Servant, WILLIAM-HENRY
DRAYTON, President.
Charlestown, Feb. 5, 1776.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 6, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

RESOLVED, That the Council of Safety do forthwith cause the Marsh and
Hog-Island creek channels, in Charlestown harbor, to be so effectually
stopped* as to prevent the passage of ships of war through either. And that
they do also cause such landmarks as they shall think proper, to be so removed
or disguised, as to render the passage over the bar as difficult as possible.

RESOLVED, That three thousand bills, each of the denomination of fifty pounds,
be stamped and signed, in lieu of thirty thousand bills, each of the
denomination of five pounds, heretofore resolved to have been stamped and
signed.

ORDERED, That the commissioners formerly appointed, do cause the said three
thousand bills, each of the denomination of fifty pounds, to be stamped,
signed, and lodged in the Colony Treasury, with all possible dispatch.

The letter from Major Williamson, of the 29th past, read in Congress on the 3d
inst. the consideration whereof had been postponed, was now again read.

And the following resolution and orders were passed in consequence thereof:

RESOLVED, That Patrick Cunningham, Hugh Brown, and Thomas Edghill, now in
custody of Major Williamson, be forthwith sent to Charlestown, to be committed
to the common goal. That John York, Major Joseph Robinson, Capt. Hendricks,
Henry O'Neal, and Euan M'Laur^n, be also sent to Charlestown, as soon as they
can be taken and secured: and that Andrew Cunningham, John Evans, and William
Evans, also in the custody of Major Williamson, may be discharged.

ORDERED, That Col. Thomas do take proper measures for apprehending and
securing John York abovementioned.

ORDERED, That a letter be written to Major Williamson, transmitting to him the
resolutions of Congress, respecting the prisoners at Fort Charlotte; and
ordering, that he do suspend the disarming the insurgents, until the Congress
shall make further order thereon.

ORDERED, That Mr. Arthur Middleton, Major Pinckney, Col. Richardson, Major
Mayson, Mr. Salvador, Mr. Rapley, Colonel Gervais, Colonel Thomas, and Mr.
Woods, be, and they are hereby appointed, a Committee, to enquire into the
state of the interior parts of the colony lately in commotion; to consider what
measures are proper to be pursued, to preserve the peace and secure the safety,
and to prevent future commotions therein; and also to consider of the cases of
the state prisoners, and to report what measures might be pursued with respect
to them.

RESOLVED, That Col. Powell, and Col Richardson, do retain such of the men of
their respective regiments now in town, and who may hereafter arrive, as are or
shall be willing to remain on duty here for one month respectively. That they
do discharge the remainder of their detachments. And that the horses of such as
shall so stay be sent home, and brought back, at the charge of the public.

RESOLVED, That a sum not exceeding twenty thousand pounds currency, be
forthwith placed in the hands of Col. Richard Richardson, to be by him applied,
to discharge the pay due to such of the men under his command, who were with
him on the late expedition, as stand most immediately in need thereof.

And a warrant was issued accordingly.

ORDERED, That all the absent members be summoned to attend their duty in
Congress.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 7, 1776.
The Congress met,

And the journal of yesterday was read.

Capt. Robert Patton, who had in August last been elected a member of Congress,
for the district eastward of Wateree river, and in whose absence Mr. George
Douglas was chosen to serve during the last session as a provisional
representative, as stated in the proceedings of the 3d of November last, now
attending, to take his seat.

ORDERED, That Capt. Robert Patton do take his seat, in the room of Mr. Douglas.

RESOLVED, That the expenses of the horses belonging to the foot militia, now
in Charlestown, since their arrival, be defrayed by the public.

RESOLVED, That in lieu of making provision in future for the horses of
detachments ordered to march on the public service, provision shall be made for
wagons and carts, for the conveyance of the necessary baggage of such
detachments, while in actual service.

A motion was made, that no member of this Congress shall, in future, be
allowed to speak more than twice upon one question.

After some debate,

The question being put,

The Congress divided,

The yeas went forth, Yeas 53 Nays 49


Teller for the yeas, Col. Pinckney.

Teller for the nays, Capt. William Cattle.

So that it was resolved in the affirmative.

RESOLVED, That every member of Congress, who shall hereafter fail to give his
attendance at the hour of adjournment, shall be subject to a fine of twenty
shillings currency.

RESOLVED, That Mr. Peter Bounetheau be, and he is hereby, appointed cashier to
this Congress.

ORDERED, That the Secretary do proceed in reading the journals of the
Continental Congress.

And the same were read accordingly to the end of the manuscript.

RESOLVED, That the absence of the members of Congress, who are officers of the
militia in Granville County, and actually upon duty, be excused.

Mr. President reported the following letter, which he had written by order:

By Authority of Congress. To Major ANDREW WILLIAMSON.
Charlestown, February 6, 1776. SIR,
I Transmit to you the determinations of Congress this day, relative to the
prisoners at Fort Charlotte, which I make no doubt you will, without delay,
endeavor to execute.

The Congress mean to take the most effectual measures to settle the state of
the interior country, and to prevent, if it be possible, any future commotions
there: For this purpose, a Committee is appointed, to form a plan of proper
measures: And, in the mean time, you are ordered to suspend the disarming the
insurgents, until further order shall be made therein.

I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most humble Servant, WILLIAM-HENRY DRAYTON,
President.


RESOLVED, That the members of the present Council of Safety, be a Committee to
take into consideration the number of forces necessary to be raised, and kept
in pay, for the service of this colony -- and the resolution of the Continental
Congress of the 4th day of November last, relative thereto.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 8, 1776.
The Congress met,

And the journal of yesterday was read.

RESOLVED, That Mr. President do signify the approbation of this Congress, and
present their thanks, to the Hon. Henry Middleton, and John Rutledge, Esqrs.
now present in Congress, and to the other Delegates of this colony at
Philadelphia, for their important services in the American Congress.

Mr. President accordingly addressed himself to the Hon. Mr. Middleton, and Mr.
Rutledge, in nearly the words following:

GENTLEMEN,
When the hand of tyranny, armed in bostile manner, was extended from
Great Britain to spoil America of whatever she held most valuable; it was, for
the most important purposes, that the good people of this colony delegated you,
to represent them in the Continental Congress at Philadelphia. -- It became
your business to ascertain the rights of America -- to point out her violated
franchises -- to make humble representation to the King for redress -- and --
he being deaf to the cries of his American subjects -- to appeal to the King of
Kings, for the recovery of the rights of an infant people, by the Majesty of
Heaven formed for future empire.

In this most important business, you engaged, as became good citizens; and,
step by step, you deliberately advanced through it, with a regret and sorrow,
and with a resolution and conduct, that bear all the characters of ancient
magnanimity. Your constituents, with a steady eye, beheld your progress. --
They saw the American claim of rights -- the association for the recovery of
American franchises -- and the humble petition to the King, for redress of
grievances. -- They saw the American appeal to the King of Kings; and, a second
humble petition to the British Monarch -- alas! -- as unavailing as the first.
-- They have also seen the establishment of an American naval force -- a
treasury -- (...) general post office -- and the laying on a continental
embargo: -- In short, they have seen permission granted, to colonies, to erect
forms of government, independent of, and in opposition to, the regal authority.

Your country saw all these proceedings, the work of a body of which you were
and are members -- proceedings arising from dire necessity, and not from choice
-- proceedings that are the natural consequences of the present inauspicious
reign -- proceedings just in themselves -- and which, notwithstanding the late
declarations of the corrupt houses of parliament -- the proclamation at the
court of St. James's, on the 23d of August -- and the subsequent royal speech
in parliament, are exactly as far distant from treason and rebellion, as stands
the glorious revolution which deprived a tyrant of his kingdoms -- and elevated
the house of Brunswick to royalty.

Worthy Delegates! It is the judgment of your country, that your conduct, of
which I have just marked the grand lines, in the American Congress, is
justifiable before God and man, and that, whatever may be the issue of this
unlooked-for defensive civil war, in which, unfortunately, though gloriously,
we are engaged -- whether independence or slavery, -- all the blood, and all
the guilt, must be imputed to British, not to American counsels. Hence your
constituents, sensible of the propriety of your conduct, and of the benefits,
which, with the blessing of the Almighty, it is calculated to shed upon
America, have constituted me, their instrument, as well to signify to you their
approbation, as to present to you their thanks: and it is in the discharge of
these duties, that I now have the honor to address you.

In an important crisis like the present, to receive the public thanks of a
free people, is to receive the most honorable recompense for past services --
and to deserve such thanks, is to be truly great. I know that it is with pain,
such men hear their commendations. -- Gentlemen, with the public recompense, I
mean to pay in to you, my mite also; and lest I wound your delicacy, when I
mean only to do justice to your merit, I forbear to particularize, what is
already well known: I therefore confine myself; and I do most respectfully, in
the name of the Congress, present to you, and to each of you, the thanks of
your country, for your important services, in the American Congress, at
Philadelphia.

Col. John Lisle, elected one of the representatives for the district between
Broad and Saludy Rivers, not having taken his seat during the late session, now
attended, and declined serving.

A return was made of the following gentlemen as duly elected members of the
present Congress, in the upper part of the district between Broad and Saludy
Rivers, viz. Capt. John Caldwell, James Williams, John Williams, Jonathan
Downs, John Rogers, John Lindsey, and John Caldwell, of Enoree, Esqrs.

And Messrs. John Williams and James Williams attending to take their seats.

ORDERED, That they do take their seats in Congress accordingly.

RESOLVED, That the Rev. Mr. Tennent, Mr. Prince, Col. Thomas, Col. Wofford,
Mr. John Williams, Mr. James Williams, and Mr. Jonas Beard, be, and they are
hereby, appointed a Committee, to consider and report a proper division of the
extensive district between Broad and Saludy Rivers, into three, and the number
of members each division ought to have in Congress, to constitute a full
representation.

RESOLVED, That the Committee appointed to inquire into the state of the
interior parts of the colony, be authorized and empowered to send for persons,
papers and records; and that such members of Congress who choose so to do, may
attend and give their opinions.

Mr. Edwards, from the Committee to whom the petition of the congregation of
Particular Baptists in Charlestown, had been referred, delivered in a report.

And the said report being taken into immediate consideration.

ORDERED, That James Brisbane be sent for to Charlestown, to do justice to the
petitioners.

RESOLVED, That the present members of the Council of Safety, together with Mr.
President of the Congress, Col. Powell and Major Pinckney, be, and they are
hereby, appointed a Committee, to take into consideration the following
resolution of the Continental Congress, of the 4th of November last, viz.

RESOLVED, That if the Convention of SouthCarolina, shall find it necessary to
establish a form of government in that colony, it be recommended to said
Convention, to call a full and free representation of the people; and that the
said Representatives, if they think it necessary, establish such form of
government, as, in their judgment, will best produce the happiness of the
people, and most effectually secure peace and good order in the colony, during
the continuance of the present dispute between Great Britain and the colonies.

RESOLVED, That this Congress will make provision for defraying the necessary
expenses of wagon hire, incurred on the late expedition under Col. Richardson.

Adjourned to eleven o'clock tomorrow

In CONGRESS. FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 9, 1776.
The Congress met,

And the journal of yesterday was read.

Col. Christopher Gadsden, one of the Delegates from this colony to the
Continental Congress, having arrived last night, and being present in his
place, as a member of this Congress, for Charlestown.

RESOLVED, That the approbation of this Congress be signified to Col, Gadsden,
for his conduct, and their thanks returned to him, for the important services
he has rendered to his country, in the American Congress.

Mr. President signified the approbation, and returned the thanks, of this
Congress, to Col. Gadsden, accordingly.

RESOLVED, That Col. Gadsden be added, to the Committee appointed on the 7th
Inst. to take into consideration, the number of forces necessary to be raised
and kept in pay for the service of this colony, and the resolution of the
Continental Congress relative thereto of the 4th of November last; and also, to
the Committee appointed yesterday, to consider the resolve and recommendation
of the said Congress, respecting a form of government.

The Rev. Mr. Tennent, from the Committee to consider of a proper division of
the distirict between Broad and Saludy rivers, etc. delivered in their report.

And the said report being taken into immediate consideration, the Congress
came to the following resolution thereupon:

RESOLVED, That the district heretofore described between Broad and Saludy
Rivers, be now divided into three, as well for the convenience of electors of
members of Congress, as on account of the happy influence which it may have
upon the peace and union of the inhabitants. That the LOWER DISTRICT, commonly
called the Dutch Fork, shall have the following boundaries, viz. from the Fork
where Broad and Saludy Rivers meet, up Broad River to where Tiger River falls
into Broad River; thence up said Tiger River, to the ford crossed by the old
Saludy road; thence along the said road to where it crosses Saludy, at the
place usually called Saludy Old Town; thence down to the confluence of Saludy
and Broad Rivers: And that the election of Members of Congress for the said
District, be held at the Meetinghouse nearest to the house of Adam Summers. That
the LITTLE RIVER DISTRICT be bounded as follows: By Saludy River, from Saludy
Old Town, to where the said river crosses the Indian Line; by the said Indian
Line, to where it is crossed by Enoree River; thence down Enoree, to the road
above described, which bounds the lower district: The election to be held at
Hammond's Old Store. That the UPPER, or SPARTAN DISTRICT, be bounded by Tiger
River, from its confluence with Broad River, up to where the said Tiger River
is crossed by the old Saludy Road; thence by the said road to where it crosses
Enoree; thence by the said Enoree River, to the Indian Line: thence by the
Indian Line to the Colony Line; thence by the Colony Line to where it
intersects Brond-river, thence by Broad-river to its confluence with Tiger: The
place of election to be at the Meeting House, near the house of Joseph Kelsey.
And that the said districts, as now divided. be allowed, and do respectively
elect four members of Congress, as their representatives.

ORDERED, That the above resolution be forthwith printed in hand-bills, and
made public.

Col. Gadsden presented to the Congress an elegant standard, such as is to be
used by the commander in chief of the American navy; being a yellow field. with
a lively representation of a rattle-snake in the middle, in the attitude of
going to strike, and these words underneath, " DON'T TREAD ON ME!"

ORDERED, That the said standard be carefully preserved, and suspended in the
Congress room.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 10, 1776.
The Congress met,

And yesterday's journal was read.

Col. Laurens, from the Committee, to whom was referred the resolution of the
Continental Congress of the 4th of November last, respecting a form of
government, reported.

RESOLVED, That the said report be now taken under consideration, by a
Committee of the whole.

The Congress accordingly resolved itself into a Committee of the whole.

After some time spent therein, Mr. President resumed the Chair,

And the Rev. Mr. Tennent, from the Committee of the whole, reported, That they
had gone through the report referred to them, and agreed to the same, without
any alteration, to wit,

"That in their opinion, the present mode of conducting public affairs, is
inadequate to the well governing the good people of this colony: That many
regulations are wanting, for securing peace and good order, during the unhappy
disputes between Great Britain and the colonies: And that the Congress should
immediately take under consideration, what regulations are necessary for these
good purposes."

RESOLVED, That the said report be taken into consideration tomorrow.

RESOLVED, That the Council of Safety be authorized to order payment of
constables fees employed in the public service.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

The Rev. Mr. Tennent, having performed Divine Service, received the thanks of
the Congress.

The Congress then proceeded upon the order of the day.

And the report of the Committee of the whole, being gone through, the same was
unanimously agreed to.

RESOLVED, That a Committee of eleven members, be chosen by ballot, to prepare
and report, to this Congress, such a plan or form of government, as will best
produce the happiness of the people, and most effectually secure peace and good
order in the colony, during the continuance of the present dispute between
Great Britain and the colonies.

RESOLVED, That the ballots of the members, for the said Committee, be received
at five o'clock this afternoon.

Adjourned to five o'clock in the afternoon.

In CONGRESS. SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 1776, P. M.
The Congress met.

The Congress then proceeded to ballot, for the members of the Committee, to
prepare a plan or form of government.

And the following gentlemen were, by Mr President, declared duly elected, by a
majority of votes, viz. Major Charles-Cotesworth Pinckney, John Rutledge, Esquire
Col. Charles Pinckney, Col. Henry Laurens, Col. Christopher Gadsden, Hon.
Rawlins Lownde^, Arthur Middleton, Esquire Hon. Henry Middleton, Thomas Be, Esquire
Thomas Lynch, jun. Esquire Thomas Heyward, jun. Esquire.


Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. MONDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

RESOLVED, That no guns be fired in or about Charlestown, without permission
from the proper officers; and that public notice hereof be immediately given.

RESOLVED, That whosoever shall presume to violate the above Resolution, shall
be subject and liable to a fine of five pounds current money, for every gun so
fired; to be recovered before any three members of the Charlestown Committee,
two of whom shall be a quorum.

ORDERED, That the Secretary do cause the above resolutions to be forthwith
printed, and made public, in hand bills, and by beat of drum.

ORDERED, That the Rev. Mr. Tennent, Col. Fuller, Capt. Shubrick, Capt. Lynch,
and Capt. Harrington, be a Committee, to consider and report the best method
for promoting the manufactory of salt petre in this colony.

ORDERED, That Richard Rapley, Esquire be a commissioner, for stamping and signing
the money issued by resolution of Congress, of the 14th of June last, in the
room of Theodore Gaillard, jun. Esquire.

ORDERED, That Capt. Roger Smith, Mr. Edwards, Capt. Gillon, Mr. Kershaw, Mr.
Hall, Capt. Harrington, Mr. Corbett, Col, Gervais, and Mr. Dupont, be a
Committee, to inquire and report the quantity of flour now in the colony; how
much will be requisite for the subsistence of the inhabitants and troops; and
to consider and report proper ways and means for supplying the colony with
salt, sugar, rum, and other necessaries of life, at reasonable rates; and also
the causes of, and remedies for, the present impositions upon the public, in
the high advance in price upon the necessaries of life, and all kinds of
commodities and labor.

Read a continuation of the proceedings of the Continental Congress, presented
by Col. Gadsden, to the time of his leaving Philadelphia.

ORDERED, That Col. Gadsden, Capt. Shubrick, and Capt. Gillon, be a Committee
to examine a ship now on the stocks, at Capt. Cochran's; and to report whether,
it is a proper vessel to be purchased and armed in the colony service.

RESOLVED, That every member of Congress be entitled, during the present
session, for his actual attendance therein, on the service of the colony, to
the allowance of forty shillings currency per diem; upon application to the
Treasurers during the sitting thereof, or within three days after.

RESOLVED, That every member of Congress, who shall, during the present
Session, absent himself from the service thereof, without leave first had and
obtained, shall be sent for at his own expense.

Adjourned to eleven o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 13, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

A petition of Henry Aitkin, master of the ship Port-Henderson, and Nathaniel
Russell, of Charlestown, merchant, was presented and read.

ORDERED, That the said petition be taken into consideration tomorrow.

RESOLVED, That Mr. President do issue his warrant, for immediately committing
to Charlestown goal, the body of William Guest, charged with practices,
inimical to, and destructive of, the peace of this colony.

And a warrant was issued accordingly.

ORDERED, That Mr. De Saussure, Col. Gervais, and Mr. Salvador, be a Committee
to extract such parts, as they shall judge proper to be made generally known,
from the intercepted letters lately taken from Moses Kirkland, and laid before
this Congress on the 3d inst. and also from a letter formerly written by John
Stuart, Esquire to the Committee of Intelligence, dated (...) 1775. And that the
Secretary do cause copies of such extracts, certified by him, to be forwith
printed and published.

RESOLVED, That the Council of Safety be authorized to pay to Capt. Thomas
Brandon, all reasonable charges, for having apprehended and brought to
Charlestown, persons taken in criminal practices; and also to order payment of
reasonable charges for other similar services.

Adjourned to ten o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

The Congress being informed, that Joseph Woods, Esquire one of the members for the
New-Acquisition, had this morning departed this life.

ORDERED, That the members of Congress do attend the funeral of the said Mr.
Woods, in form, at five o'clock this afternoon: And that Col. Neel, Col.
Gervais, Mr. Brown, and Mr. Weyman, be a Committee to conduct the same.

Col. Tacitus Gaillard, elected one of the representatives of the parish of St.
Matthew, not having taken his seat the last session, now attended, and declined
serving.

ORDERED, That four hundred and fifty pounds weight of gunpowder, borrowed
from Augusta, by Capt. Le-Roy Hammond, for the public service, be repaid.

A motion was made, That this Congress do order payment of certain expenses,
amounting to two hundred and thirty-four pounds, incurred by a detachment of
militia, under the command of Major Hicks, lately marched to this town, for
camp utensils, and other articles.

A debate ensued,

And the question being put,

It was carried in the negative.

Read a letter from the Committee at Beaufort, dated Feb. 11, 1776, relative to
the shippers of the cargo on board the brigantine William, Capt. Mercier,
detained there.

ORDERED, That the said letter, with the papers that were enclosed, be referred
to the Council of Safety; and that they do report thereon.

Mr. De Saussure, from the Committee, to whom was referred the petition of John
Ellis, reported.

And the said report being taken into consideration.

RESOLVED, That the money lodged in the colony treasury, for the purchase of a
cargo of rice, sold by Philip Tidyman, to John Ellis and Thomas Todd, the 30th
of November last, and by them, since sold to Capt. Alexander Gillon, be
retained in the said treasury, until the further determination of this Congress.

ORDERED, That the determination on the prayer of the petitioner to be
permitted to depart the colony, be postponed.

On motion, The following, resolution was unanimously agreed to:

Whereas the Continental Congress, on the first day of November last,
prohibited exportation from the United Colonies, until the first day of March
next: And whereas by reason of the distance of several of those colonies from
Philadelphia, the resolution of the said Congress, relative to exportation
after that day, may not be known for some time: And it may be injurious to the
common cause of America, if exportation should be permitted in any colony,
before such resolution shall be known there.

RESOLVED, That the said prohibition shall continue, and be of force in this
colony, until the first day of May next, unless an authentic account of the
determination of the Continental Congress, relative to exportation, after the
said first day of March, shall be sooner received and published by the Council
of Safety.

ORDERED, That the foregoing resolution be forthwith printed in hand bills and
made public.

ORDERED, That Mr. President do transmit a copy of the foregoing resolution to
the Conventions of Georgia and North Carolina, recommending, that those
colonies do pass one similar thereto; and to our Delegates at Philadelphia,
desiring them to give the Council of Safety the earliest intelligence of the
proceedings of the Continental Congress on this subject.

ORDERED, That Mr. President's Letter to Georgia be forwarded by a Committee of
two gentlemen, to be delegated to make all possible representation to induce
that colony to come into a similar resolution.

RESOLVED, That orders be forthwith issued to the Committees of parishes and
districts where vacancies have happened, by the death of members, or persons
elected refusing to serve, to order elections for filling up such vacancies.

Orders accordingly were issued in the form following to the Committees of the
parishes of St. Philip and St. Michael, Charlestown; St. George, Dorchester;
and St. Matthew, for the district of Ninety-Six, for the district in the Fork
between Broad and Saludy Rivers, and for the district called the New
Acquisition, respectively, for filling up a vacancy in each, in the room of
Miles Brewton and William Sanders, Esqrs. deceased, Tacitus Gaillard, John
Lisle and Champness Terry, Esqrs. who had declined serving, and Joseph Woods,
Esquire deceased.

In Congress, Feb. 14, 1776.
ORDERED, That the Committee for the parish of (...) do forthwith give due and
sufficient public notice to the inhabitants of the said parish, who have a
right to vote, to assemble at the parish church, on a day to be by them
appointed, then and there to proceed, by ballot, to the choice of a member to
represent them in the present Congress, in the room of (...) and that the said
Committee do make a due return of the said election as soon as may be.

ORDERED, That the Committee for the parish of St. John, in Berkley County, do
forthwith make a return of the member of Congress, said to have been elected
for that parish, in the room of James Ravenell, Esquire who had declined serving,
and that they do notify to said member to give his attendance.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 1776.
The Congress met,

And the journal of yesterday was read.

A petition of Joseph Buffington, was presented and read.

ORDERED, That the said petition be referred to the following Committee, viz.
Col. Powell, Col. Thomas, Col. Richardson, Major Henderson, the Rev. Mr.
Tennent, Mr. Kershaw, Doctor Farrar, and Mr. Prince.

Capt. Shubrick, from the Committee to examine a ship now on the stocks at
Capt. Cochran's, reported, That having examined the said ship according to
order, they found her every way unfit to be equipped, as a ship of war, in the
colony service.

RESOLVED, That a Committee be appointed to consider and report the best means,
and an estimate of the expense, of building, with the utmost dispatch, two
frigates, for the service of this colony, each to mount thirty-two guns on one
deck: and also to consider and report the expediency of stationing armed
vessels to protect the navigation of Beaufort and George-Town harbors.

ORDERED, That Capt. Shubrick, Capt. Gillon, Col. Powell, Mr. Edwards, Doctor
Farrar, Major Mayson, and Capt. Joiner, be a Committee for the above purposes.

Read a petition of John Sigell, steward to Lord William Campbell, of this date.

ORDERED, That the said petition be referred to the following Committee, viz.
Mr. Jacob Motte, Capt. Benjamin Huger, Capt. Hammond, Mr. Elias Horry, and Mr.
John Parker: And that the said Committee do also consider and report, what may
be proper to be done with the effects of Lord William Campbell, and a trunk of
books belonging to James Trail; both having withdrawn themselves from this
colony on board the Cherokee ship of war -- the latter, after having been
enjoined* by the General Committee, not to go out of the limits of Charlestown.

RESOLVED, That the Hon. Rawlins Lowndes, Esquire Col. James Parsons, and Capt.
Thomas Savage, be delegated to proceed forthwith to Savannah, to make proper
representations to induce that colony to cooperate with this, in paying the
strictest obedience to all the resolves of the Continental Congress,
particularly that relative to non-exportation; and to urge the necessity of
extending the non-exportation to the first day of May next.

Mr John Rutledge, acquainted the Congress, that it was with the utmost concern
he found himself obliged to request, that they would dispense with his
attendance in the Continental Congress in future; that he had many weighty
reasons which rendered his request proper; but above all, that as the American
dispute was now agitated by arms, he was certain he could be of more service to
his country, and the common cause, at home than abroad; and that therefore he
earnestly desired they would grant his request. He also acquainted the
Congress, that his brother (Edward Rutledge, Esquire) from very urgent motives,
requested to be recalled.

RESOLVED, That this Congress will tomorrow proceed to the choice of
Delegates, to represent this colony in the Continental Congress, by ballot.

Adjourned to ten o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 16, 1776.
The Congress met,

And the journal of yesterday was read.

The Hon. Henry Middleton arose, declared his sensibility of, and thankfulness
for, the honor that had been conferred upon him, in his appointment as a
Delegate from this colony to the Continental Congress; and that no man had
better wishes, or would go greater lengths, to serve his country, than himself;
but that, as the infirmities of age, which were creeping on, deprived him of
the ability of rendering so much service to the public, as in his earlier days,
he might have done; so he requested that the Congress would not again appoint
him as a Delegate to the Continental Congress, in the choice now to be made.

Mr. John Rutledge, from the Committee to take into consideration the number of
forces necessary to be raised and kept in pay, for the service of this colony,
and the resolution of the Continental Congress, on the 1st day of November
last, relative thereto, delivered in a report.

ORDERED, That the said report be taken into consideration to morrow.

On motion, That the number of Delegates, from this colony, to the Continental
Congress, be now ascertained.

RESOLVED, That five delegates be chosen, to represent this colony in the
Continental Congress.

RESOLVED, That the said five Delegates be chosen to serve for one year.

A motion was made, That the majority of the Delegates, present in
Philadelphia, shall be a Quorum; and that when, by sickness or accident, only
one Delegate shall be present in Congress, in such case, such Delegate shall
give his voice on the part of the colony.

A debate ensued,

And the question being put, it was

Resolved in the affirmative.

RESOLVED, That the ballots, for delegates to the Continental Congress, be
received at five o'clock this afternoon.

RESOLVED, That Sergeants of militia in future, while in actual service, be
allowed a pay of twelve shillings and sixpence currency per day, and Corporals,
in the like case, eleven shillings and three pence.

Adjourned to five o'clock in the afternoon.

In CONGRESS. FRIDAY Evening, FEBRUARY 16, 1776.
The Congress met.

Mr. President laid before the Congress, the following copy of the letter which
he had written and sent express, by their order, to the colony of Georgia.

South Carolina, Charlestown, February 15, 1776. By Authority of Congress. To
the Honorable the Congress of Georgia. GENTLEMEN,
I Have the honor to enclose to you the copy of a resolution of Congress,
extending the resolution of the Continental Congress on the first of November
last, prohibiting exportation from the United Colonies; and I have it in charge
to recommend to you, in the strongest terms, that your colony should form a
similar resolution.

It is thought so absolutely necessary for the welfare of America, that
Georgia, form a similar resolution; and we have this point so much at heart,
that the Congress have delegated the Hon. Rawlins Lowndes, Col. Parsons, and
Thomas Savage, Esquire to repair forthwith to Savannah, to make all possible
representation to induce your cooperating with us in so salutary a step.

These gentlemen mean to set out tomorrow or next day, and their speedy
departure renders it unnecessary for me to add any thing more, to give weight
to the recommendation in question.

I have the honor to be, Gentlemen, Your most humble Servant, WILLIAM-HENRY
DRAYTON, President.


The Congress then proceeded to ballot for the Delegates to the Continental
Congress.

And the ballots being reckoned, it appeared, and Mr. President declared, that
THOMAS LYNCH, JOHN RUTLEDGE, EDWARD RUTLEDGE, ARTHUR MIDDLETON, and THOMAS
HEYWARD junior, Esqrs. were, by majority of votes, duly elected.

Whereupon the Congress

RESOLVED, That Thomas Lynch, John Rutledge, Edward Rutledge, Arthur Middleton,
and Thomas Heyward, jun. Esqrs. be, and they are hereby appointed, and fully
authorized, to represent this colony in the Continental Congress, for one year
next ensuing.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 17, 1776.
The Congress met,

And yesterday's journal was read.

Mr. Corbett, from the Committee to whom was referred the petition of Capt.
Aitken and Mr. Russel, delivered in a report.

ORDERED, That the consideration thereof be postponed.

A motion was made, that Benjamin B. Boot, Esquire being a person whose going at
large may endanger the public safety, be committed to close confinement.

RESOLVED, That Benjamin B. Boot, Esquire be forthwith committed to close
confinement in the common gaol of Charlestown.

ORDERED, That Mr. President do issue his warrant for that purpose.

ORDERED, That Mr. President do forthwith, by letter, acquaint the Council of
Safety at Salisbury, with the present situation of Messrs. Dunn and Boot, and
desire their further directions.

Mr. President, of the Council of Safety, laid before the Congress, letters
received by that board,

From the Provincial Congress of Georgia, dated Savannah, 12 th instant,
relative to the hostile armament assembled there.

From Capt. John Allston, of the Volunteer Company of Foot Rangers, dated 15 th
instant, relative to the original establishment of the said company, -- and
referred to Congress. And,

From Doctor Chalmers, relative to the ill state of health of Mrs. Stuart, and
the necessity of her taking air and exercise -- also referred to Congress.

Which were severally read.

ORDERED, That the consideration of Capt. Allston's letter be postponed.

RESOLVED, That Mrs. Stuart be allowed to take necessary air and exercise, upon
the terms proposed in Doctor Chalmers's letter, that is, accompanied by Mr.
Fenwicke or the Doctor, and they being responsible for her appearance whenever
called for.

Notice was given to the Congress, that the contract for supplying the colony
forces with provisions, would expire on the 29th instant.

The Congress then proceeded upon the order of the day.

After some time spent in debate,

A motion was made, that the further consideration of the report on the number
of forces necessary to be raised, and kept in pay, for the service of this
colony, be postponed.

A debate ensued,

And the question being put,

Resolved in the affirmative.

A motion was then made, that this Congress do now resolve, that three
battalions of Infantry be forthwith raised, upon the Continental establishment,
agreeable to the powers vested, by the Continental Congress, in this colony.

After some debate,

The question was put,

And passed in the negative.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 18, 1776.
The Congress met,

The Rev Mr. Turquand, by desire, performed Divine Service.

And the thanks of the Congress were returned to that gentleman.

The journal of yesterday was read.

RESOLVED, That Benjamin Booth Boot, Esquire be supplied with all proper
necessaries and accommodation in his present confinement, and that he be
allowed the liberty of the garden belonging to the gaol, in the day time only.

RESOLVED, That Michael Kalteisen, Esquire be appointed to the office of commissary
of military stores for the regular forces.

ORDERED, That Col. Powell, Col. Pinckney, Col. Richardson, Col. Bull, Col.
Thomas, Col. Wofford, Col. Neel, Col. Horry, Major Mayson, Major Kershaw, Capt.
Hammond, Capt. Harrington, Capt. Maham, Capt. Vanderhorst, and Capt. William
Skirving, be a Committee, to consider and report, the number of country,
militia that ought to supply the place of the detachments to be discharged on
the first day of March next, and in rotation, to do constant duty, in and near
Charlestown; also the most effectual means to oblige such of the inhabitants
of Charles Town, as are liable to bear arms, and are absent, to return to town;
also the best division of the country militia, into battalions, where such
division is necessary; and also, such measures as may, in their opinion, be
necessary to render the militia most serviceable to the public.

ORDERED, That Mr. Edwards, Capt. Roger Smith, Mr. Corbett, Mr. Dupont, Mr.
Robert-William Powell, Mr. Hall, Capt. Ledger, Mr. Theodore Gaillard, jun. and
Mr. Elias Horry, be a Committee, to receive and examine such public accounts,
as may be referred to them, by the Congress or Council of Safety; and to report
their opinion thereon, to the Congress or Council of Safety, as soon as
possible.

A motion was made, that the Council of Safety, in order that they may be
enabled to devote the more of their time to the immediate objects of their
appointment, do set apart, a particular day in each week, for the particular
purpose of determining on public accounts.

After some debate,

The previous question was moved for,

And being put,

It was resolved in the affirmative.

But the main question being then waved;

RESOLVED, That the Council of Safety shall only twice in the week be liable to
be called upon to pay public accounts.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. MONDAY, FEBRUARY 19, 1776.
The Congress met,

And the journal of yesterday was read.

Mr. President laid before the Congress, the copy of a letter which he had
yesterday written by their order, relative to the present situation of Mess.
Dunn and Boot, viz.

South Carolina, Charlestown, Feb. 18, 1776. By Authority of Congress. To the
Committee of Safety, for Salisbury, North Carolina. GENTLEMEN,
MR. Dunn and Mr. Boot, who were sent prisoners from your colony to this, have
repeatedly made applications to our public assemblies for their discharge. In
our last session of Congress, they presented a petition and remonstrance to the
same effect, which the Congress referred to your judgment, and I enclosed the
prayer of the petition in the following letter, addressed to you. The letter
was delivered to Mr. Boot, who undertook to forward it.

Gentlemen, I have the honor to enclose to you, an extract of the prayer of a
remonstrance and petition, which has been by Mr. Dunn and Mr. Boot, presented
to the Congress of this colony, in their last session. These gentlemen, in
their remonstrance and petition, declared, they did not mean, and never would
relinquish, any right of action at law* which they may have against those
gentlemen, who were the immediate cause of their being sent prisoners into this
colony. The Congress would not make any other order upon the remonstrance and
petition, than that, it should be referred entirely to your judgment. -- Jan.
10, 1776.

Mr. Dunn, is now a prisoner upon his parole; and Mr. Boot, is a prisoner in
the common gaol in this town, he being, of the two, thought to be, by much, the
most dangerous person.

The Congress have directed me to acquaint you with the situation of these
gentlemen, requesting that you will signify your sentiments to me thereupon.

I have the honor to be, Gentlemen, Your most humble Servant, WILLIAM-HENRY
DRAYTON, President.


Mr. President, of the Council of Safety, laid before the Congress, an account
of Mr. John Champneys, one of the commissioners for receiving and selling rice,
on the public account.

And the said account being immediately taken under consideration, the Congress
disallowed the following charges therein: For his commission on the purchase of
rice, L.183 2 6 Commission on selling, 399 1 11


ORDERED, That the Committee on public accounts, do ascertain the quantity of
rice sold out by retail, by said Mr. Champneys, and report the commission
proper to be allowed thereon. And that the charge of five hundred pounds in
said account, for damages sustained, be referred to the Committee on Mr. Thomas
Singleton's petition.

RESOLVED, That the Committees in the several parishes and districts,
throughout the colony, ought, and they are hereby required, strictly to execute
the resolution of the Congress in January, 1775, to prevent the removal of the
effects of any debtors out of the colony, without the knowledge or consent of
their creditors.

RESOLVED, That at least one thousand men from the country militia, are
necessary for the immediate defense of Charlestown.

Capt. John Allston's letter, of the 15th inst. being taken into consideration.

RESOLVED, That the resolution of Congress, of the 27th of November last,
relative to Capt. Allston's Indian company of Foot Rangers or Rovers, be made
void; and that the said company be restored to their original establishment.

Whereas one thousand and fifty men of the country militia, exclusive of
commission and noncommissioned officers, are necessary to do duty in and near
Charlestown, in addition to the regulars and town militia, from the first day
of March to the first day of April next. Therefore,

RESOLVED, That the following draughts be forthwith made, and marched to
Charlestown, to relieve the militia to be discharged on the first day of
March, viz, from the regiments Capts. Subalts. rank and file. Of Col. Powell 2
4 125 Col. Richardson 3 6 180 Col. Bull 1 3 75 Late Col Fletchall 1 3 100 Col.
Stark 1 2 65 Col. Thomas 1 2 50 Col. Savage 1 3 100 Col. Neel 1 2 55 Col.
Thomson 2 4 100 Col. Rothmahler 2 4 100 Col. Singellton 1 2 50 Col. Glover 1 2
50 17 37 1050

And further Resolved, That the said draughts shall remain in and near
Charlestown, one month; at the expiration of which time, they shall be
relieved monthly, by the same numbers, to do the same duty, from the same
regiments. That the first draughts shall be made of such men, if there are any
such in their respective regiments, as have not been on duty by order of
Congress or Council of Safety; except, in such regiments respectively,
volunteers shall offer to do the duty for which the draughts are intended. And
that the Colonels of the said regiments respectively, shall appoint the
Captains and Subalterns to command the said detachments, according to the dates
of their commissions.

RESOLVED, That the militia on the Sea-Islands, and in Christ-Church parish* be
not included in the said draughts.

ORDERED, That Mr. President do transmit copies of the foregoing resolves to
the commanding officers of the several regiments from which draughts are to be
made, by express, with the utmost expedition.

ORDERED, That letters be forthwith written, by different conveyances, to the
Continental Congress at Philadelphia, acquainting them with the present
situation of affairs in this colony, and the recent alarming intelligence we
have received from Georgia, of the hostile armament collecting at Cockspur.

Adjourned to eleven o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 20, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

The Congress proceeded on the consideration of the report of the Committee,
upon the number of forces necessary to be raised, and kept in pay, for the
service of the colony; and made some progress therein.

A motion was made, that the regiment of Rangers be reduced, from horse to foot.

A debate ensued,

And the question being put,

The Congress divided.

The Yeas went forth.

Tellers, For the Yeas, Capt. Benj. Huger. For the Nays, Doctor Farrar.


Yeas 46 Nays 54
So that it was determined in the negative.

A motion was made, that the name of the regiment of Rangers be changed, to
that of Light Dragoons.

A debate arose,

And the question being put,

It passed in the negative.

A motion was made, that a Colonel be appointed to command the regiment of
Rangers.

A debate ensued,

The question was put,

And passed in the negative.

A motion was made, that the rule of Congress, of the 7th instant, restricting
the members from speaking more than twice upon one question, be amended, by
adding the words "without leave from the chair.

After some debate,

The previous question was moved for, and put,

And passed in the negative.

A motion was made, that rations be allowed to the regiment of Rangers, in like
manner as to the regiments of Infantry.

After some time spent in debate,

The question was put.

The Congress divided.

The Yeas went forth.

Tellers For the Yeas, Col. Moultrie, For the Nays, Col. Pinckney,


Yeas 49, Nays 49,
So that Mr. President was obliged to decide, which he did by voting in favor
of the motion.

And it was resolved in the affirmative.

ORDERED, That the further consideration of the report be adjourned.

Adjourned to eleven o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 21, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

Mr. Salvador, from the Committee to inquire into the state of the interior
parts of the colony, lately in commotion; to consider what measures are proper
to be pursued, to prevent future commotions therein; and also to consider of
the cases of the state prisoners, and to report what measures ought to be
pursued, with respect to them -- delivered in a report.

ORDERED, That the consideration of the said report be postponed.

The Congress then proceeded in the consideration of the report of the
Committee, on the number of forces necessary to be raised and kept in pay, for
the service of this colony -- and made a further progress therein.

RESOLVED, That an Adjutant and a Quartermaster; be allowed and appointed to
the regiment of Rangers.

A motion was made, That the daily pay of the privates, in the regiment of
Artillery, be augmented to ten shillings currency.

A debate arose,

The question was put,

And passed in the negative.

A motion was made, That a daily pay of ten shillings be allowed to expert
Rifle-men, who shall enter into a regiment of Rifle-men, to be raised for the
service of this colony.

A debate ensued,

And the question being put,

It was resolved in the affirmative,

A motion was made, That a bounty of ten pounds currency, be allowed, on
inlisting, to expert Rifle-men, entering in the regiment of Rifle-men.

After some debate,

The question was put,

And passed in the negative.

A motion was made, That the sum of five pounds currency, be allowed to every
private; who shall, at the time of his entering into the regiment of Rifle-men,
be provided with a good and sufficient Rifle-gun, as hire for the same, during
the time for which he is engaged to serve.

A debate ensued,

And the question being put,

Resolved in the affirmative.

A motion was then made, to allow to such Rifle-men, a bounty of seven pounds
and ten shillings at the time of inlisting.

After some time spent in debate,

The Congress was adjourned to eleven o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 22, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

The consideration of the report, on the number of forces necessary to be
raised, and kept in pay, for the service of this colony, was resumed.

A motion was made, That a bounty of nine pounds and ten shillings currency, be
allowed and paid to every expert Rifle-man, who shall inlist in the regiment of
Rifle-men, to be raised for the service of this colony.

A debate ensued,

And the question being put,

Resolved in the affirmative.

The whole of the said report being gone through, the Congress came to the
following resolutions thereupon.

Whereas it is absolutely necessary, that a considerable body of regular forces
be kept up for the service and defense of the colony in this time of imminent
danger: Therefore,

RESOLVED, That the first and second regiments be immediately augmented to
their original establishment; and that their bounty money be increased to
twenty-five pounds per man. Also,

That the regiment of Rangers be continued upon their present establishment of
nine companies, each to be augmented to fifty privates; the companies to be
immediately completed, and the men inlisted according to the rules and articles
for the government of the troops: And it is HEREBY DECLARED, That the said
regiment of Rangers shall be composed of expert Rifle-men, who shall act on
horseback, or on foot, as the service may require; each man, at his own
expense, to be constantly provided with a good horse, rifle, shot-pouch and
powder-horn, together with a tomahawk or hatchet. Also,

That the regiment of Artillery be continued upon their present establishment.
Also,

That a regiment of expert Rifle-men, to take rank as the fifth regiment, under
proper field and other officers, be immediately raised, to consist of seven
companies; each company to consist of one Captain, two Lieutenants, one Ensign,
and one hundred men, including four Sergeants, and four Corporals. And it is
hereby declared, That the said regiment shall be inlisted to the 1st of June,
1777, subject to the rules and articles for the government of the troops, and
liable to be sooner discharged by public authority, having one month's pay
advanced: Each man in the said regiment, at his own expense, during the
service, finding his own clothes, except a uniform hunting shirt, and hat or
cap, and blanket, to be provided by the public; and also, at his own expense,
to be constantly provided with a good rifle, shot-pouch, and powder-horn,
together with a tomahawk or hatchet: The privates shall be allowed five pounds,
as the hire of their arms, during their service; nine pounds and ten shillings
as bounty, and ten shillings daily pay; the Sergeants, twelve shillings and
sixpence, the corporals, eleven shillings and three pence, and the
commissioned officers the same daily pay, as those of the first and second
regiments. Also,

That a company of Artillery, of one hundred men, with proper officers, be
immediately raised, for the defense of Fort Lyttelton, on Port Royal Island.
And one other company of Artillery, consisting of sixty men, with proper
officers, be, in like manner raised, for the defense of George-Town. These
companies to be officered and paid in like manner, and in proportion to the
artillery establishment; and the men to be inlisted for the same term, and in
like manner with the regiment of Rifle-men. Also,

That, of the matrosses on the present establishment, the seamen in the colony
navy, and the matrosses and seamen expected to arrive here, from the
New England colonies and other parts, in the whole upwards of nine hundred men,
two hundred may, if found necessary, be established as marines on board the
navy. Also,

That the rations of the regular forces, be increased to one pound and an half
of fresh beef, or to eighteen ounces of salt pork: And that the regiment of
Rangers, the regiment of Rifle-men, the two independent companies of Artillery,
and the Militia upon actual service, be allowed rations in like manner with the
first and second regiments of foot, and the regiment of Artillery, and as
increased by this establishment. Also,

That an Adjutant be appointed to the regiments of Rangers and Rifle-men
respectively, a Play Master and a Surgeon to the regiment of Rifle-men, and a
Sergeant-Major, a Quartermaster, and a Quartermaster Sergeant, to each
regiment of the regular forces. Also,

That the men to be inlisted in the regiment of Rangers and Rifle-men, be
approved of by the commanding officer of each regiment respectively, -- as
expert Rifle-men. And,

That the Captains in the regiment of Rifle-men, who shall first send, bring,
or cause to be brought, to the regimental head quarters, sixty men, approved as
aforesaid, such Captains shall take priority of rank respectively, in the said
regiment. And the said Captains respectively, with the approbation of the
Colonel of the regiment, shall appoint their Lieutenants, Ensign, and
non-commissioned officers. And also

RESOLVED, That all the regular forces of this colony, both naval and military,
shall, upon any emergency, and when the Congress or Council of Safety shall
think proper, be liable, under either of their order and direction, to serve
and act in any part of this, or of a neighboring colony.

And whereas it will not be expedient, to put any of the forces of this colony
upon the continental establishment, so as to be subject to continental
articles, and entitled only to continental pay, and to their discharge in
December next; it being more proper, to keep all the colony troops upon the
present footing, as to their quantum of pay, their articles, and the time of
inlistment: Therefore,

ORDERED, That the Council of Safety do return the thanks of this colony to the
Continental Congress, for their attention to its security; that they state the
peculiar circumstances, and the heavy expenses, which have been, and will be
incurred, by this colony, in the measures necessary for her defense: And that
they do request the Continental Congress to allow this colony so much money, as
the expenses of three battalions, upon the continental establishment, would
amount to for one year; and to give continental rank to the officers of the
three regiments raised in June, and of the regiment of artillery raised in
November, from the dates of their respective commissions, or, at least, from
the first day of November, when, they resolved to allow this colony three
battalions.

RESOLVED, That all the officers and men in the naval and military forces of
this colony, shall take the same oath of fidelity, as is prescribed in the
rules and articles for the government of the troops.

RESOLVED, That this Congress will, by ballot, elect the field officers of the
regiment of Rifle-men to be raised, separately.

A motion was made, That the Captains for the said regiment, be also elected,
by ballot, by the members of Congress.

After some debate,

The question being put,

It was resolved in the affirmative.

RESOLVED, That the Captains of the two companies of Artillery, to be raised
for the defense of Beaufort and George-Town, be also ballotted for tomorrow,
by the members of Congress.

RESOLVED, That this Congress will proceed to ballot for the said officers
tomorrow afternoon.

Capt. Ledger, from the Committee, on the memorial of Charles-King Chitty,
delivered in a report*

ORDERED, That the said report be taken into consideration tomorrow.

Col. Powell from the Committee, to consider and report the number of country
militia necessary to replace the detachments to be discharged the first day of
March next, and in rotation to do constant duty in and near Charlestown -- the
means of obliging absentees liable to bear arms, to return -- the best division
of the country militia -- and such measures as will tend to render the militia
most serviceable, delivered in a further report.

ORDERED, That the consideration thereof, be postponed.

Mr. Motte, from the Committee, on the petition of John Sigell, delivered in a
report.

ORDERED, That the consideration thereof, be likewise postponed.

Col. Powell, from the Committee, on the petition of Joseph Buffington,
delivered in their report.

ORDERED, That the consideration of that report be also postponed.

Capt. Roger Smith, from the Committee to enquire and report the quantity of
flour now in Charlestown -- the quantity that will be wanted -- the best means
of obtaining salt, sugar, rum, and other necessaries, on reasonable terms --
with the causes of, and remedies for, the present impositions in the advanced
prices on the necessaries of life, other commodities and labor, delivered in a
report.

ORDERED, That the consideration of the said report, also be postponed.

Adjourned to ten o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 23, 1776.
The Congress met,

And the journal of yesterday was read.

RESOLVED, That a Muster-master General be appointed for the naval and land
forces of this colony, with power to appoint one deputy.

ORDERED, That Col. Gadsden, Col. Moultrie, Col. Motte, Col. Gervais and Dr.
Oliphant, be a Committee to ascertain and report the special duties of the said
Muster-master General.

The Congress then proceeded to take under consideration the report on the
state of the interior parts of the colony; and made some progress therein.

Adjourned to five o'clock in the evening.

In CONGRESS. FRIDAY Evening, FEBRUARY 23, 1776.
The Congress met,

A motion was made, that the election of field officers for the regiment of
Rifle-men to be raised, be determined by a majority of ballots of the whole
number of members present in Congress, and not otherwise.

A debate ensued,

And the question being put,

The Congress divided.

The Yeas went forth.

Tellers For the Yeas, Capt. Sumpter, For the Nays, Capt. Benj. Huger.


The Congress then proceeded to ballot for a Colonel of the said regiment.

And Isaac Huger, Esquire was declared, by majority of votes, duly elected.

The Lieutenant Colonel was then balloted for,

And Alexander M'Intosh, Esquire declared duly elected, by majority of votes.

The Major was next ballotted for,

And Benjamin Huger, Esquire declared, in like manner, duly elected.

A motion was made, That the Captains for the regiment of Rifle-men, be
postponed till tomorrow.

A debate arose,

And the question being put,

It was resolved in the affirmative.

The Congress then proceeded to ballot for the Captain to command the company
of Artillery, to be raised for the defense of George-Town; and also for the
Captain of a like company -- for the defense of Fort Lyttelton, Port Royal.

And the majority of votes, for the former, were declared to be in favor of
Paul Trapier, jun. Esquire and for the latter, in favor of William Harden, Esquire.

Adjorned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 24, 1776.
The Congress met,

And yesterday's journal was read.

RESOLVED, That the privates in the regiment of Rifle-men, to be raised, shall
remain, and be continued, in the same companies wherein they were respectively
first inlisted.

RESOLVED, That the Committee on the public accounts, do, and they are hereby
required, to give all possible aid and assistance to Col. Gadsden, or the
commanding officer of the colony forces for the time being, and also to Capt.
John Copithorn, in procuring and supplying all such articles for the public
service, as the said commanding officer shall from time to time apply for.

Read a petition of Thomas Far, jun. Esquire Clerk of the late Commons House of
Assembly, with his account against the public.

ORDERED, that the said petition be referred to a Committee of such members of
the present Congress, as were members of the said Commons House on public
accounts.

Whereas a constitutional post is now established, under the authority of the
Continental Congress: And whereas, it is of the utmost consequence, in the
present time of imminent danger, that the post riders do not meet with the
least delay in their progress: Therefore,

RESOLVED, That it be recommended, and it is hereby recommended, to the keepers
of all the public ferries in this colony, to give all possible dispatch to the
passage of the constitutional post riders, over their respective ferries.

RESOLVED, That Mr. Be, Capt. John Huger, Col. Richardson, Col. Thomas, Capt.
Hammond, Major Henderson, Mr. John Owen, Col. Thomson, Capt. Harrington, Mr. De
Saussure, Capt. Simons and Dr. Farrar, be, and they are hereby appointed,
Commissioners to contract for the making, or purchasing already made, any
number, not exceeding one thousand stand, of good rifles, with good bridle
locks, and proper furniture, not exceeding the price of thirty pounds each: The
barrels of the rifles to be made, not to weigh less than seven pounds and an
half, or be less than three feet eight inches long, and carrying balls of about
half an ounce weight; and those new ones already made, not to be less than
three feet four inches long in the barrel. Also for the making, or purchasing
already made, one thousand stand of good smooth-bored muskets, carrying an
ounce ball, with good bridle locks and furniture, iron ram-rods, and bayonets,
at a price not exceeding twenty pounds each: The muskets to be made, to be
three feet six inches long in the barrel, and the bayonets seventeen inches
long. The power of the Commissioners to continue during six months. And they
are required from time to time to cause the rifles and muskets by them
purchased, to be delivered to the Council of Safety, who are hereby authorized
to pay their draughts for such arms.

The report of the Committee on the petition of Capt. Aitkin and Mr. Russel,
was taken under consideration; and the same being gone through:

ORDERED, That the ship Port Henderson, be forthwith discharged, agreeable to
the prayer of the petitioners.

RESOLVED, That the Council of Safety be, and they are hereby authorized, to
contract with Mr. Kershaw, for all the flour and ship bread he can supply, on
the public account; the delivery thereof to be at the risk of the public, from
capture by the enemy.

Adjourned to five o'clock in the evening.

In CONGRESS. SATURDAY Afternoon, FEBRUARY 24, 1776.
The Congress met.

A memorial signed by twenty-one officers of the country militia, now doing
duty in Charlestown, was presented and read.

Mr. President, by desire of the Congress, requested of the Rev. Mr* Turquand,
that he would perform divine service in Congress tomorrow.

Adjourned to half past nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 25, 1776.
The Congress met.

The Rev. Mr. Turquand performed Divine Service, and received the thanks of the
Congress.

The journal of yesterday was read.

RESOLVED, That the Commissioners for purchasing rifles, or either of them, be*
and they are hereby authorized and empowered, to agree with any person to make
a rifle of a new and different construction from the kind, they have power to
purchase by the resolution of yesterday: And that, if the Council of Safety
shall approve of the construction, they may contract for the purchasing and
making such kind of rifles.

ORDERED, That the memorial delivered in yesterday, do lie on the table.

The Congress then proceeded to ballot for the Captains of the regiment of
Rifle-men.

And the ballots being counted, it appeared, that the following gentlemen were,
by majority of votes, duly elected: Hezekiah Maham, Esquire Benjamin Tutt,
Esquire George Cogdell, Esquire William Richardson, Esquire Richard Richardson,
jun. Esquire William Henderson, Esquire John Bowie, Esquire


Adjourned to ten o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. MONDAY, FEBRUARY 26, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

Mr. President declared the names of the gentlemen, that had been, yesterday,
by majority of votes, elected Captains for the regiment of Rifle-men.

ORDERED, That the members of the Council of Safety, with Col. Gadsden, be a
Committee to consider the necessity and expediency of immediately raising
another regiment of Rifle-men, for the service of this colony; and that they do
report thereon tomorrow.

A petition of Robert Cunningham, proposing to observe a neutrality, was
presented and read.

Capt. Maham, Capt. Richard Richardson, and Major Henderson, yesterday elected
Captains for the regiment of Rifle-men, respectively declined accepting
commissions in that regiment; the two former alleging, among other reasons,
that they already commanded volunteer companies, to which their particular
attention was due, and with which they should always be ready to go forth and
render their best services to the colony; and the latter, that being a
field-officer of a new regiment, composed entirely of volunteers, the public
service required his continuance in that station.

RESOLVED, That this Congress will forthwith proceed to the choice of three
other Captains, for the regiment of Rifle-men, in the room of the gentleman,
who have declined to serve.

The said Captains were accordingly immediately balloted for.

And the following gentlemen, declared duly elected, by majority of votes, viz.
Francis Prince, Esquire. Thomas Potts, Esquire. David Anderson, Esquire.


Adjourned to eleven o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 27, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

The Churchwardens of the parishes of St. Philip and St. Michael,
Charlestown, returned Alexander Moultrie, Esquire as duly elected, yesterday, to
be a member of the present Congress, for Charlestown, in the room of the late
Miles Brewton, Esquire

ORDERED, That Mr. Moultrie, who attended, do take his seat accordingly.

Read a letter from Jonathan Downs, Esquire dated the 25th instant, acquainting the
Congress, that he was on his way to Charlestown, with Patrick Cunningham, Hugh
Brown, and William Duggins, three of the late insurgents, as prisoners.

ORDERED, That Mr. President do issue his warrant for the immediate commitment
of the said Patrick Cunningham, Hugh Brown, and William Duggins, to the common
gaol in Charlestown.

And a warrant was issued accordingly.

RESOLVED, That the Captains of the companies of Artillery, to be raised and
posted at Fort Lyttelton and George-Town, shall have rank in the army, as they
shall respectively have made returns to the Parochial Committees, of their
having raised sixty men; the said returns to be transmitted to the Council of
Safety.

RESOLVED, That the Ensigns in the regiment of Rifle-men, be allowed a daily
pay of thirty-two shillings and sixpence.

ORDERED, That Colonel Gervais, Col. C. C. Pinckney, Major Cattle, Capt Lynch,
and Doctor Oliphant, be a Committee, to consider and report, the best ways and
means of supplying the colony troops and militia with rations.

ORDERED, That the Committee on public accounts do inquire into the state of
the colony Treasury, and report thereon as soon as possible.

RESOLVED, That Edward Rutledge, Esquire one of the Delegates from this Colony to
the Continental Congress, have leave to return.

Mr. Butledge, from the Committee appointed to consider the necessity and
expediency of raising another regiment of Rifle-men, for the service of this
colony, delivered in a report.

ORDERED, That the said report be taken into consideration tomorrow.

Adjourned to Eleven o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

The Congress entered upon the consideration of the report of the Committee, to
consider and report on the necessity and expediency of raising another regiment
of Rifle-men.

A motion was made, That a question be put, whether a second regiment of
rifle-men, shall be raised?

A debate ensued,

And the question being put,

The Congress divided.

The Yeas went forth.

Tellers For the Yeas, Mr. Salvador, For the Nays, Col. Pinckney.
Yeas 51, Nays 37,


So that it was resolved in the affirmative.

A motion was made, That the said regiment shall consist of seven hundred men.

A debate arose,

The question was put,

And passed in the negative.

A motion was then made, That the said regiment shall consist of six hundred
men.

After some debate,

The question was put,

And passed in the negative.

A motion was made, That a Colonel be appointed to command the said regiment.

A debate arose,

And the question being put,

It passed in the negative.

The report of the Committee on the expediency of raising another regiment of
Rifle-men, being gone through,

RESOLVED, That a second regiment of Rifle-men, to rank as the sixth regiment,
in the colony service, be raised as soon as possible; to consist of five
companies of one hundred men each, under a Lieutenant Colonel Commandant, and a
Major; upon the same terms and establishment as the first regiment of Rifle-men.

Major Cattle, from the Committee to consider and report the best ways and
means to supply the troops and militia with rations, delivered in a report.

ORDERED, That the said report be taken into consideration tomorrow morning.

Upon an application by Mr. George Ancrum, junior,

ORDERED, That Mr. President do write to Georgia, to request the good offices
of the Congress or Council of Safety there, to enable Mr. Ancrum to export from
thence to this colony, certain goods the property of the said Ancrum, which had
been detained for the Indian trade.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 29, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

Agreeable to the order of yesterday, the report of the Committee, on the best
ways and means of supplying the troops and militia with rations, was taken into
consideration.

On motion, to disagree with a part of the said report, recommending an
allowance of (not exceeding) forty shillings per day, to the clerks of the
Commissary General.

A debate arose,

And the question being put,

It was determined in the affirmative.

The said report having been fully debated and amended, the Congress came to
the following resolutions thereupon, viz.

RESOLVED, That a Commissary-General be appointed, to supply the colony troops
and militia with rations, and also to supply the hospital with such provisions
as the Director shall require.

That the said Commissary General be allowed as many Deputy Commissaries and
Clerks* as with the approbation of the Council of Safety, he may judge
necessary. The said Deputy Commissaries and Clerks to be approved of by the
Council of Safety, who shall be informed by the Commissary General, what branch
of service they are to be employed in. And the Council of Safety are empowered
to allow such salaries to the Clerks so appointed, as they shall deem
sufficient, not exceeding five hundred pounds per annum, and one ration each
per day.

That the Commissary-General, shall be allowed a salary of two thousand pounds
currency per annum; and each Deputy, a pay not exceeding three pounds per day,
and two rations; and also such boat hire, and other charges, as the Council of
Safety may think reasonable. And that orders to the Commissary-General, shall
be issued in writing, from the Council of Safety, or the Commander of the
troops for the time being.

That the Commissary shall give bond, with surety, for ten thousand pounds,
duly to account for the moneys that may be advanced to him. And that he shall
once in every month, make a return to the Commander in Chief; and once in every
three months, render an account, on oath, to the Council of Safety, of what
provisions he has purchased, what has been delivered to each corpse
respectively, what remains on hand, and at what places; and that the accounts
rendered by the Deputies to the Commissary General, shall also be on oath.

That the Commissary-General, shall from time to time, acquaint the Council of
Safety with his proceedings; point out abuses, and the proper remedies for
them; represent the best mode to be pursued for supplying the army plentifully,
regularly, and at the same time with economy; and he shall have timely notice,
at what places magazines are to be formed, of what quantity and quality.

That no money be paid for rations that have not been drawn; and whatsoever
officer, whether Commissary-General, Deputy-Commissary, or Clerk, shall pay for
such rations, he shall be dismissed from his office. And that, if the
Commissary-General shall apprehend more rations have been drawn by any corpse
than they have a right to, he shall immediately acquaint the Council of Safety
thereof.

That the price of rations shall not be fixed: But that the Commissary-General
shall be empowered to purchase provisions on the best terms, or to contract for
them, with the approbation of the Council of Safety, and whose draughts or
certificates, if approved by the said Council, shall be answered.

That besides the rations of beef and pork already allowed by the present
Congress, there shall also be allowed one pound of bread, flour, or shipbread,
or one pint and an half of rice, each man, per day; also salt and vinegar, not
exceeding one pint per month of each; and two pounds of pepper (if to be had)
per day, for each regiment of seven hundred and fifty men, and in that
proportion to other regiments. And (...)

That the Council of Safety shall be, and they are hereby, empowered to remove
or suspend the Commissary-General, or any Deputy-Commissary, for mal-practices
or incapacity, on a hearing; and to appoint others in their room, during the
recess of Congress.

Col. C. C. Pinckney, from the Committee appointed to confer with Mr. De Brahm,
reported, and recommended it as an expedient measure to retain him in the
colony service.

A motion was then made, That Mr. De Brahm be retained in the colony service,
as an engineer upon the terms proposed yesterday.

After some debate,

The question being put,

It was resolved in the affirmative.

RESOLVED, That every member of Congress who has left it, or shall absent
himself from the service thereof, without leave, and does not reside more than
sixty miles from Charlestown, shall be sent for at his own expense.

ORDERED, That Mr. Kershaw, Capt. Alexander Moultrie, and Capt. Roger Smith, be
a Committee to draw a proper form of Accounts to be delivered in against the
public, for the service of draughts of militia, and lay the same before this
Congress.

TWO accounts of Richard Savage, for attendance and medicines to some of the
draughted militia, who had fallen sick, were delivered in* amounting together
to eighty-nine pounds and ten shillings.

ORDERED, That they be referred to the Committee on public accounts.

Adjourned to five o'clock in the evening.

In CONGRESS. THURSDAY Evening, FEBRUARY 29, 1776.
The Congress met.

The Congress proceeded to ballot for the field officers for the second
regiment of Rifle-men, separately.

And Thomas Sumpter, Esquire was declared, by majority of votes, to be duly elected
Lieutenant Colonel Commandant.

And William Henderson, Esquire Major, of the said regiment.

A motion was made, That the ballotting for the Captains in the said regiment
be adjourned till nine o'clock tomorrow morning.

A debate ensued,

And the question being put,

It was resolved in the affirmative.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. FRIDAY, MARCH 1, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

The Congress proceeded to ballot for the Captains in the second regiment of
Rifle-men.

And the ballots being reckoned, the following gentlemen were declared duly
elected, by majority of votes, viz.

Samuel Tailor, Esquire. James Duff, Esquire. George Wade, Esquire. Richard
Richardson, jun. Esquire. William Brown, Esquire.
RESOLVED, That no vessels whatsoever, shall pass any armed posts in the rivers
and inlets, or on the coast of this colony, until a satisfactory account shall
have been given of them at such posts: And that public notice be given of this
resolution.

RESOLVED, That public notice be given, That a Commissary-General is wanted:
And that the nomination of that officer be by the Council of Safety.

The Hon. Mr. Lowndes, with Col. Parsons, being returned from Georgia, Mr.
Lowndes reported, that he, with Col. Parsons, and Capt. Savage, having found
the Congress of that colony dissolved, they made every representation to the
Council of Safety, to induce them to cooperate with this colony, in continuing
the non-exportation resolution of the Continental Congress: That the Council
represented to them the great opposition, in Savannah, to the measures of
Congress* which had not entered into any decisive resolve on that head; but
that they would do every thing in their power to cooperate with us: And in
short, that it was their opinion, unless this colony interfered in a forcible
manner, exportation would speedily take place.

ORDERED, That the thanks of this Congress be returned to the Hon. Mr. Lowndes,
Col. Parsons, and Capt. Savage, for the zeal and diligence they have exerted in
the discharge of the business for which they were delegated by this Congress to
go to Georgia.

And thanks were accordingly returned to those gentlemen.

RESOLVED, That Col. Bull, in addition to the detachments in Savannah, from the
regiment under his command, do forthwith, from the most convenient parts of
Granville County, march as many men, including the draught already ordered for
Charlestown, to reinforce those detachments, as he shall think proper. And
that Col. Pinckney do immediately detach, not exceeding one hundred men, such
as shall offer themselves volunteers, from the militia now in Charlestown, and
cause them to be conveyed or marched to Savannah, to join the forces under the
orders of the commanding officer from this colony.

ORDERED, That Mr. President, the Hon. Mr. Lowndes, and Mr. John Rutledge, be a
Committee, to prepare a form of orders proper to be given to Col. Bull.

RESOLVED, That one Play Master be appointed for the two regiments of Rifle-men
resolved to be raised.

RESOLVED, That this Congress will immediately proceed to ballot for a
Play Master for the two regiments of Rifle-men.

And that officer being ballotted for accordingly,

Richard Mercer, Esquire was declared, by majority of votes, duly elected.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. SATURDAY, MARCH 2, 1776.
The Congress met,

And yesterday's journal was read.

Mr. Rutledge from the Committee to prepare a form of orders proper to be
delivered to Col. Bull, made a report, which being amended, was unanimously
agreed to as follows:

South Carolina. By Authority of Congress. To STEPHEN BULL, Esquire Colonel, or, To
the Commanding Officer for the time being, of the South Carolina forces ordered
to act in aid of Georgia.
WHereas there is reason to apprehend, that attempts will be made to cause the
merchant vessels in Savannah River to sail with their cargoes: And as such a
proceeding would be detrimental to the interest of America, it becomes this
colony to aid the friends of America in Georgia, by endeavoring, with them,
effectually to prevent the said vessels sailing with their cargoes: I herefore,
you are hereby ordered under the direction of the Colonel of the continental
forces in Georgia, and with the concurrence of the friends of America in that
colony, to take post on either side of Savannah River, with the troops under
your command, and use every effort in your power to incapacitate those vessels
from proceeding with their cargoes on their several voyages; and to that end,
cause them to be forthwith unrigged, their rudders taken off, and their sails
and rudders deposited in some secure place, or kept under a proper guard.

You are also ordered, under the direction and with the concurrence aforesaid,
to give every aid in your power for repelling insurrections and invasions
there, and securing and imprisoning every person in Georgia, whose going at
large may be dangerous to the liberties of America, or the security of that
colony.

Having executed these orders, you are, either with all or a part of the forces
under your command, to return to this colony, or remain in Georgia, at your
discretion, and so act, under the direction, and with the concurrence
aforesaid, as you shall think most advantageous to the American cause, until
you shall receive further instructions from the Congress or Council of Safety
of this colony; to whom you are, from time to time, to transmit full
information of your proceedings.


ORDERED, That an engrossed copy of the above orders be forthwith made out,
signed by Mr. President, and delivered to Col. Bull.

Which was done accordingly.

ORDERED, That the sum of two thousand pounds be advanced to Col. Bull, for the
above service, to be accounted for by him.

ORDERED, That Capt. Hammond, Mr. Richard Waring, and Mr. Douxsaint, be added
to the Committee on public accounts.

ORDERED, That Mr. Jacob Motte, and Capt. Alexander Moultrie, be added to the
Commissioners for signing the first emission of money, by authority of
Congress. And that Mr. John Izard, Capt. William Skirving, Mr. Richard Waring,
Capt. Robert Ladson, Mr. Elias Horry, jun. and Capt. Benjamin Smith, be added
to the Commissioners for signing the second emission, under the same authority.

Mr. Salvador, from the Committee to whom the report on the state of the
interior parts of the colony, lately in commotion, was recommitted, reported on
the part which had been recommitted.

ORDERED, That the said report be taken into consideration tomorrow.

ORDERED, That the Committee appointed to form a plan of government, do
forthwith sit, and that they do report tomorrow.

Adjourned to ten o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. SUNDAY, MARCH 3, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

ORDERED, That Col. Powell, Mr. Edwards, Mr. Neufville, Capt. Roger Smith,
Capt. Trapier, Mr. Salvador, and Mr. Matthewes, be a Committee to consider of
ways and means, for payment of the services already voted; and that they do
report tomorrow.

Read a letter from the Committee of St. Bartholomew's parish, dated the 29th
past, enclosing an inventory of the estate and effects of John Stuart, Esquire in
that parish, taken in consequence of the order of Congress of the 3d.

The Congress proceeded on the order of the day, to consider the recommitted
part of the report on the state of the interior parts of the colony lately in
commotion.

After some time spent in debate thereon.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. MONDAY, MARCH 4, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

The President of the Council of Safety laid before the Congress, a letter
which he had last night received from Mr. Habersham, in Georgia, dated
Savannah, February 28, 1776, representing the present state of public affairs
in that colony.

ORDERED, That Mr. Simon Berwick be added to the commissioners for signing the
first emission of money ordered by Congress.

RESOLVED, That a letter be forthwith written to Col. Bull, enclosing to him a
copy of the letter received from Savannah.

ORDERED, That Mr. Kershaw be added to the Committee on public accounts.

Col. Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, from the Committee appointed to prepare such
a plan or form of government as will best produce the happiness of the people,
and most effectually secure peace and good order in the colony, during the
continuance of the present dispute between Great Britain and the Colonies,
delivered in a report.

ORDERED, That the determination when the said report shall be taken into
consideration, be postponed till tomorrow morning eleven o'clock.

RESOLVED, That all the members of Congress within sixty miles of Charlestown,
who are still absent, be forthwith sent for, by special messengers, at their
own expense.

The Rev. Mr. Tennent, from the Committee to whom the Petition of William Hill,
relative to a bloomery, was referred, delivered in a report.

ORDERED, That the consideration thereof be postponed.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. TUESDAY, MARCH 5, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

ORDERED, That the Committee appointed to superintend and promote the making of
gunpowder in this colony, do forthwith make a report of their proceedings to
this Congress.

ORDERED, That Col. Powell, the Rev. Mr. Tennent, Mr. Corbett, Col. Gervais,
Mr. Felder, and Mr. Kershaw, be a Committee to consider and report the best
means of erecting a powder mill, and of promoting the making of gunpowder in
this colony.

Mr. President of the Council of Safety, laid before the Congress the following
papers, received this morning, by express, from Georgia, and addressed to their
Board, viz.

A letter from the Council of Safety of Georgia, dated Savannah, the 1st
instant.

Another letter from the same, dated the 2nd inst.

Copy of certain resolutions entered into by said Council -- same date.

Copy of a Proclamation issued by said Council -- same date.

RESOLVED, That the unanimous thanks of this Congress be returned, by Mr.
President, to the Council of Safety of Georgia, in terms of the highest
approbation of their noble and spirited conduct.

A return was made of the election of Thomas Tudor Tucker, Esquire on the 26th
past, to be a member of the present Congress, to represent the parish of St.
George, Dorchester.

Notice being at the same time given, that Mr. Tucker declined to serve.

ORDERED, That the Committee for the said parish of St. George, Dorchester, do
forthwith take the proper measures for filling up the vacancy.

The Rev. Mr. Tennent from the Committee to consider and report the best means
of promoting the making of Nitre, in this colony, delivered in a report.

RESOLVED, That Henry Peronneau and Benjamin Dart, Esqrs. joint Public
Treasurers, be ordered forthwith to lay before this Congress an exact state of
the Treasury under their care.

ORDERED, That they be immediately served with a copy of the above resolve.

Capt. Roger Smith, from the Committee to consider of ways and means for
payment of the services already voted, delivered in a report.

ORDERED, That Mr. President, Mr. John Rutlege, Col. Powell, Col. C. C.
Pinckney, and Capt. Shubrick, be a Committee to prepare proper rules and
articles for the better regulation and government of the navy of this colony.

The Congress then proceeded in the order of the day.

After a considerable time spent in debate,

A motion was made, That this Congress do postpone the consideration of the
report on a plan or form of government, until May next.

A debate arose,

The question was put,

And passed in the negative.

RESOLVED, That this Congress will, on Thursday morning next, in a Committee of
the whole, take into consideration the report of the Committee who were
appointed, by ballot, to prepare such a plan or form of government as will best
produce the happiness of the people, and effectually secure peace and good
order in the colony.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. WEDNESDAY, MARCH 6, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

Mr. President laid before the Congress the following copy of the letter,
written by their order, to Georgia:

South Carolina. Charlestown, March 5, 1776. By Authority of Congress. To the
Honorable the Council of Safety for Georgia. GENTLEMEN,
YOUR letters of the 1st and 2d instant, and your resolutions, order, and
proclamation of those dates, were laid before the Congress, transfusing a
general and perfect joy. -- And the Congress, sensible of the vast importance
which your exemplary conduct must be of to the American cause, unanimously
voted their thanks; and I have the honor thus to transmit them to you, for
your having decisively taken the noble, politic, and vigorous resolution, That
the vessels in the ports of Savannah, ready to sail, contrary to the interest
of America, shall be forthwith unrigged and unruddered; and that, rather than
the enemy shall possess those vessels and your capital, ALL shall perish in a
noble conflagration, lighted by yourselves -- an instance of heroic principle,
not exceeded by any, and equalled but by few, in history.

Your conduct, in citing such of the inhabitants of Savannah, as had abandoned
their possessions in that town, to return to its defense, under penalty of
being deemed to have deserted such property, and of being excluded from any
support toward obtaining an indemnification for any loss they may sustain by a
general conflagration, received the highest applause, as being worthy of
imitation -- The policy and justice of the measure are equally conspicuous.

In short, the Congress feel the greatest satisfaction, from their having
anticipated your call for assistance; it is sufficient that we know our friends
stand in need of our aid. We hope, that our forces under Col. Bull, will fully
accommodate your necessities: And you may rest assured, that we shall continue
to afford the friends of America, in Georgia, every support in our power.

I have the honor to be, Gentlemen, Your most humble Servant, WILLIAM-HENRY
DRAYTON, President.


Mr. Peronneau, and Mr. Dart, in conformty to the order of yesterday, attended,
and delivered in the following

STATE of the PAPER CURRENCY, in the PUBLIC TREASURY of SOUTH CAROLINA:
Of lawful bills of credit, so torn, and obliterated, as not to be current, of
various denominations, about L. 50,000 0 0 Of tax certificates, and public
orders, out of date, and kept to be destroyed, 20,620 0 0 Of certificates,
issued by the House of Assembly, 17,900 0 0 Of certificates, issued by the
Congress, 23 15 0 There is owing on bonds to the King, for negro duties, 11,693
12 10 And on notes to the Joint Treasurers for other duties 18,693 18 4 March
6, 1776. L. 118,931 6 2
Signed HENRY PERONNEAU, BENJAMIN DART,
Joint Public Treasurers.

The report from the Committee on ways and means, for payment of the services
already voted, was taken into consideration.

And the said report having been debated, and amended, the Congress came to the
following resolutions thereupon:

Whereas it appears, that on the 28th day of February, after discharging the
services now due, there remains in the Colony Treasury, no more of the one
million one hundred and twenty thousand pounds, issued by authority of
Congress, than three hundred thousand pounds: And whereas the charge of the
naval and military establishments, calculated from the first instant to first
of January next, will amount to one million one hundred and nineteen thousand
two hundred and seventy-six pounds; so that, should this colony obtain the
allowance for three continental battalions, with rations at three shillings per
man per day, amounting to three hundred and sixty-five thousand three hundred
pounds, with the sum remaining in the Treasury, there will be a deficiency of
four hundred and fifty-three thousand nine hundred and seventy-six pounds, and
there may be wanted, for contingencies, two hundred and ninety-six thousand and
twenty-four pounds more: Therefore,

RESOLVED, That a sum not exceeding seven hundred and fifty thousand pounds
currency, in bills or certificates, in the quantities, and of the denominations
following, be stamped or printed, signed, and lodged in the Treasury, viz.

2000 bills of one hundred pounds each, 3700 of fifty pounds each, 5200 of
twenty-five pounds each, 9000 of fifteen pounds each, 5000 of three pounds
each, 10,000 of two pounds five shillings each, 5500 of two pounds each, 10,000
bills of one pounds fifteen shilings each, 6000 of one pounds ten shillings
each, 10,000 of seventeen shillings and sixpence each; 10,000 of twelve
shillings and sixpence each, 12,000 of six shillings and three pence each,
10,000 of five shillings each, 10,000 of three shillings and nine pence each,
10,000 of two shillings and sixpence each, 10,000 of one shilling and three
pence each.
RESOLVED, That the Public Faith of this Colony be, and it is hereby solemnly
pledged, to provide funds for calling in and sinking the bills to be issued
under the foregoing resolutions.

And whereas notwithstanding the great issue of paper Currency, it appears,
that cash is scarce in circulation: But to avoid a redundancy of such currency,

RESOLVED, That a power be, and is hereby vested in the Council of Safety, to
borrow on interest, the whole or any part of the said sum of seven hundred and
fifty thousand pounds, now resolved to be issued, if they shall find it
expedient and practicable.

The report of the Committee to whom the petition of William Hill, was
referred, being taken into consideration, debated on, and amended.

RESOLVED, That the sum of one thousand pounds currency, be paid by the
Commissioners of the Treasury, to William Hill, upon his producing and
depositing with them, proper conveyances and titles of his land, and the
improvements thereon, situated on Allison's creek, a branch of Catawba river,
in St. Mark's parish, to be made to Col. Thomas Neel, Capt. Samuel Watson, and
Mr. John How, in trust for the public, for repayment of the said sum of one
thousand pounds -- within the term of two years.

RESOLVED, That no moneys be issued by Henry Peronneau or Benjamin Dart, Esqrs.
Joint Public Treasurers, out of the Public Treasury, until the further order of
this Congress, or authority derived from them.

The following prohibition was accordingly issued by Mr. President, and served
upon the said Treasurers:

South Carolina. Charlestown, March 6, 1776. By Authority of Congress. To
Henry Peronneau and Benjamin Dart, Esqrs. Joint Public Treasurers. GENTLEMEN,
YOU are hereby prohibited from issuing or causing to be issued, any public
money in your charge, without order first had and obtained from the Congress,
or proper authority derived from them.

I am, Gentlemen, Your most humble Servant, WILLIAM-HENRY DRAYTON, President.


Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. THURSDAY, MARCH 7, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

On motion, the Congress entered into the following resolution:

Whereas some doubts have arisen whether the bounty money, and the sum allowed
for clothing, to the men inlisted into the colony regiment of Artillery, was
intended, by the resolve of Congress of the 22d of February last, to extend to
the two companies to be raised for the defense of Fort Lyttelton and
George-Town: It is hereby declared and resolved, that the same bounty and
allowance for clothing shall be paid to and for the men inlisted in the said
companies, as to those who are raised for the regiment of Artillery.

A motion was made, That the men to be raised for the regiment of Rangers, be
inlisted to serve until the first day of June next, unless sooner discharged by
proper authority, upon one month's pay being advanced.

A debate arose,

And the question being put,

Resolved in the affirmative.

ORDERED, That Capt. Hammond, Col. Thomas, Major Williamson, Mr. Kershaw, Mr.
Beard and Mr. Felder, be a Committee to consider and report the most proper
places for erecting of Iron-works in this colony, and what encouragement from
the public, in their opinion, may be most effectual to promote the
establishment of such works, and the manufacturing of iron.

RESOLVED, That the order of the day be postponed. And, that this Congress will
tomorrow morning, nine o'clock, resolve itself into a Committee of the whole,
to take the same into consideration.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. FRIDAY, MARCH 8, 1776.
The Congress met.

And yesterday's journal was read.

RESOLVED, That this Congress will now resolve itself into a Committee of the
whole, to take into consideration the report on a plan or form of government.

After some time spent therein.

Col. Powell from the Committee of the whole, reported, That having taken into
consideration the report on a plan or form of government, they had made some
progress therein and desired leave to sit again.

RESOLVED, That this Congress will tomorrow, again resolve itself into a
Committee of the whole, and resume the consideration of the said report.

Mr. President informed the Congress, that he had just received a letter, by
express, from Georgia, containing very important intelligence.

ORDERED, That the said letter be read.

Read accordingly, a letter from the Council of Safety in Georgia, signed
William Ewen, President, and dated Savannah, March 4, 1776.

ORDERED, That the Secretary to this Congress do forthwith cause the said
letter to be published in a Gazettee Extraordinary.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. SATURDAY, MARCH 9, 1776.
The Congress met,

And the journal of yesterday was read.

The Congress resolved itself into a Committee of the whole, to resume the
consideration of the report on a plan or form of government.

And some time being spent in the said Committee,

Major Cattle reported, That they had made some progress in the report on the
plan or form of government, and desired leave to sit again.

RESOLVED, That this Congress will, tomorrow, again resolve itself into a
Committee of the whole, to resume the consideration of the said report.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. SUNDAY, MARCH 10, 1776.
The Congress met.

The Rev. Mr. Turquand performed Divine Service.

The journal of yesterday was read.

RESOLVED, That the resolution of Congress in January 1775, prohibiting the
killing of Sheep in this colony, be repealed. And in lieu thereof, it is now
Resolved, That no lambs, or sheep under two years old, shall be killed for sale.

Agreeable to the resolve of yesterday, the Congress resolved itself into a
Committee of the whole.

After some time spent therein,

Major Cattle reported, That they had made a farther progress in the report
before them; and desired leave to sit again.

RESOLVED, That this Congress will tomorrow, again resolve itself into a
Committee of the whole, to resume the consideration of the report on the plan
or form of government.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. MONDAY, MARCH 11, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

RESOLVED, That every soldier or militia man, who shall engage to labor on the
public works, shall in addition to their regimental or militia pay, receive
such pay, as with each of them shall be agreed by Mr. Daniel Cannon, who shall
weekly render in and receive payment on his account for such services.

The Congress, agreeable to the order of yesterday, again resolved itself into
a Committee of the whole, to resume the consideration of the report on the plan
or form of government.

And having spent some time therein.

Major Cattle, from the said Committee reported, that they had made a farther
progress, and desired leave to sit again.

RESOLVED, That this Congress will tomorrow again resolve itself into a
Committee of the whole, to resume the consideration of the said report.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. TUESDAY, MARCH 12, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

The Congress, agreeable to the resolve of yesterday* resolved itself into a
Committee of the whole, and resumed the consideration of the report on a plan
or form of government.

After some time spent therein,

Major Cattle, from the said Committee, reported, that they had made a further
progress, and desired leave to sit again.

RESOLVED, That this Congress will tomorrow again resolve itself into a
Committee of the whole, to proceed on the said report.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. WEDNESDAY, MARCH 13, 1776.
The Congress met,

And the journal of Yesterday read.

ORDERED, That Mr. Loocock, Mr. Theodore Gailard, jun. Mr. Kershaw, Mr. Toomer
and Mr. Ve^ree, be a Committee to inquire and report the quantity of salt now
in the colony, and the prices at which the respective holders purchased the
same.

RESOLVED, That no person shall have permission to remove out of this colony,
until such person, so intending to remove with permission, shall have first
given ten days public notice, by advertisements affixed at the doors of the
State House, of his or her intention to apply for such leave.

The Congress having resumed the consideration of the report to inquire into
the state of the interior parts of the colony, lately in commotion, and the
most likely measures to preserve peace, and to prevent future commotions
therein; and having gone through the said report.

RESOLVED, That a declaration of pardon and amnesty be published to the late
insurgents, with certain exceptions.

That all persons who shall hereafter bear arms against, or shall be active in
opposing, the measures of the Continental or Colony Congress, and upon due
conviction thereof, before a majority of the Committee of the district or
parish where such persons reside, shall be disarmed, and, at the discretion of
the said Committee, taken into custody, and, if necessary thereto, the said
Committee shall call in the aid of the military, as soon as possible,
transmitting to the Congress or Council of Safety, an account of such
proceedings.

That all reasonable indulgence ought to be given to the aforesaid late
insurgents, and as far as is consistent with the public safety, they be allowed
to trade as usual, except for arms and ammunition.

That if any person who has been disarmed, shall convince the Committee
aforesaid, That he sincerely desires to join in support of the American cause,
his arms shall be restored to him, and in every respect he shall be put on the
footing of an Associator, upon his taking the following oath:

I A.B. do, upon the Holy Evangelists (of according to the form of my
profession) freely, voluntarily, and without the least compulsion, evasion, or
mental reservation, solemnly swear and declare, that I will, at all times, to
the best of my power, aid and support the authority of Congress, and every
authority derived from them: And also, that I will pay obedience to the
Continental and Provincial Councils, according to the true meaning and spirit
of the Association entered into by the Congress of this colony, on the 4th of
June last. SO HELP ME GOD.

That if any person, having been disarmed, shall, without leave of the
Committee aforesaid, be found in possession of arms or ammunition, or be
convicted of having purchased either of those articles, he shall again be
disarmed, and committed to close confinement, by the said Committee; they
transmitting as soon as possible, to the Congress or Council of Safety, an
account of such proceeding.

That all Commissions of officers, who have been in arms against the authority
of Congress, or who have been or shall be convicted of having been active in
opposing the authority of Congress, or having refused to act in support of that
authority, be, and shall be null and void.

That the respective Committees, and the supporters of the American cause,
ought to discourage the use of any opprobrious language, reflecting upon the
late misbehaviour of the aforesaid insurgents, who, behaving in a peaceable
manner, ought to be treated with friendship and humanity, tenderness and
moderation, as the Congress wishes to reclaim rather than to punish.

RESOLVED, That the consideration of the order of the day be postponed.

RESOLVED, That this Congress will tomorrow, again resolve itself into a
Committee of the whole, to resume the consideration of the report on a plan or
form of government.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow,

In CONGRESS. THURSDAY, MARCH 14, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

The Congress resolved itself into a Committee of the whole, according to the
resolve of yesterday, and resumed the consideration of the report on a plan or
form of government.

After some time spent therein,

Major Cattle, from the said Committee, delivered in a partial report, on a
plan or form of government in this colony, until an accommodation* shall take
place between Great Britain and the British American colonies.

And the said report being read.

ORDERED, That the same be taken into consideration tomorrow.

ORDERED, That Mr. President do prepare a draught of a declaration of pardon
and amnesty, to the late insurgents, agreeable to the resolution of this
Congress of yesterday.

RESOLVED, That the Committees for George-Town and Beaufort, respectively, be,
and they are hereby, authorized and empowered to purchase, and fit out, a
proper armed vessel, at each of those ports, for the protection of the trade
and navigation thereof.

The report of the Committee, to point out the best mode of encouraging the
making of Saltpeter in this colony, being taken into consideration.

After some debate thereon, the Congress

RESOLVED, That Doctor David Ramsay, be requested to superintend the public
nitre works in Charlestown, and to direct the manufacturing of nitre at the
said works: And that the sum of five hundred pounds be lodged in Dr. Ramsay's
hands, for the repairing of the said works, and for the carrying on the
manufacture of nitre thereat to the best advantage, to be by him accounted for.

That the said works be open to all persons, who, for the purpose of acquiring
instruction, shall choose to visit them: And that Doctor Ramsay be requested to
publish, as soon as he can, the most easy and simple method of manufacturing
nitre; and that, from time to time, he also publish such further improvements
therein as he may experience.

That a person be appointed by every Parochial or District Committee, to
receive all such good nitre made in the colony, as shall be offered to such
person; and the said Committees shall transmit the quantities so received, to
the Council of Safety; who, after the nitre now belonging to the public, shall
be made into gunpowder, shall then be authorized to exchange gunpowder for
Saltpeter, at the rate of one pound of gunpowder, manufactured at the public
works, for one pound and a half of nitre transmitted as aforesaid: And where
the owner of the nitre shall not choose such powder in exchange, he may
receive, in lieu thereof, twenty shillings currency the pound.

ORDERED, That the Secretary do forthwith cause a number of copies of
directions, for an easy process in the making of Saltpeter, sent by Mr. Lynch
from Philadelphia, to be printed, and distributed amongst the members, that
they may be properly dispersed.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. FRIDAY, MARCH 15, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

The Congress proceeded to take under consideration, the report of the
Committee of the whole, on a plan or form of government in this colony.

And proceeding in that clause of the first section of the said report That
this Congress, being a full and free representation of the people, shall
henceforth be called the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of South Carolina.

A motion was made, That the said clause be struck out.

After some debate,

The question was put,

And passed in the negative.

On reading the clause, "That this Congress, as a General Assembly, shall
continue as such, until the 20th day of July next."

A motion was made for an amendment, by striking out the words "20th of July,"
and inserting in their stead, the words "21st of October.

And the question being put,

Resolved in the affirmative.

The second section of the said report being read,

A motion was made, That the words "Legislative Council," be struck out.

A debate ensued,

And the question being put,

The Congress divided,

The yeas went forth,

Teller for the Yeas, Col. Gadsden.

Teller for the Nays, Col. Pinckney.

Yeas 30 Nays 40
So that it was determined in the negative.

A motion was then made, That the said Legislative Council shall consist of
twenty-one members, eleven whereof to be a quorum.

After some time spent in debate,

The question was put,

And passed in the negative,

On motion, That the said Council shall consist of seventeen members, nine of
them to be a quorum.

The question was put,

And passed in the negative.

A motion was made, That the said Council shall consist of fifteen members,
whereof nine to be a quorum.

And the question being put,

It passed in the negative.

A motion was made, That the members of the said Legislative Council, be chosen
by ballot, "from among the members of the General Assembly."

After some time spent in debate,

The question being put,

Resolved in the affirmative.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. SATURDAY, MARCH 16, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

The Congress resumed the consideration of the report of the Committee of the
whole, on a plan or form of government.

And the third section of the said report being read,

A motion was made, To strike out the word "President," and, to insert instead
thereof, the "word Governor."

After some debate,

The question was put,

And passed in the negative.

The fourth section of the said report being read,

A motion was made for an amendment, by inserting, after the words, "by
ballot," the words, "from among themselves, or the people at large."

The question being put,

Resolved in the affirmative.

The fifth section of the said report being read*

A motion was made for an amendment, by inserting, after the words "Legislative
Council," Provided always, That no officer in the army or navy, in the service
of the continent, or of this colony, shall be eligible.

After some time spent in debate,

The question being put,

Resolved in the affirmative.

The Congress then proceeded in the seventh section of the report, on a plan or
form of government.

A motion was made to amend the same, by striking out the words "bills of
supply," and inserting instead thereof, the words "money bills."

After some debate,

The question being put,

Resolved in the affirmative.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. SUNDAY, MARCH 17, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

The Congress resumed the consideration of the report of the Committee of the
whole, on a plan or form of government.

The eleventh section of the said report being read,

A motion was made, to strike out the words "every year," and to insert in lieu
thereof, the words "the same days in every second year."

After some debate,

The question being put,

Resolved in the affirmative.

On motion, to agree with that part of the said eleventh section, which
directs, "That each parish and district have the same representation as at
present."

A debate ensued,

And the question being put,

Resolved in the affirmative.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. MONDAY, MARCH 18, 1776.
The Congress met according to adjourment,

And the journal of yesterday was read.

RESOLVED, That the Council of Safety be, and they are hereby, empowered and
directed, to appoint a proper person as Barrack-Master, whose duty it shall be
to take care of the barracks, and to procure proper quarters and barrack
necessaries for the colony troops and militia.

The Congress resumed the consideration of the report of the Committee of the
whole, on a plan or form of government.

Upon reading the last clause of the eleventh section,

A motion was made, to amend the same, by inserting at the end thereof, the
words, "and construed to mean clear of debt."

A debate arose,

And the question being put,

Resolved in the affirmative.

The thirteenth section being read,

A motion was made for an amendment, by inserting the words, "shall not be
elected oftener than twice successively."

A debate ensued,

And the question being put.

It passed in the negative.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS, TUESDAY, MARCH 19, 1776.
The Congress met,

And the journal of yesterday was read.

The consideration of the report of the Committee of the whole, on a plan or
form of government was resumed.

After some progress made therein,

ORDERED, That the further consideration thereof be postponed.

The Congress then proceeded to take into consideration the report of the
Committee to inquire what quantity of salt is in the colony.

And the said report being debated on, and gone through, the following
resolutions were thereupon entered into.

Whereas information has been laid before the Congress, that certain persons
do monopolize the necessary article of Salt, and demand an extravagant price
for the same; and also require specie in payment, to the detriment of the
continental and colonial currency: The Congress do therefore

Resolve, That no person do hereafter presume to sell SALT for more than
twenty-five shillings per bushel, exclusive of the expense of reasonable
freight or carriage to the distant parts of the colony. And that Mr. Joseph
Kershaw, Mr. Loocock, Mr. Samuel Prioleau, jun. Capt. Maurice Simons, and Capt.
Samuel Legare, for Charlestown; Mr. Daniel de Saussure, and Mr. Thomas Hughes,
for Beaufort; and Mr. George Croft, and Mr. Anthony Bonneau, for George-Town,
be, and they are hereby, appointed Commissioners, and empowered to enquire
after, and buy up out of the hands of individuals, all quantities of SALT,
which such individuals may have, more than necessary for their respective
families; and to dispose of the same, in small quantities, at the same rate.
And, that the said Commissioners do also purchase, all the SALT which may be
imported within six months.

That Col. Laurens, Mr. Ferguson, the Rev. Mr. Tennent, Mr. Edwards, and Mr.
Gibbes, be and they are hereby, appointed Commissioners, to erect and
superintend a PUBLIC SALT WORK, at or near Charlestown: That Mr. Joseph
Allston, Capt. William Allston, Mr. Benjamin Young, Mr. Peter Simons, and Mr.
Thomas Butler, be, and they are, in like manner, appointed Commissioners, for a
PUBLIC SALT WORK on the northern coast; And that Capt. Thomas Tucker, Mr.
Daniel Jenkins, Mr. Joseph Fickling, Mr. James Clark, and Mr. James Fickling,
be, and they are hereby, appointed Commissioners, in like manner, for a PUBLIC
SALT WORK, on the southern coast of this colony. That each board of the said
Commissioners respectively, shall have power to draw upon the colony Treasury,
for any sum not exceeding Seven Thousand Pounds currency, for defraying the
necessary expenses incurred by this service. And, that they shall sell the SALT
to be made at the said public works, at the most reasonable rate.

RESOLVED, That all continental currency, all currency issued by authority of
the Congress of this colony, and all tax-certificates, and other certificates
and orders issued by authority of the Commons House of Assembly, shall be, and
they are hereby declared, legal tenders, in all payments whatsoever, within
this colony.

The Congress then again resumed the consideration of the report on a plan or
form of government.

Upon reading the sixteenth section,

A debate arose, and

A motion was made to amend the same, by striking out the words, "there shall
be a Chancellor, who," and inserting instead thereof, the words "the
Vice President of the colony and the Privy Council, or the Vice President and a
majority of the Privy Council for the time being."

The question being put,

Resolved in the affirmative.

A motion was made to amend that clause of the said section, respecting an
Ordinary.

And the question being put,

It passed in the negative.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. WEDNESDAY, MARCH 20, 1776.
The Congress met,

And the journal of yesterday was read.

RESOLVED, That one half of the established rates of ferriage, for single
persons and horses, is a sufficient allowance for the transporting any number
more than three at a time of the colony forces or militia in times of alarm,
over any of the established ferries in this colony.

The Congress resumed the consideration of the report of the Committee of the
whole, on a plan or form of government.

Upon reading the section relative to a Court of Appeals,

A motion was made to disagree to the said section.

A debate arose,

And the question being put,

Resolved in the affirmative.

The nineteenth section of the said report being read,

On motion for an amendment, by inserting the words, "That no persons selling
liquors shall be put into the commission of the peace."

A debate arose,

And the previous question being put,

It passed in the negative.

A motion was made to strike out of the same section, the words, that they [the
magistrates] shall not be entitled to fees, except on prosecucutions for
felony."

After some debate,

The question was put,

And passed in the negative.

Upon reading the twenty-fifth section of the said report,

A motion was made, to insert, after the words, "during pleasure," the words,
"until otherwise directed by resolution of the General Assembly and Legislative
Council."

After some debate,

The question being put,

Resolved in the affirmative.

ORDERED, That Mr. President, Major Cattle, Capt. Moultrie, Capt. Lynch, and
Mr. Salvador, be a Committee to consider and report tomorrow morning, what
salaries are proper to be allowed to the several public officers.

The Congress being informed of the arrival of a Committee from North Carolina,
to concert with a Committee of this Congress, a plan of measures for mutual
defense and assistance.

ORDERED, That the present members of the Council of Safety, together with Col.
Gadsden, and all the other field officers of the several corpse of regular
forces of this colony, be a Committee to confer with the Committee from
North Carolina, and with them to concert a proper plan.

Col. Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, from the Committee, to prepare proper rules
and regulations for the government of the navy of this colony, delivered in a
report,

And the said report being read.

ORDERED, That the consideration thereof be postponed.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. THURSDAY, MARCH 21, 1776.
The Congress met,

And the journal of yesterday was read.

An act of the Britsh Parliament, just received from Georgia, declaring all
seizures of the persons and property of, and damages done to the American
colonists before the passing of the said act, from Massachusetts Bay to Georgia
inclusive, to be legal; and also declaring all the said colonies in actual
rebellion, entitled, An act to prohibit all trade and intercourse with the
colonies of NewHampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode-lsland, Connecticut,
New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, the three Lower Counties on Delaware,
Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia, during the
continuance of the present rebellion within the said colonies respectively; for
repealing an act, made in the 14th year of the reign of his present Majesty, to
discontinue the landing and discharging, lading or shipping, of goods, wares,
and merchandise, at the town, and within the harbor, of Boston, in the
province of Massachusetts Bay; and also two other acts, made in the last
session of parliament, for restraining the trade and commerce of the colonies
in the said acts respectively mentioned, and to enable any person or persons,
appointed and authorized by his Majesty, to grant pardons, to issue
proclamations, in the cases, and for the purposes, therein mentioned, was read.

RESOLVED, That a copy of the said act be immediately dispatched, and conveyed
with all possible haste, to the Continental Congress at Philadelphia. And that
proper extracts from the said act be forthwith made, printed, and published
here.

RESOLVED, That the ship Port-Henderson, Henry Aitken, master, now lying under
the cannon of fort Johnson, and bound for London, be forthwith seized, and
brought up to Charlestown, under the care of, the Prosper ship of war That
upon the said ship being brought up, the cargo on board be forthwith landed,
and sold. And that, the said cargo being sold, the moneys arising from such
sale, be lodged in the Colony Treasury.

ORDERED, That Mr. Loocock be added to the Board of Commissioners appointed to
erect and superintend the intended Public Salt-Work, at or near Charlestown.

Major Cattle, from the Committee to consider and report, what salaries are
proper to be allowed to the several public officers, delivered in a report;

And the said report being taken into immediate consideration,

A motion was made, to agree with that part thereof, which recommends a
Secretary to be allowed the President and Commander in Chief, with a salary of
two thousand pounds a year.

After some debate,

The question was put,

And it passed in the negative.

A motion was made to agree with the report, in fixing the salary of the
President and Commander in Chief, at ten-thousand pounds a year.

After some time spent in debate,

The question was put:

The Congress divided,

The Yeas went forth,

Tellers, For the Yeas, Capt. Vanderhorst. For the Nays, Mr. Salvador.
Yeas 25 Nays 27


And it was determined in the negative.

A motion was made, that a yearly salary of nine thousand pounds be allowed the
said President and Commander in Chief.

The question being put,

Resolved in the affirmative.

On motion to agree with the report, That the Assistant-Judges be allowed a
yearly salary of twenty-eight hundred pounds each.

A debate ensued,

And the question being put,

It passed in the negative.

A motion was then made, That a salary of two thousand and five hundred pounds
per annum, be allowed to each of the said Judges.

After some debate,

The question was put,

And it passed in the negative.

On motion to agree with the report, That a salary of one thousand pounds a
year be allowed to the Ordinary.

A debate arose,

And the question being put,

Resolved in the affirmative.

A motion was made, That a Judge of Admiralty be allowed a salary of five
hundred pounds a year.

After some time spent in debate,

The question was put,

And it passed in the negative.

The said report being amended and agreed to,

ORDERED, That the same be added to, and made the 34th section of the report of
the Committee of the whole, on a plan or form of government.

ORDERED, That Mr. Benjamin Eddings be added to the Commissioners for erecting
a Public Salt-Work on the southern coast of this colony.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. FRIDAY, MARCH 22, 1776.
The Congress met,

And the journal of yesterday was read.

A proposal of Mr. William Bellamy, That he, with some assistance from the
Public, would undertake to erect and complete a proper mill, for making paper,
and cutting files at the same time, was presented and read.

ORDERED, That the said proposal be referred to a Committee of the following
gentlemen, viz. Mr. Kershaw, Mr. Edwards, Mr. Loocock, the Rev. Mr. Tennent,
and Mr. William Bull; and that they do report thereon as soon as possible.

RESOLVED, That Col. Powell, Col. Fuller, Mr. Loocock, Capt. Shubrick, Dr.
Oliphant, Mr. Cannon, and Mr. Brown, be, and they are hereby appointed
Commissioners, for laying forthwith such obstructions to the navigation of the
channels over Charlestown bar and in the harbor, as they shall judge
necessary, to prevent the passage of ships of war. And that the Council of
Safety do give every assistance to the said Commissioners, and cause the
necessary sums of money to be advanced, for the carrying on this service.

Col. Powell, from the Committee to consider and report the best means of
erecting a powdermill, and promoting the making of gunpowder in this colony,
delivered in a report;

And the said report being considered, the Congress came to the following
resolution:

Whereas Henry Felder, Esquire having proposed to manufacture sulphur and nitre
into gunpowder: According to his offer, it is

RESOLVED, That a proper quantity of nitre and sulphur, belonging to the
Public, be put into the hands of the said Henry Felder, Esquire to be by him made
up into gunpowder, and delivered into the Public Magazine: That Mr. Felder be
allowed seven shillings and six pence currency for each pound of gunpowder, by
him so made up, from such materials, exclusive of the charge of carriage. And
that upon his delivering a quantity of gunpowder into the hands of the Public
Receiver, he be, from time to time, supplied with an equal quantity of
materials, to be in like manner made up into gunpowder.

RESOLVED, That the following members of Congress be immediately, at their own
expense, summoned to attend the public service in Congress, on or before the
26th instant, viz. Peter Ledger, Gabriel Capers, Elias Ball, jun. Richard
Walter, Benjamin Smith, John Izard, James Akin, Charles Elliott, Robert Ladson,
George Haig, William Skirving, Thomas Horry, Capers Boon, Elias Horry, jun.
Theodore Gaillard, jun. Thomas Tucker, Benjamin Garden, Isaac Macpherson, John
Gaillard, Philip Porcher, Peter Sinckler, and Hezekiah Maham, Esquires. And
further

RESOLVED, That if any of the said members shall fail, without good and
sufficient reason, of being present in Congress as aforesaid, such absent
members shall be, at their own expense, taken into custody.

RESOLVED, That the Commissioners of the Treasury do pay the forty shillings
per day allowed by Congress to members attending the public service in
Congress, only by warrant from the President, specifying the sum due to the
member requiring payment, and that he has leave of absence.

Col. Laurens, from the Committee to confer with the Committee, from
North Carolina, and to concert a plan of measures for mutual defense and
assistance, delivered in a report;

And the said report being read, and agreed to,

RESOLVED, That three hundred men from Col. Powell's regiment, and two hundred
from Col. Horry's (exclusive of the militia on Waccamaw Neck) nearest to the
North Carolina boundaryline, be draughted and held in readiness, to march, on
the shortest notice, when required, to the assistance of that colony.

That one thousand men, from the district of Salisbury, should be draughted,
and held in readiness, to march, on the shortest notice, when required, to the
assistance of this colony. And,

That all expenses attending troops sent, from one, to the relief of the other
colony, should be paid by the colony from which they are sent; and that on
stating a proper account between the two colonies, the balance, in which one
shall be indebted to the other, shall be forthwith paid.

ORDERED, That the Committee appointed on the 18th of last month to consider,
among other things, of a proper division of the militia, and how the same may
be rendered most serviceable to the public, do forthwith sit, and give in a
report tomorrow.

ORDERED, That Major Williamson, Col. Gervais, Capt. Williams, and Capt. Winn,
be added to the said Committee.

Read a letter, received last night from the Council of Safety of Georgia,
dated 16th instant, with the sundry papers therein referred to, viz.

No. 1. Two letters from Messrs. Demere and Roberts to Col. M'Intosh, dated on
board the Charming Nancy, 3d and 4th March -- Col. M'Intosh's answer -- Letter
from Messrs. Demere and Roberts, 4th March.

No. 2. Letter from Col. M'Intosh to Messrs. Demere and Roberts -- Letter from
Capt. Barclay and Major Grant, dated on board the Hinchinbrook 6th March --
Col. M'Intosh's letter to them, 5th March -- Letter from Mr. Demere to Col.
M'Intosh, dated Hinchinbrook, 6th March.

No. 3. Letter from the Council of Safety in Georgia, to Capt. Barclay and
Major Grant, dated Savannah, 7th March -- Letter from Capt. Barclay and Major
Grant, to Anthony Stokes, Esquire dated on board the Scarborough, 14th March.

No. 4. Letter from the Council of Safety for Georgia, to Capt. Barclay and
Major Grant, dated Savannah, 16th March -- Copy of an intercepted letter from
James Tailor, dated on board the Christie, at Cockspur, 14th March, to Mr.
George Houston -- Copies of other intercepted letters, viz. from John Simpson
in London, dated 23d December, 1775, to Mr. George Houstoun; from Robert Grant
and Comp. in London, to the same, of same date; with an extract of a contract
with the Commissioners of the Victualling-Office; from Roger Kelsall in London,
dated 5th December, 1773; and from the same, dated 22d December, to Kelsall and
Spalding at Sunbury.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. SATURDAY, MARCH 23, 1776.
The Congress met,

And the journal of yesterday was read.

Thomas Waring, duly elected, and returned, a member of Congress for the parish
of St. George, Dorchester, in the room of William Sanders, Esquire deceased,
attending, and declaring that he was willing to serve,

ORDERED, That Mr. Waring do take his seat accordingly.

RESOLVED, That the Commissioners appointed yesterday for laying such
obstructions to the navigation of the channels over Charlestown Bar and in the
harbor, as they shall judge necessary, be, and they are hereby, authorized and
required, to prepare proper fire-vessels, for the most effectual annoyance of
any enemy that shall attempt to enter the said harbor.

ORDERED, That Capt. Lempriere be added to the said Commissioners.

RESOLVED, That all the letters which have been put on board the ship
Port-Henderson, be forthwith brought from thence, and lodged in the
Constitutional Post Office, and there delivered to the several persons
claiming; the claimants opening the same in the office, to prevent mis-delivery.

RESOLVED, That Mr. Edwards, Capt. Roger Smith, Mr. Hall, Mr. Loocock, Mr.
Corbett, and Mr. Dupont, be, and they are hereby, appointed Commissioners, for
unlading and valuing the cargo of the ship Port-Henderson, and for fixing a
reasonable rate at which the said cargo shall be sold, for consumption, or for
sale, at a price not exceeding the purchase and carriage, in small quantities
by retail; and for employing proper persons to execute this service, allowing
such proper persons a reasonable compensation for their trouble.

RESOLVED, That the Commissioners appointed to purchase Salt, do take, for the
public benefit, all such salt as they can find in the hands of private persons,
as expressed in the Resolve of the 19th instant, for the uses therein
mentioned; paying for the said salt twenty-five shillings per bushel, and
allowing for each family from whom such salt shall be taken, sufficient for
such family's use during six months.

Read a letter from Edward Rutledge, Esquire one of the delegates from this colony
in the Continental Congress, dated at Philadelphia, 1st March, 1776.

RESOLVED, That the delegates of this colony in the Continental Congress, or a
majority of such of them as shall, at any time, be present in the said
Congress, or any one of the said delegates, if no more than one shall be
present, be, and they and he, are and is, hereby authorized and empowered, for
and in behalf of this colony, to concert, agree to, and execute, every measure
which they or he, together with a majority of the Continental Congress, shall
judge necessary, for the defense, security, interest or welfare of this colony
in particular, and of America in general.

RESOLVED, That Roger Smith, Thomas Savage, John Matthewes, John Huger, John
Parker, Jacob Motte, Elias Horry, jun. Peter Ledger, and Alexander Moultrie,
Esquires, be, and they are hereby appointed Commissioners to stamp, and any
three of them to sign, the bills or certificates of the larger denominations
from one hundred pounds down to fifteen pounds; which bills shall also be
countersigned by any one of the Commissioners of the Treasury: And that John
Deas, John Scott, sen. John M'Call, sen. Joshua Ward, Samuel Prioleau, jun.
James Fisher, John Webb, William Doughty, Alexander Inglis, William Greenwood,
Samuel Legare, Nathaniel Russel, Thomas Jones, Peter Fayssoux, and Thomas
Waring, Esquires, be, and they are hereby appointed Commissioners, with all
possible dispatch, to have printed, and any two of them to sign, the bills of
smaller denominations, from three pounds down to one shilling and three pence;
voted on the 6th instant to be issued: And when stamped, printed, signed and
numbered as aforesaid, that they, from time to time, deliver all the said
bills, into the hands of the Commissioners of the Colony Treasury.

The report of the Committee, to whom were referred the petitions of Joseph
Buffington and William Wofford, Esquire being taken into consideration, and
amended; the Congress came to the following resolutions thereupon:

Whereas it appears, That the fifty acres of land, upon which iron works are to
be erected by Joseph Buffington, are not his, but the property of William
Wofford, Esquire or others; and that there is an encumbrance upon the said works,
already begun; and that the carrying on the said works will be a public
benefit: Therefore,

RESOLVED, That the said encumbrance, being two thousand three hundred and
eighty-one pounds, eight shillings and ten pence halfpenny, due to the Hon.
William-Henry Drayton, be paid; and that the sum of four thousand pounds be
lent, for the carrying on, and completing the said works, upon the following
terms, viz. That when the said William Wofford, or others, having legal right
so to do, shall have made, to the said Joseph Buffington, good and sufficient
title, in fee simple, to the said fifty acres of land; saving to the said
William Wofford, his heirs and assigns, that on no part of the said fifty acres
of land shall any grist or flour mill, to work by water, be erected, and that
the water shall not be stopped to the detriment of the said William Wofford,
his heirs and assigns; and the said Joseph Buffington shall then have made to
John Neufville, William Gibbes, and Peter Bacot, Esquires, in trust for the
public, good and sufficient titles in fee simple, and also titles in like
manner to one thousand acres of land, with timber, for fuel, contiguous
thereto, and Mr. Drayton shall have transferred to the said John Neufville,
William Gibbes, and Peter Bacot, Esquires, for the use of the public, all such
securities as he may have for the payment to him of the said encumbrance; then
the said sum of two thousand three hundred and eighty-one pounds, eight
shillings and ten pence halfpenny, shall, by the Commissioners of the
Treasury, be paid to Mr. Drayton; and the said Commissioners shall also then
pay into the hands of Col. John Thomas, Capt. James Williams, and Mr. John
Prince, the said sum of four thousand pounds, to be, by them, expended and laid
out, as Commissioners, for erecting and completing the said works. And that, if
the said sum of six thousand three hundred and eighty-one pounds, eight
shillings and ten pence halfpenny, shall not, by the said Joseph Buffington,
his heirs or assigns, be repaid to the Commissioners of the Treasury for the
time being, within four years next ensuing, then the said lands, with all the
improvements thereon, shall be sold, and the public reimbursed the said six
thousand three hundred and eighty-one pounds, eight shillings and ten pence
halfpenny, of the money arising from the sale; and the overplus, if any, be
paid to the said Joseph Buffington, his heirs or assigns.

And whereas the establishment of another iron work will also be of public
utility: Therefore,

RESOLVED, That the sum of three thousand pounds, for that purpose, be granted
to William Wofford; upon his giving full and sufficient Security for the
re-payment of the same, within four years, to the Commissioners of the Treasury
for the time being. Provided nevertheless, That the said sum of three thousand
pounds shall not be lent to the said William Wofford, until he shall have made,
or caused to be made, good-titles as aforesaid to the said Joseph Buffington,
to the said fifty acres of land. And also,

It is hereby declared, That the two iron works above specified, shall not be
entitled to receive the premiums already declared for the encouragement of iron
works.

Mr. Edwards, from the Committee to whom the proposal of Mr. William Bellamy
was referred, delivered in a report;

And the said report being taken into immediate consideration*

RESOLVED, That the sum of three thousand pounds currency, be advanced to the
said William Beliamy, out of the Colony Treasury, on loan, for the term of five
years, free of interest, in consideration, and for the express purpose, of his
forthwith erecting a proper mill for making paper and cutting files, in as
great perfection as in any part of Europe* He, the said Bellamy, giving
undeniable security to John Neusville, William Gibbes, and Peter Bacot,
Esquires, Commissioners of the Colony Treasury, for the performance thereof,
and for re-payment of the said sum, into the said Treasury, by the expiration
of the said term of five years.

On motion, That this Congress do now proceed to choose another captain for the
second regiment of riflemen, in the room of Capt. Richardson, resigned.

RESOLVED, That the said appointment be referred, and left, to the Council of
Safety.

RESOLVED, That Thomas Lynch, jun. Esquire on account of the alarming ill state of
health of his father, one of the delegates from this colony, at Philadelphia,
have leave of absence.

RESOLVED, That another delegate to represent this colony in the Continental
Congress, be forthwith chosen by this Congress, by ballot, in addition to, and
with as full powers, in all respects, as the delegates already chosen have, and
are invested with.

The Congress then proceeded to ballot for the said delegate;

And Thomas Lynch, jun. Esquire appeared to be, and was declared, duly elected;

RESOLVED, That Thomas Lynch, jun. Esquire be, and he is hereby, appointed a sixth
delegate from this colony, to represent the same in the Continental Congress.

Col. Powell, from the Committee to consider of a proper division of the
country militia, delivered in a report;

And the said report being taken into consideration immediately, amended, and
agreed to. It was

RESOLVED, That the regiment of militia, commanded by Col. Richard Richardson,
be, in the following manner, divided into four battalions; each under a
Lieutenant Colonel and Major resident in the district, and the whole under the
command of Col. Richardson, viz. That part of the said regiment lying eastward
of Santee and Wateree rivers, into two battalions, to be divided by
Rafting-Creek, from the mouth and north branch thereof up to its source, and
thence by a line due east to Lynch's creek; and the other part of the said
regiment, lying westward or Wateree river, into two other battalions, to be
divided by Wateree creek, and the south branch thereof up to its source, then
down Jackson's creek to the mouth, and to S^yra's ferry on Broad River. And,

That the fork between Saludy and Broad Rivers, be divided into three
regiments, according to the division of districts by the resolve of Congress of
the 9th of February last, one regiment in each of the said districts.

RESOLVED, That Thomas Lynch, sen. Esquire one of the delegates of this colony in
the Continental Congress, on account of his ill state of health, have leave to
return to this colony, if he shall think it necessary.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. SUNDAY, MARCH 24, 1776.
The Congress met,

And the journal of yesterday was read.

Mr. John Rutledge, from the Committee to prepare a plan or form of government,
in addition to their former partial report, made a further report;

And the said further report being taken into immediate consideration, and
amended, and the whole report being gone through:

ORDERED, That the same be forthwith fairly engrossed upon royal paper, and
laid before the Congress.

RESOLVED, That Gabriel Manigault, Thomas Smith, John Scott, sen. Samuel
Prioleau, sen. Lionel Chalmers, Esquires, and Messrs. Benjamin Baker, Richard
Muncreeff, Thomas Young, and William Banbury, be, and they are hereby,
appointed Commissioners, they, or any five of them, to appraise and value the
houses in Charlestown; in order that if, during the present unnatural civil
war, any of those houses should be damaged or destroyed, and any recompense
should hereafter be thought proper to be made, such owners of them as shall be
in readiness, by arms, to defend Charlestown, and widows and orphans, may be
recompensed accordingly. And that the said Commissioners, or a majority of
them, as aforesaid, shall, upon oath, and as soon as possible, make return of
the said appraisement, together with the names of the proprietors, or
inhabitants, of the houses respectively that are abandoned.

RESOLVED, That the same allowance as has been heretofore granted to the
delegates of this colony, be given to the delegates now representing, and to
represent, this colony in the Continental Congress.

RESOLVED, That the thanks of this Congress be forthwith, by Mr. President,
presented, by letter, to Col. Richard Richardson, for the very important and
signal services he has rendered to his country, and to the common cause, by
putting a stop to the late dangerous and alarming insurrection, which the
enemies of America had excited in the interior parts of the colony; desiring
the colonel to signify the thanks of this Congress also, to the officers and
men who were under his command upon that expedition.

RESOLVED also, That the thanks of this Congress be returned to Major Andrew
Williamson, for his important services on the same occasion.

And Major Williamson being present in Congress, received thanks accordingly.

RESOLVED, That Mr. President be desired to transmit the thanks of this
Congress to Major James Mayson, for his services upon the late expedition under
Col. Richardson.

RESOLVED, That the thanks of this Congress be returned to Stephen Bull, Esquire of
Sheldon, Colonel of the Granville county regiment of militia, for his important
services in the command of the colony forces in Savannah: And that he be
desired to signify their thanks to the officers and men then under his command.

And thanks were accordingly returned to Col. Bull.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. MONDAY, MARCH 25, 1776.
The Congress met.

And the journal of yesterday was read.

The report of the Committee to prepare proper rules and articles for the
government of the navy of this colony, being taken into consideration;

The said rules were amended, and agreed to.

ORDERED, That the Secretary do forthwith cause a proper number of copies of
the said rules and articles to be printed, for the use of the navy of this
colony.

RESOLVED, That every officer who actually keeps a servant, and does not take a
soldier from the regiment, to wait on him, shall be allowed a ration of
provision for such servant per day.

ORDERED, That Capt. Williams, Capt. Winn, Mr. Loocock, Mr. Prince, Col.
Wofford, and Mr. Beard, be a Committee, to consider and report proper places in
the interior parts of the colony, at which the election of members of Congress,
or of the General Assembly, should be held, where such places are not already
appointed, or where those, already appointed, may be improper or inconvenient;
and also of proper persons to attend and receive the votes of the electors.

Adjourned to nine o'clock tomorrow.

In CONGRESS. TUESDAY, MARCH 26, 1776.
The Congress met,

And the journal of yesterday was read.

The Committee to whom the petition of David Duncan was referred, reported,
That they had, to the satisfaction of both parties, settled the dispute between
him and Mrs. Lingard.

The engrossed copy of "a constitution or form of government" being laid before
the Congress,

ORDERED, That Col. C. C. Pinckney and Mr. Salvador, be a Committee, to examine
and compare the same with the rough draught thereof.

George King, Esquire was returned duly elected on the 6th instant, as a
representative for the parish of St. Matthew, in the room of Tacitus Gaillard,
Esquire who had declined serving.

On motion, to establish a proper rank between the officers of the land and sea
forces, of this colony.

Whereas it is expedient for the public service, that a proper rank should be
established between the officers in the navy, and between the officers in the
navy and the officers in the land forces of this colony: Therefore it is

RESOLVED, That rank be established in the following manner:

The captain of a ship or frigate, of not less than twenty guns, all not less
than nine-pounders, of three years standing, to rank with a colonel.

The captain of a ship or frigate, as aforesaid, of less than three years
standing, to rank with a lieutenant colonel.

The captain of a ship that does not carry twenty guns, all not less than
nine-pounders, to rank with a major.

The master or commander of a snow or brigantine, scooner or sloop, each
carrying not less than fifty men, to rank with a captain of foot. And,

Lieutenants in the navy to rank with lieutenants of foot.

Col. C. C. Pinckney reported, That he, with Mr. Salvador, had carefully
examined the engrossed copy of the constitution or form of government, and that
they found it correct.

ORDERED, That the following title be prefixed to the said engrossed copy:

SOUTH CAROLINA.
In a CONGRESS, begun and holden at Charlestown, on Wednesday the first day of
November, one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five, and continued, by diverse
adjournments, to Tuesday the twenty-sixth day of March, one thousand seven
hundred and seventy-six.

A CONSTITUTION, or Form of Government, agreed to, and Resolved upon, by the
Representatives of South Carolina.

RESOLVED, That Michael Kalteisen, Esquire while he continues to discharge the
duties of commissary of military stores for the regular forces, be allowed a
pay of forty shillings per day, for that service.

The Committee to whom the memorial of sundry inhabitants on Savannah-river,
Great Rocky-creek, and places adjacent, was referred, delivered in a report;

And the said report being taken into immediate consideration, was agreed to.

RESOLVED, That Fort-Royal, about eighteen miles above Fort-Charlotte on
Savannah-river, on the frontiers of this colony, is advantageously situated for
the security of the inhabitants, in case of an Indian war either with the
Creeks or Cherokees. That Major Williamson, Capt. Bowie, Capt. Andrew Pickens,
Adam-Crain Jones, Esquire and Mr. Rapley, be, and they are hereby, appointed
Commissioners, they, or a majority of them, to view the said fort, and to
report, upon oath, at the next meeting of Congress or General Assembly, the
state thereof, the expense of building it, and the damage done to the owner of
the land.

RESOLVED, That the paymaster to the two regiments of riflemen, be allowed a
daily pay of three pounds and ten shillings.

ORDERED, That the engrossed copy of the constitution or form of government,
with the title prefixed, be now read;

And the same being read, is as follows:

SOUTH CAROLINA. In a CONGRESS, begun and holden at Charlestown, on Wednesday
the first day of November, one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five, and
continued, by diverse adjournments, to Tuesday the twenty-sixth day of March,
one thousand seven hundred and seventy-six.
A CONSTITUTION, OR FORM OF GOVERNMENT, Agreed to, and Resolved upon, BY The
Representatives of South Carolina.
WHEREAS the British Parliament, claiming of late years a right to bind the
North-American Colonies by law, in all cases whatsoever, have enacted statutes
for raising a revenue in those colonies, and disposing of such revenue as they
thought proper, without the consent, and against the will of the colonists. And
whereas, it appearing to them, that (they not being represented in Parliament)
such claim was altogether unconstitutional; and, if admitted, would at once
reduce them from the rank of Freemen to a state of the most abject Slavery; the
said colonies, therefore, severally remonstrated against the passing, and
petitioned for the repeal of those acts -- but in vain. And whereas the said
claim being persisted in, other unconstitutional and oppressive statutes have
been since enacted, by which the powers of the Admiralty Courts in the colonies
are extended beyond their ancient limits, and jurisdiction is given to such
Courts in cases similar to those which in Great Britain are triable by jury --
Persons are liable to be sent to, and tried in, Great Britain, for an offense
created and made capital by one of those statutes, though committed in the
colonies -- the harbor of Boston was blocked up -- people indicted for murder
in the Massachusetts Bay, may, at the will of the Governor, be sent for trial
to any other colony, or even to Great Britain -- the chartered constitution of
government in that colony is materially altered -- the English laws and a free
government, to which the inhabitants of Quebec were entitled by the King's
Royal Proclamation, are abolished; and French laws are restored; the Roman
Catholic Religion (although before tolerated and freely exercised there) and an
absolute government are established in that province, and its limits extended
through a vast tract of country, so as to border on the free Protestant English
Settlements, with design of using a whole people, differing in religious
principles from the neighboring colonies, and subject to arbitrary power, as
fit instruments to overawe and subdue the colonies. And whereas the Delegates
of all the colonies on this continent, from Nova Scotia to Georgia, assembled
in a General Congress at Philadelphia, in the most dutiful manner, laid their
complaints at the foot of the throne, and humbly implored their Sovereign, that
his royal authority and interposition might be used for their relief from the
grievances occasioned by those statutes, and assured his Majesty, that harmony
between Great Britain and America, ardently desired by the latter, would be
thereby immediately restored, and that the colonies confided in the magnanimity
and justice of the King and Parliament for redress of the many other grievances
under which they labored. And whereas, these complaints being wholly
disregarded, statutes still more cruel than those abovementioned, have been
enacted, prohibiting the intercourse of the colonies with each other,
restricting their trade, and depriving many thousands of people of the means of
subsistence, by restraining them from fishing on the American coast. And
whereas, large fleets and armies having been sent to America, in order to
enforce the execution of those laws, and to compel an absolute and implicit
submission to the will of a corrupt and despotic administration, and in
consequence thereof, hostilities having been commenced in the
Massachusetts Bay, by the troops under command of General Gage* whereby a
number of peaceable, helpless, and unarmed people, were wantonly robbed and
murdered; and there being just reason to apprehend that like hostilities would
be committed in all the other colonies, the colonists were therefore driven to
the necessity of taking up arms to repel force by force, and to defend
themselves and their properties against lawless invasions and depredations. --
Nevertheless, the Delegates of the said colonies, assembled in another Congress
at Philadelphia, anxious to procure a reconciliation with Great Britain upon
just and constitutional principles, supplicated his Majesty to direct some mode
by which the united applications of his faithful colonists might be improved
into a happy and permanent reconciliation; that in the mean time measures might
be taken for preventing the further destruction of their lives; and that such
statutes as immediately distressed any of the colonists might be repealed. And
whereas, instead of obtaining that justice to which the colonists were and are
of right entitled, the unnatural Civil War, into which they were thus
precipitated, and are involved, has been prosecuted with unremitted violence;
and the Governors and others bearing the Royal Commission in the colonies,
having broken the most solemn promises and engagements, and violated every
obligation of honor, justice and humanity; have caused the persons of diverse
good people to be seized and imprisoned, and their properties to be forceably
taken and declined, or destroyed, without any crime or forfeiture -- excited
domestic insurrections -- proclaimed freedom to servants and slaves -- enticed
or stolen them from, and armed them against their masters instigated and
encouraged the Indian nations to war against the colonies -- dispensed with the
law of the land, and substituted the law-martial in its stead -- killed many of
the colonists -- burned several towns, and threatened to burn the rest; and
daily endeavor, by a conduct which has sullied the British arms, and would
disgrace even savage nations, to effect the ruin and destruction of the
colonies. And whereas a statute has been lately passed, whereby, under
pretense that the said colonies are in open rebellion, all trade and commerce
whatsoever with them is prohibited -- vessels belonging to their inhabitants
trading in, to, or from the said colonies, with the cargoes and effects on
board such vessels, are made lawful prize, and the masters and crews of such
vessels, are subjected, by force, to act on board the King's ships, against;
their country and dearest friends; and all seizures and detention, or
destruction of the persons and properties of the colonists, which have at any
time been made, or committed, for withstanding or suppressing the said
pretended rebellion, and which shall be made in pursuance of the said act, or
for the service of the public, are justified; and persons suing for damages in
such cases are, on failing in their suits, subjected to payment of very heavy
expenses. And whereas, large reinforcements of troops and ships have been
ordered, and are daily expected in America, for carrying on war against each of
the United Colonies, by the most vigorous exertions. And whereas, in
consequence of a plan recommended by the Governors, and which seems to have
been concerted between them and their ministerial masters, to withdraw the
usual officers, and thereby loosen the bands of government, and create anarchy
and confusion in the colonies; Lord William Campbell, late Governor, on the
15th day of September last, dissolved the General Assembly of this Colony, and
no other has since been called, although, by law, the sitting and holding of
General Assemblies, cannot be intermitted above six months; and having used his
utmost efforts to destroy the lives, liberties and properties of the good
people here, whom by the duty of his station he was bound to protect, withdrew
himself from the colony, and carried off the Great Seal and the Royal
Instructions to Governors. And whereas the Judges of the Courts of Law here
have refused to exercise their respective functions, so that it is become
indispensably necessary, that during the present situation of American Affairs,
and until an accommodation of the unhappy differences between Great Britain and
America can be obtained, (an event, which though traduced and treated as
rebels, we still earnestly desire) some mode should be established by common
consent, and for the good of the people, the origin and end of all government,
for regulating the internal polity of this Colony, THE CONGRESS, being vested
with powers competent for the purpose, and having fully deliberated touching
the premises, Do therefore RESOLVE,

I. That this Congress, being a full and free representation of the people of
this colony, shall henceforth be deemed and called the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of
South Carolina, and as such shall continue until the twenty-first day of
October next, and no longer.

II. That the General Assembly shall, out of their own body, elect by ballot, a
Legislative Council, to consist of thirteen members, (seven of whom shall be a
Quorum) and to continue for the same time as the General Assembly.

III. That the General Assembly, and the said Legislative Council, shall
jointly choose by ballot, from among themselves, or from the people at large, a
President and Commander in Chief, and a Vice President of the colony.

IV. That a member of the General Assembly, being chosen and acting as
President and Commander in Chief, or Vice President, or one of the Legislative
Council, shall vacate his seat in the General Assembly, and another person
shall be elected in his room; and if one of the Legislative Council is chosen
President and Commander in Chief, or Vice President, he shall lose his seat,
and another person shall be elected in his stead.

V. That there be a Privy Council, whereof the Vice President of the colony
shall of course be a member and President of the Privy Council, and that six
other members be chosen by ballot, three by the General Assembly, and three by
the Legislative Council. PROVIDED ALWAYS, That no officer of the army, or navy,
in the service of the Continent, or of this colony, shall be eligible. And a
Member of the General Assembly or of the Legislative Council, being chosen of
the Privy Council shall not thereby lose his seat in the General Assembly or
Legislative Council, unless he be elected Vice President of the Colony, in
which case he shall, and another person shall be chosen in his stead. The Privy
Council (of which four to be a Quorum) to advise the President and Commander in
Chief when required; but he shall not be bound to consult them, unless in cases
after mentioned.

VI. That the qualifications of the President and Commander in Chief, and
Vice President of the colony, and members of the Legislative and Privy Council,
shall be the same as of members of General Assembly; and on being elected, they
shall take an oath of Qualification in the General Assembly.

VII. That the legislative authority be vested in the President and Commander
in Chief, the General Assembly, and Legislative Council. All Money Bills for
the support of government shall originate in the General Assembly, and shall
not be altered, or amended by the Legislative Council, but may be rejected by
them. All other Bills and ordinances may take rise in the General Assembly or
Legislative Council, and be altered, amended, or rejected by either. Bills,
having passed the General Assembly and Legislative Council, may be assented to,
or rejected by the President and Commander in Chief; having received his
assent, they shall have all the force and validity of an Act of General
Assembly of this colony. And the General Assembly and Legislative Council,
respectively, shall enjoy all other privileges which have at any time been
claimed, or exercised by the Commons House of Assembly; but the Legislative
Council shall have no power of expelling their own members.

VIII. That the General Assembly and Legislative Council, may adjourn
themselves respectively, and the President and Commander in Chief shall have no
power to adjourn, prorogue, or dissolve them, but may, if necessary, call them
before the time to which they shall stand adjourned. And where a bill has been
rejected, it may, on a meeting after an adjournment, for not less than three
days, of the General Assembly and Legislative Council, be brought in again.

IX. That the General Assembly and the Legislative Council shall each choose
their respective Speakers, and their own officers, without control.

X. That if any Member of the General Assembly, or of the Legislative Council,
shall accept any place of emolument, or any commission, (except in the militia)
he shall vacate his seat, and there shall thereupon be a new election, but he
shall not be disqualified from serving, upon being reelected.

XI. That on the last Monday in October next, and the day following, and on the
same days of every second year thereafter, Members of the General Assembly
shall be chosen, to meet on the first Monday in December then next, and
continue for two years, from the said last Monday in October. The General
Assembly to consist of the same number of Members as this Congress does, each
parish and district having the same representation as at present, viz.

The Parishes of St. Philip and St. Michael, Charlestown, thirty members. The
parish of Christ-Church, six members. The parish of St. John, in Berkley
County, six members. The parish of St. Andrew, six members. The parish of St.
George, Dorchester, six members. The parish of St. James, Goose-Creek, six
members. The parish of St. Thomas and St. Dennis, six members. The parish of
St. Paul, six members. The parish of St. Bartholomew, six members. The parish
of St. Helena, six members. The parish of St. James, Santee, six members. The
parish of Prince George, Winyah, six members. The parish of Prince Frederick,
six members. The parish of St. John, in Colleton-County, six members. The
parish of St. Peter, six members. The parish of Prince William, six members.
The parish of St. Stephen, six members. The District to the Eastward of Wateree
River, ten members. The District of Ninety-Six, ten members. The District of
Saxe-Gotha, six members. The District between Broad and Saludy Rivers, in three
Divisions, viz. The Lower District, four members; the Little River District,
four members; the Upper or Spartan District, four members. The District between
Broad and Catawba Rivers, ten Members. The District called the New Acquisition,
ten members. The parish of St. Matthew, six members. The parish of St. David,
six members. The District between Savannah-River, and the North Fork of Edisto,
six members.
And the election of the said members shall be conducted, as near as may be,
agreeable to the directions of the election-act; and where there are no
churches or churchwardens in a district or parish, the General Assembly, at
some convenient time before their expiration, shall appoint places of election,
and persons to receive votes and make returns. The qualification of electors
shall be the same as required by law; but persons having property, which
according to the rate of the last preceding tax, is taxable at the sums
mentioned in the election act, shall be entitled to vote, though it was not
actually taxed, having the other qualifications mentioned in that act. Electors
shall take an oath of qualification, if required by the returning officer. The
qualification of the elected, to be the same as mentioned in the election act,
and construed to mean clear of debt.

XII. That if any parish or district neglects or refuses to elect members, or,
if the members chosen do not meet in General Assembly, those who do meet, shall
have the powers of the General Assembly. Not less than forty-nine members shall
make a house to do business, but the Speaker, or any seven members, may adjourn
from day to day.

XIII. That as soon as may be after the first meeting of the General Assembly,
the President and Commander in Chief, a Vice President of the colony and Privy
Council, shall be chosen in manner and for the time abovementioned; and till
such choice shall be made, the former President and Commander in Chief, and
Vice President of the colony, and Privy Council, shall continue to act as such.

XIV. That, in case of the death of the President and Commander in Chief, or
his absence from the colony, the Vice President of the colony shall succeed to
his office, and the Privy Council shall choose out of their own body a
Vice President of the Colony. And in case of the death of the Vice President of
the colony, or his absence from the colony, one of the Privy Council, to be
chosen by themselves, shall succeed to his office, until a nomination to those
offices respectively, by the General Assembly and Legislative Council for the
remainder of the time for which the officer so dying or being absent was
appointed.

XV. That the Delegates of this colony in the Continental Congress be chosen by
the General Assembly and Legislative Council jointly by ballot in the General
Assembly.

XVI. That the Vice President of the colony and the Privy Council, or the
Vice President and a majority of the Privy Council, for the time being, shall
exercise the powers of a Court of Chancery. And there shall be an Ordinary, who
shall exercise the powers heretofore exercised by that officer in this colony.

XVII. That the jurisdiction of the Court of Admiralty be confined to maritime
causes.

XVIII. That all suits and process depending in any Courts or Law or Equity
may, if either party shall be so inclined, he proceeded in and continued to a
final ending, without being obliged to commence de novo. And the Judges of the
Courts of Law shall cause jury-lists to be made, and juries to be summoned as
near as may be according to the directions of the acts of the General Assembly
in such cases provided.

XIX. That Justices of the Peace shall be nominated by the General Assembly and
commissioned by the President and Commander in Chief, during pleasure. They
shall not be entitled to Fees except on prosecutions for felony; and, not
acting in the magistracy, they shall not be entitled to the privileges allowed
to them by law.

XX. That all other judicial officers shall be chosen by ballot jointly by the
General Assembly and Legislative Council, and except the Judges of the Court of
Chancery, commissioned by the President and Commander in Chief, during good
behavior; but shall be removed on address of the General Assembly and
Legislative Council.

XXI. That the Sheriffs, qualified as by law directed, shall be chosen in like
manner, by the General Assembly and Legislative Council, and commissioned by
the President and Commander in Chief for two years only.

XXII. That Commissioners of the Treasury, the Secretary of the colony, the
Register of Mesne Conveyances, Attorney General, and Powder Receiver, be chosen
by the General Assembly and Legislative Council jointly by ballot, and
commissioned by the President and Commander in Chief, during good behavior;
but shall be removed on address of the General Assembly and Legislative Council.

XXIII. That all Field Officers in the army, and all Captains in the navy,
shall be by the General Assembly and Legislative Council chosen jointly by
ballot, and commissioned by the President and Commander in Chief; and that all
other officers in the army and navy shall be commissioned by the President and
Commander in Chief.

XXIV. That in case of vacancy in any of the offices above directed to be
filled by the General Assembly and Legislative Council, the President and
Commander in Chief, with the advice and consent of the Privy Council, may
appoint others in their stead, until there shall be an election by the General
Assembly and Legislative Council to fill those vacancies respectively.

XXV. That the President and Commander in Chief, with the advice and consent of
the Privy Council, may appoint during pleasure, until otherwise directed by
resolution of the General Assembly, and Legislative Council, all other
necessary officers, except such as are by law directed to be otherwise chosen.

XXVI. That the President and Commander in Chief shall have no power to make
war or peace, or enter into any final treaty, without the consent of the
General Assembly and Legislative Council.

XXVII. That if any parish or district shall neglect to elect a member or
members on the day of election, or in case any person chosen a member of the
General Assembly shall refuse to qualify and take his seat as such, or die, or
depart the colony, the said General Assembly shall appoint proper days for
electing a member or members of the said General Assembly in such cases
respectively. And on the death of a member of the Legislative, or Privy
Council, another member shall be chosen in his room, in manner abovementioned
for the election of members of the Legislative and Privy Council respectively.

XXVIII. That the resolutions of the Continental Congress now of force in this
colony, shall so continue until altered or revoked by them.

XXIX. That the resolutions of this, or any former Congress of this colony, and
all laws now of force here, (and not hereby altered) shall so continue, until
altered, or repealed by the Legislature of this colony, unless where they are
temporary, in which case they shall expire at the times respectively limited
for their duration.

XXX. That the executive authority be vested in the President and Commander in
Chief, limited and restrained as aforesaid.

XXXI. That the President and Commander in Chief, Vice President of the colony,
and Privy Council respectively, shall have the same personal privileges as are
allowed by act of Assembly to the Governor, Lieutenant Governor and Privy
Council.

XXXII. That all persons now in office shall hold their Commissions until there
shall be a new appointment in manner above directed,, at which time all
Commissions not derived from authority of the Congress of this colony, shall
cease and be void.

XXXIII. That all persons, who shall be chosen and appointed to any office, or
to any place of trust, before entering upon the execution of office, shall take
the following oath: I A.B. do swear, that I will to the utmost of my power
support, maintain, and defend the Constitution of South Carolina, as
established by Congress, on the 26th day of March, one thousand seven hundred
and seventy-six, until an accommodation of the differences between
Great Britain and America shall take place, or I shall be released from this
oath by the Legislative Authority of the said colony. So help me God.

And all such persons shall also take an oath of office.

XXXIV. That the following yearly salaries be allowed to the public officers
undermentioned:

The President and Commander in Chief, nine thousand pounds.

The Chief Justice and the Assistant Judges, the Salaries respectively, as by
act of Assembly established.

The Attorney General two thousand and one hundred pounds, in lieu of all
charges against the public, for fees upon criminal prosecutions.

The Ordinary one thousand pounds.

The three Commissioners of the Treasury, two thousand pounds each.

And all other public officers shall have the same salaries as are allowed such
officers respectively by act of Assembly.

By Order of the Congress. MARCH 26, 1776.
ORDERED, That Mr. President of the Congress do sign the same, and also the
Secretary.

Which being done,

ORDERED, That the Secretary do cause the same to be forthwith printed and
published, and three copies delivered for every member.

ORDERED, That Col. Parsons and Mr. Be, be a Committee to prepare and report,
the form of an oath proper to be administered to His Excellency the President
and Commander in Chief, previous to his entering upon the execution of the
duties of that high station.

The Constitution, or Form of Government, agreed to, and resolved upon, by the
Representatives of South Carolina, being signed, by the President of the
Congress, and attested by the Secretary;

The Members made choice of the Honorable William-Henry Drayton, to be their
Chairman.

And were then adjourned, as a General Assembly, to meet at five o'clock in the
afternoon.

A LIST of OFFICERS Chosen in the Manner directed by the CONSTITUTION, OR FORM
of GOVERNMENT, Agreed to, and Resolved upon, BY The Representatives of
South Carolina, On the 26th Day of March, 1776.
TUESDAY, March 26. Members of a Legislative Council.

The Honble. Charles Pinckney, Henry Middleton, Richard Richardson, Rawlins
Lowndes, Le Roy Hammond, Henry Laurens, David Oliphant, Thomas Ferguson,
Stephen Bull, George-Gabriel Powell, Thomas Be, Joseph Kershaw, and Thomas
Shubrick,
Esquires.

President and Commander in Chief of the Colony, His Excellency JOHN RUTLEDGE,
Esquire

Vice President of the Colony, His Honor HENRY LAURENS, Esquire

WEDNESDAY, March 27.

Chief Justice. The Hon. William Henry Drayton, Esquire

Assistant Judges. The Hon. Thomas Be, Esquire and John Matthewes and Henry
Pendleton, Esqrs. -- [ One still remains to be chosen, in the room of Joshua
Ward, Esquire who declined serving in that Station.]

Attorney General. Alexander Moultrie, Esquire

Secretary of the Colony. John Huger, Esquire

Ordinary. William Burrows, Esquire

Judge of the Admiralty. Hugh Rutledge, Esquire

Register of Mesne Conveyances. George Sheed, Esquire

Sheriff of CHARLESTOWN District. Thomas Grimball, Esquire

Speaker of the General Assembly. The Hon. James Parsons, Esquire

Clerk. Peter Timothy.

Speaker of the Legislative Council. Hon. George Gabriel Powell, Esquire

Clerk. Thomas Far, jun. Esquire

Member of the Legislative Council, in the room of His Honor HENRY LAURENS,
Esquire, chosen Vice President.

The Hon. William Moultrie, Esquire.

THURSDAY, March 28. Members of a Privy Council.
The Hon. James Parsons, William-Henry Drayton, John Edwards,
Esquires.

The Hon. Charles Pinckney, Thomas Ferguson, Rawlins Lowndes,
Esquires.

[ The THREE FIRST named were chosen by the GENERAL ASSEMBLY, the THREE last by
the Hon. the LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.]

Sheriffs for the Country Districts.
Edward Martin, Esquire for George-Town. Tunes Tebout, Esquire for Beaufort. Lewis
Golson, Esquire for Orangeburg. Robert Stark, Esquire for Ninety-Six. John Wylly, Esquire
for Camden. Henry-William Harrington, Esquire for Cheraws.
Mr. Tebout and Mr. Golson, having respectively desired leave to decline
accepting the office of Sheriff, JOHN RHODES, Esquire has been since appointed for
BEAUFORT; and JOHN JAMES HAIG, Esquire for ORANGEBURG.

Secretary to the Privy Council. John Colcock, Esquire

On the 27th of March, His Excellency the President elect, being then present
in the General Assembly, addressed that body in nearly the following words, viz.
Gentlemen,
THE very great, unsolicited, and unexpected honor, which you have been
pleased to confer on me, has overwhelmed me, with gratitude and concern. --
Permit me to return you my most sincere thanks, for so distinguishing, and
unmerited, a mark, of your confidence and esteem. I have the deepest sense of
this honor --, the being called, by the free suffrages of a brave and generous
people, to preside over their welfare, is, in my opinion, the highest any man
can receive: But, dreading the weighty and arduous duties of this station, I
really with, that your choice had fallen upon one, better qualified to
discharge them; for, though, in zeal and integrity, I will yield to no man, in
abilities to serve you, I know my inferiority to many: Since, however, this,
Gentlemen, is your pleasure, although, I foresee, that, by submitting to it, I
shall be ranked, by our enemies, amongst ambitious and designing men, by whom,
they say, the people have been deceived and misled; yet, as I have always
thought, every man's best services due to his country, no fear of slander, or
of difficulty or danger, shall deter me, from yielding mine -- In so perilous a
season as the present I will not withhold them; but, in her cause, every moment
of my time shall be employed: Happy, indeed, shall I be, if those services
answer your expectations, or my own wishes -- On the candor of my worthy
countrymen, I rely, to put the most favorable construction, as they hitherto
have done, upon my actions -- I assure myself, of receiving, in the faithful
discharge of my duty, the support and assistance of every good man in the
colony; and my most fervent prayer, to the omnipotent Ruler of the universe,
is, that, under his gracious providence, the Liberties of America may be for
ever preserved.

Titles of ACTS and ORDINANCES passed during the Session.
1. An Ordinance establishing an Oath of Office, to be taken in Manner therein
mentioned.

2. An Ordinance for making Disposition of Moneys for the Support of
Government; and to enable His Excellency the President and Commander in Chief
of South Carolina for the Time being, to execute certain Powers therein
mentioned.

Passed the 6th Day of April, 1776.

3. An Ordinance to repeal Part of an Ordinance of the General Assembly, passed
the 23d Day of February, 1771, "appointing Henry Per^nneau and Benjamin Dar^,
Esqrs. Joint Public Treasurers;" and to appoint Commissioners to take a State
of the Treasury: And also to empower the said Commissioners to settle the
Accounts of the late Powder-Receiver.

4. An Act to increase the number of Fire masters in Charlestown: and to
empower any three of them to pull down any such Houses or other Buildings as
they shall adjudge necessary, for the stopping and preventing the spreading of
fire.

5. An Act to punish those who shall counterfeit or utter, knowing them to be
counterfeit, the Certificates issued by the late Houses of Assembly, or the
Continental or Colonial Currency, which has been or shall be hereafter issued.

6. An Act for the more effectual Prevention of the Desertion of Soldiers and
Sailors in the Service of this Colony: And for the Punishment of those who
shall harbor or conceal them; or who shall purchase, receive or conceal the
Arms, Clothes or Accoutrements of Deserters.

Passed the 9th Day of April, 1776.

7. An Ordinance for altering the Time of holding the ensuing Circuit-Courts,
and the Courts of Common Pleas and General Sessions in Charlestown; and for
other Purposes therein mentioned.

8. An Ordinance to ascertain the Duties of a Muster-Master-General of the Land
and Naval Forces in the Service of this Colony.

9. An Act to prevent Sedition, and to punish Insurgents and Disturbers of the
Public Peace.

10. An Act to empower the Court of Admiralty to have Jurisdiction in all Cases
of Capture of Ships or Vessels of the Inhabitants of Great Britain, Ireland,
the British West Indies, Nova Scotia, East and West Florida; and to establish
the Trial by Jury in such Cases.

11. An Act to revive and continue for the Time therein mentioned, the several
Acts and Clauses of Acts of the General Assembly therein particularly
mentioned: And to appropriate certain Penalties; and to confirm the Powers of
the Commissioners of Roads, Paths, Bridges, Creeks, Causes, and Water Passages.

Passed the 11th Day of April, 1776.

Copy of the Speech delivered by His Excellency the PRESIDENT, at the close of
the Session, 11th April, 1776.
Honorable Gentlemen of the Legislative Council, Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of
the General Assembly.
IT has afforded me much satisfaction, to observe, that though the season of
the year rendered your sitting very inconvenient; your private concerns, which
must have suffered greatly by your long and close application in the late
Congress to the affairs of this colony, requiring your presence in the country;
yet, continuing to prefer the public weal to ease and retirement, you have been
busily engaged, in framing such laws, as our peculiar circumstances rendered
absolutely necessary to be passed, before your adjournment. -- Having given my
assent to them, I presume you are now desirous of a recess.

On my part, a most solemn oath has been taken, for the faithful discharge of
my duty -- On yours, a solemn assurance has been given, to support me therein.
-- Thus, a public compact, between us, stands recorded. -- You may rest
assured, that I shall keep this oath ever in mind -- the Constitution shall be
the invariable rule of my conduct -- my ears shall be always open, to the
complaints of the injured -- Justice, in mercy, shall neither be denied, or
delayed -- Our Laws and Religion, and the Liberties of America shall be
maintained and defended, to the utmost of my power. -- I repose the most
perfect confidence in your engagement.

And now, Gentlemen, let me entreat, that you will in your several parishes and
districts, use your influence and authority, to keep peace, and good order, and
procure strict observance of, and ready obedience to, the Law. -- If any
persons, therein, are still strangers to the nature and merits of the dispute
between Great Britain and the Colonies, you will, explain it to them fully, and
teach them, if they are so unfortunate as not to know, their inherent Rights.
-- Prove to them, that the Privileges of being tried by a jury of the vicinage,
acquainted with the parties and witnesses; of being taxed only with their own
consent, given by their Representatives, freely chosen by, and sharing the
burden, equally, with themselves, not for the aggrandizing a rapacious
minister, and his dependant favorites, and for corrupting the people, and
suverting their Liberties, but, for such wise and salutary purposes, as they
themselves approve; and of having their internal polity regulated, only by
laws, consented to, by competent judges of what is best adapted to their
situation and circumstances, equally bound too by those laws, are INESTIMABLE,
and derived from that Constitution, which is the birthright of the poorest man,
and the best inheritance of the most wealthy. -- Relate to them, the various
unjust, and cruel statutes, which the British Parliament, claiming a right to
make laws for binding the colonies in all cases whatsoever, have enacted, and
the many sanguinary measures, which have been, and are, daily, pursued, and
threatened, to wrest from them those invaluable benefits, and to enforce such
an unlimited and destructive claim. To the most illiterate it must appear, that
no power on earth can, of right, deprive them of the hardly-earned fruits of
their honest industry, toil and labor -- even to them, the impious attempt, to
prevent many thousands, from using the means of subsistence, provided for man,
by the bounty of his Creator, and to compel them, by famine, to surrender their
rights, will seem to call for Divine Vengeance. -- The endeavors, by deceit
and bribery, to engage barbarous nations, to embrue their hands, in the
innocent blood, of helpless women and children, and the attempts, by fair but
false promises, to make ignorant domestics, subservient, to the most wicked
purposes, are acts, at which humanity must revolt.

Show your constituents, then, the indispensable necessity which there was, for
establishing some mode of government in this colony; the benefits of that,
which a full and free representation has established; and, that the consent of
the people is the origin, and their happiness, the end of government. -- Remove
the apprehensions with which honest and well-meaning, but weak and credulous
minds, may be alarmed; and prevent ill impressions by artful and designing
enemies. -- Let it be known, that this constitution is but temporary -- till an
accommodation of the unhappy differences between Great Britain and America can
be obtained; and that such an event is still desired, by men who yet remember
former friendships and intimate connections, though, for defending their
persons and properties, they are stigmatized and treated as Rebels.

Truth, being known, will prevail over artifice and misrepresentation --
Conviction must follow its discovery. -- In such a case, no man, who is worthy
of life, liberty or property, will, or can, refuse to join you, in defending
them to the last extremity -- Disdaining every sordid view, and the mean paltry
considerations of private interest, and present emolument, when placed in
competition, with the liberties of millions; and seeing that there is no
alternative, but, absolute unconditional submission, and the most abject
slavery, or a defense becoming men, born to freedom, he will not hesitate about
the choice. -- Although superior force may, by the permission of Heaven, lay
waste our towns, and ravage our country, it can never eradicate, from the
breasts of freemen, those principles which are ingrafted in their very nature
-- such men will do their duty, neither knowing, or regarding, consequences,
but, submitting them, with humble confidence, to the Omniscient and Omnipotent
Arbiter, and Director, of the fate of empires, and trusting that his Almighty
Arm, which has been so signally stretched out for our defense, will deliver
them, in a righteous cause.

The eyes of Europe, nay of the whole world, are on America. -- The eyes of
every other colony, are on this -- a colony, whose reputation, for generosity
and magnanimity, is universally acknowledged. I trust, therefore, it will not
be diminished by our future conduct; that there will be no civil discord here;
and that, the only strife amongst brethren will be, who shall do most, to
serve, and to save, an oppressed and injured country.

JOHN RUTLEDGE.

List of Magistrates nominated by the General Assembly, March 30, 1776.
Justices Quorum Unus.
THE Members of the Legislative Council, the Members of the Privy Council, the
Judges of the Court of Common Pleas, the Judge of the Admiralty, and the
Speaker of the General Assembly, all for the Time being respectively; John
Drayton, Christopher Gadsden, Paul Trapier, Claudius Pegues, John Chestnut,
John-James Haig, Richard Rapley and Benjamin Garden, Esqrs.

Justices for Charlestown District.
James Akin, Nathaniel Broughton, Edmund Bellinger, Richard-Bohun Baker, Joseph
Be, Elias Ball, jun. John Boon, John Brailsford, William Boon, Capers Boon,
Peter Bounetheau, James Carsan, Andrew Cunningham, William Cattle, Lionel
Chalmers, Isham Clayton, James Clark, John Coram, Charles Cantey, Gabriel
Capers, James Donnom, Paul Douxsaint, Levi Durand, John-Sandford Dart, William
Dewitt, John Drake, John Deas, Samuel Elliott, Thomas Evance, John Frierson,
Alexander Fraser, Thomas Fuller, Benjamin Fuller, Nathaniel Fuller, John
Fullerton, Frederick Grimke, Culcheth Gibbes, Joseph Glover, William Gibbes,
Robert Gibbes, Melchior Garner, John Gaillard, Thomas Heyward, Thomas
Hutchinson, Daniel Horry, John Huger, William Hopton, George Haig, Richard
Hutson, James Hamilton, William Hort, Edward Jerman, Ralph Izard, John Izard,
Benjamin Jenkins, Joseph Jenkins, jun. William Jenkins, Thomas Lynch, Gabriel
Gignilliat, Thomas Lynch, jun. Andrew Leitch, William Logan, James Lynah, John
Livingston, James Laroche, Isaac Legare, Thomas Ladson, John's Island, Gabriel
Manigault, Arthur Middleton, Gabriel Marion, Jacob Motte, John Moore, Isaac
Mazyck, Hezekiah Maham, Job Marion, Joseph Maybank, Peter Mouzon, William
Mason, William Massey, Benjamin Marion, jun. Ephraim Mitchell, William Morgan,
Robert Murril, Ephraim Mikell, James Murray, Sampson Neyle, Hopkin Price, John
Pamor, John Parker, Philip Porcher, Isaac Porcher, William Parker, John Poaug,
Hopson Pinckney, James Reid, James Lytton Richards, James Ravenell, Isaac
Rivers, David Reynolds, George Sheed, Thomas Smith, James Stobo, James
Skirving, Jonathan Scott, William Scott, Henry Smith, Philip Smith, Jeremiah
Savage, Joseph Seabrook, Benjamin Smith, Benjamin Simons, John Syme, Peter
Sinckler, James Skirving, jun. William Swinton, Maurice Simons, James Smith,
John Scott Son of Jonathan, Richard-Park Stobo, Joseph Slann, Charles
Shepherd, William Stanyarne, James Sinckler, Thomas Turner, John Troup, Joshua
Toomer, Edward Thomas, jun. Arnoldus Vanderhorst, Robert Williams, Robert
Williams, jun. Sims White, John Wright, Richard Withers, Abraham Weight,
Benjamin Waring, John Wigfall, Joseph Wigfall, Peter Witten, Richard Walter,
John Wilson, Wadmelah, Francis Young, Esqrs.

Justices for Beaufort District.
Andrew Aggnew, John-Lewis Bourquin, John Bull, William Brisbane, Pierce
Butler, Joseph Brailsford, John Barnwell, jun. Nathaniel Barnwell, John
Chisolm, Bellamy Crawford, Cornelius Dupont, Edward Davies, William Elliott,
John Fripp, sen. David Giroud, Benjamin Guerard, Richard Guerard, Godin
Guerard, James Gignilliatt, William Harden, William Hazard, Thomas Hughes, John
Joiner, Adrian Mayer, John Mitchell, Samuel Porcher, Richard Proctor, Hugh
Rose, Thomas Rivers, William Ross, William Reynolds, Thomas Rutledge, Daniel de
Saussure, William Stoutenburgh, James Thomson, William Weight, Esquires.

Justices for George-Town District.
Joseph Allston, Josias Allston, William Allston, jun. Anthony Bonneau, Abraham
Buckholts, John Brockington, Capers Boon, Daniel Huger, Francis Britton, John
Baxter, jun. Kingston; James Carey, Alexander Chovin, Samuel Dwight, Thomas
Emes, Charles Fyffe, Benjamin Huger, Thomas Greigher, Benjamin Gause, Hugh
Giles, Daniel Horry, Robert Herriot, Elias Horry, jun. Dennis Henkins, Thomas
Henning, John James, Thomas Lynch, Isaac Marion, William Mason, Archibald
M'Donald, Adam M'Donald, James M'Donald, William Michau, Samuel Nesmith, John
Plowden, Thomas Port, Job Rothmahler, William Snow, Benjamin Screven, Peter
Simons, Paul Trapier, jun. Samuel Wragg, Anthony White, John Witherspoon,
William Wilson, Gavin Witherspoon, Esquires.

Justices for Orangeburg District.
George Ancrum, William Arthar, Jonas Beard, Samuel Boykin, Richard Brown,
Donald Bruce, Peter Corbin, James Cornelly, Malcolm Clark, Isham Clayton, John
Chestnut, Michael Dickart, Benjamin Farrar, John Fairchild, Lewis Golson,
Tacitus Gailliard, Ralph Humphries,

Househill, David Holmes, William Housell, John Kensalow, Michael Leitner,
Ephraim Mikell, David Pou, Henry Patrick, James Pritchard, Samuel Row,
Michael-Christopher Row, Jacob Richman, George Robinson, John Savage, Arthur
Simkins, George Strawther, William Thompson, William Tucker, Thomas Young.

Justices for Ninety-Six District.
William Anderson, David Anderson, Robert Anderson, John Bowie, Patrick
Calhoun, William Calhoun, John Caldwell, John Calwell, Enoree, Jonathan Downs,
John Delahowe, John Fairchild, John Ford, John-Lewis Gervais, James Griffin,
sen. Thomas Gordon, William Henderson, Elias Hollingsworth, David Holmes, James
Hamilton, John Johnston, jun. Adam-Craine Jones, William Jones, William
Kennedy, Charles King, James Linley, James Mayson, Robert M'Cra^y, John Purves,
James Price, Thomas Polk, James Pollard, Andrew Pickens, James Pritchard, John
Rogers, Andrew Rogers, George Ross, John Louis du Mesnil de St. Pierre, John
Savage, Arthur Simkins, Ralph Smith, John Satterthwaite, John Thomas, John
Thomas, jun. Benjamin Tutt, John Tiger, Edward Wilkinson, Thomas Waddleton,
William Wofford, George Whitefield, John Williams, James Williams, James Wood,
William Wood, David Zubly, Esquires.

Justices for Camden District.
Andrew Allison, Robert Allison, Francis Adams, Richard Brown, William Bratton,
William Buyers, Joseph Brown, John Cantey, James Carey, Thomas Charlton, Henry
Cassels, Michael Dickson, Wood Furman, Lewis Golson, David Gordon, William
Gaston, Samuel Boykin, William Brown, John Gaston, Robert Hancock, William
Howell, George Hancock, Henry Hunter, David Hopkins, Andrew Hemphill,
James-Mortimer Harris, Simon Irons, Richard Jenkins, William Lang, William
Myers, Nathaniel Moore, John Nixon, Thomas Neel, John-Newman Oglethorpe, John
Palmer, James Patton, Philip Pearson, Thomas Polk, Ezekiel Polk, Robert Patton,
John Robinson, ( Crowder's Creek) John Robinson, ( Mill Creek) Richard
Richardson, William Richardson, Richard Richardson, jun. James Simpson, Matthew
Singleton, William Strother, John Smith, Alexander Turner, Thomas Tailor, John
Winn, Richard Winn, Thomas Woodward, Esquires.

Justices for Cheraws District.
John Alran, William Dewitt, Elias Dubose, Charles Evans, Robert Gray, George
Hicks, Henry-William Harrington, Arthur Heart, John Kimbrough, Thomas Lide,
William-Henry Mills, George Pawley, Claudius Pegues, Philip Pledger, William
Pegues, Esquires.


