JOHN ROGERS, A Servant of JESUS CHRIST, To any of the FLOCK of CHRIST that may
be scattered among the CHURCHES of New England, GREETING. GIVING A DESCRIPTION
OF THE True Shepherds of Christ's Flock; AND ALSO OF THE Antichristian
Ministers, According to the TESTIMONY of JESUS CHRIST, and his Apostles, in the
Holy Scriptures. AS ALSO SOMETHING TOUCHING BAPTISM and the LORD's SUPPER.

THE FOURTH EDITION.

NORWICH: PRINTED in 1776.

JOHN ROGERS, A SERVANT of JESUS CHRIST. To any of the Flock of Christ that may
be scattered among the Churches of New England, Greeting.
I WISH you grace and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus
Christ. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has called
us with an holy calling, and has revealed his everlasting Love (in and through
Jesus Christ his beloved Son) unto us by his own spirit.

WHEREFORE, brethren, I beseech you to walk worthy of this holy calling, not
fashioning yourselves according to the former conversation in the time of your
ignorance, when you were ignorant of the true God; but now being translated out
of a state of darkness into a state of light, now walk as children of light,
bringing forth the fruits of God's spirit, seeing he has sowed the seed of
righteousness in your hearts, be ye now the followers of them, who through
faith and patience, come to inherit the promises which God has made to them
that love him; for though you may have a great and terrible wilderness to
travel through before ye come to inherit that blessed promise, yet, through
faith and patience, you may be led through the great deep, and see your enemies
drowned in the depth of the sea, and you stand and rejoice in the God of your
salvation; yet did those afterward perish that believed not in their journey
toward the land of rest, but fell short of it.

I HAVE seen and learned by experience, that it is a needful thing, that
patience should have its perfect work, in the day of temptation, and that
without believing in God, in all trials, it is impossible that we can enjoy it,
without being led by his spirit; therefore it is written, as many as are led by
the spirit of God, are the sons of God; and if we be the sons of God, then are
we heirs of God, and joint heirs with Chirst, of that inheritance which our
heavenly father has promised us, even that inheritance which is everlasting;
but take heed lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in
departing from the living God, and so you come to fall short of that rest; for
there remains the keeping of an everlasting sabbath of rest, to the people of
God.

BUT the people, after they were delivered out of Egypt, perished in the
wilderness, because of their unbelief, and so fell short of that rest, which
was a figure of the true, unto whom the gospel was preached; but they not being
united to it by faith, they perished in the wilderness.

BELOVED in the Lord, I am greatly sensible, though you are not, how that you
are entangled in the evil net of antichrist, and miserably bewildered in the
traditions and delusions of a wicked and an adultrous generation, who have gone
a whoring from God, and is become an harlot, and her teachers are such as have
not entered into the sheepfold by the door, but have climbed up another way,
that is, they are not sent from God, but have their call and authority from an
earthly power, according to what was before told us by our blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, and his holy apostles, how that in the last days there
should come false, teachers, as there had been of old false prophets; and how
that they would deceive many by reason of which the way of truth should be evil
spoken of; and how that many should follow their pernicious ways; therefore it
is written, they shall heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears, and
shall t^rn away their ears from the truth, and shall give heed unto fables: Now
the truth which they shall turn their ears from is Christ himself, although
they confess him in words, yet deny him in works; for Jesus Christ is a
quickening spirit, and this spirit is in all God's children, and is the truth
according to Christ's words, I am the way, and the truth, and the life; he that
is in this spirit is in the truth, and he that is led by it is in the truth;
and it is the life of Christ in you, and you need not that any man should teach
you, for you are complete in Christ, who is the head of all power and authority
whatsoever. I cannot say to you as once the apostle ^d to a church of Christ,
beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the
traditions of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ,
because you are entangled already in the evil net of antichrist, in following
after the traditions of men, and not being lead only by the spi^ of Christ;
this is the very grounds of your walking in darkness, and not in the light of
assurance; but I can say to you as he did to them in the very next words, for
in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and ye are complete in
him, and you need not be taught but as that spirit of truth teaches you; and
if ye be followers of it, it will lead you into all truth, even that spirit
whom the world cannot receive, because the world does not see it, nor know it,
but ye know it, for it dwells in you, and it has given you an understanding,
to know him that is true; you that are of Christ's sheep, have heard his voice
speaking in you, in the voice of the spirit of truth, which has taken of his
righteousness, and revealed it unto you; and if this spirit abide in you, ye
also shall continue in the Father and in the Son; for to be led by the spirit
of truth, is the path of the just, which will lead unto a perfect light, and by
this means you will be able to try the spirits of false prophets, and also of
the true; for many false prophets are gone out into the world, which in words
confess Jesus Christ to be their king, but sin rules in them; they will confess
Christ to be their priest, but never yet was freed from the guilt of sin,
through the sacrifice of himself; they will say he is their prophet, but never
yet heard the voice of his spirit speaking in them; yet they will pray, preach,
and make a great outward show, when the spirit of Christ is not in them. These
are the antichrists and deceivers that we have had fore-warning of, that should
come, that have not the spirit of Christ in them; but says the apostle John,
ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things: I have not
written unto you because ye know not the truth, but because ye know it. This
unction is the spirit of truth, which all God's chrildren are anointed with;
it is the immediate teaching of Christ, who dwells in his own children, as the
spirit of the wicked one dwells in his children; and it is the spirits that we
are exhorted to try, and not to believe every spirit; for many false prophets
were gone out into the world in the days of the apostle John, but have now
spread over nations and kingdoms, who set light for darkness, and darkness for
light, who call evil good, and good evil: These are not called or sent of God,
neither has Jesus Christ revealed himself to them; their call is only from an
earthly power, and through covetousness; with feigned words, they make
merchandise of you, and their preachings is only their own imaginations or
studyings.

AND I have written unto you the way and manner of God's calling and sending
his messengers, in all ages, as the penmen of the holy scripture have left upon
record, whose writings are as a light that shines in a dark place, until the
day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts; which will certainly be, if
you order your conversation aright, and become fruitful branches in Christ the
true vine; for the goings of the Lord toward his people (that are led singly
by his spirit) is like the morning light, which shines more and more even unto
the perfect day. And there is no writings of the holy prophets or apostles that
is of any private interpretation; for the scriptures of truth came not in old
time by the wisdom or learning of the world, but holy men of God spoke as they
were immediately enlightened by the spirit of Christ which was in them; and it
is the same spirit that gives us an understanding of their writings, according
to what is written. Luke xxiv. 45. Then opened he their understanding, that
they might understand the scriptures, 1 John v. 20, 21. And we know that the
Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding that we may know him
that is true; and we are in him that is true, even in his son Jesus Christ;
this is the true God and eternal Life. Little children keep yourselves from
idols.

An EXPOSITION upon ACTS ii. 39. For the Promise is unto you, and to your
Children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall
call.


HERE arises a question in the first place, what this promise is? Which
question is resolved in the 17th verse; which was the promise that God made by
the prophet Joel, saying, and it shall come to pass in the last days (says
God) I will pour out of my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your
daughters shall prophecy. So that this promise is the gift of the Holy Ghost.
The second question is, to whom is it promised, and upon what conditions?
Answer, it was promised to all that was there present, which were both Jew and
Gentile, yea, of every nation under heaven, verse 5. And upon what condition is
showed in the 38th verse? Then Peter said unto them, repent, and be baptized,
every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye
shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to
your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God
shall call: As much as if he should say, this promise is not made only to you
that are here this day present, but to your children after you, and to all that
are afar off; for so did God before promise, by the prophet Joel, not only to
pour out his spirit upon their sons and daughters, but also upon all flesh,
that is, so many as God shall call, both far and near, they repenting,
believing, and obeying; so that this promise is made (both to father, son and
daughter, upon their repentance, and being baptized in the name of the Lord
Jesus Christ) that they shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and also to
all afar off, not only to Jews, but also to Gentiles; as says Paul, Ephesians. ii.
17. And came and preached peace to you which were afar off, that is the
Gentiles; and to them that were nigh, that was the Jews; for both Jew and
Gentile have an entrance into God's love and favor, only by Jesus Christ, and
that through the blood of Jesus, who was that lamb of God that takes away that
sin of the world.

NOW the outward washing with water by the ministers of Christ, is but an
outward sign to the world; and there is no virtue at all in it; for all divine
virtue is only from the divine power, for every good gift, and every perfect
gift, is from God; and that is not the baptism that is outward with the element
of water, but that is the baptism that washes the heart and inward parts, from
the defilement of sin, James i. 17. Matt. iii. 11. 1 Cor. xii. 13. which is the
work of God, done only in the name of his son; and by a divine water, which is
the water of life, and does quicken the dead sinner, that repents and believes
in the God that raised up Jesus from the dead, he also is raised up by the same
spirit with Christ. And this outward sign, acted by the ministers of Christ, is
a figure of this death, burial, and resurrection with Christ, which is seen and
felt by every one that is Christ's; for they have the immediate witness of God
in themselves, 1 John ii. 20. 1 John v. 10, 20. 2 Timothy iii. 5. But the
antichristian world, that has not this immediate inspiration of God, which is
a holy unction, they idolize the outward signs, and are enemies to godliness,
but know nothing of that mighty power that works in us; as it is written,
Ephesians. iii. 20. Col. i. 29. 1 John iv. 4.

An EXPOSITION upon 1 COR. vii. 14. For the unbelieving Husband is sanctified
by the Wife, and the unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the Husband; else were
your Children unclean, but now are they holy.


THE first thing that we are to take notice of is this, that this chapter is an
answer to what this church wrote to Paul about, and is to resolve their doubt
about marriage; as verse 1, they being such as had newly turned from dumb idols
to the living God, and questioning whether it was lawful for the believer to
have communion with the unbeliever, as man and wife; to which doubt Paul gives
his judgment, as in the 12th verse, but to the rest speak I, not the Lord; for
though he had not any immediate commandment from the Lord, yet he gives them
his judgment, saying, If any brother has a wife that believes not, and she be
pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her away, ver. 13. And the woman
which has an husband that believes not, and if he be pleased to dwell with
her, let her not leave him. And the reason that he gives, why the believer
should not put away the unbeliever, is this, that the unbeliever is sanctified
to the believer; for it is evident, though the marriage was made in the
belivers unconverted estate, yet to be kept by the believers; for marriage is
honorable in all, and the bed undefiled, Heb. xiii. 4. But the question here
arises, only by the believer; now if the unbeliver be not sanctified to the
believer, then of necessity the children must be so esteemed also, as unclean,
and not holy, to the beliver; as in Ezra x. 3. and so both wives and children
to be put away, not being sanctified, but unclean to the believer: For this
sanctification and holiness, that the unbeliver and belivers children is to the
beliver, comes not in by the redemption of Christ, to which baptism is a figure
of, but by the covenant of marriage, which is honorable in all, and the bed
undefiled; for the children's holiness comes as well from the unbeliever as
from the believer; for if the unbeliever be not sanctified by, or to the
believer, then the children are unclean to the believer also; for these
children's cleanness to the believer, comes in by the unbelievers being
sanctified to or by the believer; so that both wife and children are clean to
him, or husband and children clean to her; but if the one be to be put away,
then the other also; for if the one be not sanctified, then is the other
unclean also, and not holy, and so both to be separated from the believer, as
not clean; so that if the unbeliever be not first sanctified to the believer,
then are the children unclean also to the believer, and not holy; so that the
unbeliever bears the root of this holiness, as well as the believer, which is
the cause of the branches, or children are holy. Why do ye not baptize, and
receive into your churches, in the first place? And so when you have baptized,
and received the unbelievers into your churches, then their children which come
to be holy, by their being sanctified to the believer? For ye fools and blind,
whether is greater, the child's holiness, or the unbeliever's being sanctified
by, or to the believer, by which the children come to be esteemed holy? else
says the scripture, they would be unclean; for which is the greatest, the
gold, or the temple that sanctifies the gold? for so it is in this case.

QUESTIONS founded upon the Holy SCRIPTURES.
WHETHER the first day of the week be a sabbath, by God's appointment, or an
invention of Antichrist?

1st Question. Whether the holy scriptures be a perfect rule of instruction, as
to the way of righteousness?

Ans. 2 Timothy iii. 16, 17. All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works.

2d Quest. Does the scripture teach who is the lawgiver, as to true religion?

Ans. James iv. 12. There is one lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy;
who art thou that judge another. Isa. xxxiii. 21. The Lord is our lawgiver.

3d Quest. Does God impute sin where no law is? Or can there be transgression
where no law is?

Ans. Romans iv. 15. For where no law is, there is no transgression. Romans v. 13.
But sin is not imputed when there is no law. 1 John iii. 4. Whosoever
commits sin, transgresses also the law; for sin is the transgression of the
law.

Seeing that the scripture is profitable for instruction in righteotsness, that
the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, and
that it teaches us that there is one law-g^er, who is God; and that where no
law is, there can be no transgression.

4th and last Quest. Whether God has any law to forbid work on the first day
of the week? Or is it an invention of the Devil, by which the antichristian
world is deceived? If of God, quote chapter and verse for it; for if they speak
not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them, Isa. viii.
20. For if it be but the commandment of men, Christ teaches us, it is but vain
worship to attend it, Matt. xv. 9. Hos. v. 11. Ephraim is oppressed and broken
in judgment, because he willingly walked after the commandment. Psalm. xciv. 20,
21, 22, 23. Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which
frames mischief by a law? They gather themselves together against the soul of
the righteous, and condemn the innocent blood. But the Lord is my defense, and
my God is the rock of my refuge. And he shall bring upon them their own
iniquity, and shall cut them off in their own wickedness; yea, the Lord our God
shall cut them off.

Concerning ABRAHAM'S Covenant.
AS to the covenant that God made with Abraham, it contained in it, spiritual
promises as well as temporal; and the temporal promises were figures of the
spiritual, or signs. Now when God made this covenant with Abraham, he was
ninety-nine years of age, and had no child but Ishmael; and being affected with
God's gracious promise, in promising and covenanting with him, to be a God to
him, and to his seed after him; and to give unto him, and to his seed, the land
of Canaan, for an everlasting possession. I say, and having no children but
Ishmael, he breaks forth into supplication and prayer to God for Ishmael,
saying, O that Ishmael might live before thee! And God said, Sarah thy wife
shall bear thee a son indeed, and thou shall call his name Isaac; and I will
establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant, and with his seed
after him. As for Ishmael (says the Lord) I have heard thee, etc. but my
covenant will I establish with Isaac; so that Isaac was the son of promise, not
being yet born, to whom God promised to establish his covenant saying, In Isaac
shall thy seed be called; showing to Abraham, when as yet Isaac was in his
loins, that he would establish his covenant in Isaac, and in his seed, pointing
at Christ, who was in the loins of Abraham, and after in Isaac; for this
covenant made with Abraham, was in Christ, and he alone was intended of God,
who is the natural heir of that inheritance, for God does not covenant with
Abraham, saying, to thy seeds, as speaking of many, but as of one, and to thy
seed, which is Christ; and if we be Christ's, says the Apostle, then are we
Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise; for we come to be heirs of this
inheritance, by adoption in Christ, and God comes to be our God and father by
adoption; for we are heirs but by adoption in Christ, of this inheritance; for
we are the children of God by faith in Christ, upon which the covenant is
founded; for the children of the flesh, though Abraham's seed, are not counted
for the seed, nor intended in the covenant; but it is the children of promise,
says the apostle. Now, we, brethren (says the apostle to the Gentiles) as
Isaac was, are the children of promise; and Abraham is the father of all them
that believe. So that the covenant as it is spiritual, and a gospel covenant,
it is made to Abraham and his seed, counting them only to be Abraham's seed,
who are Christ's by adoption, and that through faith, and so come into this
covenant, Gal. iii. 16, 29. Romans viii. 15, 16, 17. Ephesians. v. 11, 13, 14. 1. Pet.
i. 3, 4. Romans ix. 8. Gal. iv. 18, 29. Romans iv. 11.

NOW as the covenant was temporal, it contained only temporal promises, which
had a temporal token annexed to it, which was the outward circumcision that was
made in the flesh; but to relate it in order as it was temporal, it was thus,
God was a God to Abraham's fleshly seed, begotten by Isaac and Jacob, in that
he brought them out of Egypt, and led them forty years in the wilderness, and
gave them the earthly Canaan, read Genesis xv. beginning at the 13th verse to the
end, for there the covenant was first made with Abraham.

BUT the gospel covenant was preached to Abraham by these temporal things, as
thus; God is a God to Abraham, and to his seed, through faith in Christ, in
delivering them out of the bondage of sin, and leading them safely through the
wilderness of of affliction, till he brings them to the everlasting inheritance
purchased by Christ, and there gives them rest from all their enemies; which
inheritance is everlasting, world without end. And the token of this covenant
(as it is spiritual) is the circumcision of the heart, wrought by the spirit of
God, in cutting off our sins, by the circumcision of Christ; and this
circumcision of the heart is the seal of this covenant, as it is a gospel
covenant; and therefore it is written, That is not circumcision that outward in
the flesh. And again, says the Apostle, Abraham received the sign of
circumcision, calling the outward circumcision, the sign of circumcision, That
he might be the father of all them that believe; so that only them that believe
by scripture account, are reckoned for Abraham's seed: And another scripture
says, After that ye belived, ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise,
which is the earnest of our inheritance; Romans ii. 29. Col. ii. 11. Phil. iii.
3. Ephesians. iv. 30. 2 Cor v. 5. Ephesians. i. 13, 14. Romans ii. 8. chap. iv. xi.

Concerning BAPTISM.
BAPTISM is an ordinance of the New Testament, and it is a visible figure of
the death, burial, and resurrection of Jesus Christ, and of our death, burial,
and resurrection by Jesus Christ; for the Lord Jesus did ordain, that the
excellent virtues of his sufferings should be held forth by outward figures,
which have no virtue in themselves, but are outward signs of real benefits and
virtue that we have received by Christ. For as Christ offered himself a
sacrifice for sin through the eternal spirit of God, a^ a lamb without spot and
without blemish; so the repenting sinner that believes in him, and comes to God
through faith in him, God sends forth his holy spirit into the sinner, in the
name of his beloved son, and so condemns sin in the sinner; that the sinner
feels sensibly a death to sin in himself; that he has an inward witness
immediately from God; that Jesus is the Christ and Lamb of God, that takes
away the sin of the world, Gal. iii. 1. 1 John v. 10. And can give as true a
witness of the death of Christ as they that did behold his sufferings with a
mortal eye; and can set to his seal that the holy scriptures are true by an
immediate inspiration of God, 1 John ii. 20, 21. For the sinner is now born
again, and is become a saint, and does see by the eye of faith, that the body
of sin, which he before carried about with him, is crucified with Christ, dead
and buried with him; so that the old man, or body of sin, is put off by the
power and spirit of God; so that he sees by the spirit of faith which dwells in
him, that he is put to death in the flesh, as to sin, by the virtue of Christ's
death, applied to him by the spirit of God; and he has not only a witness of
Christ's death, but also of his resurrection; for by the resurrection of
Christ, a resurrection out of sin is brought to light, and also a resurrection
of the body; for what is lost by the first Adam is recovered by the second; for
upon repentance and faith in Jesus Christ there is not only a death to sin, but
the very spirit that raised up Jesus Christ from the dead has quickened us
also together with him, and raised us up to a new life, 1 Pet. iv. 1, 2, 3. So
that we are recovered by Christ out of a state of sin al-already, and brought
to a state of innocence; and hereby is brought to light a resurrection of the
body, and an eternal life, by the immediate witness of God's spirit in us, by
which we have a lively hope. And thus the sinner has an entrance into the love
of God by Jesus Christ, and stands and rejoices in hope of eternal life, seeing
he is born of God even by the spirit of truth, by which spirit he is purified
and washed from the guilt and filth of sin; and his body, which before was a
body of, in which the prince of the power of the air did rule, is now become
the temple of God, even a sanctified body, being baptized by the spirit of
truth, and thereby made a fit habitation for God to dwell in by his spirit,
John iii. 5, 6, 7. Heb. x. 22. 1. Cor. iii. 16, 17, chap. vi.xix. 2 Cor. vi. 16.

NOW this great work, which is the workmanship of God, is invinsible to the
world, and therefore God has ordained that it shall be preached by an outward
and a visible figure, ministered by his messengers, in burying the repenting and
believing sinner into the likeness of Christ's death, and raising him up in the
likeness of Christ's resurrection; so that the death and resurrection of Christ
is figured out, and our death and resurrection by Christ, in that ordinance;
and this is the reason why we are buried with him in baptism, Romans vi. 3, 4.
Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into
death, that like as Jesus Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of
the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. Col. ii. 12. Buried
with him in baptism, wherein also you are risen with him, through the faith of
the operation of God, who has raised him from the dead, 1 Cor. xv. 29. Else
what shall they do, which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not not
at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead? So that this ordinance of
baptism, being administered according to the form and pattern delivered to us by
the scriptures, does by a visible sign, preach and show forth the death,
burial, and resurrection of Christ, with our death to sin by Christ, as also
our resurrection out of sin by him, and also the resurrection of the body.

BUT as to the antichristian foppery, who have a basin of water brought into
their meeting house, is a sign of nothing else but their own delusions, an idle
of their own invention and blasphemously, in the administering of it, take the
name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, in vain; and yet will pretend the
scripture to be their rule, although they walk as contrary to it, as light is
to darkness; for the scripture of the apostles teaches them otherwise,
although they may be wholly blind, as to any divine light by God's quickening
spirit, and therefore cannot discern the things that are spiritual, as God's
children can, who have an unction from the Holy One, and know all things, 1
John ii. 20. The scripture does plainly tell us, that there went out unto him
all the land of Judea, and they of Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in
the river of Jordan, Mark i. 5. And ver. 9, it is said, that Jesus was baptized
of John in Jordan. And in acts viii. 38, 39, it is said, that they both went
down into the water, and came up out of the water. As also John iii, 22, 23,
after these things came Jesus and his disciples into the land of Judea, and
there he tarried with them, and baptized. And John also was baptising in Enon,
near to Salim, because there was much water there. Which scripture fully
confutes and condemns the antichristian foppery, for the apostle testifies that
it was because there was much water there: But a little in a basin will go a
great way with an antichristian minister. And for any to make this outward
sign, although ministered never so exactly according to scripture, to be the
baptism, it is also ^n idolizing a figure of the true baptism: For by one
spirit we are all baptized into one body; for there is but one baptism that
washes us from the defilement of sin: For it is not the washing the filth of
the flesh outwardly with water, but it is the answer of a good conscience
toward God, that we have by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, with whom we are
risen; which conscience is purified by the spirit of truth, 1 Cor. xii. 13.
Matt. iii. 11. Mark i. 8. Ephesians. iv. 5.

Concerning the LORD's SUPPER.
THE supper of the Lord also, the bread and wine, is a visible sign of that
which is invisible to the carnal eye, and it is no more the body and blood of
Christ, than the baptism of water is the baptism of Christ, for they are both
but outward signs of gospel truths, and they are revealed by the scriptures of
the apostles; but that which is signified by them, is revealed by the spirit of
truth immediately by God, so that every one that believes has the witness in
himself, and can set to his seal, that the scripture is true, according to what
is written, 1 John ii. 21. I have not written unto you because ye know not the
truth, but because ye know it: For the children of God have their
understandings opened by the spirit of truth to understand the scriptures, Luke
xxiv. 45. Now the scripture of truth gives u^n account, that the same night in
which our Lord was betrayed, he took bread, and when he had given thanks, he
break it, and said, take eat, this is my body, which is broken for you; this do
in remembrance of me. After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had
supped, saying, this cup is the New Testament in my blood, this do ye, as often
as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. This also is an ordinance of the New
Testament, whereby the man Christ Jesus, who through the eternal spirit offered
himself a sacrifice for sin, who was foreordained of God to be the Lamb that
should take away the sins of the world; and through the blood of this Lamb of
God, which is the blood of the New Testament, the guilt of sin is taken away by
free pardon and remission of sin. So that the blood of the New Testament is
drink indeed; for the free pardon and remission of sin through the blood of
Christ, is revealed immediately by the spirit of God in the sinner, where
remission and forgiveness is: And there is no remission of sin but only by the
blood of this Lamb of God, for this is he that came by water and blood. By his
blood we have free remission of sin, and by the divine water we are washed or
sanctified from the defilement of sin, and it is the spirit of truth that
applies the virtue of his blood to us. So that we being now sprinkled from an
evil conscience by the blood of Jesus Christ, we can draw nigh to God with a
true heart, in the full assurance of faith, which causes joy unspeakable, yea,
greater than the joy of wine that makes the heart glad; which wine is ministered
only in remembrance of his blood shed for sin. And his body that was offered a
sacrifice for sin, by the application of the spirit of God, is the true bread
of life by which we live; for Jesus Christ is both God and man; for he took our
nature and laid down his life, and has taken it up again, and of his fullness
have we all received, and grace for grace, and because he lives we live also;
for he has given us of his spirit, even of that spirit which raised up Jesus
Christ from the dead, and has given us life through him, who were dead in sins
before. And it is the spirit of Jesus that quickens us; for says Christ, John
vi. 63, It is the spirit that quickens the flesh profits nothing: And says
Christ, he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in
him. So that the spirit of Christ is the true bread of life, that quickens
and strengthens us in righteousness, and dwells in us; and this true bread
of life is given us through the sacrifice of himself, as he was the seed of
David, whom God raised from the dead; for it is he that was dead and is alive,
and lives for evermore.

AS to the bread which he brake the night in which he was betrayed, after he
had given thanks, and gave it to his disciples, saying, take, eat, this is my
body, which is broken for you, this do in remembrance of me. After the same
manner also he took the cup when he had supped, saying, this cup is the New
Testament in my blood, this do ye, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me.
And says the apostle, as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do
show the Lords death till he come. So that this ordnance of bread and wine is
to show forth his death, who was raised from the dead, after that he had
offered himself a sacrifice for sin, and shall appear a second time in glory,
as to his divine presence we now enjoy, for he dwells in us, and is the object
of our hope of glory; so that it is to be done in remembrance of that man
Christ Jesus (whom God has raised from the dead) till he come, John xiv. 16,
17, 21, 23. Col. i. 27. And every worthy receiver does discern the virtue of
that body, and that blood of the New Testament; for by it they are purged from
the guilt of sin, and thereby do discern the Lord's body. But whosoever shall
partake of this visible sign of the body and blood of Christ, which was offered
for sin, being under the guilt of sin, crucifies the Lord afresh, and so
becomes guilty of the body and blood of Christ, and does but eat and drink
judgment to himself, not discerning the Lord's body, which is distributed to
every worthy receiver, by the spirit of truth, which is Christ's divine nature.

BUT the antichristian minister, who confess the scripture to be their rule in
words, but in works are always denying it, they administer an imitation of it
at noon, calling it the sacrament of the Lord's supper, when as they, contrary
to the scripture, make a dinner of it, or rather idolize the ordinance than
attend the rule of the scripture, as Matt. xxvi. 20. Now when the evening was
come, he sat down with the twelve. Mark xiv. 17, 18. And in the evening he
comes with the twelve. And as they sat and did eat, etc. 1 Cor. xi. 23. For I
have received of the Lord, that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord
Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread, etc. for as the
lamb of the passover was always to be offered in the evening, which was the
figure of Christ, the real Lamb of God, who was betrayed the same night in
which it was offered, and then he left this ordinanance w^ his church, to be
done in remembrance of himself, when he offered up himself a sacrifice for sin;
and every believer is a partaker of his body and of his blood, but not the
antichristian world.

A Description of the true Shepherds of Christ's Flock, and also of the
Antichristian Ministers, according to the Testimony of Jesus Christ, in the
Scriptures.
JOHH X, 1. Verily, verily I say unto, he that enters not by the Door into the
Sheepfold, but climbeth up some other Way, the same is a Thief and a Robber.
Verse 2. But he that enters in by Door is the Shepherd of the Sheep.


THIS was a parable spoken by our Lord Jesus Christ when he was upon the earth,
but the hired shepherds of Israel that he put it forth to, understood it not,
as in ver. 6, compared with ver. 12. Now a parable is to set forth another
thing, and has always a meaning to it, as in Prove. i. 6. Now this parable of
Christ has an interpretation to it, which we are to search into. In the first
verse we read of a sheepfold, and a door to enter into the sheepfold, also,
they that enter not into this sheepfold by the door, but climeth up some other
way, the same is a thief and a robber. In the second verse we read, that he
that enters in by the door, is the shepherd of the sheep.

NOW these things raise questions, and an enquiry, what this sheepfold is? And
what the flock is? And what the door is? And who the thief and robber is? And
who the shepherd is that enters in by the door?

TO which I answer: The sheep is Christ's flock, the fold is the place where
they rest, the door is Christ, as in verse 9; the thief and robber were those
shepherds which the world hired, and not sent by Christ, as in verse 12; and
the shepherd that enters in by the door, are those shepherds that go not into
the fold till Christ sends them; so that they enter in by him, who is the good
or chief shepherd of his own flock, as verse 14.

BUT some may say, I desire to be farther informed in this matter, how Christ
calls and sends his shepherds, so that it may be truly said, they enter into
the sheepfold by the door, which is by himself? And also, how the thief and
robber that climb up some other way into the sheepfold, may be found out who
he is, that so the true shepherds may be discerned from the false, and that by
scripture testimony? To which I answer: I cannot give fight to the blind, but
Christ can; as you may see in the former chapter all this discourse arose about
the blind man, whose eyes were opened by Christ, the chief shepherd; but, for
several reasons, they did not believe aim to be the chief shepherd, but rather
took him to be the chief deceiver, or Beelzebub; one reason was, because he hid
the man carry his bed on the Sabbath day, and also mingled clay and spittle on
the Sabbath day; therefore (said they) this man is not of God, because he
keeps not the Sabbath day, as in chap. i^. verse 16. Others said, do any of
our rulers believe on him? Chap. (...) verse 48. So that we may see they built
much upon their wise and learned men, being those that judged godly, who sought
to put him to death as a deceiver; but these were deceiving reasons.

NOW we shall come to describe, by the scriptures of truth, which way the true
shepherds come into their ministry; and then 2dly, how the thief and robber
climbs up another way, which is the hireling. In verse 8 says Christ, all that
ever came before me are thieves and robbers; so that here in this verse the
thief and robber is said to be thieves and robbers, that is, the hirelings, or
hired shepherds. Now to look with a carnal eye at Christ's words, where he
says, all that ever came before me, it might be objected and replied to him,
that Abraham, Moses, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and the like, were true shepherds, and
came into the sheepfold before thee, yet were no thieves nor robbers, but
entered in by the door. Christ would have answered, they did not come before
me, for before Abraham was, I am; and Abraham did not go before I called him,
and sent him, Genesis xii. 1, 4. Isa. xli. 2. And so Moses did not go before, till
I appeared to him in the bush, and called him, and sent him (...) people
Israel, to be their shepherd. Yea, it may truly be said, that Christ was in
them, and went with them, and that it was his voice which spoke; and that no
man takes this honor to himself but he that is called of God, as was Aaron,
Heb. v. 4; if they do they are thieves and robbers, though men and devils
ordain them in their office, and teach them all the learning that the world can
afford; to preach and to pray with all the excellent words they can study, and
that the devil can suggest into them; yet if Christ have not called them, and
sent them, they do but deceive the world, and a devil is in them, that
transforms himself as an angel of light. Now such shepherds as these come not
in by the door, but come in as a thief, only to kill and steal, as in verse 10,
not being called nor sent by Jesus Christ, who is the door, but climb up
another way. They come to cloth themselves with the wool, and to kill them
that Christ has fed, according to what is written, Ezekiel. xxxiv. 2, 3, Woe be to
the shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves. Ye eat the fat, and ye cloth
you with the wool, ye kill them that are fed. These are the hirelings that have
no faith in God, but, contrary to the scripture, take thought what they shall
eat, and what they shall drink, and how they shall be clothed, because they
have no ground of faith in him, not being called nor sent by him, but climb up
another way into the sheepfold.

NOW all the true shepherds of Christ come in by the door, that is, by Christ;
for they are called and sent by him into the sheepfold, and so enter in by the
door, not to kill nor steal, but to feed the flock. They do not go before he
comes to them, and calls them, and sends them, and delivers to them the key of
knowledge; so that they enter in by the door into the sheepfold, that is to
say, by Christ himself. And being thus called and sent by Jesus Christ, having
their authority from heaven as John the baptist had, and not from an earthly
power, they come in the name of Jesus Christ, in opposition to the world, and
to those hireling shepherds that have their authority only from men, and so
have entered into the sheepfold another way, and not by Christ, who is the door.

NOW consider the cloud of witnesses that have left record in the holy
scriptures, after what manner Christ called and sent his shepherds into the
world to feed his flock, and to bear witness against the thieves and robbers
that climb up into the sheepfold, and enter not in by Christ the door, who have
their call and authority from an earthly power, and have not seen Christ nor
heard his voice at any time; for though he was in the world, and the world was
made by him, yet the world knew him not; neither does the world know his
shepherds, and therefore says the scripture, the world knows us not, because
it knew not him; as Christ says to his shepherds, If ye were of the world, the
world would love you, but because I have chosen you out of the world therefore
the world hates you.

BUT those hirelings, as Christ calls them in ver. 12. or thieves and robbers,
as he calls them in ver. 8. who have their call and authority from an earthly
power, and are not called nor sent by Christ, they are of the world and
therefore the world hears them, says the scripture. They have their call and
commission from the world, and therefore the world hears them; and they have
their reward and their honor from the world. They do not nor cannot deliver
any message from Christ, for he has not sent them with any; but to deceive the
world they study a message of their own heart, and not from the mouth of the
Lord, according to what is written, Jer. xxiii. 16. Hearken not unto the words
of the Prophets that prophesy unto you; they make you vain; they speak a vision
of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord. Ver. 21. I have not
sent these Prophets, yet they run; I have not spoken to them, yet they
prophesied. Ver. 22. But if they had stood in my counsel, and had caused my
people to hear my words, then they should have turned them from their evil way,
and from the evil of their doings. Ver. 32. Therefore they shall not profit
this people at all, says the Lord. Now these Prophets were looked at in Judea
and Jerusalem to be the true Prophets and messengers of God, and Jeremiah to be
the false Prophet, as in Jer. xviii. 18, chap. xxix 26, 27, chap. xliii. 2.
Thou speak falsely, the Lord our God has not sent thee. Thus they refused to
hear the voice of Christ by his messenger whom he sent, not believing that he
was sent, but inclined their ears to the false Shepherds, and would not believe
the true. Now this Prophet whom they did not believe, but reviled and
persecuted for a deceiver, was sent, and did not run before he was sent, though
he had no call from the earthly power, yet was he called by Christ, sent with
the key of knowledge, and so entered in by the door, Jer. i. 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 17,
18, 19. Now when Christ sends his messengers thus into the world, it is to be a
witness against them that enter into the sheepfold, but not by the door, and to
be a witness against Kings and Governors for setting these up, and maintaining
them whom he has not sent. Thus Christ comes by his messengers, not to send a
message of peace to these intruders, thieves and robbers, or hireling
Shepherds, as Christ calls them, but to bear witness against them, and against
their upholders; and therefore it is written, You shall be brought before Kings
and Governors for my sake, for a testimony against them. And says Christ in
another place to his brethren that did not believe on him. The world cannot
hate you, but me it hates, because I testify against it, that the works
thereof are evil. And thus Christ comes, not to send peace to these intruders,
who are the chief men of the world, but to send a sword and to kindle a fire;
and therefore the Prophet Jeremiah, chap. xv. 10. says, Woe is me, my mother,
that thou have born me a man of strife, and a man of contention to the whole
earth; for Jesus Christ's messengers always meet with but coarse entertainment
in the world, for they are strangers to it; as Christ says to the world, I was
a stranger, and ye took me not in; that is, his messengers were so to the
world. Now these intruders that come into the sheepfold, and not by the door,
but climb in another way, that is, such as are called of men, and ordained of
them, and not called nor sent by Christ, those the world will reward and
respect, they will feed, and they will cloth, and they will visit: these can
look every one for his gain from his quarter, as says Isaiah, chap. lvi. 11.
Yea, they are greedy dogs which can never have enough, and they are Shepherds
that cannot understand; they all look to their own way, every one for his gain
from his quarter. Thus it is with these Shepherds that have their call from the
world, and are not sent by Christ: But the Shepherds whom Christ sends to feed
his flock, who are faithful, they come not for gain, nor for reward, but to
feed the flock of Christ. They covet no man's silver or gold, or apparel, but
labor with their hands night and day, that they may not be chargeable to any,
They consider Christ's words, who said, when he was upon the earth, It is more
blessed to give then to receive Acts xx. 33, 34, 35. These are reviled,
reproached, and persecuted for the sake of him that sends, according to what is
written, Acts xxviii. 22. For as concerning this sect, we know that every where
it is spoken against; but says Christ, woe be unto you, when all men shall
speak well of you, for so did their fathers of the false prophets; but blessed
are you when men revile you and persecute you, and the like; for so did their
fathers the prophets that are before you. Thus they did to Jeremiah, chap. xx.
1, 2, and xxvi. 11, and xxxii. 2, and xxxvii. 15, and xxxviii. 6. Isa. l. 6.
Yet these their persecutors made a great show in the world of seeming worship
to God, by which they deceived the world and themselves: They would fast, and
make prayers, and keep sabbaths, and have solemn meetings; thus they garnished
their outside with a high profession of the name of God, but their inside was
full of pride, and covetousness, and wickedness. But the messengers of Jesus
Christ, they are sent by him with a message of peace and reconciliation to
those that repent and believe in God; for God will wash such from the
defilement of sin: And his messengers were always sent with this message, viz.
that it is purity and cleanness in the inward parts that God looked at, and not
a flattering of God with the mouth and lips, when the heart is defiled and full
of sin; and therefore says Jeremiah chap. iv. 14, O Jerusalem, wash thine
heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved. And Isa. i. 16, wash ye, make
you clean. This has always been the doctrine of Christ's messengers, to make
clean the inside of the cup and platter: To worship God in spirit and in truth,
in the inward man. But this doctrine is grievious to the world, for they never
saw a clean inside washed from the guilt and filth of sin, neither will they
believe this message, because their lives are always with the unclean; the
strong man of sin has ever kept his throne in them, and they never yet saw a
stronger than ^e; for their bodies are the habitation of sin, where the prince
of the power of the air rules. Now these are not of Christ's sheep nor of his
fold, neither will they believe his shepherds voice. B^ all Christ's shepherd
that ever were, or ever shall be to the end o^ the world, are immediately
called, inspired, and sent by him, a^ it is his voice speaking in them, for he
is present with them to t^ end of the world, and it is not they that speak, but
it is his spir^ speaking in them. They never run before they are sent, for a^
that do so, enter not by the door, but climb up some other way into the
sheepfold.

BUT we have a cloud of witnesses as is before mentioned, to the way and manner
of God's calling and sending his messengers, a^ has been already showed, by
Abraham, Moses, Jeremiah, Isaiah, as also Ezekiel, chap. ii. 1, 3. Hos. i. 2,
3. Joel i. 1, 2. Amos vii. 14, 15. Jonah i. 1, 2. Hag. i. 3. Yea, they we^ all
called of God, as was Aaron, and did not take this honor upon themselves by
any earthly call or institution of man, b^ came all into the sheepfold by the
door, and looked for no reward or revenue from the world, but passed through
great tribulation and sufferings, testifying against hireling shepherds that
came into the sheepfold, but not in at the door, as might be abundantly
instanced: Every one seeks for his gain from his quarter, says one. Another
says, they are all given to covetousness, from the priest to the prophet.
Another says, the judges judge for reward, and the priests teach for hire, and
the prophets prophesy for money. And another says, woe to the shepherds of
Israel that feed themselves; ye eat the fat, and ye cloth you with the wool.
Another, his shepherds are blind, yea, they are greedy dogs, which can never
have enough. Now I must confess these are offensive words to be spoken to them
that are in authority in the world, and honorable men.

HAVING had an account by the scriptures of the prophets, that were before
Christ (the great shepherd of the sheep) came into the world, how that they
were called of God as was Aaron, and so entered into the sheepfold by the door.
And also, having had an account, how that the hirelings or false shepherds had
no call of God, but came into the sheepfold by climbing up another way, and not
in at the door, who came only to feed and to cloth themselves with Christ's
flock; and how that these intruders had good entertainment in the world, and
were honored with great gifts and rewards; and how that they attained these
things by a wile, in that they appeared to the world as ministers of
righteousness, by their prayers, prophesyings, or preachings, keeping Sabbaths,
days of fasts, and solemn meetings, which had a fair outside show to the world,
but their inside was the habitation of sin and uncleanness, which the world
could not discern.

IN the next place, let us come to the following generations, which were in the
days when Christ and his Apostles were in the world; for reason will afford us,
that the world had got better experience, in seeing how their fathers had been
deceived, and that by these intruders that climbed up into the sheepfold, and
how that God punished their fathers with sore judgments, for the abuse of his
messengers, as it is written, 2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 15, 16, 17. And the Lord God of
their fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising up betimes, and sending;
because he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place: But they
mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his prophets,
until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy.
Therefore he brought upon them the King of the Chaldees, who slow their young
men with the sword, in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion upon
young men or maiden, old man, or him that stooped for age; he gave them all
into his hand. Reason will afford that one should think, that this might be a
sealed instruction to the succeeding generations, seeing also that it was a
pure church that came out of Babylon, for there God refined his church, and
pur^fied it in the f^ce of affliction, and brought it forth as gold tried in
the fi^e; so was she once before, when God had purified her in the wilderness
of affliction, as it is written, Jer. ii. 2.3. Go, and cry in the ears of
Jerusalem, saying, thus says the Lord, I remember thee, the kindness of thy
youth, the love of thy espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness,
in a land that was not sown. Israel was holiness unto the Lord, and the first
fruits of his increase; all that devour him, shall offend, evil shall come upon
them, says the Lord. Isa. i. 21. How is the faithful city become an harlot!
Thus the church of God, that was a holy people at the beginning, began to be a
declining people, till little by little she became a harlot, and only kept an
outside form, but lost her inward purity and fellowship with God's spirit, and
then she began to expect instruction from the wise and learned men, whom they
did adore, and so the intruders entered into the sheepfold, being approved
teachers by the judges, and so became persecutors of God's messengers, and took
upon them to deliver messages of their own imaginations, which they studied,
and not from the mouth of the Lord, Isa. iii. 14. and ix. 16. and xxviii. 14.
and xxix. 14. Mich. iii. 1, 2, 3. Amos v. 10, 11.

But I say. it was a purified church that came out of Babylon, and her
shepherds were the messengers of God, immediately called and sent of God, as in
Hag. i. 13. Then spoke Haggai the Lord's messenger in the Lord's message unto
the people. Zech. i. 3. Therefore say thou unto them, thus says the Lord of
Hosts. These were now true shepherds that entered into the sheepfold by the
door; for they were called and sent by Jesus Christ, and his flock knew his
voice, while they were in a state of purity and holiness while they were an
inclining people, and not a declining people, therefore says Christ, my sheep
hear my voice, and the voice of a stranger they will not hear, for they know
not the voice of strangers. However, it was not long before this people came to
be a declining people, and yet retained and upheld an outside profession; but
God that searches the heart and the reins, did see what his church began to be
in her inside, in the days when he sent his messenger Malachi; she was then
much corrupted and declined, yet I do not say, but that she kept a fair outside
profession, so that she could not come to have a right judgment and discerning
of herself. She was so far gone from God, and declined, that she reasoned with
God's messenger, in a justifying way of herself; for God had sent a curse upon
the fruits of the ground, and she could not discern the reason why it was, she
having attended those ordinances commanded in the law, which were signs and
figures of heavenly things, as sabbaths, sacrifices, and the like; yet
notwithstanding her exactness in these things, and all outward rules whatsoever
was commanded in the scripture, yet while Christ sees the love of his espousals
grows cold to him, and that her heart begins to go after other lovers, after
the world, and the things of the world, Oh! how this wounds the Lord's spirit!
jealousy^s a grievous thing! for Christ to look upon his Church, his spouse,
and to see her flatter him with her tongue, but sees her heart is removed from
him, and set upon other lovers, this is grievous to be born; this was the state
of her mother, who had a bill of divorce, Isa. l. 1. Thus says the Lord, where
is the bill of your mother's divorcement, whom I have put away? or which of my
creditors is it to whom I have sold you? behold, for your iniquities have you
sold yourselves. Psa. lxxviii. 36, 37. Nevertheless, they did flatter him with
their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongue. For their heart was not
right with him. Now this pure and sanctified church of Christ that came out of
Babylon, begins to be enticed with the love of the world, and her priests and
teachers were in a declining state, yet not so far gone as to persecute God's
messenger, yet to be so careless and negligent of the flock, that they were in
great danger of thieves and robbers entering in upon them. But they reason with
the prophet, Mal. i. 7, Ye offer poluted bread upon mine altar; and ye say,
wherein have we polluted thee? Mal. ii. 1. And now, O ye Priests, this
commandment is for you. Ver. 7. For the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and
they should seek the law at his mouth; for he is the messenger of the Lord of
Hosts. Ver. 8. But ye are departed out of the way; ye have caused many to
stumble at the law. Thus the Lord sent his messenger to reprove both priests
and people for their declention. Now they were not so far declined as to
persecute him, for she was not yet become a harlot, but began to be bewildered,
as in Mal. iii. 14. Ye have said, it is vain to serve God; and what profit is
it, that we have kept his ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before
the Lord of Hosts? Yet here was a remnant that feared the Lord, and obeyed the
voice of his messenger, and spoke often one to another, and the Lord hearkened
and heard it, and a book of rememberance was written before him for them that
feared the Lord, and thought upon his name, ver. 16. Here we see God's church
did hearken to his messenger, though she was far declined, and her teachers so
far declined, that they caused many to stumble at the law, yet were stirred by
God's messengers, so that they spoke often one to another; and then God made
them gracious promises, how that he would send his messenger, that was John the
baptist, and a promise, that the Lord whom they did seek should suddenly come,
that is, the Lord Jesus Christ, chap. iii. 1.

But now let us turn and look upon her again, now these messengers (before
prophesied of) be come, even John the baptist, a man sent from God, and also
the Lord Jesus Christ himself: Alas! she is now become a wicked and adulterous
generation, and thieves and robbers are got into the sheepfold, garnishing the
sepulchers of the prophets, whom their fathers slew, and appeared as Angels of
light to the people, and said, If we had been in our fathers days (...) ^ould
not have partook with them in the blood of the prophets. They pray and they
preach, and they extol the scriptures of the prophets (whom their fathers slew)
very highly; yea, so highly, that in them they thought to have eternal life,
John v. 39. They are very strict in keeping sabbaths, and attending their
solemn meetings and it is like enough, that they stood in the meeting house,
and under a pretense of duty to God, they made long prayers; for Christ showed
to his disciples, That that was a custom of hypocrites, to pray, and to fast,
and to give alms publicly in view of men; but he teaches his disciple^ to do
these things in secret, looking only for a reward from him that sees in secret;
and that they should live in the world without care, and free from
covetousness, taking no thought for their lives, what to eat, or what to drink,
or how to be clothed: But hypocrities cannot do so, to live without care; and
if their praying, their sabbath keeping and their singing David's Psalms, for
so we read, they chau^ to the sound of the viol, and invent to themselves
instrument of music, like David, take but this cup of an outward show out of
this churches hand, and look but into the inside of it, and it is full of the
abomination of the filthiness of her whoredom; for thus it is with a church
that is gone a whoring from God, they know no freedom form sin, neither will
they endure such a doctrine; all that they do, is to be seen outwardly, but
their heart and inward parts is full of defilement, when Christ told this
adulterating generation, John viii. 34. Whosoever commits sin, is the
servant of sin, promising to make them free, ver. 36. If the son therefore
shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. Ver. 45 says Christ, And because
I tell you the truth, ye believe me not. But this was a grievous doctrine to
them, to tell the^ of a freedom from sin. In the beginning of this chapter they
were very forward to accuse the woman taken in adultery; but when Christ says
to them, ver. 7. He that is without sin, let him first cast a stone at her,
they all appeared guilty, being convicted by their own consciences. After this,
he declares unto them his power and willingness to make them free from sin, but
this doctrine they cannot bear. What answer do they make? Ver. 48. Then
answered the Jews and said unto him, say we not well that thou art a Samaritan,
and have a Devil? And after this we find that they cautioned o^ another of the
danger of hearing him, see chap. x. ver. 10. And many of them said, he has a
Divil, and is mad; why hear ye him! But Christ tells them, ver. 26. Ye believe
not, because ye are not of my sheep. For those that are under a form of
godliness, but have not the power of godliness in them, these are not the sheep
of Christ, for the power of godliness they deny, because it is not in them; for
as the prince of the power of the air rules in sinners, and they feel no
greater power than the power of sin in them, so Jesus Christ, as he is a great
King, rules inrighteousness in the saints, and they feel no greater power than
the power of righteousness, so that they can say, Jesus Christ is my King, and
rules and reigns in me, in righteousness, and my body is the habitation of God,
to dwell in by his spirit, and can truly witness what the Apostle John says,
1 John iv. 4. Greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. And
in another place, It is (...) I that live, but Christ that lives in me. If
these outside professors would but come to a serious self-examination of
themselves, according to scripture direction, to see whether they are in the
faith which they cannot be, except Jesus Christ be in them; and if Jesus Christ
be not in them, they are reprobates, that is dross, and not silver, o^ sinners,
and not righteous, or unclean, and not clean; yea, reprobate silver or
counterfeits, shall men call them.

Now are we come to the age and persons to whom Christ put forth this parable,
and though it speaks to all times and ages past, present, and to come. As to the
time past, has been showed, how that always the true shepherds entered in by
the door into the sheepfold, they did not run before they were sent, and Jesus
Christ, as he was God, was present with them, and it was his voice that spoke
in them; but those that were not of his sheep, could not understand his voice
by his shepherds, as in ver. 26. but his own sheep could, as in ver. 27. but
his flock is very small, Luke xii. 32. Matt. vii. 14. And we shall find, that
this great shepherd of the sheep did not run before he was sent, as in John
viii. 26. I have many things to say, and to judge of you, but he that sent me
is true. And ver. 29. He that sent me, is with me, the father has not left me
alone. Thus we see the great shepherd of the sheep did not run before God sent
him, but followed his calling, till he was about the age of thirty years, Luke
iii. 23. But when he was called and sent of God, he went into the meeting house
and taught, but it was greatly offensive to the people that were brought up
under the hirelings, which they hired to teach them, Mark vi. 1, 2, 3. And he
went from thence, and came into his own country, and his disciples follow him.
And when the sabbath day was come began to teach in the synagogue; and many
hearing him, were astonished, saying, from whence has this m^ these things;
and what wisdom is this which is given unto him? Is not this the carpenter, the
son of Mary? and they were offended at him. So we may see that these goats that
are brought up under the thieve^, robbers, and hirelings, as Christ calls them,
they are taught and instructed by their shepherds, that none are fit to teach
but the scribes and learned men of the world; and because they saw their elders
or shepherds persecute Christ, they judged him to be a deceiver, that they were
cursed that did believe on him, John vii. 48, 49. For these shepherds, which
were intruders, never had any vision from the Lord, therefore the people under
their teaching, always perish; their flock ever did and ever will be a
depending upon their wisdom, and their learning, and their study, and therefore
never did, nor never will believe any that come from God by an immediate call
and sending. This is the reason of all the persecution that ever was; for these
intruders never had, in any age, any revelation from God, nor never would
believe there was any that is to say, in their day: They would acknowledge that
the prophets, whom their fathers slew, had immediate revelation from God, but
would not believe any in their day, in no age of the world, and therefore
always persecuted God's messengers with a confident boldness, That they were
false reachers, and seducers, and pestilent fellows, and troublers of Israel.

BUT let us now take a description of them from the mouth of of Christ, the
great shepherd of his flock, for he is the best able to give a description of
these hirelings, thieves and robbers, as he calls them; and when we have a
description from Christ's own mouth, we shall have no reason admire why they
were offended at him, to take it upon himself, as they judged, whom they knew
to be a tradesman, viz. a carpenter, for going into the meeting house to teach;
for those that are in their state and condition, are liable to the same error
and censure. For, first, consider their ministers were wise learned men, not
brought up to trades, or work, but to learning, to the end that they might be
able to teach others; for they did not expect nor believe any immediate call
from God; a false church and false teachers never had nor never did expect any
revelation immediataly from God, neither did they believe that any had in their
day; they also looked at themselves to be God's church and ministers, not
considering that they had gone a whoring from God, were degenerated, and so
were not now his church.

BUT to come to the description that Christ gives of the stewards or intruders
into the sheepfold: They are such stewards as cannot work for their living, and
to beg they are ashamed, for they are the learned men of the world. Now when
they come to be turned out of their stewardship [it is bad times with such
then] these bad stewards will certainly be as Luke xvi. 3. Then the steward
said within himself, what shall I do? for my Lord takes away from me my
stewardship, I cannot dig, and to beg I am ashamed. For these intruders lay
heavy payments upon the people, but the receivers bear none of it, according to
Christ's words, Matt. xxiii. 4. For they bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be
born, and lay them on men's shoulders, but they themselves will not move them
with one of their fingers. Here is two descriptions of these stewards, thieves,
robbers, or hirelings, as Christ calls them; the one is, they cannot dig, and
to beg they are ashamed, which shows they are the honorable men of the world.
The second is, they are such as lay heavy burdens on the people, but bear
nothing themselves. Well, let us see what further description Christ gives of
them, viz. they are such as expect the upper rooms at feasts, and that men
should greet them in the market, and to sit in the uppermost seats in the
meeting house, and to be called of men, master, master. These are very notable
descriptions that Christ gives of them, which will stand good to discover them
in any age or time of the world, whenever they shall appear to deceive
themselves or others, Matt. xxiii. 6, 7. But that which these deceive the world
with, is, they will sit on Moses's seat, or climb up into the sheepfold, under
a pretense of expounding Moses law, and the prophets writings; and under a
pretense of duty to God, they will make long prayers, and be very strict in
Sabbath-keeping, judging Christ and his apostles for being short in their duty.
And thus these blind guides will make clean the outside of the cup and platter
by an outside show of seeming worship to God, by which they deceive the goats,
but kill and steal Christ's flock from him; and by this means they feed and
cloth themselves, but their inside is full of extortion and excess: Yet Christ
shows that these ministers, by these outside pretenses, appear righteous to
men, Matt. xxiii. 28. Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but
within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity. But these thought in themselves,
that if they had been in the days of their fathers, they would not have been
partakers with them in the blood of the prophets; but they are punishing and
putting to death them that they judge to be evil doers, blasphemers, perverters
of the nation, and deceivers; but it may be, they may be deceived as their
fathers were before them, for thus they judged of Christ and his apostles; but
they do ignorantly as their fathers did, as it is written, Acts iii. 15. Ye
killed the Prince of life. Ver. 27. And now, brethren, I wet that through
ignorance ye did it, as did also your rulers. And says Paul, 1 Cor. ii. 7, 8,
But we speak the wisdom of God in mystery, which none of the Princes in this
world knew, for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of
Glory. But however, they thought themselves to be in the right way, and those
they persecuted, they thought to be in the wrong way, as always a wicked and an
adulterous generation does. Upon this generation will be required all the
righteous blood shed from the foundation of the world to this very day. Now it
is to be observed, that the false prophets always keep in friendship with the
judges of the earth, and make an image of worship to the earthly power; and
they command all, both small and great, rich and poor, to worship that image,
or form of godliness, and that no man must buy or sell, that refuses to worship
the said image, that is, they must not meddle with the ordinances of Christ,
though they are sent of God, but must be judged; for these will always get into
the seat of judgment, which is Christ's place, and judge those that are sent of
God. as deceivers and troublers of the world; and indeed God's messengers be,
and ever were, offensive to the world: Yea, the scripture says, that Christ is
a rock of offense, and a stone of stumbling. For the world always was, and ever
will be offended by his messengers, because they are witnesses against their
false worship. When the world sees such poor objects appear, and do not see him
that sent them, they cry, Do you think so stand against the whole world? Or who
is able to make war agaidst the beast? That is, the earthly power that sets up
false worship.

NOW we have had a view of the state of the church in the time of Christ and
his apostles, and find, that they were as much deceived as their fathers that
were before them, for all their high conceits and opinions of themselves, but
is a declining church, like to be deceived the third time, yea, so often as she
declines; for though she keeps all the outward rules of the scripture, as
exactly, and as strictly as these scribes and Pharisees did in Christ's ^me;
for it is purity in heart that gives a true sight of God* It it the p^ in heart
that shall see God, and it is the path of the ju^ that is a shining light. It
is not an outward form that makes a Christian, but it is the spirit of Christ
in the heart that makes a Christian, and to be led by it; for so many as are
led by the spirit of God, are the sons of God, and no more: These are Christ's
sheep, and know his voice. Now when Christ's church is so far declined, that
she is become a persecuting church, yea, an adulterous generation, then Christ,
after she has had her time and space of repentance, and does not repent, then
he discovers her delusions, by the brightness of his appearing in his
messengers, and discovers her scarlet color, and decked with gold, and
precious stones, and pearls. Now though she be thus beautified and glorified
with outward ornaments, enough to win the affection of the whole world, yet
shall she be stripped naked, and made bare of all her outward ordinances, and
her scarlet colored garments shall be seen to be only colored with the blood
of the saints and martyrs of Jesus, and that she drunk only with the blood of
the saints whom she condemned for deceivers and deluded persons, and that the
scarlet-colored beast that she rid upon, was only an earthly power that upheld
her, and persecuted the flock of Christ, and so became a scarlet-colored
beast, being stained with the blood of saints and martyrs of Jesus, and that
her teachers were only commissionated and instituted, defended and maintained
by an earthly power.

IN the next place, let us come to view the cautions and warnings that Christ
and his apostles give to the children of God, to beware of these outside gilded
deceivers, that are garnished with an outside profession, but inwardly are
ravening wolves; they will be very ready to judge sinners, and look upon their
own fine garment of ordinances of praying, singing, expounding of the
scriptures, keeping their Sabbaths, fasts, and the like; are forward to accuse
the woman taken in adultery, although they are every one of them guilty sinners
themselves. Thus they look upon their outside profession, as if they did some
service to God, without any consideration that it is all sin and wickedness,
and burdensome to God, according to what is written, Isa. i. 13, 14. Your
Sabbaths, solemn meetings, and the like, they are a trouble to me, I am weary
to bear them. Amos v. 21, 22, 23. I hate, I despise your fast days, and I will
not smell in your solemn assemblies. I will not accept your offerings. Take
away from me the noise of thy songs; for they invented to themselves
instruments of music like David, as in chap. vi. ver. 5. And chap. ii. 13. I am
pressed under you as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves. Prove. xxi. 27.
Psa. l. 16. But unto the wicked God says, what have thou to do to declare my
statutes, or that thou shoulast take my covenant in thy mouth? Yet these
sinners will separate themselves from other sinners, because they deceive
themselves with an outside profession, according to what is written, Isa. lxv.
5. Stand by thyself, come not near me, for I am holier than thou. Thus these
outside worshippers deceive the world, and many times God's children too, when
they are in a declining state; therefore says Christ to his desciples, Luke
xii. 1, 2. First of all, beware of the leaven of the pharisees, which is
hypocrisy: For (says Christ) there is nothing covered that shall not be
revealed, neither hid that shall not be known. For the bright shining light of
God's spirit in his messengers, always discovers these outside professors, who
are all sinners, and defiled within, not having the spirit of God dwelling in
them, yet separate themselves from other sinners, into church fellowship. These
will pray, preach, sing, fast, keep sabbaths, and thus deceive themselves and
others. These are those antichrists which Christ and his desciples have given
warning to the little flock of Christ, to beware of. These are they that Jude
speaks of. ver. 19. These are they who separate themselves, sensual, having not
the spirit. These are they that spread the antichristian world over, that went
out of the true church, according to what is written, 1 John ii. 19. They went
out from us, but were not of u^* for if they had been of us, they would no
doubt have continued with us.

THESE four following descriptions Christ and his Apostles give of the
anti-christians, which they foretold of, that should come in the latter days,
yet no other ways than the false prophets did of old, will inform us who they
be.

THE first is, They shall be persecutors. The second is, They shall be known by
their covetousness. The third is, Their form of godliness to deceive the world
with. And the fourth is, Their call should be from men.
FIRST. John xv. 20. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you.
Chap. xvi. 2. They shall put you out of the synagogues (...) yea, the time
comes, that whosoever kills you will think that he does God service. Ver. 4.
But these things have I told you, that when the time comes, ye may remember
that I told you of them.

THE next is, covetousness. 2 Pet. ii. 1, 2, 3. But there were many false
prophets among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you; and
many shall follow their pernicious ways: [Note the words; he does not say few
but many] And through covetousness shall they, with feigned words, make
merchandise of you. Jude 11. We unto them, for they have gone in the way of
Cain, (that is, bloody persecutors) and ran greedily after the error of Balaam,
for reward; that is, covetousness, to get a reward for their teaching.

THE third is, 2 Timothy iii. 5. Having a form of Godliness, but denying the power
thereof; that is, the powerful working of God's spirit in his people, they
shall deny.

And the fourth is, 2 Timothy iv. 3, 4. For the time will come when they will not
endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves
teachers, having itching ears. And they shall turn away their ears from the
truth, and shall he turned unto fables. Thus the Apostle shows, that these
antichrists have their call from men [They shall heap to themselves teachers]
he shows they shall be plenty enough, but it must be money that must hire these
teachers that the world heaps up to themselves.

BUT the Apostle John says to Christ's sheep, 1 John ii. 20. But ye have an
unction from the holy one; as much as if he should say, but ye are anointed
with the spirit of the holy one, and ye knew all things; that is, by this
immediate inspiration of God. Now these deceivers began to deceive the church
in the apostles days, and to teach them to observe days, and months, and years,
and to judge the church for not keeping sabbaths, and new moons, and the ^ke,
as it is written, Gal. iv. 10, 11, Ye observe days, and months, and times, and
years. I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain. Gal.
v. 12. I would they were even cut off, which trouble you. Col. ii. 16, 17. Let
no man therefore judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of an holy day,
or of the new moon, or of the sabbath da^; which are a shadow of things to
come, but the body is of Christ. Thus the apostle endeavors to keep the church
from these things, which were shadows (under the law) of Christ, and written by
a handwriting in the book, so that Paul call it a handwriting of ordinances,
in the 14th verse: Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances, that was
against us, nailing it to his cross. And in Ephesians. chap. ii. 15 having abolished
in his flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments, contained in
ordianances. And says John to the true church of Christ, when these deceivers
appeared in the world, to deceive them with sabbaths and holy days, which were
commanded under the law of Moses, and were shadows of Christ, and were all
abolished at his coming; and therefore says the apostle John, when these
antichrists and deceivers appeared in the world, to deceive the Gentile church,
as they had done the church of the Jews, 1 John ii. 24. Let that therefore
abide in you, which ye have heard from the beginning. If that which ye have
heard from the beginning, shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the
son, and in the father. Ver. 26. These things have I written unto you,
concerning them that seduce you. Ver. 27. But the anointing which ye have
riceived of him, abides in you; and ye need not that any man teach you But, as
the same the anointing teaches you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie;
and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him. Now these thieves,
robbers, and h^relings, as Christ calls them, and those that are not his sheep,
they have not this immediate teaching of God's spirit, neither know they what
this immediate teaching is, that the holy scriptures b^ witness to; for all the
holy bible directs to this immediate teaching of God, which antichrists know
nothing of, neither would they ever believe God's shepherds that were thus
inspired by this spirit of truth, as it is written, Neh. ix. 30. Yet many years
did* thou forbear them, and testifiedst against them by thy spirit in thy
prophets; yet they would not give ear. Christ also tells these ^ireli^gs, and
their flock, this very thing of God's teaching, John vi. 45. And they shall be
all taught of God. Every man therefore that has heard, and has learned of the
father, comes unto me. And this teaching is by the immediate word of God
speaking in his people, which word is not in the anti-christians, as says
Christ, John v. 38. And ye have not this word abiding in you. Now all God's
children have this word abiding in them, even that very word that was made
flesh, John. ^.14. This very word is ingrafted in all God's children, which
word is the divine nature of Christ, ingrafted into every saint's human nature,
according to what is written, 2 Pet. i. 3. According as his divine power has
given unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness. Ver. 4. Whereby
are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these you
might be partakers of the divine nature. Thus the divine nature of Christ,
which is the living word of God, is grafted in all God's children, and gives
them faith and strength against the devil, as it is written, 1 John ii. 14. I
have written unto you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God
abides in you. This is that powerful word that is in all God's children, that
gives them strength against sin, and the author of it, which is the devil; but
those that are not of Christ's sheep, have not this word of God abiding in
them, neither were they ever taught by it, and therefore know not his voice, as
his sheep do the follow him; for he is their King, Captain, and leader, even
this word of God, which the whole book of God teaches, and is Christ's divine
nature in his saints Rev. xix. 13, 14, 16. And he was cloathe^ with a vesture
dipped in blood; and is name is called, the word of God: And the armies which
were in heaven followed him. And he has on his vesture, and on his thigh, a
name written. KING of KINGS, and LORD of LORDS.

NOW it may be asked, what the scarlet-colored beast is? And what is the woman
arrayed in scarlet-colour, which is upheld by the beast?

I ANSWER: The beast is the earthly power, the woman is the declining church,
that is become a harlot, let her be in any age or time of the world whatsoever,
and let her be under what form soever it will, and never so exact according to
scripture, as to ordinances, the beast and the woman's scarlet-colored robe is
colored with the blood and martyrs of Jesus; and he that has his vesture dipped
in blood, whose name is the word of God, is Jesus Christ, who kills with the
sword, the worldly power, and the false church, who killed the saints, so that
their blood is sprinkled on his vesture, and has stained all his garments,
according to what is written, Rev. xiii. 10. He that kills with the sword,
must be killed with the sword. Here is the patience and faith of the saints.
James v. 6.7. Ye have condemned and killed the just, and he does not resist
you. Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord.

NOW this immediate divine teaching, which all God's children are taught with,
the whole antichristian world, nor their teachers, know nothing of, for it is
the immediate voice of Christ teaching every child of his; for they are all in
covenant with him, not in the covenant of works (that covenant was written in
tables of stone) but in a covenant of free grace, which is written upon their
hearts, not with ink, the bible that bears witness to the truth of it, is
written with ink; nor yet upon tables of stone, though the old covenant, or
covenant of work, was writ on tables of stone, to wit, the ten commandments,
but this covenant is writ on the fleshly tables of the heart by the spirit of
God, 2. Cor. ii. 3. And all Christ's shepherds are ministers of this covenant,
as ver. 6. Not of the letter but of the spirit. Now the Lord is of that spirit,
ver. 17. And teaches the righteousness which is of faith, and is written in
the heart by the spirit, and are not letter teachers without the spirit. Now
all that are in covenant with Christ, are all immediately taught by him,
accoding to what is written, Heb. viii. 11. And they shall not teach every man
his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord; for all shall
know me from the least to the greatest: They shall be all taught of God; and as
the apostle John says, They need not that any man teach them, but as this
anointing teaches them, as before was said. The word that was made flesh is in
all God's children, which is Christ's divine nature, even that word which was
in the beginning of this world, and all things were made by it, there is not
any thing that our eyes behold, that was made without it; for in that word is
life, and this word is in all God's children, and is their teacher, and this
word is God, 1 John v. 7. For there are three that bear record in heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one. Now this is the
commandment of God, that we should believe on the name of his son Jesus Christ,
and love one another, and he that keeps these commandments dwells in God,
and God in him; and by this we know that Jesus Christ dwells in us, by the
spirit he has given us, and this spirit of God witnesses to our spirits, that
we are his children. So that all God's children, which have received his
spirit, and are led by it, walk in a perfect light, and a clear sight, that
they are the children of God, for all such have the witness of God in
themselves, even his spirit witnessing to their spirits, that they are his
children, and these can draw nigh to God, in a full assurance of faith, for
there are no clouds of darkness comes betwixt God's spirit and theirs, while
they are obedient children, being led singly by his spirit, they come under no
condemnation, but their inward joy and peace is full, and there is a good
judgment in their going. But these teachers that come n^ in this spirit of
Christ, they know not the way of peace, neither is there any judgment in their
goings, let them attend their traditional prayer as much as they will, let them
keep their Sabbaths as strictly as they will, and let them preach and sing
David's psalms as often as they will, all will not give them any true peace,
nor free them from the guilt of one sin. Seeing then that it is the heart and
inward parts that God looks at, and a clean inside, which is cleansed by the
blood and spirit of Jesus Christ, then we ought to beware of false prophets
that come in sheep's clothing, not having Christ's spirit in them, but a
ravenous spirit, even the spirit of a wolf, and not of a lamb; and therefore
says the apostle John, Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits
whether they be of God; for many false prophets are gone out into the world.
Thus we are taught to try the spirits of these prophets, and not their
profession only, for they may say, and do not; therefore examine them, whether
Jesus Christ be come into them (and cast out the strong man of sin that rules
in the antichrists) and whether they can say with Paul, It is not I that live,
but Christ that lives in me, and Christ in me is my hope of glory; and as John
says unto the children of God, Ye are of God, little children, and have
overcome them, that is, the false prophets, as in the foregoing verses; for
greater is he that is in you than he that is in the world; for he that is in
the children of this world, is the prince of the power of the air; but he that
is in God's children, is Jesus Christ, who rules in them in righteousness, and
is their King, who has offered himself a sacrifice for their sins, and has
purged them from the guilt and filth of sin, and therefore is their priest; and
he has sent his spirit into their hearts to teach them, and therefore is their
prophet, or teacher, and they need not that man teach them, but as that spirit
teaches them. And so I shall conclude with Paul's good exhortation to all that
are under the profession of the name of Christ: Not to deceive themselves with
a bare profession of his name, but to examine themselves, whether they be
believers or not, by looking in their own hearts, to see whether Jesus Christ
be in them; for if he be not, then are you but dross, and not silver, 2 Cor.
xiii. 5. Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves;
know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobrates? Let every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity,
2 Timothy ii. 19.

THE END.
John Rogers A Servant of Jesus Christ, To all my beloved Brethren in Christ,
Greeting.
I HAVE written unto you some necessary Things, considering what this dark
Night of Apostasy has brought in; and to desire your serious Consideration of
it, for strait is the Gate and narrow is the Way that leads to Life, and few
there be that find it. And says Christ, Whosoever does not bear his Cross, and
come after me, cannot be my Disciple.

Concerning the two Ministrations, to wit, of the Law, and of the Gospel.
THE first Ministration was represented by the Tree of Knowledge of Good and
Evil; for when Adam had eaten of it, his Eyes were opened, and a divine Light
shined in him, which was the Moral Law written in his Heart, or the Knowledge
of Good and Evil communicated unto him, which was the first Ministration, and
came by the first Adam's Fall, whose State was represented by the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil, which was in the Midst of the Garden of God.

Concerning the Second or Gospel Ministration.
THE Second or Gospel Ministration was represented by the Tree of Life, the
Fruit of which Tree is given to the Transgressor, through Faith in the Blood of
Jesus Christ, that he may eat thereof, and live forever, and thus to overcome
Death by the second Adam, whose State was represented by the Tree of Life,
which was in the Midst of the Garden of God.

The first Ministration was the Ministration of God's Justice to the
Transgressor, in which Ministration the Light of the spiritual Law of God was
communicated to Adam and to his Posterity, which gave them the Knowledge of
Good and Evil, even the Knowledge of Sin, and this came by eating of the Fruit
of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, which was in the Midst of the Garden
of God.

The Second Ministration is the Ministration of Life and Righteousness to the
Transgressor, in which Ministration God's free Grace and Mercy is ministered to
him through Jesus Christ; for in this Ministration the Cherubims and flaming
Sword, which turned every Way to keep the Tree of Life (lest Adam should also
put forth his Hand and take of the Tree of Life, and eat, and live forever) is
removed, that the Transgressor may come at the Tree of Life, and put forth his
Hand, and take of that also, and eat thereof and live forever, which Tree of
Life was in the Midst of the Garden of God also.

Those that are only under the first Ministration, are under the Guilt of their
Sins, and the Wrath of God, and have a Spirit of Fear attends them, whose
Kingdom and Glory is of this World.

But those that are under the Gospel or second Ministration, they have received
the Spirit of Adoption, which Spirit witnesses with their Spirit that they are
the Children of God, and Heirs with Christ, whose Kingdom is not of this World,
but they are Pilgrims and Stangers here in this World.

In the first Ministration there is only Justice ministered to the Transgressor;
in the second Ministration there is only Mercy ministered to the Transgressor.
So that here is two distinct States that Mankind is in, and two distinct
Kingdoms, to wit, the Kingdom of this World, which was the Kingdom of the first
Adam, and still is the Kingdom of his Posterity; the other is the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, whose Kingdom is not of this World, but of that which is to come;
and this Kingdom is not under the Law, but under the Grace and Favor of God.
But those that are under only the first Ministration, they are under the Law,
and not under Grace, and their Kingdom is only of this World; for they bear
only the Image of the first Adam, and have only the Light of the moral Law,
which is the Knowledge of Good and Evil, which Knowledge is the Effect of the
Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; by which Knowledge they shall
be either justified or condemned, according to their own Works; and by this
Knowledge do they rule in their own Kingdom, which is of this World.

But they that are under the second or Gospel Ministration, they have received
the Spirit of Life and Righteousness which is the Effect of the Fruit of the
Tree of Life, and is the Light of the Gospel.

So that they which are under the first Ministration only, they have received a
Light, by which they see themselves to be under the Guilt of Sin, and therefore
fear the Wrath of God.

But they that are under the second Ministration, have received a Light, by
which they see themselves made free from Sin, and so consequently free from
Guilt, and free from the Fear of God's Wrath. But those that are under only the
first Ministration have not this Gospel Light, and therefore know nothing of
it, neither will they believe there is such a Thing; for they have eaten only
of the Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil in the first Adam, but
have not yet tasted of the Tree of Life in the second Adam; so that their Eyes
have not seen, nor their Ears heard, neither has it once entered into the
Heart, the Things which God has made known by his Spirit to them that are
under the second Ministration, by which Spirit they are become Followers of the
second Adam, who is their alone Pattern, since he came into the World.

But before he came into the World, those that were under the second
Ministration were led and taught by a shadowing Law, and were under Typical
Judges Kings and Priests, who were Types of Christ's kingly, prophetical and
priestly Offices; but since his coming in the Flesh they are ceased, and he
himself is their alone King, Priest and Prophet to rule and teach them, in a
more Evangelical or Gospel Way; and this was prophesied of before his coming
into the World, Deuteronomy. 18.15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet
from the Midst of thee, of thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him shall ye
hearken. Isa. 3.6. For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the
Government shall be upon his Shoulder, and his Name shall be called Wonderful,
Councellor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, of the
Increase of his Government and Peace there shall be no End. Psalm. 110.4. The
Lord has sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a Priest forever after the Order
of Melchizedeck. Thus was he prophesied of before his coming in the Flesh, to
wit, in his prophetical, kingly and priestly Offices; but he being now already
come, we are to hear him in all Things, and to follow him in all exemplary
Things, and he alone is to rule in his Church, being their King, Priest and
Prophet.

Quest. Can it stand with Christianity, according to Christ's Doctrine and
Example, since he came into the World, for his Church and People to join in
with the Powers of this World to resist Evil, by judging and condemning
Sinners, and to destroy Men's Lives, by fighting against Flesh and Blood with
carnal Weapons, as Guns, Swords, or the like Weapons; or to lord it over
others, by exercising Authority over them, as the Kings and Judges of this
World do?

Answer. No: for both his Doctrine and Example forbids his Church all such
Things, as appears by these following Scriptures, Mat. 5.38, 39. Ye have
heard that it has been said, an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth, but I
say unto you, that ye resist not Evil. Now this was the Work of the Judges
under the Ministration of the Law of Justice, to resist this Evil, on the
Behalf of him that was smitten, who was to give Life for Life, Eye for Eye,
Tooth for Tooth, etc. Exodus 21.23, 24. So that the Lord does both forbid such a
Judgment by his Disciples, and does also forbid the Prosecution of it by him
that suffers the Wrong, being his Disciple. Romans 12.19. Dearly beloved, avenge
not yourselves, but rather give Place unto Wrath, for it is written, Vengeance
is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. By this, we may see, the Followers of
Christ, are not to avenge themselves by an earthly Judge, as they had Liberty
to do under the Law: but they are to leave Vengeance unto their Lord, who will
repay it on their Behalf; and to take him alone for their Example, Joh. 3.7.
for God sent not his Son into the World to condemn the World, but that the
World by him might be saved. Joh. 12.47. for I came not to judge the World, but
to save the World: neither did he assent to condemn the Woman taken in
Adultery, but said unto her, go and sin no more. Joh. 8.4. etc. And thus are we
to be Followers of him, who is our only President and Example to follow. 1 Cor.
11.1. Be ye Followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. And thus are we to be
Followers of him, and not to take the Place of a Judge upon us, from the Hands
of the Children of this World, and so follow them in their Kingdom, to sit with
them in Judgment, to judge and condemn Sinners, whom Christ did not come to
judge, or to condemn, but to save. And also seeing he who was without Sin, has
not executed Justice upon us who were Sinners, but has extended his Grace and
Mercy to us, in acquitting and forgiving us, so ought we to be Followers of
him, and not now become Judges and Condemners of Sinners, seeing he has not
judged nor condemned us for our Sins. And seeing he who was without Sin, did
not cast a Stone at the Woman taken in Adultery, who was a Sinner, so likewise
let us, who were once Sinners, learn of him to be merciful unto Sinners, as he
has been merciful unto us, who came not to destroy Men's Lives but to save
them, Luke 9.56.

And by his Doctrine, he teaches us that the Weapons of our Warfare are not
carnal, 2 Cor. 10.4. and that we wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, Ephesians.
6.12. but we know that the Weapons of the Powers of this World are carnal, and
that they have no other Weapons to fight withal, and that it is Flesh and Blood
they fight against; contrary to Christ's Doctrine here taught to his Disciples;
for they are under the Ministration of the Law (but Christ's Disciples are
under the Ministration of the Gospel) but God has put into their Hand the
Sword of Justice, and they themselves also shall be judged by the Law (...)
justice.

But Christ's Doctrine does not give his Disciples so much Liberty as to defend
themselves by the Law of Justice from the Hands of earthly Judges. Mat. 5.38.
etc. Ye have heard that it has been said, an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a
Tooth, but I say unto you that ye resist not Evil, etc. And if any Man will sue
thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also, etc.

From hence we may observe, That under the Ministration of the Law, before
Christ came in the Flesh, it was an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth,
that is, if any Man smote another Man's Eye or Tooth out, he might resist by
the Law and Judges, who were to give Eye for Eye and Tooth for Tooth; but now
in the clear Gospel Dispensation, a Christian is, by Christ's Doctrine,
forbidden to resist this Evil by the Hands of worldly Judges, but are to commit
their Cause to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet 2.23. who has said to his
Church, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay, says the Lord; therefore if thine
Enemy be hungry, feed him; if he be thirsty, give him drink; for in so doing,
thou shall heap Coals of Fire on his Head, Romans 12.19, 20. As also, under the
Law, before Christ came in the Flesh, there was Liberty, that if a Man was sued
to the Law he might defend himself by the Law: but now, under the clear Gospel
Dispensation, his Disciples are forbidden this Liberty; for says Christ, if
any Man will sue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have thy
Cloak also.

And forasmuch as Christ's Followers have no Liberty from him to defend
themselves by the Law of Justice, from the Hands of earthly Judges, so it does
consequently follow, that they are not to sit in Judgment with them; for that
is also absolutely forbidden both by his Doctrine and Example; for, says he,
My Kingdom is not of this World, Joh. 18.36. Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not
of this World, if my Kingdom were of this World, then would my Servants fight,
etc. Joh. 6.15. When Jesus thereof perceived that they would come, and take him
by Force, to make him a King, he departed again into a Mountain alone. From
hence we may note, that he declares that his Kingdom is not of this World. And
secondly, When they would have made him a King, he refused to receive that
Office at their Hands, to wit, to be a King by the Ordination or Appointment of
Man; for the Kings and Governors of this World are the Ordinances of Men, who
ordain them to their Offices, to govern and rule over them; for so has God
appointed it should be among them. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of Man for the Lord's Sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, or
unto Governors, as unto them him that are sent by him for the Punishment of
Evil Doers. From hence we may observe, that a worldly King is the Ordinance of
Man, for it is they that have ordained him and set him over them, by God's
Appointment, to rule and govern them, under the Ministration of the Law, they
being the first Adam's Successors in his Kingdom. And earthly Governors they
are also the Ordinance of Men, for the King has ordained them under him to
punish Evil Doers; and all this is by God's Appointment under the first
Ministration of the Law, and is so to continue still over them that are under
the first Ministration, to wit, of the Law.

And also, under the Law, before Christ was Partaker of Flesh and Blood, God
set over his Church a typical Kingdom and a typical Priesthood, till he came in
the Flesh, who is the alone and only Ordinance of God, and not the Ordinance of
Man, as worldly Kings are; but God alone has ordained him to be a King and a
Priest forever over his Church, whose Members in this World are as Strangers
and Pilgrims, according to what written, Heb 11.13. And confessed that they
were Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth, 1 Pet. 2.11. and therefore are not to
exercise any Authority among them in a strange Country, but to follow the
Example of their Lord and Master, who refused to be made a King by the
Ordinance of Man, and has taught the like to his Disciples, saying, Luke
22.25. And he said unto them, the Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over
them, and they that exercise Authority upon them are called Benefactors* but ye
shall not be so, but he that is greatest among you, l^ him be as the younger,
and he that is chief, as he that does serve; for whether is greater, he that
sits at Meat, or he that serves? is not he that sits at Meat? but I am
among you as he that serves, etc. And I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my
Father has appointed unto me, etc.

From hence we may observe, that Jesus Christ is the Ordinance of God, and not
of Man; for it is God alone that has ordained him to be a King, and not Man;
and says Christ unto his Disciples, I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father
has appointed unto m^ So that God has appointed Christ's Kingdom, and Christ
has appointed his Disciples Kingdom. And this he says unto them, that they
may know, as his Kingdom is not of this World, so likewise that their Kingdom
is not of this World; and as he refused to exercise kingly Power in this World,
so ought they to refuse the same likewise, and to take him for their Example,
who though he was born a King, and for this Cause came into the World, Joh.
18.37. yet, says he, I am among you as he that serves; and therefore he
teaches them, as being their President, to take Example by him, and to learn
of him, who did condescend to minister to them in the meanest Service in the
World, even to wash their Feet, John 13.4. etc.

Even thus he has left us an Example to minister one to another in this
strange Country, even while we are Strangers among the Kingdoms of this World,
and not to exercise Lordship or Authority among them; for says he, and they
that exercise Authority upon them, are called Benefactors, but ye shall not be
so, says he, but he that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger, and
he that is chief as he that does serve.

Thus we may see, that though God has appointed the Children of this World to
ordain Kings and Governors over them, to punish Evil Doers whose Kingdom and
Glory is of this World, yet he has not so ordained among his Disciples, but
has appointed a King over them, whose Kingdom is not of this World, and his
Servants are but Strangers here in the World, being free born Subjects to his
Kingdom, being born not of Blood, nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the Will
of Man, but of God, Joh. 1.13. but though the Children of God are free from the
Kingdoms of this World; yet they are not to use this Liberty for a Cloak of
Maliciousness, but as the Servants of God, and of Christ, they are to honor
all Men, and to love the Brotherhood, to fear God and to honor the King, 1
Pet. 2.16, 17. Yea, we are to love our Enemies, and to bless them that curse
us, and to do good to them that hate us, and to pray for them that despitefully
use us, and persecute us, Mat. 5.4 and to do Violence to no Man, and to live
peaceably with all Men, as much as in us lies, by suffering ourselves to be
defrauded, Romans ^2.18. 1 Cor. 6.7.

Thus we may see, by the Doctrine and Example (...) Christ, that it cannot
stand with perfect Christianity (...) be either Governor, Judge, Executioner or
Jury m^ or to be active in the making any Laws, which may useful in the Body of
the Kingdoms of this Wor^ who are only under the first Ministration of the m^
Law, and their Weapons are carnal, with which W^pons they fight against Flesh
and Blood only, pun^ing both the Righteous and Wicked, according to w^ is
written. And he was numbered with the Transgress^ (by the Judges of this
World,) Mark 15.28.

But the Weapons that are under the Gospel Dispe^sation are to cut down Sin,
and save Flesh and Blo^ alive, as Christ says, Luke 9.5, 6. For the Son of M^
is not come to destroy Men's Lives, but to save them. Rom 8 13. But if ye
through the Spirit do mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live So that this
Gospel Weapon, (...) wit, the Spirit, mortifies Sin, but Flesh and Blood live
after the Body of Sin is destroyed.

Quest. Has Christ since he came into the World (...) an End to Wars among
Christians?

Answ. Yes; for that also belongs to the first M^nistration; for those Kings
and Judges which God ^sed up in his Church under the Law (before this o^ King
came into the World) were Types of his Kingdom, and by Faith in him they fought
against the Kingdoms of the Gentiles, and in that Faith they always overcome
the Enemies of God's Church. And forasmuch as David and those good Kings (which
God (...) over his Church, under the first Ministration) were Types of Christ's
Kingdom, it is said, Luke 1.32, 33. And the Lord shall give unto him the Throne
of his Father David, and he shall reign over the House of Jacob forever, and of
his Kingdom there shall be no End. So that those Kingdoms set over God's Church
before Christ's coming in the Flesh, were Figures of his Kingdom, and continued
no longer than till he came, who was to gather both Jews and Gentiles into one
Body, by one Spirit, that he might reign over them, so that his Church, after
his coming, might have no other Head, Judge or King but himself; for the Church
of God is espoused to him, as much as the Wife is to the Husband, and she is to
have no other Head, Ruler or Governor but him, 2 Cor. 11.2. For I have espoused
you to one Husband, Romans 7.4. That ye shall be married to another, even to him
who is raised from the Dead.

But while the Church of God was under a typical Kingdom, the Gospel of Christ
was held forth under the Law; but Christ being now come, that Kingdom over his
Church has ceased, and those Laws which they did rule by, to wit, an Eye for
an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth, and Life for Life, are not to be put in
Execution by any of Christ's Church since his coming, to whom Vengeance
belongs. And this was prophesied of before the Church was governed by this
typical Kingdom, even by Jacob, Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from
Judah, nor a Law giver from between his Feet until Shilo come, and unto him
shall the gathering of the People be. For whereas he says, The Scepter shall
not depart from Judah, that is, the typical Kingdom and Laws should be given to
them to rule by, and to continue till Christ's coming. And to him shall the
gathering of the People be, that is, by Faith, that he might rule and govern
them in Righteousness, and in Peace. And this his Kingdom and peaceable
Government was before prophesied of, and how he should put an end to Wars, and
reconcile Sinners to his Church, who were compared to Ravenous F^s; but by his
coming and Gospel, they are so reconciled, as that the Wolf comes to dwell with
the Lamb, and the Leopard to lie down with the Kid, etc. Isa. 11, 1, etc. And
there shall come forth a Rod out of the Stem of Jesse, and a Branch shall grow
out of his Roots, and the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him etc. This is a
plain Prophecy of Christ, that he should come of the same Stock as David did;
for David was a Rod that grew out of the Stem of Jesse, and a Branch that grew
out of his Roots, and was a Figure of Christ; and therefore the Prophet alludes
from David, as he was a Type of Christ, showing, That Christ should not judge
after the Manner of other kings; for says he. And he shall not judge after the
sight of his Eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his Ears, but in
Righteousness shall he judge the poor, etc. And Righteousness shall be the
Girdle of his Loins, and Faithfulness the Girdle of his Reins: The Wolf also
shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the
Calf and the young Lion and the Fatling together, and a little Child shall lead
them; and the Cow and the Bear shall feed, their young Ones shall lie down
together; and the Lion shall eat Straw like the Ox, etc. They shall not hurt
nor destroy in all my holy Mountain; for the Earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea. Thus the Prophet makes Use
of these fierce Beasts, to wit, the Wolf, Lion, Leopard, and the Bear, to set
forth the great Peace and Reconciliation that should be at the coming of Jesus
Christ, and by the Preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles, who were before as
ravenous Beasts, to devour God's Church and People, according to what is
written, They have eaten up Jacob, and devoured him, and consumed him. Thus
speaking after the Manner of Beasts that eat up, and devour, and consume the
Flock. But now, by the coming of Jesus Christ there is Peace and Reconciliation
between the Jew and the Gentile, where the Gospel is received, there the Wolf
shall lie down with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, etc.
they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain, that is where the
Gospel is received, there will be no killing nor destroying one another. Isa.
2.4. And ^e shall judge among the Nations, and rebuke many People, and they
shall beat their Swords into Plowshares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks,
Nation shall not lift Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn War any
more. This also was a Prophecy of Christ how he should put an End to Wars at
his coming; for says the Prophet, He shall judge among the Nations, and shall
rebuke many People, and they shall beat their Swords into Plow shares, and the
Spears into Pruning Hooks, etc. As much as if he should say, When he shall come
to be Judge among the Nations, he will rebuke many People, for their killing
and destroying one another, and shall cause them to beat their Weapons for War
into Tools for necessary Uses; Neither shall they learn War any more, says he.
Thus the Prophet fore saw that at t^ coming of Christ, and preaching of the
Gospel to the Nations, it would put an end to War, and r^concile both Jew and
Gentile into one Body, when the Gospel should be received, and that they should
learn War no more; as also Micah fore saw the sam^ Mic. 4.3, And these
Prophecies were fulfilled in him at his coming, as appears both by his
Doctrine and Example, Mat. 26.52. Then said Jesus unto hi^ Put up again thy
Sword into his Place, for all the that take the Sword shall perish with the
Sword. Rev. 13.10. He thas leads into Captivity shall go into Captivity: He
that kills with the Sword must be killed with the Sword. Here he rebuke^ the
Use of the Sword, according to what was before prophesied of him, threatening
them that use it to measure the same Measure to them, in that he says, A^ they
that take the Sword shall perish by the Sword; (...) He that kills with the
Sword must be killed wit^ (...) Sword. From hence it appears plainly, that the
ver^ Reason why Christ bid them provide Swords, was, the he might fulfill those
Prophecies which prophesied o^ him before hand, That he should rebuke the Use
of the Sword when he should come, and cause them to bent their Swords into
Plow-shares, and their Spear^ into Pruning hooks, and that they should learn W^
no more; for when they told him, there were two Swords, he said, It is enough;
but when they came to make use of them, he rebuked the Use of them, saying, Put
up again thy Sword into his Place; for all they the take the Sword shall perish
with the Sword. So that it appears he did not bid them provide Swords to kill
and slay with them, but put an End to the Use of them in his Church. Thus
seeing Christ has rebuked the Use of the Sword, and taught us to love our
Enemies, and not to resist Evil for Evil, saying, And as ye would that Men
should do unto you, do ye also to them likewise, Luke 6.31. And further says,
Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy Neighbor, and hate
thine Enemy, Mat. 5.43. But this which Christ terms, To hate thine Enemy, was
no other, than that Israel was to engage War by the outward Sword against their
Enemies; for we no where read those Words, Thou shall hate thine Enemy; but
only they had Liberty to make War against them; but now Christ has put an End
to it in his Church.

We thus seeing that Christ has rebuked the Use of Sword in his Church, and
that they are to learn War no more, but are to beat their Swords into useful
Tools, for necessary Uses; it is an evil Thing for a Christian to practice any
Gesture that tends to War, as watching, warding or training, or exercising
any Posture leading to War; for it is some Degree of Contempt to the Doctrine
of Christ, who has taught us to learn War no more, but to live the Life of
Faith and Love, who has promised us his Protection and Preservation from
Famine, Pestilence and Sword, when we love him and keep his Commandments, as
throughout the 91 Psalm, Job 5.19, 20. Isa. 26.1, 2, 3, 4. Rev. 3.10.

But God has ordained that there shall be a Government over the Children of
this World, whose Kingdom and Glory is of this World; for this World is their
Inheritance, they being under the first Ministration only of the Knowledge of
Good and Evil, which is the moral and spiritual Law of God, written in their
Hearts, by which Law comes the Knowledge of Sin, and makes all the World
guilty before God, and under the Power of Sin, therefore God has set over them
a Government to, be a Terror to the Ungodly and Sinners; but neither the Law,
nor yet Judges has he set over the Righteous, for the Law is not made ^ a
righteous Man, but for the lawless and disobedien^ 1 Timothy 1.9. neither has he
ordained the Famine, Pestilence or Sword against the Righteous, but against the
Wicked and Ungodly; for God has ordained that they shall kill one another with
the Sword; Rev. 6.4. And there went out another Horse that was red, and Power
was given to him that sat thereon, to take Peace from the Earth, and that they
should kill one another; and there was given unto him a great Sword. Mat. 24.6.
And ye shall hear of Wars, and Rumors of Wars, see that ye be not troubled,
for all these Things must needs come to pass. But God will protect his People,
and preserve them in Safety that trust in him, so that they shall not be afraid
of Destruction when it comes, Joh. 5.21, 22. But forasmuch as we have obtained
Mercy and Grace by Jesus Christ, and are thereby reconciled to God, and made
Heirs of a better Kingdom, and are but Strangers, Pilgrims and Sojourners here,
we are not to mix ourselves with the Children of this World, by joining with
them in their Kingdom, to judge or condemn, or torture any Man for his Sin,
seeing we are under another Ministration, having not been condemned by Christ
for our Sins, neither are we to join with them to kill or slay our Fellow
Creature, seeing Christ has rebuked the Use of the Sword in the Hands of his
Followers; and except we deny ourselves in all these Things, and take up our
Cross and follow him, we cannot be his Disciples.

And although we are of another Kingdom, and therefore are not to be concerned
in the Kingdom we do not belong to, either to sit in Judgment with them, or to
fight and kill under their Kingdom, yet as being in their Country and Limits,
rather than to offend them, we have Liberty from our King to pay them Tribute
for the carrying on the Affairs of their Kingdom and Government, both by his
Doctrine and Example, Romans 13.6, 7. Mat. 17.24 etc. And when they were come to
Capernaum, they that receive Tribute Money, came to Peter, and said, Does not
your Master pay Tribute Money? He says, Yes. And when he was come into the
House, Jesus prevented him, saying, What think thou, Simon, of whom do the
Kingdoms of the Earth take Custom or Tribute? of their own Children or of
Strangers? Peter says unto him, Of Strangers. Jesus says unto him, Then are
the Children free; notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, go thou to the
Sea, and cast an Hook, and take up the Fish that first comes up, and when thou
have opened his Mouth thou shall find a Piece of Money; that take, and give
unto them for me and thee. From hence we may observe, That when the Receivers
of an earthly King's Tribute, asked Peter, saying, Does not your Master pay
Tribute? he says, Yes. 2dly, We may observe, That when he was come into the
House, Jesus prevented him, by asking him a Question: The Question was, Of whom
do the Kings of the Earth take Custom or Tribute? Of their own Children, or of
Strangers? Peter says, Of Strangers. Then says Jesus, The Children are free.
He does not say, their own Children are free, (which was the Question) but,
then are the Children free, (says ^e Notwithstanding, lest we should offend
them (says Christ) give them a Piece of Money for me and the^

Here necessarily arises a Question, Why did Chr^ prevent Peter, by asking him
that Question?

Answ. It was to let Peter understand upon wh^ Account he gave them the Money,
to wit, lest he should offend them; for when Peter had answered the Question,
then says Jesus, Then are the Children free. And it is evident that Christ
intends the Children of God, for he applies the Freedom to themselves, in
saying, Lest we should offend them, give the Money for me and thee; for his
Words carry in it, not as a due Debt from us to them, but for Peace Sake give
it them. And Peter in his first Epistle, Chap. 2 v. 13, etc. writes after the
same Manner, Submit yourselves (says he) to every Ordinance of Man for the
Lord's Sake whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors, as unto
them that are sent by him, etc. ^ free, and not using your Liberty for a Cloak
of Maliciousness, but as the Servants of God. From hence we may observe, That
forasmuch as worldly Kings are ordained by Men to be their supreme Head on
Earth, Peter calls the King the Ordinance of Men. And forasmuch as Governors
are ordained by the King, for the Punishment of Evil Doers, this is the
Ordinance of Man also. And forasmuch as it is the Will of God that there should
be Kings and Governors set over the Children of this World, we are to submit
ourselves t^ them for the Lord's Sake, who has appointed them. And whereas
Peter says, As free, that is after the Manner of Christ's Speech to Peter,
Then are the Children free. But although the Children of God are free, being of
another Kingdom, yet are they not to use their Liberty for a Cloak of
Maliciousness against them, but as they are the Servants of God, and proper
Subjects of his Kingdom, they are to honor all Men, and to fear God, and to
honor the King, and to make Conscience, as Christ did, not to offend them, but
rather to give them their Demand for carrying on of their Affairs in their own
Kingdom, that they may uphold and defend it by their own Sword, till God
himself shall overthrow it, according to what is written, Rev. 11.15. Dan*
2.44. And thus by well doing are we to put to Silence the Ignorance of foolish
Men, whose Trust is in their own Strength, and not in the living God, whom they
ignorantly profess.

Concerning Swearing.
Matthew. 5.33, etc. Again, Ye have heard that it has been said by them of old
Time, Thou shall not forswear thy self, etc. but I say unto you, Swear not at
all.

We may observe from hence, that Christ is not speaking of any vain Swearing
that was under the Law, but of such Swearing as was allowed under that
Ministration, under which Ministration false Swearing is forbidden, and all
vain Oaths; but Swearing itself was allowable; and that Swearing which he
alludes from, and forbids, is that allowable Oath that was under the Law, to
wit, Lev. 19.12. And ye shall not swear by my Name falsely. It is this allowable
Oath that was under the Law, that forbids Swearing falsely in God's Name, that
he here forbid his Disciples, saying, But I say unto you, swear not at all. So
that he forbids, in the first Place, that lawful Swearing that was under the
Law, and in the next Place, forbids all vain Oaths in common Communication; for
as it was said by them of old, Ye shall not swear by my Name falsely, in Answer
to this, says Christ, But I say unto you, swear not at all. So that he is
forbidding his Disciples Swearing by God's Name, in the first Place; and 2dly,
says he, Neither by Heaven, for it is God's Throne. So that he forbids
Swearing by God's Name, and by God's Throne. And 3dly, He forbids Swearing by
the Earth, which is God's Footstool. And, 4thly, He forbids Swearing by
Jerusalem. And, 5thly, He forbids Swearing by thine own Head. And lastly, He
exhorts his own Disciples to let their Communication be Yea, and Nay, for what
is more than this comes of Evil.

But as to the Swearing of Men to worldly Offices, and Swearing of Witnesses, I
know of no such President in the Bible, but do think it is crept into the World
in the Night of Apostasy.

But an Oath under the Law was for Confirmation, to end Strife between two, in
such a Case where Witnesses could not be procured, as in Exodus 22.10, 11.

Concerning God's Visitation by Sickness.
IN Time of Sickness, Ache or Pain, we are to examine our own Hearts, to see and
find out the cause of God's Chastisement, and to look up to him who wounds, and
whose Hands alone make whole, who is the same Yesterday, to Day and forever;
and to attend the Apostle James's Direction. James 5.13, etc. If any Man among
you be afflicted, let him pray; is any merry, let him sing Psalms; is any sick
among you, let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over
him, anointing him with Oil in the Name of the Lord; and the Prayer of Faith
shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed
Sins, they shall be forgiven him. Confess your Faults one to another, and pray
one for another, that ye may be healed. The effectual fervent Prayer of a
Righteous Man avails much.

J. R.

THE END.

