SOME MISCELLANEOUS REMARKS, AND SHORT ARGUMENTS, ON A SMALL PAMPHLET, Dated in
the CONVENTION of the REPRESENTATIVES of the STATE of NEW YORK, October 2,
1776, and sent from said CONVENTION to the County of CUMBERLAND.

AND Some REASONS given, why the District of the New Hampshire Grants had best
be a STATE.

By IRA ALLEN.

HARTFORD: Printed by EBENEZER WATSON, near the GREAT BRIDGE. M.DCC.LXXVII.

PREFACE.
THE following impartial work was undertaken by and at the request, of the
General Convention of the district of the New Hampshire Grants, and many
matters of fact are here inserted, as a short state of the disingenuous cunning
of the former government (now State) of New York, toward the inhabitants of
said district. Which are humbly dedicated to the candid reader, by the author,
for the good of mankind

SOME MISCELLANEOUS REMARKS, etc.
OUR Author informs us in Page 7th and 8th, viz. It is unquestionable, that the
jurisdiction of this State over the territory which now comprehends the County
of Cumberland, is co-eval with its first formation as a colony under the crown
of Great Britain.

IT is a fact notoriously known, by those that are acquainted with the history
of the former government of New York, that that government did not extend so
far north as the city of Albany, until the accession of King William and Queen
Mary to the throne; then we find a commission from their Ma^esties, to Henry
Slaughter, to be materially different from those of the respective Governors of
New York before. King William and Queen Mary by their commisions dated the
fourth day of January in the first year of their reign, appointed Henry
Slaughter to be Governor of ^he province of New York, and the territories
depending thereon, in America.

BEFORE the accession of King William and Queen Mary to the throne, plantations
were extended northwardly, either on patents procured immediately from the
crown or government, or mere set^lements on extra-provincial lands, in which
the city of Albany was includ^^.

THE enlargement in the Commission to Henry Slaughter was in these words, viz.
"And the territories depending thereon in America." These territories are that
extension of jurisdiction beyond their ^^rst circumscribed limits, terminating
south of Albany, called the province of New York. This territorial extension of
jurisdiction was altogether in the arbitration of the crown to curtail or
extend; this being the case, the respective Governors can no otherway be judges
of the extent of jurisdiction, but by directio^^ given them in their
commissions, together with his Majesty's express proclamations and public
determinations relative thereto, as in the instance of the royal adjudication
in 1764, a publication of which, by his Majesty's orders, gave his subjects to
understand, that it was his pleasure, that the territorial jurisdiction of
New York should extend to the west banks of Connecticut-river, which includes
the counties of Cumberland and Gloucester within that government. Before this,
it wa^ impossible for the subjects to know it; if they could have known it
without his Majesty's proclamation certifying the same such proclamation would
have been needless and impertinent: The truth of the matter is, his Majesty i^
173^ determined that New Hampshire government should cover the pr^^ent county
of Cumberland: He altered his determin^tion in 1764, whereby New York extended
its territories over the ^ounty of Cumberland, and for any gentleman to amuse
people of common sense, that it is unquestionable, that the jurisdiction of
this State, over the territories which now ^omprehends the county of
Cumberland, is co eval with its first formation as ^ colony under the crown of
Great Britain, is the height of folly. It was in the nature of things
absolutely impossible his Majesty himself should have known that to have been
the case the moment before he determined it, and equally inconsistent, that the
subjects should know it 'till his Majesty proclaimed i^.

OUR Author further inserts in page 8, these words, viz* (...) implying a
latent design, by a future separation from (...) to leav^ the whole burden of
the present cruel and (...) war to be sustained by the rest of the Community.
This i^ indeed a very extraordinary way of arguing, and in particular for the
Honorable the Provincial Congress to assert. It i^ well known to that State,
that it was ever disagreable to the inhabitants of the New-H^mpshire Grants to
be within the State of New York, and that there has been much talk of
seperating from said State, and should the county of Cumberland absen^ from
said State, and connect with the State of the Massachusetts Bay, or should they
connect with the rest of the New Hampshire (...) and form a new State, it is
not to be even supposed, ^ut that (...) should pay our proportion, according to
our abilities, o^ the expenses of the present war. It is not reasonable if one
of the United States should be more pressed with powerful armies tha^ any other,
that they ought or will pay any more for that, or if one State should raise
more men, according to their numbers, to join the main army, or to scout in
their own frontiers if need be, than the rest, that they ought in justice to
bear any more of the burden than any other State; (but, in consequence of
their being harrassed by the enemy, they ought not to pay so much.) But in the
sequel of the war the whole expense will be mad^ in one bill by the Honorable
the Continental Congress; then each (...) will share equally the blessings of
the glorious victor^ (...) the liberties, granted to our ancestors, by the
supreme Govern^^ of the universe, may be kept inviolate and handed down to the
latest posterity, and if one State has done more than their propo^tion, it will
be remitted to them again to their everlasting honor, for exerting themselves
to maintain the liberties God has given us; if each State have done their equal
proportion, then consequently each State will pay their proportion, according
to their abilities, until said Bill is discharged.

OUR Author asserts the following lines in page 10. And the success of the
great cause in which the whole continent is engaged cannot but be weakened by
dissension and by counte^^ncing the factious and self-interested. This
objection, at (...), seems to be important, but upon examination will va^^sh. I
readily agree that it would be matter of lamentation, that when we are jointly
engaged in a bloody contest, merely to oppose arbitrary power, without us, that
we should have occasion to contend against the same within ourselves,
especially by those who profess to be friends to liberty. I imagine this
objection arises for want of due consideration; we are much mistaken in our
views, if we are not proposing that and that only, which will prevent
contentions and divisions taking place amongst us, and that which will have the
most happy effect to unite us in indissoluble bonds of (...) and friendship, by
forming the whole district of the New Hampshire Grants, into a new and
permanent State, in which all the free and natural rights of men will be
protected to the latest posterity. Certainly if the observations I have made
are just, the objection must cease in the mind of every reasonable person; for
if we consider that oppression was the cause of this unnatural war, and the
oppressions this district has received from the Government of New York are
similar (which I think may plainly appear) are we not pursuing the same general
cause? The only difference is, that we are contending against the same enemy
within, that is also without, and certainly, if arbitrary power without us
ought to be punished with vengeance, that within ought to have sevenfold;
therefore we are persuaded, that every one who is a true friend to the
liberties of mankind, and has any sense of his own or posterity's good will
think the case well deserves a serious consideration and ought to be referred
to the Honorable the Grand Council of the United State of America, f^r their
wise deliberation and determination, which is our ardent wish.

GOD gave mankind freedom by nature and made every man equal to his neighbor,
and has virtually enjoined them to govern themselves by their own laws.

DOUBTLESS you remember in ancient times, every (...) his own vine and fig tree
and there was none to (...) them afraid, and when it became necessary for them
to have some (...) and laws to govern themselves by, every man appeared
personally, under their own fig trees in council, and harmoniously ^gree^ (...)
rules to be governed by; they also worshipped the deity in the open air* but in
process of time, to shelter themselves from the inclemency of the weather, they
built houses for that sacred (...) then, by the increase of men, it became
necessary for some divi^^ons and they divided themselves into tribes, each one
governing his own internal policy, etc.

SINCE the propagation of settlements through the world* (...) become necessary
for the sake of good order and government, that the inhabited part of America
should be divided into ^^^vernments or States, counties, towns, etc. for the
convenience o^ its inhabitants, though not for the agrandisement of any
p^^ticular place or number of men, but for the mutual advantage of the whole;
it was not the free voice of the people of the New Hampshire Grants ever to be
in the government of New York, but was an express order from the crown in the
year 1764, and was unknown to most of the inhabitants of said grants, until his
Majesty's proclamation appeared certifying the same.

BY the declaration of Independence all laws and connections with the British
Court were dissolved, which left all ^ingly governments destitute of any law or
established mode of government, and since each State is preparing a new mode of
government, to establish as a free and independent State of America, and as the
design of forming governments was meant for the mutual benefit, peace and
happiness, of the present and future ages, I see no reason why any county or
counties, community or communities of people, may not assert their free and
natural rights and liberties, which was given them by the God of nature, and if
the royal tyrant of Great Britain did pass an order extending the territorial
jurisdiction of New York to the w^st ba^ks of Connecticut-River, for some
sinister views to the crown (or by the influence of (...) gentlemen in
New York) and contrary to the free voice of the inhabitants of the whole
district of the New Hampshire Grants, as it rendered the situation of the
inhaqitants very disagreable in many respects, and one o^ this hypothesis
unmovable, viz. their local situation, as some of them are upwards of four
hundred miles from the seat of government at New York. This order may be well
accounted one of the cruel acts of the crown, and as the Honorable the
Continental Congress, did, on the fourth day of July last, declare the United
Colonies of America to be free and independent of the crown, which declaration
the people of the New Hampshire Grants have most cordially acqui^sc^d in, by
forming an association, binding themselves, by all the (...) held sacred
amongst men, to exert themselves to defend by (...) the liberties of America,
as also by many votes of their Ge^^ral Convention of later dates, and whereas
by said declaration, the arbitrary acts of the crown are null and void in
America, consequently the jurisdiction by said crown granted to the government
of New York, over the people in the New Hampshire Grants, is totally dissolved,
so that the veil of New York is not left over any part of the New Hampshire
Grants.

IT has been before observed, that the design of forming governments, was meant
for the mutual benefit, peace and happiness of the present and future ages,
therefore, since the dissolution of the British power in America, all power, as
it was in the beginning, naturally revolves back on the people; it therefore
now stands every individual in hand to see what way and mode of government they
adopt, as also the boundaries of each State, together with the natural genius,
habit and temper of the people which are to make and constitute one body
politic.

AND now, as I view it, we are probationers to act, not only for ourselves, but
for posterity, even, in some degree, as (...) was with Adam in his original
purity. He transgressed the divine law, thereby brought sin and misery on
himself and posterity, which deprived his successors of those liberties and
mansions God had given him. Each man is accountable to his creator for the part
he now takes, for on the conduct of the present age depends the liberties of
millions yet unborn.

SINCE this vast continent has made this noble stand, have and still continue
to weild the sword of liberty, to preserve inviolate the freedom of the present
and future ages, and are about to establish new and free States under the
authority of the people, it behooves us, as inhabitants of the New Hampshire
Grants, to view with candor our own situation.

WE principally emigrated from the New England States, the former laws, rules
and regulations of which, were nearly ali^e; in consequence of which, the
inhabitants of said Grants, have been taught in one way; their genius and
customs have been so near correspondent, that there is the highest probability,
that they would unanimously agree on a mode to govern the internal policy of a
State, with the greatest unanimity, which is one of the greatest blessings ever
bestowed on a free people.

ON the other hand, the former laws, rules and regulations of the government,
now State, of New York, have been so m^^erially different from those we have
been accustomed to* and considering the conflict that has subsisted those many
years between this district and the said government, there is the greatest
reason to believe, that should this district connect with that State, to make
one body politic, there would be as little hopes of a reconciliation's ever
taking place between them, as there would be between Great Britain and the
United States of America, which must render the situation of both very unhappy.

WITNESS a resolve, viz. In Convention of the representatives of the State of
New York, at Harlem, August 2, 1776. Resolved Unanimously, That all quit-rents
formerly due and payable to the King of Great Britain within this State, are
now due and owing unto this Convention, or such future government as may be
hereafter established in this state.

Extract from the Minutes, ROBERT BENSON, Secretary.



IT is to be here noted, that those Grants that derived from New Hampshire pay
one shilling proclamation money, and those from New York, half a crown sterling
on each hundred acres, when in the ancient part of the province of New York,
Livingston's Manor, a tract of land about twenty miles square, pays but one
beaver's-skin annually, as quit rent; and Bateman's Patent, a valuable tract of
about ninety thousand acres, pays only a quit rent of three pounds ten
shillings; in fine, all the old settled part of the province pays no more than
a trifling acknowledgment.

THUS it appears by the above resolves, and by a small pamphlet, dated in
Convention, the second of October 1776, and sent from the Honorable the
Provincial Congress of the State of New York to the county of Cumberland, that
the said present Honorable Congress, have passed some unreasonable and
oppressive resolves: A very extraordinary way indeed to collect a sum of money
to defray public expense, after the former government of New York had by
cunning, fraud, threats and deceit, terrified and seduced the inhabitants of
some townships to take regrants of them, at the extortionate price of even 2300
dollars for a township and on said subsequent patents, was added more than ^
three fold quit-rent.

THIS act of the former government carries the color of tyranny in its very
visage, and is plain to be seen by the weakest capacity.

I cannot see why there is not as much tyranny in taking this threefold
quit-rent, since the dissolution of the British power in America, as there was
in giving the subsequent patent, for it is still holding up in existence, one
of those cruel acts, which induced us to take arms and join our brethren in the
several United States, to defend the liberties of the whole.

BY this the candid reader will easily see the almost infinite disproportion of
collecting money for public expense.

TO understand political power right, and derive it from its original, we must
consider what state all men are naturally in, and that is a state of perfect
freedom, to order their actions and dispose of their possessions and persons as
they shall think fit, within the bounds of the law of nature, without asking
leave or depending upon the will of any other man. (Lo^k.)

A STATE also of equality wherein all power of legislation is reciprocal, no
one having more than another, there being nothing more evident than that
creatures of the same species and rank, promiscuously born to all the same
advantages of nature and the use of the same faculties, should be equal one
amongst another, without subordination or subjection, only what is absolutely
necessary to keep up good laws, rules and regulations amongst mankind.

THE natural and just rights of a free people is first, the making and,
secondly, executing their own laws: On these two branches depends the liberties
of a free people, and are guarded by having the control of those branches in
their own hands. And now the inhabitants of the district of the New Hampshire
Grants, being invested with such powers as the God of nature has blessed them
with; although Delegates from the counties of Cumberland and Gloucester have
been admitted to sit in the Honorable Provincial Congress of New York, yet the
following will plainly demonstrate, that they were not legally chosen by the
inhabitants of said counties at large; for it would be unreasonable, even to
suppose, that the inhabitants of said district of the New (...) with a power,
with whom they had been for a number of years ^^rnestly contending, without any
hopes of redress.

THAT in consequence of circular letters from said Congress of New York, dated
May 31, 1776, requesting the counties of Cumberland and Gloucester, to send
delega^es to sit in Convention and assist them in making and establishing a
code of laws for said State, the following method was made use of in choosing
the three Delegates for the county of Cumberland, viz. The three first in
nomination for w^om the greatest number of votes appeared, were declared
accepted without allowing a negative voice, when at the same time it was
generally conceeded to by the said County Convention, that it was contrary to
the free voice of three-fourths of the inhabitants of said county, to elect
delegates to represent them in Convention aforesaid, or to be otherwise
connected with them; so that by this method of choosing, if one man has ten
votes, another five, and another three, they would be severally chosen by the
people at large, to assist in the establishment of a code of laws, by which the
whole are to be governed. True this mode of choosing is a sure and quick method
of getting a choice the first attempt, and where a community are agreed in the
mode, is justifiable, but this mode would be very wrongly applied to these
counties, considering the aged conflict which has subsisted so long, and with
such impetuousity, as to spill the blood of several of its inhabitants. It ever
was and still is disagreable for the inhabitants of those counties, to be and
remain within the jurisdiction of New York, therefore, according to natural
liberty, a vote should have been first obtained for choosing delegates, and
secondly (if that were completed) the mode of choosing; that is, the
inhabitants of each town, in their public town meeting, appointed for that
purpose, to deliver to the Moderator or clerk, their votes severally, in
writing, which votes to be carefully sealed up in the presence of such meeting
and properly conveyed to some meet person, duly appointed to receive and
deliver the same to the chairman of the county committee, who, with a quorum,
is to complete what is further (...) thereon; but not in the clandestine way of
designing men's going to the habitations of private individuals to collect
votes.

IN the County of Cumberland there is upwards of two thousand voters, out of
which there was but three hundred and sixty-eight in favor of electing
delegates, to sit in the Honorable Convention of New York, viz. For Colonel
Joseph Marsh 358, For Captain John Sessions 172, and for Simon Stevens, Esquire
166. Six or seven towns in said county did at the same time enter their protest
against election, and even the county committee, who gave the Delegates their
credentials, did restrict them to particular instructions, reserving to
themselves, in behalf of the county, a right of absenting from the State of
New York, whenever a suitable opportunity would admit thereof; yet, Messrs
Sessions and Stevens, two of the delegates of Cumberland county (if I may so
call them) declared in Congress, that they were chosen by the people at large,
that the committee who gave them their instructions and sent the said letter to
the Convention, were elected long before their own election as deputies for
said county; that their credentials from the county gave them full and
unrestrained power in forming a government; that they conceive themselves no
farther bound by their instruction, than they shall appear to be right and
beneficial; but, that when, even on debate, it should appear, that those
instructions might work an injury to the State, or if on any question they
should be out voted, they should not consider themselves bound by their
instructions; and further, that as Representatives of said county, they fully
acknowledged the jurisdiction of this State over the said county and its
inhabitants.

THIS representation seems to be big with great mischief; for surely if there
was any validity in their credentials, there was equally the same in their
instructions, for they both derived from one committee, and were both joined on
one paper, and all done in one day, and if their credentials gave them a seat
in that honorable house, they must consequently follow their instruction or
cease to be the representatives of the people, by the same rule that George the
third ceased to be our King by breaking his coronation oath.

THUS it appears that out of above two thousand voters, in the county of
Cumberland, but three hundred and sixty-eight could be persuaded to vote for
delegates, and by no means a majority in the county of Gloucester, and not one
on the west side of the range of Green Mountains, in the latter of which is
full half of the inhabitants in said district.

BY this the candid reader will see, that there has but a very inconsiderable
part of the inhabitants in said district, ever attempted to delegate power of
legislation to any body politic, and those under particular restrictions:
Therefore the inhabitants of said District, have the sole exclusive and
inherent right, to govern their internal police; in consequence of which, it
now behooves every one to be critical in establishing a plan of Government, for
it will be like a seed sown, which will spring up, with boughs either extending
to secure the liberties of Millions yet unborn, or else to skreen the wicked
designs of crafty usurpers.

BUT let us take a retrospect view of the former government of New York and
their conduct toward us, and then heartily consider whether the said State
would not be as well off, without the district of the New Hampshire Grants, as
with, and then see if it would not be to the benefit, peace and happiness of
the inhabitants of both, for the district of the New Hampshire Grants, to be
included in a new State.

LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR COLDEN represented to his Majesty and Privy Council, that
it would be greatly to the advantage of the inhabitants of the district of
lands to the westward of Connecticut River, which had been before granted by
the government of New Hampshire, to be under the jurisdiction of the province
of New York, and that Connecticut River was a good and (...) boundary line to
divide the two respective provinces, and furthermore, that Hudson's River was
navigable a great way into the country, and the situation of the New Hampshire
Grants, was such, as would naturally constitute that river the center of trade
and commerce, for the inhabitants of those Grants, by the navigation of which,
they could easily send exports to the city of New York, and receive and return
such articles as they would; and that it would therefore be much more
convenient and happy for them to be under the jurisdiction of New York, etc.

THIS Representation of Lieutenant Governor Colden was falacy, and would appear
so to be, to any gentleman that knew the situation of the New Hampshire Grants:
as to a few towns, in the south-west corner of the district of lands aforesaid,
I grant that Hudson's River will naturally constitute that the center of trade
to the inhabitants thereof, and a small part of the south-east corner of the
said district, from their remote situation from Hudson's River, Lake Champlain,
etc. and their contiguousness to Connecticut River, will naturally constitute
that the center of trade for its inhabitants; but far the greater part of the
district of lands aforesaid, from their remote situation from Hudson's River,
navigation in Connecticut River and the eastern seaports, from the
contiguousness thereof to Lake Champlain, Chamblee, Montreal on the river St.
Lawrence, etc. will naturally constitute them the center of trade for the
inhabitants thereof.

THIS being the situation of the district of the New Hampshire Grants as to
trade, and had it not been for self-interest, that is, by the handle of
jurisdiction, to overreach and seduce the people by cunning, fraud, violence
and oppression, so as to make the landed interest of the New Hampshire Grants
their own, will plainly appear by their conduct toward us. No sooner than they
had of (...), Lieutenant Governor Colden gave subsequent patents o^ the very
identical lands on which the New-^ampshire (...) to certain monopolizing
attorneys and fav^urite gentlemen of New York; at this the peaceable
inhabitants were greatly alarmed, they sent repeatedly to New York for
settlement of such an unheard of dispute, but none could be had, except they
would resign up their New Hampshire charters and deeds and take new ones under
the great seal of the province of New York: At this the inhabitants sent an
agent to the Court of Great Britain to solicit redress, and he obtained the
following prohibition, viz.

AT a court at ST. JAMES'S, the 24th day of July 1767.

Present, The KING's most Excellent Majesty, Arch Bishop of Canterbury, Lord
Chancellor, Duke of Queensborough, Duke of Ancaster, Lord Chamberlain, Earl of
Litchfield, Earl of Bristol, Earl of She^burn, Viscount of Falmouth, Viscount
Barrington, Viscount C^erk, Bishop of London, Mr. Secretary Conway, Hans
Stanley, Esquire.


His Majesty taking the said report, that is, report of the Board of Trade,
into consideration, was pleased, with the advice of his Privy Council, to
approve thereof; and does hereby strictly charge, require and command, that the
Governor or commander in chief of his Majesty's province of New York, for the
time being, do not, upon pain of his Majesty's highest displeasure, presume to
make any grants whatsoever, of any of the lands described in the said report,
until his Majesty's further pleasure shall be known concerning the same.

A true copy, Attest. WILLIAM SHARP, GEORGE BANYOR, Dep. Sec.

NOTWITHSTANDING the above prohibition, the respective Governors of New York,
presumed to regrant our lands, from (...) our feet, in open defiance to the
regal authority ^f Great Britain. They also sent showers of writs of ejectment
to the inhabitants, which, on trial, produced writs of possession; then the
posse commitatus, consisting of about 700 men were raised to enforce
possession, then the spirited inhabitants assembled with arms, to repel force
by force; from this the inhabitants of said district may date the beginning of
the war for our rights and liberties, which we have now joined the United
States of America in; I have been a personal actor in both scenes, but can see
no odds in the nature of the dispute, however much they may differ in their
degree.

FOR thus defending our possessions which the legislative and executive powers
of New York, attempted to take from us by virtue of subsequent patents, that
was laid on ours after the arrival of the above prohibition, we were indicted
for rioters, large sum^ of money offered for us, also twelve acts of out-lawry
was made by said legislative body, dated the 9th of March 1774, by which acts
the judges were empowered to award sentence of death without the criminal's
ever being arrested or arraigned before the bar. -- North. -- Before this act
of out-lawry was made, the following report arrived, viz.

Extract from a report from the Lords of Trade to the committee of his
Majesty's most honorable Privy Council for plantation affairs, dated December
3, 1772.
UPON the fullest examination into all the circumstances which at present
constitute the state of that district between the rivers Hudson and
Connecticut, out of which the greatest discords and confusion have arisen, it
seems to us that the principal objection of attention in the consideration of
any measures that can be suggested for restoring public tranquillity and
quieting possession, are

First, Those townsh^ps which having been originally settled and established
under grants from the government of the Massachusetts-Ba^ fell within this
district by the determination of the northern boundary of that province, in the
year 1740.

Secondly, Those grants of land made within this district, by the government of
New York, previous to the establishment of the townships laid out by the
Governor of New Hampshire, after the conclusion of the peace, and which land
now lies within the limits of some one or other of those townships.

Thirdly, Those townships which having been originally laid out by the Governor
of New Hampshire, either continue in the same state, or have been confirmed by
grants from New York, and also those which have since originated under grants
from the latter of those colonies.

WITH regard to those townships which fall under the first of the
abovementioned descriptions, when we consider the nature and origin, and the
numberless difficulties to which the original proprietors of them must have
been subjected, in the settlement of lands, exposed to the incursions of the
savages, and to every distress which the neighborhood of the French in time of
war could brings upon them, and when we add to these considerations, the great
reason there is to believe that the grants were made on the ground of military
services against the enemy, we do not hesitate to submit to your Lordships our
opinion, that the present proprietors of those townships ought, both in justice
and equity, to be quieted in their possessions; and that all grants whatsoever,
made by the government of New York, of any lands within the limits of those
townships, whether the degree of improvement under the original grant had been
more or less, are in every light oppressive and unjust; but as we are sensible
that such subsequent grants, made by the government of New York, however
unwarrantable, cannot be set aside by any authority from his Majesty, in case
the grantees should insist on their title, we submit to your Lordships, whether
it might not be expedient in order to qui^t the original proprietors in their
possessions, to propose, that all such persons who may claim possession of
lands within the limits o^ such townships, under New York grants, should upon
cond^t^o^s of their quitting such claim, receive a grant under the seal of
New York, upon the like terms and free of all expenses, of (...) number of
acres, in some other part of the district, lying between the rivers Hudson and
Connecticut, and in case where any actual settlement or improvement has been
made, by such claimants, that they should in such case receive fifty acres of
waste land for every three acres they may have so improved.

WITH regard to those grants made by the government of New York, which fall
under the second description, and upon which actual improvement has been made,
they disappear to us to deserve the same consideration, and that the
proprietors ought not to be disturbed in their possessions, (...) t^eir
improvement be to a gr^ater or lesser extent. But (...) leave to observe to
your Lordships, that in both cases n^ ^^^sideration ought to be had to any
claim, where it shall appear that no regular possession has ever been taken,
and no actual settlement ever been made.

WITH regard to those townships which fall within the last mentioned
description, we submit to your Lordships our opinions, that provided such
townships do not include lands within the limits of some antecedent grant, upon
which actual improvement has at any time been made, it would be advisable they
should be confirmed as townships, according to the limits expressed in the
grants thereof, and that all persons having possession of any share in said
townships, either as original grantees, or by purchase or conveyance, and upon
which shares any actual improvement or settlement has been made, ought in
justice to have been or to be in future disturbed in the possession of such
sh^res, (...) they to be bound to any other conditions, whether of quit-rent or
otherwise, than what is contained in the grant.

I shall here make (...) miscellaneous remarks on the conduct of (...) New York
to the inhabitants on the east (...) the mountains in said district.

(...) had (...) jurisdiction, the legislative body (...) a law to elect (...)
which now comprehends the county of Cumberland (...) ^ounty, and sent the same
to the count of Great-Brita^^, to be there ratified and confirmed; in the mean
time they arrogated power to commissionate favorite foreigners to the place of
(...) officers, they also commissionated a great number of both civil and
military officers, such as would be most likely to be subservient to bring
about their vile and mercenary purposes. But alas! to their great surprise,
this law was sent back negatived, yet in open violation to the laws of the
crown, the legislative and executive powers assumed to themselves authority to
hold courts, their conduct was so notorious, that it was (...) of that odious
and never to be forgotten massacre at the (...), in said Cumberland county, on
the evening of the thirt^^^^h of March 1775, in which several persons were
actually murdered -- Oh horrid scene!

SOME of those officers, thus appointed, were very officious in advising the
inhabitants to take re-grants of their lands, they were also terrified by
threats from said province, that if the people did not comply with their terms
they should lose all their possessions, by which means they seduced the
inhabitants of some towns so as to take subsequent patents.

THE Governor and Council of New York have been aiding, assisting and
consenting to a mandamus being laid on the ancient town of Hinsdale, which was
first appropriated by a purchase from the Indians, secondly by a grant from the
Massachusetts Bay, thirdly by the government of New Hampshire, and fourthly, by
an uninterrupted possession and occupancy about seventy years.

THE Assembly of New York in their state of the rights of the colony of
New York, etc. in order to rid their government of the blame justly due, say,
that said mandamus proceeded from the crown, and was an act decisive in itself.

A very extraordinary representation, the right of election is restricted
entirely to crown lands, whereon no christian subject to the crown is settled
by possession or otherwise. Common sense may teach, that a manda^us, or any
other crown grant, cannot subvert the property which the subject holds under
the crown, by virtue of prior grants; that would overturn all grants and make
the King absolute.

THUS it plainly appears, that self-interest was the moving cause of the
government aforesaid making such a representation to the court of
Great Britain; had it not been for sake of profit to themselves, it is not
likely they would ever have troubled his Majesty on this subject, and if they
had done it in the simplicity of their hearts, to accommodate the inhabitants
in general as to trade, etc. they would have solicited his Majesty to annex
said district to the province of Quebec, as said grants are bound about 100
miles on the eastern shores of Lake Champlain and from the north end of said
lake to Chamblee is twelve miles land carriage, and to Montreal eighteen, near
the latter, in the river St. Lawrence, seventy-gun ships have sailed.

I cannot see that it would be any way incompatible, provided the inhabitants
of said district should trade to New York, Connecticut river, Lake Champlain,
etc. and be in a new State; it never was supposed, that jurisdictional lines
were so drawn, that each government would have sea ports in them, so as to best
accommodate every part; but in free states, every part of the country trades to
the ^ighest and best seaports, without any regard to jurisdictional lines,
witness the western part of the Massachusetts Bay and Connecticut, they have
made their main trade to the city of New York ever since the origin of their
settlements.

I have heard some people raise this objection, viz. That it was inconvenient
for the district of the New Hampshire Grants to be a State, for the sole reason
of there not being a seaport in said district. I freely grant we have none, and
if we were annexed to any other State that would not bring a seaport any nearer
to us; those things are immovable, yet I think we are as well off as ever any
inland State was, in consequence of our bordering so far on Lake Champlain,
etc. by which means the State may be supplied with all kinds of goods at a
reasonable rate, and make a good market for all such species as are to be
spared in exchange. In some parts of the world there is inland kingdoms, and
why not inland States; we have our advantages and disadvantages in this as well
as in all other things.

AT this time many of the most valuable ports in America are blocked up by our
cruel enemies, the river St Lawrence for one, all the province of Quebec is in
heir possession, yet, as I was with our army at Quebec, I am conscious to
myself that there is many friends to America now in that province. We have the
greatest reason to believe that in the sequel of this wa^, all the ^merican
ports will be cleared of those cormoran^s that now invest them, and that the
province of Quebec will become one of the United States of America, and as wars
have ever been frequent in all kingdom^ and countries, no doubt but that the
United States of America will sooner or later be involved in wa^; wherever war
centers in any country it brings the greatest calamities and most dreary
scenes* witness Boston, Charlestown, New Jersey, etc. in such days the invaders
of America must first begin on some of the frontier States, then we must send
forth the ha^dy soldier, to assist our friends and brethren wherever occasion
shall require, then will women and children, houses and property be sa^e with
us, while in (...) frontiers of a neighboring state, women ravished and
murdered, children killed, houses and property destroyed* oh! horrid scene!

ONE special reason why the district of the New Hampshire Grants cannot connect
with the State of New York is, the Supreme C^urt in Albany at July t^^m, in the
year 17^9 expressly declared the New Hampshire ^ha^ter^ null and void, by said
court's giving writs of possession against the New Hampshire settlers by virtue
of subsequent patents from New York, by reason of which several of the
New Hampshire setlers were dispossessed (...) farms and tenements; therefore
the inhabitants of said Gra^ts, cannot be freeholders in said State, to act in
any public business, till they take re^grants of their lands, which we cannot
do by any other means, than by purchasing subsequent pa^tents from our greatest
antagonists, and at their own price, which most certainly would have been very
unhealthy for our purses.

PERHAPS some queries may arise in the minds of some gentlemen whether the
district of the New Hampshire Grants in their infant state, have men that are
capable to govern the internal policy of a State, and are able to support
government: I would ask such gentlemen, which of the United States of America,
were so well peopled and ^o able, when they began government, as we are,
surely, I think, not one, but many weaker: As to men of learning and sagacity
to rule a State* I see no great difficulty in, though it is not common that men
of so great lea^ning as some in the world, would go to subdue the dessolate
wilderness, yet I think we have men of as much virtue, and as good talents by
nature, as any in the world.

TENT makers, cobblers and common tradesmen, composed the legislature at Ath^ns,
"is not the body (said Socrates) of the Athenian people composed of men like
the^e." For (...) man to a (...) and say, that we have not men that can govern
the internal policy of a State, might with the same pa^ity of reason ^ay, that
the United States of America, should always be subject (...) Great Britain,
because there was men of more u^^ver^al kn^wledge as to ruling the scepter, and
more expe^^^n^ed Gene^als, and better equipped with shipping and warlike
stores, etc.

NECE^SITY is the mother of invention; we find, by experience, that we have as
go^d men to ^ule (...), as Br^tain her (...), and as noble Generals in the
field as English annals have any account of, powder, cannon and all kinds of
warlike stores are manufactured amongst us, ships of war are built, nay, the
preparations of war goes on with such rapidity, that it is not to be
parrellelled in history, foreign powers are now assisting the rising States of
America in many respects.

THIS ^he United States could not have done, had they not asserted their free
and natural rights and liberties that was given them by the God of nature,
thereby to throw off the heavy yoke of bondage that George the third has
prepared for us and our successors.

NEITHER will the people of the district of the New Hampshire Grants ever be a
free and happy people, except they steadfastly maintain the free and natural
rights and liberties that was given them by the God of nature, thereby to throw
off the bondage, that the former litigious government of New York has attempted
to ensnare us with. Those things have greatly deterred our settlements, and
should this obstacle be moved out of the way, no doubt but many worthy
gentlemen fit for any station in life, would move into our territories, which
would be to the mutual benefit of the whole.

IT is true our settlements are not many of them of an ancient date, yet are
very flourishing, and like young beginners we are willing to work for our
living; we have a plenty of fertile lands, our territories are considerably
larger than either of the States of New Hampshire, Connecticut, Rhode Island
and Providence Plantations, or New-Jersies, no doubt but in a short time will
be as well peopled, as we are but small as to numbers, our public concerns will
also be small in proposition, and as to a mode of government, there can be no
great expense in that, for the thi^teen United States will all form their modes
of government before we shall and we can have the privilege of perusing them,
and if any of t^em should be agreeable the people can adopt them, or take such
parts as shall best ^u^t them. Our Assemb^ies and courts will have but short
sessions, and have but little way to go, and all such money will be spent (...)
the State, and (...) the power of legislation is now in the people, they will
not have occasion to commissionate many sallary officers in the State, they
will also set all officer's fees at a reasonable rate; as to Court-houses, some
are already built, and I cannot see why we should be at any more ^^pence on
that account, if we are in a new State, than if we (...) annexed to any other,
for take it which way you will Court-houses and jails will be wanted, therefore
I cannot see where any very great expense should arise from.

IF we were to be in the State of New York, then we must send delegates to sit
in the Provincial Congress of said State, it would be a long and expensive road
to travel and an expensive place when there, and in order to have the people
properly represented, there should a considerable number go, and when they are
all met in Congress, the State would be so large, that gentlemen from the
extreme parts would not personally know but very little better the situation of
the other extreme parts than a gentlman would from London, yet most of them
must stay and see what was done, and give their consent for or against, and as
there has been an unhappy dispute between this district and the former
government of New York, and some members of that honorable house have been our
greatest antagonists, it is possible the best of men might be some biased,
though unperceivable to them, thus these gentlemen will spend near or all the
year, in doing what little business concerns this district, and assist others
to do theirs, which they know nothing of, and in getting other gentlemen to
give their consent to all resolves that concerns this district, who will be
equally ignorant of our situation by reason of their local situation from ours,
this being the case, it necessarily follows, that there ought to delegates
enough go from this district, to know all business that should be necessary to
be done for said district, if so, surely the same gentlemen might much easier
and cheaper, do their business, by meeting in some convenient place in this
distrist, where no other business would interfere with theirs.

WHEN civil laws should again take place, doubtless there would be many actions
appealed up to the supreme court at New York, and as the state would be so
large, doubtless they would be full of business, for that and many other
reasons, it is likely actions would be continued from one session to another,
no doubt some very disputable cases, that would need numbers of evidences
personally to speak: What an amazing expense it must be, for a man to go 450
miles to attend a court in this situation, yet his action may be put along
through several courts. In this way of expense would go many thousand pounds
out of this district.

THE great distance of road betwixt this district and New York, is alone a
convincing argument, that the God of nature never designed said district should
be under the jurisdiction of said State.

I Now appeal to the impartial reader, which of these two ways would be best,
wisest and cheapest, both for the district of the New Hampshire Grants and the
State of New York.

-- Brave countrymen,
We 're here assembled for the toughest fight
That ever strained the force of American arms,
See you wide field with glit'ring numbers gay,
Vain of their strength, they challenge us for slaves,
And bid us yield their prisoners at discretion!
If there is an American among you all
Whose soul can basely truckle to such bondage,
Let him depart! For me, I swear by Heaven,
By my great father's soul and by my fame,
My country never shall pay a ransom for me;
Nor will I stoop to drag out life in bondage,
And take my pittance from a Briton's hands.
This I resolve, and hope, brave countrymen,
Ye all resolve the same.

