THE BLOCKHEADS: OR, THE AFFRIGHTED OFFICERS.

A FARCE.

BOSTON: Printed in QUEEN STREET. M, DCC, LXXVI.

Dramatis Personae.
Captain Bashaw, (...). Puff, (...). Lord Dapper, Lord (...). Officers.
Shallow, (...). Officers. Dupe, Who you please. Officers. Meagre, (...).
Refugees and Friends to Government. Surly, (...) Refugees and Friends to
Government. Brigadier Paunch, (...). Refugees and Friends to Government. Bonny,
(...). Refugees and Friends to Government. Simple, E -- n. Refugees and Friends
to Government. Iemima, Wife to Simple. Tabitha, Her Daughter. Dorsa, Her Maid.
Soldiers, Women, etc.
SCENE, BOSTON.

THE BLOCKHEADS.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A Room with the Officers, etc.
PUFF. WELL, gentlemen, a pretty state for British generals and British troops
-- the terror of the world become mere scare-crows to themselves. -- We came to
America, flushed with high expectations of conquest, and curbing these sons of
riot. -- We tour'd away in the senate as if our success was certain; as if we
had only to curb a few licentious villains, or hang them as spectacles for
their brethren -- But how are we deceived? -- Instead of this agreeable employ,
we are shamefully confined within the bounds of three miles, wrangling and
starving among ourselves.


Shall. Cursed alternative, either to be murdered without, or starved within. --
These yankey dogs treat us like a parcel of poltroons; they divert themselves
by firing at us, as at a flock of partridges. -- A man can scarcely put his
nose over the intrenchments without losing it; -- another loses his eyes, only
looking through the ambuseirs. -- They have a set of fellows called rifflers;
they would shoot the very devil if he was to come within a league of them.


Capt. Bash. Gentlemen, it will not do to set groaning here; let us determine
upon some plan quickly to be done, otherwise I shall bid you farewell, and you
may follow after as well as you are able. -- You find every night brings them
nearer and nearer; they raise a hill and fortify it in 6 hours -- I expect soon
to see a fortification grow out of the channel, and our ships of war to be
blown up by some damned machine. -- Such devils are capable of any thing; the
power of miracles is put into their hands, and they improve the patent to
admiration. -- You must do something to dispossess them of those
fortifications, otherwise we shall not only be starved, but absolutely murdered.


L -- d Dap. Starved or murdered are triffles, compared to being taken
prisoners, to be dragged before their congresses, committees, etc. -- A pack of
mutton-headed fellows, with their rusty muskets, are more dread visitors, than
a tribe of furies, just arrived from h -- l; therefore let us do something in
earnest, or perhaps we shall be too late for relief.


Puff. The eminence on Dorchester-hill, which they began last night, they must
at all hazards be dispossessed of; we must rally our weak numbers, and drive
them if possible; but such is our situation, our men are become mere skeletons;
their present diet renders them more capable of terrifying their enemies, than
fighting of them* -- They will think the ghosts of their forefathers are coming
to battle against them. -- Poor devils! I pity their miserable state, but so
the fates have ordered it, we can only laugh or pity each other.


L -- d Dap. Curss'd cruel fate! that we should thus be penned up. --
Churchill's description of Scotland is but a shadow to it; -- if that great
genius was now alive, we should soon have a new edition with amendments. -- He
represents their flies and spiders, etc. as starving, but here they are
absolutely starved -- poor innocent insects, I forgive ye your former
tormenting of my legs; ye sucked 'till you could find no nourishment, and then
fell at my feet and died. -- Thousands have lain gasping within the small
circle of my chair; their case was truly deplorable -- I felt their state by
experience. -- My case is somewhat parallel to the prodigal son. -- I may well
adopt his words, how many hired servants of my father's, have bread enough and
to spare, while I perish with hunger.


Shall. We shall all be obliged to follow his example; I never thought to make
an improvement of a parable, but our case is now so truly deplorable that
necessity prompts me to it. -- Hard crusts and rusty bones have never till now
become my diet; they do not suit my digestion. -- My teeth are worn to stumps,
and my lips are swelled like a blubber-mouth negro's, by thumping hard bones
against them; my jaw bone has been set a dozen times, dislocated by chewing
hard pork, as tough as an old swine's ass.


Puff. Well gentlemen, we are all acquainted with each other's circumstances,
but however, we cannot mend them by recounting them -- Let us rally our men and
drive those rebels from their fortifications, or else we may soon expect to be
introduced to their honor's Adams and Hancock, with sundry other gentlemen of
distinction* -- My L -- d Dapper must have the command, and I doubt not we
shall be able to dispossess them. -- Let us keep up our spirits, for we have
nothing else to feed on, though it is a poor dish for a greedy appetite.


L -- d Dap. Some pretense must be made, as our honor is at stake. Exeunt Omnes.


SCENE II. A room with refugees, and friends to government.
Sur. Nothing can be more wretched than our state, -- vagabonds and outcasts in
the world! -- here we are, -- friends we have none, -- we fled here for
protection, but how are we disappointed! -- Those on whom we depended, are as
miserable as ourselves! -- we have been cajoled into all this by that curss'd H
-- n, -- he pleased us with pensions, posts of honor, and profit, but the
villain has fled, and left us to shirk for ourselves. -- My dwellings I have
forsaken, my family are left to feed on the charity of friends, if they can
find any; while I, poor wretch, have thrown myself upon the mercy of those who
are unable to help me. -- My money I have let out on government security -- and
poor security too, I am afraid; -- from affluence and splendour, I am reduced to
wretchedness and misery, and skulk about the streets like a dog that has lost
one ear. -- Oh curss'd ambition! much better had it been if I had stayed among
my countrymen, and partook quietly of the produce of my farm. -- Why need I
have meddled in politics, or burnt my fingers dabbling in this sea of fire --
My tenants and my oxen would have been much more agreeable companions than
these herd of stalking poltroons, swaggering with their swords at their a --
and afraid to draw them from the scabbard.


Simp. We have reason to blame ourselves -- we have brought affairs to the
present state -- we were fond of the titles of Col. Esquire. etc. -- a gewgow of a
commission was sufficient to render us enemies to our country -- We contrived a
thousand tricks to make ourselves obnoxious to our countrymen, that we might be
noticed as friends to government; -- we thought this would recommend us to some
lucrative post: -- We embraced the shadow of grandeur, but the substance has
fled -- A bow from a general or a fifer is all the satisfaction we have for our
loyalty. -- I am become almost ashamed of my company; a pack of strutting
pedanticks, looking like elopers from the grave* "grinning horribly their
ghastly smiles;" gallanting their drosly nymphs, hag'd with constant use. --
Sometimes I am ready to heave myself upon the mercy of my injured country, but
the awful ideas of committees, courts of enquiry, etc. terrify me from this
expedient: -- Besides, shall we stoop to submission to these miscreants; -- we,
Col's. Esq'rs. Judges, etc. bow to the lordly sway of these vile villains? -- I
will rather perish than do it.


Sur. Our pride is our only cordial -- we have nothing else to feed on; --
d-m'd poor nourishment! -- we have been long fed on the sumptuous dish of
expectation of relief, but alas! we had so keen an appetite for that, we
quickly devoured it; -- the general has no further supply left him, and we are
now left to famish till a fresh supply comes. -- We have fled here as friends
to government, but how are we treated? -- We are despised, our wives ravaged,
and our daughters debauched; -- honor or profit we have none -- abuse and ruin
we have our ample shares of. -- Much happier had we been, if instead of bowing
and cringing to the great, we had minded the concerns of our farms; and instead
of calculating the revenue of the nation, we had considered the income of our
own stocks.


Paun. Alas! we have all been deceived; -- we have been pleased with the
expectation of large reinforcements; -- that conquest was certain; -- and that
the rebels would be speedily crushed -- Flushed with these sanguine hopes, we
have buoyed ourselves amidst these seas of tumult and outrage, but now we find
ourselves woefully deceived, without any remedy. -- Victory seems to declare in
favor of the country; she has fled from these brave sons of mars, and takes
refuge within the cells and cottages of America.


Sur. Well, gentlemen, you may all whine and cry, for my part I am determined
to keep up my spirits, and hope for better times -- why should we be so
discomforted, because we have met with a little rugged treatment? -- we must
expect to encounter with many such trifles, but shall they discourage us? can
we expect to gain honor in a silver slipper? no, we must engage with all H -- l
rather than give up our point. -- Its true, friend Paunch cannot meet with his
Dainty Soups, nor feast on his favorite Fish and Oil, but shall this render
him peevish and fretful? I hope not -- we are now to try our Loyalty, by the
grand touchstone of Affliction; let us act like men, and I doubt not we shall
be well rewarded. -- His MAJESTY will regard us as the faithful of the land,
and will recommence our fidelity with ample tokens of his affection. -- Your
poor dejected Countenances are a disgrace to the cause we are engaged in;
reconcile yourselves to your present state, and I doubt not a happy deliverance
will speedily arrive.


Meagre. Deliverance is a poor worn out, unmeaning word -- I am tired with the
sound -- a word with so little meaning you cannot produce in a groce of
dictionaries -- Loyalty and Deliverance are pleasing words when used with
propriety, but they are now maimed with often handling.


Sim. Loyalty, d -- m the word and its meaning -- It is only a Court Watch
Word, to entrap men, and then fleece them of their property.


ACT II.
A ROOM. TABITHA and DORSA.
Tab. When did you receive this letter?


Dor. His servant left it with me last night.


Tab. He acquaints me that he intends to attend at the back gate this evening,
and that he shall expect me there. I shall put great confidence in your
friendship; if you deceive me I am undone.


Dor. If I deceive you, may your ruin fall on me.


Tab. L -- d Dapper has addressed me in very honorable terms; he proposes to
carry me to England, after the present campaign, but my father (an old prig) is
greatly against it, and seems tired with the company of these red coats, (as he
calls them) -- but this person I am determined to have at all hazards. -- Why
should I deny myself the pleasures and honors of this life, to please an old
fool that is just leaving of them. -- The title of lady is very agreeable; it
is what many would jump at; -- such matches do not offer every day, and I shall
improve the time as dextrous as I can.


Dor. Make hay while the sun shines, is a very good maxim. -- Indeed, madam, I
approve your determination; I should think you quite mad to determine otherways
-- who would not have a young spark if they could meet with one? -- For my own
part I would not lodge another night without one, if I could meet with a good
offer.


Tab. All our correspondence must go through your hands, you must be cautious,
and watchful, for the least mishap will disconcert the whole plan.


Dor. I am used to these taricks of gallantry; I have introduced many a young
sweetheart -- you may safely trust your security in my hands. -- But one thing
I would mention (excuse my boldness) this L -- d Dapper labors under the
disgrace of Inability.


Tab. Inability, what do you mean? I hope he is not wanting in any thing to
render the marriage state agreeable. -- If he is, I shall quickly throw him out
of window, and appoint a better person in his room -- its true, since you hint
this, it makes me somewhat suspicious, he looks like a baboon upon stilts, and
I begin to be fearful of his abilities -- however, he will serve for a cully to
fleece for my indulgencies in dress and fashion


Dor. That he may do, but for any thing else (if reports are true) I had rather
marry my old grandfather.


Exeunt. SCENE II. SIMPLE and his WIFE.
Sim. The worst job that ever I did, to move to this accurss'd place. -- A
friend to government! d -- m connection! -- my family ruined -- myself a
despised old fool.


Wife. My dear, do not be so childish -- I am sure we are agreeably situated,
excepting our scantiness of provisions; but great folks do not mind such
trifles -- roast beef etc. only becomes hard-skin'd plough joggers -- eating
and drinking became us while we were rough farmers, but now I should be ashamed
to be seen setting round a smoking table of provisions, craming and stuffing
like a yoke of oxen. -- These delicate gentlemen and ladies would despise us as
yankees, to see us maunching bread and cheese, etc. -- they would have very
nasty ideas about us, for what goes in must come out; -- Oh it makes me sick to
think of it!


Sim. You will be more sick before it is over -- I wist I had now a good
belly-full of what you mention; I would willingly bear the ridicule, as to the
manner of it is coming out. -- I believe the most delicate lady among them*
would be glad of such stable contents, and risque the hazard of it is appearing
again to the world -- however* my dear, I have no notion of being merry -- I
have more serious affairs to think of. -- I must acquaint you, that I am
absolutely ruined -- my whole fortune is fell either into the hands of the
rebels without, or lent upon the security of chance, to those within -- my
resources are entirely exhausted -- I have pleased myself with some appointment
in office, but I find that will fail -- we have so many needy fellows among us,
that one must make interest to be even groom to the light horse. -- What to do
I know not.


Wife. Now forsooth you are going upon your old whining scheme -- because you
see I am acquainted with the gentry, you begin on these canting topics -- you
are afraid I shall ask you for a silk gown, or a new cap; that I shall want to
see the plays, etc. and that you must have to bring forth some of those rusty
joannes, which you have pilfer'd from your neighbors, when you was a justice.
-- You may depend upon it, I shall begin to want these things, and shall expect
no hesitation or denial. -- Do not think I am to lead my life like a mope, as
when we were rusty farmers -- we are now gentle-folks, and shall expect to do
like gentle-folks. -- Our daughter Tabitha, she must also be introduced into
the fashionable company, not always be a drudge about house -- she has now no
filthy butter to chirn; she is no longer a dairy-maid, but a lady, and a
GOVERNMENT LADY too, and as such she shall be supported. -- Who knows but some
rich gentleman may fancy her, and carry her to London, and perhaps take us with
her -- then for it, we shall see life, and perhaps then you may get a little
beef, or something else to fatten your paunch. -- In short, you look so much
like a skeleton, I am afraid to go to bed to you -- almost begin to wish for
another husband. -- Come, my dear, rouse yourself, don't think about your fat
farm, let it go, it is all dirty stuff, only fit for yankees.


(...). Poor foolish woman! how you feast on pride! is it possible you are in
earnest? -- Can so much folly dwell in women? -- I always thought women to be
but one degree above a she ass, but you seem many degrees below -- you may
pretend to vaunt in all these prudish airs, but depend on it, you shall get no
support from me. -- As to your daughter, she may expect to incur my
displeasure, if she goes romping among these ladies of quality. -- As to rich
upstarts, I had rather marry her to a good monkey, than to any figure of a man
in the garrison. -- What signifies putting a young girl to bed with a poor
famished image!


Wife. You old fool, do you think I am to be frightened out of my designs? --
No, I will learn you to treat your wife with a little more good manners -- I
wish you would become a little more polished, and go into the company of
gentlemen and ladies -- You would there hear nothing of she asses, and such
filthy farm terms. -- My dear, and my honey, are the terms there made use of --
thousand pretty things which I never before heard of, are whispered round --
they can talk to one another with their eyes, and you can almost guess what
they mean -- none of your coarse language defiles their conversation -- nothing
but pure refinement. -- I would not for the world go back to my former
habitation, to hear the grunting of hogs -- I should dye with the spleen. As to
your not supplying me, I am no way concerned about it; if you will not another
will, and you may expect a pair of horns grow out of your head as large as your
old bulls.


Sim. Do, and welcome, but stand clear if you come within reach of them. Exeunt.


SCENE III. A Garden. -- Enter L -- d Dapper and Tabitha.
L -- d Dap. Well, my dear, we have met, agreeable to appointment -- I hope
your old dad of a father has become more reconciled -- the old prig is as
obstinate as a mule; neither offers of profit or friendship have any avail with
him -- however, let us not disappoint ourselves of the pleasure of matrimony,
for to gratify the whim of a grey-headed old fool. All things are ready; fly
from this place of confinement, and let us celebrate our long expected nuptials.


Tab. My papa, Sir, remains as determined as ever -- he seems tired with being
confined within the garrison -- he had rather be among his farm neighbors,
which makes him so fretful with all of your party -- I do not think it possible
ever to get his consent, but such a trifle shall never baulk my inclination --
I shall throw off all reserve, and put myself entirely under your protection --
shall quit the family, and depend on your honor.


L -- d Dap. Poor girl, you will find but little of that.

Aside. -- Come let us hasten as fast as possible, as delays of this kind may
prove fatal.


As they are going off, her father appears. Sim. Villain, what business have
you with my daughter?


L -- d Dapper draws his sword, and Simple runs away. SCENE IV.
Here is exhibited a prospect of the light horse, being so weak, are supported
by ropes to keep them on their legs; the groom busy in giving them glisters --
also, a review of their troops -- the whole looking like French cooks, in a hot
day's entertainment; each company favored with a close-stool pan. Officers.
Gentlemen soldiers, we are now agoing to fight against these rebel dogs; be not
discouraged, but let us play the man.


Soldiers. We had much rather fight for a good pudding.


ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Officers, etc. Puff. Heaven and earth are against us, the party are
entirely defeated from heaven, the wind has been so boisterous as to drive them
back. You see, gentlemen, our situation, our enemies are gaining upon us
hourly, one night more perhaps will make us their prisoners -- for heaven's
sake let us determine upon something speedily, whether to quit the town, or try
once more to rout these rebels.


Shall. Why will you desire us to go to battle? -- are you for seeing another
Bunker-Hill frolic? -- those devils would glory to have us come out to them, it
would be sport to the dogs, to see us breaking our shins, tumbling over each
other. -- I esteem my life beyond my honor, and am not for throwing it away for
the diversion of a parcel of yankees -- If we cannot hold the garrison by
keeping in, for God's sake, let us beat a retreat; but the LORD knows where;
however, I had rather heave myself upon the mercy of the sea, than be taken
their prisoner: -- Who but a mad man would trust himself out of these
entrenchments? it is certain death. -- I am for fighting, where there is some
prospect of coming off clear; but here venture yourself out, and I would not
insure you for 100 per cent. -- d -- n the devils, they excel their very father
Beelzebub for fighting. -- I had rather engage with a squadron just arrived from
the lower-regions, than with those cursed fellows on yonder hill.


L -- d Dapper. You are quite right -- such herds of men are enough to scare
Hannibal, and all the heroes that ever lived, -- look! what millions there are!
-- the inhabitants of the four quarters of the globe (excepting ourselves) are
now on those hills! -- for heaven's sake, let us improve the time, and retreat
as fast as possible -- I shall expect all the fishes of the sea to turn men,
and become our enemies, let us improve our passport while the inhabitants of
the sea are at peace.


Dupe. Now B -- e, here is more matter for humor, you may now give us a second
edition of your farce. -- This is beyond all expectation! -- a fine story to
tell my L -- d N -- h! but he is at helm, he may risk his own head if he will,
I am determined not to hazard mine for his whims -- he may go fight them one
after another, if he pleases, he shall not catch me to run his tom-fool errands
-- the ministry and the parliament may come over, and hold their courts in
Boston, and may send forth, and execute their acts if they think fit, they
shall not find me fool enough to run my head against a cannon ball, to execute
their d -- m silly acts. -- I never would have come on this expedition, if I
had had the least intimation of the bravery of this people. -- I thought a
bright sword, and a smart cocked hat, would effectually have terrified these
fellows into submission, but I find the contrary, and have no inclination to
try their skill at man killing.


Shall. If I had a scolding wife, perhaps I would venture myself within a
hundred yards of those hills; but while I have not, you shall find me far
enough from them; and I don't care how much farther. -- Our ministry think
soldiers were made to be fired at as sport, but I hope on this occasion they
will find themselves deceived, -- for my part, I am determined to secure a
place of safety; -- if any have a mind to go out, let them, they have my good
wishes for their return; but if they regard their lives, I advise all, and
every one to keep within the entrenchments -- I would rather sh -- t my
breeches than go without these forts to ease myself.


Puff. D -- m them, I know the fellows by experience, -- I remember Bunker-Hill
-- I shall never forget them, for their civility to me -- their cocked eye
taking sight, makes my very blood run cold -- how I came off alive is a
miracle; whiz, whiz, whiz, good Lord, how it makes me shudder to think of it!
-- no, no, my lads, you shall not catch me among you, while I am out of your
reach, I will keep out -- In short, gentlemen, it will not do to be looking at
them; they seem preparing to come nearer us, let us give out the alarm for a
retreat immediately; we must determine where to go, after we are without the
reach of these disagreeable visitors.


All. As speedy as possible.


SCENE II. A Room with Refugees and Friends to Government.
Sur. A retreat, is it possible! -- shall the British troops ever suffer such
disgrace, as to flee from a parcel of yankees? -- we have been fed up with high
notions of the power and resolution of these troops -- but I find, when the
matter becomes serious, they are as terrified as old women -- the General has
made a sham attempt to dispossess them of their fortifications, but has
withdrawn them with the pretense of the wind being two boisterous -- what a
pretty hobble are we in, to be drove away from our only place of security --
but I find our strong holds are become mere shadows of safety. -- A very
agreeable employ, for gentlemen to be running after a pack of cowards, and what
is more miserable to depend on them for protection. -- If I could once get
clear of my present state, you should never find me again to depend on a broken
reed.


Bon. It signifies nothing to fret, and find fault among ourselves, but let us
be for securing a retreat as fast as possible -- let us be packing up our alls,
and making our best way off. -- I have ruined my fortune, tagging after these
poltroons -- I will now trouble them with my company -- if they cannot protect
me, they shall maintain me; while they have any thing to eat themselves, I am
determined to partake. -- Poor encouragement for friends to government; if they
don't find better reception than we have met with, they will have but few
volunteers.


Sim. As to depending on their generosity for maintenance, I have no notion of.
I have a more effectual way to support myself -- I shall look out for snacks
among the booty, left in the town, by their runaway owners -- I shall improve
the opportunity while pilfering is in the fashion; the General has set us a
very pretty example.


Mea. Is this the sad alternative, either to heave ourselves upon the mercy of
our countrymen, or run away with a parcel of cowards? -- but however, as
matters are so circumstanced, we must make the best of it. -- I have a
considerable quantity of the province money, which will serve to procure me a
scanty maintenance in our retreat -- sad state! half famished on land, and pent
within the garrison for 10 months, am now obliged to put to sea, to vomet up
what little guts I have remaining I crust cruel fate! are our high expectations
come to this? -- reinforcements, and the Lord knows what all become mere
bug-bears? farewell Boston, the once happy seat of my residence -- farewell
friends, and countrymen, I leave ye all, to go I know not where.


Brig. Paunch. Gentlemen, we have just received orders from the General to
prepare speedily for a retreat, the garrison is all in alarm, every one is
driving helter skelter -- you must be careful how you walk the streets
otherways you will break your shins* or perhaps your necks in the general
confusion -- if I was not so intimately convinced, the sight would be the most
diverting that ever I beheld -- but our circumstances will not admit of
speculation, let us be gone, for the rebels are just upon us.


Exeunt. SCENE III. A Room with Simple and Wife.
Sim. Well, my dear, what think now of your agreeable situation; your filthy
farm, and coarse roast beef, etc. nasty stuff! -- what is the matter with your
refined company that they fly away so abruptly, methinks they might have been
polite enough to have given us some little notice of their retreat; not run
away like a parcel of mice, when the cat comes among them. -- I have for a long
while been fearful of this, but found my mistake too late -- I have outstay'd
my day of grace, and find I must follow these ranters a wild goose chase over
land and sea -- I am tired of the chase! my family is ruined, and my daughter I
am afraid, is debauched by a painted monkey, who I saw with her at the gate --
the villain drew his sword upon me, but like a true British general, I thought
fit to run away.


Wife. I wonder, my dear, you should complain at going abroad -- I am fond of
seeing the world -- what signifies always to be pen't up within the smoke of
our own chimnies? -- why should we not travel like other gentlefolks, to learn
the manners and customs of other nations? must we always remain as ignorant as
our brown bread neighbors and know nothing more of the world than what is
transacted within our own parish? -- for my part I am determined to extend my
knowledge, and follow the fleet from one end of the world to the other, rather
than remain as ignorant as our parson's wife. -- The rumor is, that we are
going to Halifax; a rich, flourishing populous city, where nature wantons in
all her luxury; where we may enjoy and divert ourselves, without being seaz'd
with the constant alarms of the devilish yankees -- (...) them, I wish they
were all under your cider press, and I had the screwing of it. -- Rouse up you
old Lazarus, and betake yourself, with your wife and family, aboard the ships;
don't you hear the drums beat the alarm?


Sim. Worse and worse! greater fool than ever; it seems to grow upon you -- I
presume you have made geography your study, you are so well acquainted with the
^lime and soil of Halifax: -- rich and luxurious to admiration! -- experience
is the best school master -- you are for seeing the world, and here perhaps you
may be satisfied by seeing the a -- s of it. -- I find you are a fresh water
sailor, and will make but a miserable figure aboard the ship, along side of
your polite company. -- I shall pity your modesty, when what is in will come
out, and perhaps at both ends. -- Pray, my dear, was you ever sea sick? -- I
presume not -- oh! I shudder at the thought!


Wife. Don't tantalize me no longer -- I will not bear any more of your freedom
-- pray what do you mean by coming out at both ends? -- I like no such coarse
phrazes; if I had fifty ends, my modesty should forbid any thing from coming
out of either -- I know how to behave myself, and keep all ends safe. -- Let us
be going quickly.


Sim. Gang along, with the devil to you. -- Curse my fate, to be yoked to an
old fool of a wife, and scampering after a herd of runaway cowards.


A Barrack -- with Soldiers and Women. Sol. Ha, ha, ha, -- yankee doodle
forever -- I wish Lord North was here, to see his brave troops in their present
plight, running away with their breeches down -- who can help laughing at what
a tom fool's errand we have been sent upon -- we were sent here to ransack the
country, and hang up a parcel of leading fellows for the crows to pick, and awe
all others into peace and submission -- instead of this, in our first attempt
we were drove through the country, like a pack of jack asses, nor stopped running
'till we had got within Boston, where we had been fortified for six months --
here we were confined, reduced to skeletons, our bones standing sentry through
our skins -- we ventured out once more to dispossess them of Bunker-hill, we
gained the ground, but if we are to purchase the whole land of America at so
dear a rate, the Lord have mercy upon us. -- We have received reinforcements,
but they only served to fill up the vacancies made at Bunker-hill frolic --
large force of artillery, light horse, and the devil knows what, have come to
our assistance, but what has been our luck? loss of men, of honor, of flesh,
and to crown the whole, are now running away, as fast as we can scamper.


Sol. A pretty story this in the British annals -- an everlasting disgrace will
attend the transactions in America. -- Our best generals, with a force of
artillery, sufficient one would think, to storm the regions of Beelzebub -- the
most experienced troops his Majesty has; a capital navy; yet, with all this
force, our generals dare not peep over the entrenchments -- are confined within
three miles of garrison, writing and acting comedies -- dismantling meeting
houses to exercise their horses, to prevent their having the scurvy -- our
troops hag'd and famished, for want of refreshments -- our navy lying at
anchor, while the privateers are depriving us of our supplies. -- "MISTERIOUS!
UNEXAMPLED! INCOMPREHENSIBLE!" -- Disgrace too great for the spirit of Britons!
-- Not an action have we done, that has been any way to our honor or profit --
it is (...), we have set a few towns on fire, but like champions, took care to
go where there was not even a pistol for defense.


Sol. Nothing can be more diverting, than to see the town in its present
situation -- all is uproar and confusion -- carts, trucks, wheel barrows, hand
barrows, coaches, chaise, (...) driving as if the very devil was after them.
Our generals look as wild as stags, when pursued by the hounds; they are
startled at every noise; they think the rebels are just upon them. -- Orders
are given for blocking up the streets, that the rebels may break their shins,
if they pursue us -- we have also a parcel of stuffed images, looking like
devils behind the pope, to be fixed up as senteries; a fit emblem of ourselves
-- Burgoyne could not have contrived a prettier satyr -- our ambuseirs are
filled with wooden guns; d -- m such wooden-headed commanders -- to crown the
whole, they should have had an effigy with a barber's block-head, as engineer.
-- Oh Briton! your disgrace makes my very blood dance the hornpipe. -- The poor
yankee refugees, run backwards and forwards, like a parcel of cats let out of a
bag -- I would give half mm pay, that some droll blade was here to describe the
ludricous scenery.


Sol. The beauty of the whole is aboard the ships -- the yankee refugees with
their wives, cut a most ridiculous figure -- vomiting, crying, cooking, eating,
all in a heap. -- was ready to burst my sides in laughing, to see the ladies
scampering into the vessels, tumbling one over another showing their legs, etc.
-- One fellow in his hurry, pitch over board, and was kind enough to remain
there -- (...) whole scene was sufficient to raise the risibles of the c^^^ing
philosopher -- in short, words cannot describe it; the stow like a litter of
pigs, or like a young brood of spaniels; they even spew in one another's mouths.


Women. Good enough for them, they have brought it upon themselves; they had
better have minded their farms, not have run here to be a ridicule to both
p^^ties. -- If I had a good farm, I would see government the devil, before they
should catch me here, to be fro^^ famished, ridiculed -- curse them and their
spiritless protectors, and let us conclude with huzzas for America.


FINIS.
PROLOGUE.
YOUR pardon first I crave, for this intrusion,
The topics' such it looks like a delusion*
And next your candor, for I swear and vow,
Such an attempt I never made 'till now.
But constant laughing at the desperate fate,
The bastard sons of Mars endured of late,
Induced me thus to minute down the notion,
Which put my risibles in such commotion.
By yankees frighted too! oh dire to say!
Why yankees sure at red-coats faint away!
Oh yes -- they thought so too -- for lack-a-day,
Their general turned the blockade to a play:
Poor vain poltroons -- with justice we'll retort,
And call them blockheads for their idle sport.
FINIS
SOLILOQUY, by way of EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. Simple, after her arrival at Halifax.
MODEST! polite! genteel! Heavens what deceit,
Dwells in the breasts of those I termed great!
But now too late, my shame and grief appear;
I Am lost! undone! stopped short in my career.
A barn my dwelling -- paltry fish my food, --
With insults, scorn, and execrations lude.
Oh sad disgrace! -- but this is not the worst, --
I Am by my husband and my daughter cursed;
Our Bashaw too, forever in a teaze,
Vents his dire spleen on us, poor refugees.
Accursed state -- from towering hopes I Have fell,
To herd with transports, and such devils dwell. --
One tear my injured country weep for me,
And for that tear, may you be ever free.

