AN ANNIVERSARY SERMON PREACHED AT PLYMOUTH, December 23, 1776.

AN ANNIVERSARY SERMON PREACHED AT PLYMOUTH, December 23, 1776.

In grateful Memory of the first Landing of our worthy Ancestors in that Place,
An. Dom. 1620.

By SYLVANUS CONANT, Pastor or the First Church in MIDDLEBOROUGH.

-- Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth
sweetness.

SAMSON'S RIDDLE. BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: PRINTED BY THOMAS and JOHN FLEET, 1777.

AT a Meeting of the Town of Plymouth, legally assembled and held at the Court
House in Plymouth, April 7, A.D. 1777.
Voted, That Isaac Lothrop, Esquire Deacon William Crombie, and Mr. Andrew
Croswell, jun.

Be, and they are hereby appointed a Committee to wait on the Rev. Sylvanus
Conant, with the Thanks of this Town, for his ingenious Sermon delivered here
on the last Anniversary of the Landing of our Fathers in this Town, and request
a Copy thereof that it may be printed.

Attest. EPHESIANS. SPOONER, Town Clerk.

A SERMON, etc.
EXODUS, I.12. But the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and
grew.


THE laudable Institution, made by the worthy Inhabitants of this ancient TOWN,
for celebrating the wonder-working providence of GOD in favor of its first
settlers when few in number and weak in strength, demands our serious
attention, and the approbation of all who say in their hearts let the Lord be
magnified.

Many were the afflictions, and as many the favorable interpositions of
Providence, experienced by our Ancestors from the time of their first essays to
quit their native land, till they arrived and settled in this. A proper
recollection of these things, has a happy tendency to impress our minds with a
becoming Sense of GOD and the goodness of Providence to his suffering people.

To stir up our minds by way of remembrance, a great many things have been well
said upon the occasion by my worthy Brethren who have gone before me.

The most noted historical facts, relative to the coming over of our
forefathers* have been named in the first public Sermon on this occasion, from
Psalm lxxviii.5, 6, 7. Also their smallness in numbers, strength and wealth,
and the duty of not despising the day of small things, in another Sermon, from
Zech. iv.10. The general nature of that freedom, civil and religious, to which
we have all an equal right -- the embarrassments that tyranny and oppression
throw in the way of the exercise of such freedom, and the duty of a people to
reassume it, if possible, when it is wrested from them, in another, from Genesis
i.31, and Ps. cxix.134. And lastly, a representation of the heroic faith of
Abraham exemplified, in some measure, by our pious forefathers, in a fourth
Sermon, from Heb. xi.8. These things have been set before you already; and what
shall we say more?

Time would fail us, to give you a full narrative of the vicissitudes that they
and theirs passed through -- the suffering they underwent -- the christian
courage, patience, faith and fortitude they maintained, and their final
success, growth and increase, notwithstanding the trials and persecutions that
befell them during the despotic reigns of the four Kings of the Stuart House.

Methinks it may be said of these first emigrants and their successors, as was
said of the Israelites in the text, the more they (their adversaries) afflicted
them, the more they (the sufferers) multiplied and grew -- grew in the
christian graces and virtues; and at length, in numbers, wealth and strength,
so that finally (the oppressive measures taken against them notwithstanding)
they rose from small beginnings to become a numerous and flourishing people.

It is a truth worthy our notice, and let it be the general observation from
the text, that, When GOD designs the growth and increase of a people, even the
afflictions they meet with shall be overruled to promote the same. So it has
been, and so it will be; and nothing under heaven shall be able to prevent it.

If the Lord is determined that a people shall grow and multiply, either in the
natural, civil, or religious way; no tribulation, or persecution, or any kind
of affliction from their adversaries shall disappoint him of his purpose.
Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination
against Israel. Numbers xxiii.231.


We are sensible that affliction is a general term that signifies trouble,
distress and adversity, arising either from cruel oppression and persecution,
or from wise correction and just punishment; for though there is a wide
difference between oppression, and proper correction, as the one is always
wrong, and the other always right, yet they are both afflictive to the party
oppressed, or corrected.

The natural tendency of affliction, is, to waste, diminish and destroy the
afflicted; and this will be the issue, in case the affliction rises and
continues, unless the providence of GOD prevents it. This might easily be
demonstrated by a course of plain reasoning; but this method to prove the
destructive tendency of affliction is needless, because we have striking
instances of the fact in the continual decrease of the abused Africans in the
West India Islands. Their afflictions and bondage are so many and great, that
instead of multiplying and growing, it is quite the reverse, they diminish and
perish so fast under the cruel hand of oppression, that the proprietors or
planters are obliged to send for new recruits of many thousands every few years
to keep their numbers good and their lucrative business going on. The
inhumanity, cruelty and wickedness of the practice is a great deal blacker than
the miserable creatures themselves.

But however true it is, that affliction is ruinous in its natural tendency,
yet through the merciful interposition of GOD it takes a new direction, and, in
regard to its effects, it becomes good and salutary both to individuals and
communities. Under the influence of GOD, the fruit of affliction is the taking
away of sin, the reformation of manners, and the enlargement and salvation of a
people. This may be called the providential tendency of affliction, and this is
the way that good is brought out of evil.

Whenever we are afflicted, either by the hand of GOD or man, it is generally
supposed that we have offended and merit the rod. This is always true when the
Almighty afflicts us, and, with the strictest propriety, we may adopt the
confession of Nehemiah, thou have done right, but we have done wickedly. But
this is not always true when we are afflicted by the hands of men; i. e. we do
not always deserve it of them. They sometimes, either through ignorance or ill
will, make an unjust judgment, and a wrong application; and hence they punish
the innocent, or cause the guilty to be punished beyond the demerit of his
offense. In both cases (unavoidable ignorance excepted) they are chargeable
with injustice and oppression.

We know that ignorance, be it moral or political, is not the proper subject of
penalty; and that he who offends only in one degree is not the proper subject
of ten, or of two degrees of punishment. Hence, they who knowingly minister a
stripe where none is due, or two stripes where but one is due (be they Parents,
Masters or Magistrates that do it, either against an individual or against a
community) they act the part of oppressors and tyrants, and may justly expect
to hear from the Almighty that severe reprimand, what mean ye that ye beat my
people to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor. Isaiah iii.15.


When a Child, that is grown to the state of manhood and self-government, and
is set at liberty by the laws of GOD and man, to regulate and take care of
himself, has, by his industry, provided for his own subsistence, how base and
wicked is it for his Parents to seize the fruit of his labor -- to demand the
surrender of his person and property to their arbitrary disposal, and make his
refusal such a capital offense as to pursue him with vengeance? A proceeding
similar to this, either in a family or civil state, is nothing short of
high-handed oppression and cruelty; and for parents or magistrates to plead any
human law whatsoever in vindication of such practice, does no more exculpate
them than it did the murderous witnesses against our Savior to plead and say,
we have a law, and by our law he ought to die.*

Any law or institution contrary to the law of GOD, or against the good of the
people, is a law that establishes iniquity: and the execution of it produces
an affliction so painful and grievous that it cannot and ought not to be borne
without resistance, or making some essay for deliverance, agreeably to the
principle of self-defence.

We further add,

Afflictions of any kind that are pungent, do lay the afflicted under necessity
of struggling, in order to extricate themselves. If it be a profligate sinner,
whose conscience is afflicted with a sense of his sin, guilt, and danger of the
wrath to come, his enquiry will be, what shall I do to be saved? If a christian
or a christian church be afflicted with a sense of apostasy and of the divine
correction, their concern and exertion will be to repent, reform, and be
restored to the peace and love of GOD. If it be a civil community, afflicted
with public oppression -- with a sense of the loss, or the danger of losing
their natural or stipulated rights, it presently moves them to seek, devise and
and prosecute ways and means of freedom and safety; a kind of necessity is laid
upon them so to do. In this case the old proverb is verified, Necessity is the
mother of invention; she is a fruitful mother, and the necessitous and
afflicted find themselves pressed and constrained to exert their wisdom,
genius, and all their inventive powers for their salvation.

Now, when the providence of GOD directs and assists the awakened genius of
such an afflicted people, they are often led to search out and make discovery
of those means and ways of defense and relief, which otherwise they neither
would have attempted, or even thought of; however, the issue of these efforts
has often been the deliverance and enlargement of a people. And this is what
we observe, that, the same afflictions and oppressions which naturally tend to
ruin, lay waste and destroy a body of people, are nevertheless, under GOD's
directing influence, the means and occasion of their rising to a free and
flourishing state.

Civil communities, as well as christians, and christian churches, have
experienced the truth of what is here asserted, and to confirm the same,
appeals may be made to sacred and profane history, from both of which the
point will be lilucidated.

The growth and increase of the Israelites, under the afflictions, slavery and
bondage of Egypt, is to the purpose. Their adversaries (deaf to the demand of
GOD, let my people go that they may serve me; and deaf to the cries and
petitions of the afflicted) racked their invention to find out ways and means
to waste, dishearten and destroy them. To this end spoke the Egyptian Monarch
to his noble Lords, saying, come on, let us deal wisely with them, lest they
multiply -- and sight against us, and get them up out of the land. Exodus i.10.
This wise consultation issued in many severe projects, such as, appointing
over them taskmasters -- making them serve with rigor -- drawing the chains
of their bondage tighter -- taking away their straw, yet demanding the full
tale of brick, and beating them in case of default; nor was this all, two
edicts of death were made out and sent to the midwives to put in execution, one
was, to kill the male children with their own hands as soon as they were born,
the other, to cast them into the river; this was a blow at the root. However,
the Midwives feared GOD -- disobeyed the king, and saved the children alive:
nor was this disobedience censured of GOD as rebellion, but their conduct was
so highly approved of him, that it is said, he made them houses. i. e. gave
them flourishing families. It may also be observed, that as the time of their
exodus drew nearer, the weight and anguish of their afflictions increased, so
that their lives were made bitter with hard bondage. But the providence of GOD
being favorable toward them, they multiplied and grew (notwithstanding the
oppressions and miseries they were under, during the latter part of their
residence in Egypt) so that in about 220 years, there sprang, from 70 souls,
the vast number of 600,000 fighting men, which, according to common
calculation, supposes the whole number of souls that left Egypt, not less than
three millions.

Common history, as well as sacred, supplies us with instances* showing that
the grievous oppressions of a people are overruled, by the kind providence of
GOD, to bring on and promote their freedom and enlargement. A few instances may
suffice to set this matter in a clear light.

The early and severe oppressions, the violent struggles, and the final liberty
of the Swiss may (...) adduced in proof of the point. For many centuries
together they were oppressed and distressed by some or other of their imperious
neighbors, or their own lordly nobility, till at length, tired and worn out
with the gauling yoke of slavery and oppression, three Cantons only, out of the
thirteen that composed those States, began to make resistance, and stand for
their rights. This was in the year 1315.
They having fought some great battles Particularly one with the Austrians, who
came against them with 20,000 men, and Leopold Archduke of Austria (...) their
(...).
with remarkable success, the other Cantons began to fall in, till at length
the whole thirteen were combined together in the same cause; and after a mighty
struggle of about 20 years continuance, they obtained rest and safety in the
peaceable enjoyment of their liberties and properties, multiplying and growing
in numbers and allies; and have lived in quiet for the space of four centuries
past.

The history of the persecutions, cruel oppressions, bloody wars and the mighty
efforts of the seven Dutch Provinces against their oppressors (led on by the
Duke de Alva, Don John and the Duke of Parma, under Philip King of Spain) which
lasted 48 years; as also their final deliverance, and extraordinary growth in
wealth and strength, from weakness, poverty and affliction, you are not
unacquainted with. Let us now turn our thoughts homeward.

NEW-ENGLAND's beginning, growth and increase, which commenced here, and as it
were proceeded from this place, under and after the endurance of a great many
trials, afford no small evidence in the present case, viz. that afflictions,
under the merciful direction of GOD, are salutary and serve to promote the good
of the afflicted.

GOD who knows all things, foreseeing the afflictions that his servants (the
first settlers here) would endure for his name; and determining to bring them,
and with them the Gospel and privileges of it to this land, made early and
effectual provision for the same. This he did by a series of noted providence.
For instance, by causing America So called from Americus Vespucius, a
Florentine.
to be explored, as it was by Columbus Or Colon, his proper name, a Genoese,
who was inspired with an uncommon zeal for searching out this new world as it
was at first called: Further discoveries of which, a few years after, were made
by Sebastian Cabot, a Venetian employed by Henry VII. King of England.
in the year 1492. By disposing and directing Gosnald, an Englishman, to make
more particular discoveries of this part of it in 1602, since called
New England. By sending a terrible plague among the natives here, that swept
off multitudes of them a few years before the first settlers came. As though it
had been with design to make them room.
And by disposing some gentlemen at home to favor their cause and afford them
assistance, after they had concluded to make their retreat this way. In these
and the like ways, GOD as it were searched out and prepared a place in this
wilderness Alluding to Rev. xii.6. and the woman fled into the wilderness where
she has a place prepared of GOD; -- we may view the flight of our pious
forefathers from their adversaries at home, unto this then waste howling
wilderness as a particular event comprehended in the fulfillment of this passage
of scripture.
for the flight of his little persecuted flock.

It must be noted that the civil and ecclesiastical powers of England at this
time, were against them, on account of their puritan principles. As for King
James the I. One of England's four scourges, or four kings from the north* and
the first monarch of England that took to himself the title of sacred majesty.
his principles laid a foundation for the persecuting measures that he (and his
successors) afterward pursued. His political principles were despotic, and his
religious ones were a motly mixture of popery and presbytery, which, with
violence, he endeavored to make his subjects swallow. As Granvill in his
history of the wars of England tells us.
To this purpose, he (with the high-tempered Bishops) proposed, and vehemently
urged a subscription to the books of prayer, and all the articles and
ceremonies of the church of England, First set on foot in Queen Elizabeth's
reign, and now revived with great spirit and a pointed design against the
dissenting clergy.
threatening the delinquents with severe punishment. This affair of
subscription, though it was mainly intended to perplex or set aside dissenting
ministers, yet reached and wounded all good christians in their communion. As
for the doctrinal part of the articles of the church, the dissenters approved
of it; this their adversaries were apprized of, and therefore they culled out
some disciplinary articles of mere human invention, and offered them as a test
to be subscribed. The sum of the articles excepted against and rejected by the
dissenters is comprised in the following ones. 1. They (i. e. the ministers)
must be reordained, if not episcopally ordained before. 2. They must declare
their unfeigned assent and consent to all and every thing contained and
prescribed in and by the book of common prayers, and administration of
sacraments, and other rites and ceremonies of the church of England. 3. They
must take the oath of canonical obedience. 4. They must abjure the taking of
arms upon any pretense whatever against the king, or any commissioned by him.
Dr. Edmund Calamy's life of Baxter.
These grievous burdens lay principally upon the conscience, and were such as
our divine Master never imposed upon his disciples; it was a bold assault upon
the sacred right of religious liberty; however, they must comply or suffer. For,

In consequence of not subscribing or consenting to these or the like articles,
though otherwise good and peaceable subjects, they were charged with obstinacy,
rebellion, heresy, disobedience to authority, and undermining government, yea,
and were watched with a severe eye, and pursued with a violent hand, to the
destruction of their peace liberty and property.

Their first flight from these oppressors was to Holland, and in about eleven
years after, many of them took their departure from Europe for this country. In
the year 1620, and arrived at Cape Cod in November.
Their departure was attended with very great difficulties, losses and
distresses. The acaccounts given by Governor Bradford As mentioned in Mr.
Prince's Chronology and in the Appendix to Mr. Hutchinson's (...) of
Massachusetts Bay.
and others, of their trials, hardships and sufferings, are very affecting; and
all this, not for their evil doings, but for not submitting to unscriptural and
arbitrary impositions. Hence it is no excess of charity to conclude that they
suffered for righteousness sake, for at the hazard of their lives and fortunes
they chose to obey GOD rather than man.

After they had taken their final departure from Europe -- crossed the
atlantic, and landed on this shore, they had a great many evils to combat. They
were distressed on every side, and a gloomy prospect opened to view. The ocean
behind them, a wilderness before them, and the severities of winter swiftly
approaching. They were soon visited with cold, hunger and sickness, which swept
off nearly one half their number, among whom were some of their leading and
best men. In this feeble state they were often alarmed and assaulted by the
Savages of the wilderness, and had no where to look for protection but to the
GOD of heaven.

One might reasonably think that the distresses of this afflicted people would
excite the compassion of their adversaries, especially since they were rid of
their company; but it was quite the reverse. Their enemies pursued them without
mercy, and endeavored to rob them of their privileges in this, as they had
done in their native land. Archbishop Laud, one of their greatest enemies,
having obtained some false reports against them, found means to procure a high
commission from Charles I. for himself, in conjunction with several others in
high office and of his own spirit, whereby they were empowered to revoke all
charters, letters patents and rescripts royal, before granted by the crown to
the several colonies and plantations, and to make such laws and constitutions
as to them should seem meet. See the Appendix to Mr. Robbins's Sermon at the
ordination of his Son in this place.
The execution of this commission was, however, prevented by the interposition
of some gentlemen of influence in England, and the indefatigable labors of Mr.
Edward W^^slow, then agent for the country, who, for his noble exertions,
suffered three or four months imprisonment.

It must be owned, with gratitude to Providence, that this afflicted people had
some friends remaining in their native land; and no doubt we have too, the
violence of the public measures taken against us notwithstanding; but the
governing part was unfriendly to them; and to a very high degree they are so to
us their posterity, as appears from their readiness to hear and credit the
false reports of our enemies -- enacting such restraining laws as go beyond the
limits of the constitution -- appointing governors and other officers
unfavourable to the natural and stipulated rights of the people -- vacating
charters without any adequate offense -- pulling down the hedges that royal
authority once set up for our defense, and hereby opening a way for what we now
see and feel, namely, enormous fleets and armies, with commission and full
purpose to distress, destroy or enslave us. These things considered, and the
unsuccess they have hitherto met with, gives New England occasion to adopt the
language of Israel in Psalm cxxix.2. Many a time have they afflicted me from my
youth, yet have they not prevailed against me.

Let us now turn our thoughts to a more lightsome scene, and briefly view the
growth and increase of this afflicted people under the numerous trials they
meet with. GOD, minding to bring them from Europe and settle them in this
country, at the appointed time, took them on the wings of his providence In
allusion to Deuteronomy. xxxii.11. As an eagle -- fluttereth over her young, spreads
abroad her wings, takes them, bears, them on her wings; so the Lord alone
did lead them, etc.
and wafted them over here. He set their feet upon a rock, and established them
so firmly that none of the powers or machinations formed against them have been
able to pluck them up; but the more they afflicted them, the more they
multiplied and grew. As is said of the rush and the flag that flourish in mire
and water, so it may be said of them in many respects; they grew in the mire of
foul oppression, and in the waters of deep affliction; and have sent out their
roots and branches far and wide. Particularly,

They grew under their afflictions, in the christian graces and virtues of
patience, submission, charity, courage and true fortitude, praying also with
all manner of prayer, supplication and intercession with thanksgiving; and the
more they were afflicted the more they abounded in praying and humbling
themselves before GOD; nor were they unsuccessful in their addresses unto him.

Several churches, in the space of a few years, sprang from this. And, their
faith, charity and hopeful prospects resounding to England, many of the good
people there, moved by the spirit of GOD, and the desire of christian liberty,
came over to this land in great numbers a few years after.

In the year 1628 the settlement of Massachusetts colony began, where, in about
twenty four years, no less than twenty two churches were gathered and settled
with pastors. And in the whole of New England, at this period of time, the
number of churches amounted to forty three. This was their religious and
ecclesiastical growth.

About the year 1643, emigrations from abroad were so nearly at an end, that it
is supposed, as many or more went from us than came to us. At this date of
time, the number of souls in this, and the sister colonies of New England were
computed to be fifteen thousand. And in the space of nine years after, which
brings us to 1652, they rose to twenty one thousand two hundred. As Mr.
Johnston tells us in his History of the settlement of Massachusetts Colony,
entitled Wonder-working Providence of Zion's King.
And according to the public census taken in 1755, the number amounted to four
hundred thirty six thousand nine hundred and thirty six souls. Add twenty one
years to the above date, which brings us to the present time, and upon a
moderate computation we shall fall but little if any short of eight hundred
thousand, which supposes not less than one hundred thousand fighting men.

This rapid increase, through the good hand of our GOD upon us, began and
proceeded under a multiformity of afflictions and oppressions, both from our
natural and unnatural enemies. And may we not truly say, that, under GOD, this
surprising growth took its rise from the virtue, courage and success of the
first adventurers who settled in this place? If this is the case, as we may
reasonably think it is, with what holy admiration and gratitude, may we
suppose, the perfected spirits of our pious ancestors now in heaven, to look
down and behold the increase of the Redeemer's kingdom, and the flourishing of
this country, as owing, in a great measure, to their own small beginnings.

It is probable the other English colonies (which, with these of New England,
do now compose the united States of America) multiplied and grew in proportion
as these have done. If so, we have good reason to suppose the whole number of
souls in these united States to be not less, but rather more than three
millions. How amazingly has this country multiplied and grew in the space of
156 years.

Indeed, we are under a thick cloud of darkness at present, but not in despair
of light shining upon us, by and by, with increasing luster. Our heavenly
Father, provoked with our numerous and aggravated offenses, has visited us
with the sore and terrible judgment of war, from a quarter we little expected
twenty years ago. He has suffered Great Britain, once our friends, to become
our foes, and make war upon us without any sufficient cause that we know of,
unless it be their own exorbitant pride and avarice. What more could they
reasonably ask or desire of us then they used to have? They had the regulation
and benefit of the trade of the whole country -- their monarch had a negative
upon all our laws; and, upon constitutional requisition, our lives and fortunes
were devoted to his service and support. What could he, or his parliament have
more, unless it were the absolute, unconditional jurisdiction of our
properties, liberties and lives? The surrender of these is what they demand,
and because we think it an unreasonable demand we are extremely unwilling to
comply with it; nor do we, nor shall we, if we can possibly help it. And what
is the consequence? why, they make a general descent upon us with their mighty
power, and in the terrible forms of war and vengeance, to bring us at their
feet or slay us with death. The sword is theirs; the hand that permits it is
GOD's: We adore, and bow submission to the perfect righteousness of the latter,
but the former we think to be unrighteous altogether. We own ourselves
oppressed and distressed on every side, but not yet in despair. Still we hope
in our forefathers GOD, and he gives us a great deal of encouragement and
occasion, both from his word and providence, so to do. Hitherto the Lord has
helped us -- in the midst of wrath he has remembered mercy; and should we not
acknowledge it with gratitude, it would be an addition to all the other crimes
we are chargeable with.

How plain to be seen is the merciful influence of Providence in breathing a
general spirit of union into, and through the thirteen colonies -- in leading
their councils and determinations into so wise a direction as they have taken
-- in disposing and inclining the whole collective body to unite, again and
again, in humbling themselves before GOD and making confessions, prayers and
supplications unto him; as also enabling them, under all the inexperience and
disadvantages they labor, to make so noble, resolute and successful a stand as
hitherto they have done, against the united powers of Great Britain, aided by
many thousands of foreign mercenaries. These things considered, together with
the justice of our cause, we are constrained to think, unworthy as we are, that
the providence of GOD is favorable to our cause and country.

Let all Europe, and the whole world turn their eyes this way, and behold, and
wonder to see these young American colonies set on fire at both ends and in the
middle, and not consumed. Not unto us or an arm of flesh, but to the power and
goodness of almighty GOD the praise belongs that we are thus far sustained in
the fire of a flaming war. We are not only sustained, but in some respects, we
grow and increase in the things that belong to our political salvation. The
more our adversaries afflict and distress us with the sword of war, the more we
grow in military skill, strength and all manner of accomplishments and means of
defense. GOD of his infinite mercy grant that we may grow proportionably in the
christian graces and virtues! This favor granted, we should have good reason
to conclude that though never so great an host comes against our country, it will
live through the war -- that we shall rise superior to the powers that combine
against us, and finally triumph over all the enemies of our salvation. This we
may look for and depend upon, unless by our iniquities we provoke the LORD to
turn his hand against us.

In these mighty struggles and bloody wars be-between protestants and
protestants, christian churches and christian churches, For episeopalians and
dissenters are united in all the leading principles of christianity.
it seems that the time is near at hand foretold of by St. Peter, 1 Peter iv.17.
When judgment must begin at the house of GOD, among visible christians, or
professors of the same christian religion; and that the devil is come down
having great wrath, aiming by his instruments to destroy the churches and
people (with their privileges) which the Lord our GOD has planted in this
land. But we hope it will please GOD to disappoint him and all his emissaries
employed against us, and that we shall escape as a bird out of the snare of the
fowler.

One great step has been taken toward our escape and freedom; Viz. a
declaration of the independence of the thirteen united American States July 4,
1776.
the event of which, we cannot certainly foretell, though we have good reason to
think it will be favorable. The step that is taken has the appearance of a
literal accomplishment of one of those scripture prophecies which (if it is to
be understood in a literal sense) must sooner or later take place. There is a
prophetic query in Isa. lxvi.8. -- Shall the earth be made to bring forth in
one day, or shall a nation be born at once? If this passage is considered in a
spiritual sense, no doubt it has reference to the speedy, happy and
extraordinary effects of the plentiful effusion of the Holy Spirit. But is
there any thing that makes against a more literal fulfillment? If not, it is a
question whether any thing has happened for these 1700 years past, that does so
literally and extensively answer this query, as when these thirteen united
States, by the voice of their deputies in Congress assembled, were led to
declare themselves free and independent of the jurisdiction of Great Britain,
and of all other powers on earth. By this act, we view these States as under no
civil government, laws or authority but their own; and if they continue free
and united, we may, with good propriety, consider them in their united capacity
as a nation born at once.

However, we readily and religiously own that the establishment and
preservation of this newborn nation depends entirely upon the good providence
of GOD, in whom we hope and trust for support, protection and deliverance out
of all our afflictions.

FROM what has been said on the subject we are led to conclude, that the LORD
will appear to vindicate the just cause of his afflicted people, and sooner or
later, turn his hand against their oppressors. Though for their high crimes and
offenses against him, he may suffer the enemies of his people to oppress and
distress them to a great degree; nevertheless, when he sees them sufficiently
humbled for their sins, and hears them cry unto him for deliverance therefrom,
and from the oppressing hand of their enemies, he will arise for their help and
come to their rescue. So he did for his people in ancient times; when they were
near utterly laid waste by their enemies and cried unto him. Psalm lxxviii.65,
66.
Then the Lord awaked as one out of sleep, and like a mighty man that shouteth
by reason of wine; he smote his enemies in the hinder part, he put them to
perpetual reproach.

Hence, it is a vain thing for the powers of earth to attempt the downfall or
decrease of those persons or people whom the Lord is minded to build up and
increase. The powers of earth may unite their forces and take council together,
but the one shall be broken and the other turned into foolishness; for who is
he that says, and it comes to pass, when the Lord has not commanded it? Lam.
iii.37.
We may see, in the growth of the Israelites under the bondage, afflictions and
taskmasters of Egypt, and in the settlement, increase and flourishing of this
country, notwithstanding all the oppositions, hazards and hardships they had to
encounter, how easy a thing it is with GOD to frustrate the plans and purposes
formed against the people he delights to favor.

Therefore, in all disputes and controversies with our fellow men, it should be
our greatest concern to have the Lord with us and for us. As a means to enjoy
this greatest of favors we should have a care, and attend to the following
rules, namely, That we do not offend him in word or deed, either by taking his
name in vain, or doing a wicked thing. -- That we are not aggressors in any
quarrel that we may happen to fall into with men. -- That our cause, relative
to the dispute, be righteous and good, and that our hearts are sincere and
upright with God. -- That we repent of our past misconduct, and at the same
time apply to the blood of atonement for pardon and cleansing; and that our
behavior toward God and man corresponds with the directions given in the holy
scriptures. Thus conducting ourselves, we have no reason to fear but the Lord
will be on our side, and plead our cause with those that rise up against us.

As for the bloody contest between Great Britain and these united States, it is
our opinion, upon careful enquiry, that we are not aggressors in the quarrel.
While we were yet in quiet, and no public complaint exhibited to disturb us,
our adversaries began to conceive mischief against us -- to impose heavy
burdens upon us, and to rob us of our stipulated rights; and because we
declined submission to their arbitrary will in all cases, they attempted, and
are still attempting to rob us of our natural rights too. We only prayed for
peace, safety and the free enjoyment of the privileges included in our natural
and stipulated rights, but could not have them. Can any impartial judge, or
unprejudiced eye, help seeing and determining in their own minds that our cause
is good? Was our public conduct as good as our public cause, we should have
good reason to think the present war would soon issue in our favor. And, as
things stand, we do not despair, but abound in hope. Though our sins against
heaven are many and aggravated, yet we have a space and means of repentance
continued to us by the patience and goodness of that GOD who is gracious and
merciful -- ready to pardon and willing to forgive and save his penitent
people, and set them free from the cruel hands of unprovoked oppressors.

May the spirit of grace and supplication -- of repentance and reformation be
poured upon us from the fullness of him with whom is the residue of the spirit,
to the effectual suppression of all impiety and profaneness against God -- of
injustice, extortion, selfishness and the rest of the vices; and, may
righteousness, charity and benevolence, out of a pure heart and faith unfeigned
revive, and extensively prevail. Should this happy change take place among us,
we are well assured that upon seeking the Lord he would be found of us; we
might call upon him and he would answer us agreeably to his own direction and
gracious promise, call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee and
thou shall glorify me. Our forefathers often experienced the divine
faithfulness in this regard; they cried unto him in their troubles, and he
delivered them out of their distresses.

In this day of trouble and affliction, it becomes us to retrospect the
behavior and laudable example of our pious ancestors, who, under all their
oppressions, losses and hardships, held fast their integrity -- maintained
their hope in GOD -- committed themselves and their cause to him, and proceeded
on in the way of their duty with patience, activity and christian fortitude,
not thinking their fortunes or lives too dear to part with for the honor of
GOD, the peaceable enjoyment of civil and religious privileges, and
transmitting the same to after generations. They suffered, labored, prayed,
fasted, fought, and endured hardness as good soldiers of Jesus Christ. We have
entered into their labors, and for a long time been reaping the fruits of
their eminent services and sufferings; and, shall we be so base, or any of us
so lightly esteem the rich inheritance and valuable privileges they left us as
tamely and stupidly to give them up without trying, and exerting ourselves in
every suitable way to preserve them?

Rather let us imitate their noble example in times of adversity; and, like
them, the more we are afflicted by our adversaries or chastened by the hand of
Providence, the more let us pray, and humble ourselves before GOD, and confess
our sins, and lament the wickedness of the times, and implore the mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and reform our manners, and improve the means and advantages
God has put into our hands, in the best manner we possibly can, for the
salvation of our souls, and our bodies, our lives, liberties, property and
country. These are objects worthy our attention; and, as they are all
assaulted, either by our temporal or spiritual enemies, we are in duty bound to
apply ourselves, with all the skill and resolution we have, to defend and save
them. This let us do, relying on the power and grace of Him, whose is the
greatness, and the majesty, and the glory, and the victory, for assistance and
success.

Let us upon this day, in a grateful, decent, and virtuous manner, recognize
the goodness of GOD to our forefathers through all their trials and
afflictions, and take courage therefrom, to hope in the power and mercy of the
same GOD, whose hand is not shortened that it cannot save. Let us not enquire,
as misers do, who will show us earthly good, or, how shall we make the greatest
and best worldly advantage by the miseries and distresses of the present times?
But, how shall we do most for the honor of the glorious GOD -- the salvation
of our country, and the good of our fellow-men? To promote these great and
worthy ends, let us cheerfully and religiously devote our abilities, fortunes
and lives, and be followers of them (our pious forefathers and other good
christians) who through faith and patience, and much tribulation, have entered
into the kingdom of heaven.

To close with a (...) words.

May this ancient and respectable Town, and the flock of our Lord Jesus Christ
in it, and tho rest of the churches he has planted in this land be always
favored with his gracious presence and protection -- be increased with all the
increases of GOD, and the gates of hell never be suffered to prevail against
them. May the wisdom that comes from above, and is profitable to direct, be
ever imparted to the general Congress of the united States of America, and to
all the lawful Assemblies, Courts and Conventions of those States. May the GOD
of armies, by his gracious and favorable presence, be with our military forces
-- with our worthy general in chief -- with the other generals, the officers
and soldiers, inspiring them with military skill and courage, and giving them
good success; that so our enemies may fly before them, and be compelled to
depart from our country. May wars cease to the ends of the earth, and the
gospel of the grace of God, with glorious success, spread and extend as far.
May religion, pure and undefiled, revive and flourish throughout this land; and
we ourselves, together with the rest of the inhabitants, with one heart, voice
and soul, choose the LORD JEHOVAH for our Judge, our Lawgiver, King and
Savior; and, let all the people say,

AMEN.

