VIEW OF THE TITLE TO INDIANA, A TRACT OF COUNTRY ON THE RIVER OHIO.

CONTAINING INDIAN CONFERENCES at Johnson-Hall, in May, 1765 -- the DEED of the
Six Nations to the Proprietors of Indiana -- the MINUTES of the Congress at
Fort Stanwix, in October and November, 1768 -- the DEED of the Indians,
settling the Boundary Line between the English and Indians Lands -- and the
OPINION of Counsel on the Title of the Proprietors of Indiana.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by STYNER and CIST, in Second-street, near Arch-street.
MDCCLXXVI.

VIEW OF THE TITLE TO INDIANA.
AT a conference held with the Six Nations at Johnson-hall, May 2d, 1765.

PRESENT,

Sir William Johnson, Baronet, the King's Superintendant of Indian Affairs,
John Johnson, Esquire Deputy Agents.
Daniel Clause, Esquire Guy Johnson, Esquire
Mr. Arthur, Mr. Kirtland, Mr. Kreiser, Butler, Parthuis, Monteur, Interpreters
to the Crown.
Sir William addressed the Six Nations as follows:
BRETHREN,
I am now to speak to you on some affairs which greatly concern us both, and I
expect you will give me your attention, and act a becoming part upon the
occasion.

You know the treacherous and cruel part acted by some of your people at
Logstown and about the Ohio two years ago; you then plundered umbers of the
traders, who were supplying you with goods; some of them you promised to
protect and save their effects, but you did not keep your words: several of
these unhappy sufferers are thereby reduced to great necessity, some of whom
are thrown into goal, because they could not pay their debts. -- This has
induced them to apply to me, and to desire I would lay before you their
distresses, that you might give them a tract of land to compensate in some
measure for their great losses. I need not tell you, how incumbent it is upon
you to agree to their desire, as you must all be sensible they were ruined by
some of your people in a time of peace, and when they were supplying your
necessities: this conduct is sufficient to make the traders very shy of going
toward your country; and therefore I think it indispensably your interest to
grant their request, which, though it will be but a small recompense, will,
however, show the world, that you repent of what is past, and, like honest men,
are desirous of making some restitution for the damages you have committed. I
expect you will, without delay, give me an answer, and I wish it may be a
favorable one, as it will be for your own credit.

BRETHREN,

The next thing I am to take notice of, is at the desire of the General, who
commands all the army in this country: -- he has represented to me the
necessity there is for the troops to have gardens and corn about the forts; and
although it is the custom in all other places, that all the ground within
cannon-shot shall belong to the fort, he has yet such a regard for you, that he
would not make any use of it without you were first made acquainted, and
approved of it. This is an instance of so much goodness and condescension, that
I expect you will not hesitate a moment to give up the ground, within
cannon-shot round all the forts, for the use of the king's army; and I know you
will the readier do that, as such ground so near a fort can be of no use to
you, as it is only intended for the service of the garrison: -- but as the
garrison of Fort Pit is larger than the rest, and a great way from our
settlements, I have no doubt but you will give up a larger quantity of ground
there for the use of the soldiers. And if you agree to this, I am persuaded,
they will look upon you in a much more friendly light than formerly: so that I
expect a speedy and agreeable answer.

BRETHREN,

The last, but the most important affair I have at this time to mention, is
with regard to the settling a boundary between you and the English. I sent a
message to some of your Nations some time ago, to acquaint you that I should
confer with you at this meeting upon it. The king, whose generosity and
forgiveness you have already experienced, being very desirous to put a final
end to disputes between his people and you, concerning lands, and to do you
strict justice, has fallen upon the plan of a boundary between our provinces
and the Indians, (which no white man shall dare to invade) as the best and
surest method of ending such like disputes, and securing your property to you
beyond a possibility of disturbance. This will, I hope, appear to you so
reasonable, and so just, on the part of the king, and so advantageous to you
and your posterity, that I can have no doubt of your cheerfully joining with
me, in settling such a division-line as will be best for the advantage of both
the white men and the Indians, and as shall best agree with the extent and
increase of each province, and the governors, whom I shall consult upon that
occasion, so soon as I am fully empowered; but, in the mean time, I am desirous
to know in what manner you would choose to extend it, and what you will agree
heartily to, and abide by, in general terms: at the same time I am to acquaint
you, that whenever the whole is settled, and that it shall appear you have so
far consulted the increasing state of our people, as to make any convenient
cessions of ground, where it is most wanted, that then you will receive a
considerable present in return for your friendship.

On the 3d of May, the Six Nations, by the Onondaga speaker, made the following
answer:
BROTHER WARRAGHIYAGEY, [ Sir William Johnson's Indian name.]
We have heard all you said to us yesterday, and we give you many thanks for
your advice and directions to us, which we shall take due notice of.

As we are willing to show our good disposition by our actions, we shall come
into every thing you propose, that is reasonable, and we hope it will render us
more regarded by the English. -- These are serious articles, and we shall
consult both sachems and warriors about them, and by tomorrow be able to
answer you upon them; but with regard to what you spoke to us about the king's
desire, that we should agree about a line between us and the English, we must
desire to know of you how you intended the line should go, and how far.

Sir William answered,

BRETHREN,

I thank you for taking what I said into serious consideration. -- With regard
to what you desire to know concerning the line, if one sachem from each nation
attends early tomorrow morning, I shall speak farther upon that subject.

On the 4th of May, the Onondaga speaker addressed Sir William as follows:
BROTHER,
We yesterday opened our ears to what you said to us, and we have deliberated
on it ever since. We now beg you will open your ears, and hearken to what we
have to say in answer to it.

Gave three strings.

BROTHER,

We have heard what you told us, concerning the intentions of the great king,
about a line between us and the English, and we have considered, that such a
thing will be very necessary, provided the white people will abide by it.

BROTHER,

The chief cause of all the late wars was about lands. -- We saw the English
coming toward us from all parts, and they have cheated us so often, that we
could not think well of it. We were afraid, that in a little time you would be
at our very castles; for this reason we thank the great king, for his good
intentions, and we hope he will make his people keep within bounds, which they
have not yet done: we therefore agree, that a boundary shall be made between
us, and that it shall run from Fort Edward along to the Mohawks castle, and
from thence along the great mountain to Harris's Ferry on the river
Sasquehanna, agreeable to what we have drawn here, on a piece of bark. A Belt.

BROTHER,

We have told you our minds; if it does not please you, it is none of our
faults. We were always ready to give, but the English don't deal fairly with
us; they are more cunning than we are; they get our names upon paper very fast,
and we often don't know what it is for. We would do more to please the king,
but it is hardly in our power, and some of us don't like it, because we are so
often imposed upon: one of our nations is going to be cheated out of almost all
the land between the Mohawk and the Big River, by people at Albany, to whom
they never publicly made any such grant, nor never received any thing for it.
We spoke to you once before about it, and here are their chiefs now, who say,
That since they first heard of it, they were promised justice by the several
governors at Albany long ago. They have likewise spoke to you on twelve
different belts, and begged that you would get justice for them, but it is not
done; they sent a belt over to the king about it, -- but they have not yet had
any satisfaction.

BROTHER,

You see how it is with us; if the English would be more honest, we should be
more generous, and there would be peace all through the land; but it is hard,
that one of our nations, that live so near you The Mohawks.
, and have suffered so much on your account, should be so greatly wronged. --
This makes us apprehensive, that the English will soon stretch their arm over
our lands: we beg then, that you will send our belts to the king, and tell him,
how it is with us, and that we hope he will set us a good example, and give the
Mohawks their land soon, before we settle any other matters; for our necks have
been long stretched out to hear from him, and if we don't hear soon, some of
our young people's heads will begin to turn, and they will not regard what we say
about peace; they will tell us, it is not true, for if it was, our confederacy
would obtain justice, when they applied for it.

A Belt.

BROTHER,

We have finished what we had to say for the present, and we hope you will
answer us tomorrow upon it, at which time we shall speak to you on the other
matters.

On May the 5th, Sir William addressed the Indians in the following manner:
BRETHREN,
Your speech yesterday much surprised me: -- you appeared desirous to set a
boundary between the English and you, and sensible of the advantage of it; at
the same time, you have described a boundary, which is ridiculous, and which
shows me, you don't mean what you say, and are not desirous to pursue what has
been recommended to you: -- neither does it proceed from your ignorance; for
you convinced me yesterday by the remarks you made on the great map, that you
are well acquainted with the whole country, and the situation of all the places
on the frontiers. Notwithstanding which you have, in your boundary, cut off a
large tract of country, which you all knew has been long since purchased and
settled: -- the land is patented one hundred miles beyond Fort Edward, and a
great distance beyond the Mohawks Castle, and the line you make from thence to
Harris's Ferry, instead of adding to, cuts off several towns and settlements,
particularly in Pennsylvania, which you know has been fairly purchased and
allowed of by you, and to which you can make no claim, and you have taken no
notice of the other governments. The affair of the Mohawks is of old standing,
and I have never neglected it: -- I can prove by papers I have here, that I
laid it before Governor Clinton fifteen years ago, and that at the grand
congress at Albany, in 1754, I did what I could for the Mohawks, who were
promised to have the matter strictly examined into: -- there is a patent for
it, and it is not an easy matter to break it. The Mohawks have given me
infinite trouble about it, ever since the report that it was to be surveyed; it
has not as yet affected their hunting, as it has never been surveyed or
settled; and I have stated their complaints, and doubt not but they will be
redressed. That is the only large tract, which at present concerns them, and
therefore I am sorry to find, you should make it any objection to the good work
which the king recommends. These things require much time with white people; I
have often recommended patience to them, and I wish they would follow my
advice, and not interrupt a business which is of so great importance. I wanted
only at present to know your general sentiments upon this subject, and I wish
they had been more favorable, because it would have been as much for your
interest, as that of the English.

To which the Six Nations then answered,
BROTHER,
We have heard you with attention, and we are much obliged to you for showing
us what is best for our interest. We shall therefore take it farther into
consideration, because we are willing to show our good disposition. We hope our
behavior on this occasion will have a proper effect upon the great king, and
induce him to hearken to our complaints. We don't doubt, but you have done what
you could for us, and we wish it may be taken notice of; otherwise we must
think ourselves greatly wronged, and our minds cannot be at peace. -- Tomorrow
we shall answer you more particularly and to your satisfaction.

Then Thomas King [ a chief of the Six Nations] addressed the several Nations
as follows:
BRETHREN,
I would wish you all to enter with cheerfulness into the business your brother
Warraghiyagey has recommended to you, and to do it from your hearts. Let us
follow the example of our ancestors, whose bones are now turned into dust; they
were wise men, and took care of every thing that concerned peace; -- let us do
the same, and let us make a line for the benefit of our children; that they may
have lands which cannot be taken from them; and let us, in doing that, show the
king, that we are generous, and that we will grant him land enough for his
people: -- Then he will regard us, and take better care that his people do not
cheat us.

On the 6th of May, after the several Nations were assembled, the Onondaga
speaker addressed Sir William as follows:
BROTHER,
We are now assembled to answer what you said to us yesterday, regarding the
Boundary Line, concerning which we have not given you satisfaction. We hope we
shall now please you better, and we beg you will attend to our answer, and
pardon our mistakes and the manner of our expression, as we have always been
accustomed to speak our thoughts freely, the rather as we heard from the
French, that you had designs upon us, and we heard from you, that they had the
same, but of late we find you both had the like motives.

At length we have agreed together for ourselves, our wives and children, to
make a cession to the king, of the lands we shall now describe, beginning at
Owegi, on the east branch of Sasquehanna, thence down the east side of the
river to Shamokin (or Fort Augusta), and running up the west branch of
Sasquehanna, on the south side thereof, and from thence to Kittaning, or Adigo
on the Ohio, thence along and down the Ohio to the Cherokee River, and up the
same to its head, on this side; upon condition that you have some regard for
our Warriors, who always pass through that country, and give them always a free
passage; and we are very happy in being all assembled here, both sachems and
warriors, at this time, and not as has been formerly the case, on such
occasions.

We can now all act together, as all should receive a share for what they have
ceded, by which it will be preserved in our minds. We have never refused you
lands. In many places we have given proofs of our friendship, on which we have
been promised a recompense which we have not received. We assisted your army
last year, and many of our people were forsaken and left to famish, and we have
been promised a large trade, and to fix interpreters, etc. at each post, which
is not come as yet. We beg you will consider these things, and have regard to
your promises and our requests, as we pay due regard to your desires at
present; that therefore you will take these things into your consideration, and
afford us a plentiful trade, and proper interpreters at the posts, as you have
promised. -- It is in expectation of this, that we have now agreed to your
proposals, and for the sake of establishing tranquillity, we therefore
recommend it earnestly to you, to consider what we have said. We have farther
to add, that you will consider our hungry people will sometimes kill your
cattle and tread down your corn; if they do so now, it may be worse when we
assemble all nations: -- we therefore beg, that, whenever you finally settle
this affair, and that all your governors meet about it, you would appoint the
congress in some place more remote, and that you would bring provisions thither
with you. The request of the traders shall be complied with, and we shall agree
to give them some lands near Fort Pit, and also to your desire concerning some
lands about the forts, for the use of your garrisons.

Then Thomas King said to the several Nations:
BRETHREN,
I hope you will now remember what we have agreed to, and what your brother has
said; for we have now all, men, women, and children, been witness of this
transaction, which is done publicly, nor can it be said our chiefs received
any bribes; therefore should we forget what is now done, it will be a great
reflection upon us, as none of us, with truth, can deny it.

May the 6th, Sir William assembled all the chiefs, and spoke to them
concerning the Boundary Line, observing that they had not closed it properly to
the eastward, which was highly necessary.

The Onondaga speaker answered,
BROTHER,
We have attended to you, and we have already considered about closing the
line; but we find it a difficult matter to determine, as so many tribes and
branches of our confederacy have their residence about the Sasquehanna. -- We
think to continue the line up that river to Cherry Valley Lake, and from thence
to the German Flats, would be very advantageous to you; because our brethren
the Oneidas say, you have no right or title on the south side the Mohawk River
above that place: however, for the present, we shall not extend the boundary
line higher than Owegi, but when the affair comes to be finally determined, we
shall think farther about it.

Then Canaghquiesa said,
BROTHER,
You know that we are the owners of the land westward of the German Flats, we
hope we are not to be cheated out of it, but we have reason to think oddly of
it; as a German is gone to live at our large field Orisca, which is our
property, we beg you will drive him off; for he has no right to it, for we well
know the lands we sold, from the rest, and we tell you this, because we would
not do any thing in it, till we spoke to you about it -- We think we are
strangely dealt with, our fathers were asked to sell farms, and whenever they
agreed to it, the white people took woods, and all which we knew nothing of,
till we saw people coming into our country. Brother, since that is the case,
let us know, what the white people claim, and we will tell honestly what we
sold.

Sir William answered,
BRETHREN,
As I only wanted to know your sentiments in general, about a boundary, I am
content the line remains for the present, as far as you recommend. As to what
you mentioned, running to the German Flats, it cannot be agreed to, there are
good titles within that line. What the Oneidas say about the man at Orisca, I
did not hear of till now, if he is unjustly settled, he will remove on proper
warning. Whenever I can hear of your being wronged, I shall use my interest to
get justice for you; but you would have much less cause to complain, if your
people would never meddle in land affairs, without the knowledge of the whole
nation.

TO ALL PEOPLE to whom these presents shall come, greeting, Know ye, that we
Abraham a Mohawk chief, Sennghois a Oneida chief, Saquarisera a Tuscarora
chief, Chenaugheata chief of the Onondaga council, Tagaaia a Cayuga chief, and
Gaustarax a Seneca chief, chiefs and sachems of the Six United Nations, and
being and effectually representing all the tribes of the said Six United
Nations, send greeting:

WHEREAS Robert Callender, David Franks, Joseph Simons, Levy Andrew Levy,
Philip Boil, John Baynton, Samuel Wharton, George Morgan, Joseph Spear, Thomas
Smallman, Samuel Wharton administrator of John Welsh, deceased; Edmund Moran,
Even Shelby, Samuel Postlethwait, John Gibson, Richard Winston, Dennis Crohon,
William Thompson, Abraham Mitchel, James Dundas, Thomas Dundas, and John
Ormsby, in and by their several and respective letters or powers of attorney,
duly signed, sealed, and delivered by them, and now produced, interpreted and
explained to us; have constituted, nominated, and appointed, William Trent, of
the county of Cumberland, and province of Pennsylvania, merchant, their lawful
attorney and agent, to ask, solicit, demand, and receive from the sachems,
counselors, and warriors of the said Six United Nations, a grant of a tract of
land, as a compensation, satisfaction, or retribution, for the goods,
merchandise, and effects of the said William Trent, and the traders aforesaid,
which the Shawnesse, Delaware, and Huron tribes, tributaries of the said Six
Nations, (contrary to all good faith, and in violation of their repeated
promises of safety and protection to their persons, servants, and effects,
whilst trading in their country) did in the spring of the year One thousand
Seven hundred and Sixty-three, violently seize upon, and unjustly appropriate
to their own use:

AND WHEREAS we are now convened in full council, by order of our father, the
king of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, etc. at Fort
Stanwix, in the province of New York, in order to agree for, ascertain, and
finally fix and settle a permanent and lasting boundary line between the
hunting country, which we, at the conference aforesaid, SHALL and WILL reserve
for ourselves, our children and our tributaries, and the territories of the
said king of Great Britain:

AND WHEREAS application was formerly made to the said Six United Nations by
Sir William Johnson, baronet, at the requisition of the aforesaid traders, who
had sustained and suffered the losses aforesaid, for a retribution for the
same, which the said Six United Nations promised and agreed to, whenever he,
the said Sir William Johnson, baronet, should be empowered by his said majesty,
the king of Great Britain, to establish the boundary line aforesaid:

AND WHEREAS the said Sir William Johnson, baronet, has now at this present
congress, reminded the said Six United Nations of their said promise; and at
the earnest desire of the aforesaid traders, by their said attorney, strongly
recommended to the said Six United Nations, to make them a restitution, by a
grant of a tract of land to his said majesty, the king of Great Britain, his
heirs and successors; to and for the only use, benefit, and behoof of the said
William Trent, in his own right, and as attorney as aforesaid; all which the
said Six United Nations having taken into their consideration, and being
heartily disposed to agree thereunto, as an instance of their justice and
concern for the said losses; do therefore by these presents signify, publish,
and declare, That notwithstanding the grant and gift hereby made and given by
them unto his said majesty the king of Great Britain, and so forth; [ to and
for the only use, benefit, and behoof of the said William Trent, in his own
right, and as attorney as aforesaid] will be included within the cession, sale,
and boundary line, which the said Six United Nations shall and will make, sell
and grant to the said king of Great Britain, at the conference aforesaid, now
holden at Fort Stanwix, aforesaid, by the said Sir William Johnson, baronet:

YET NEVERTHELESS, the said Six United Nations have neither asked, demanded,
nor received from him the said Sir William Johnson, baronet, nor from any other
person or persons in behalf of the said king of Great Britain, any
consideration for the hereby given and granted premises, neither shall nor will
the said Six United Nations, nor their heirs nor descendants, (and by these
presents, they, the said Six United Nations, wholly and entirely interdict and
prohibit them from so doing) demand, nor receive from the said king of
Great Britain, nor from his successors, nor from his or their ministers or
servants, any consideration whatsoever, or howsoever, for the hereby granted,
bargained, or now given premises, or any part, purpart, or parcel thereof, the
same being their own voluntary act and deed, solely, and bona fide designed and
intended by them as a compensation, satisfaction and retribution for the losses
sustained by the said William Trent, and the Indian traders, aforesaid, by the
depredations of the Shawnesse, Delaware, and Huron tribes of Indians,
aforesaid, in the aforesaid year One Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-three:

Now this indenture witnesses, That we the said Abraham, Sennghois,
Saquarisera, Chenaugheata, Tagaaia, and Gaustarax, (chiefs and sachems of the
said Six United Nations, and being and effectually, as aforesaid, representing
all the tribes of the Six United Nations) for and in consideration of the sum
of eighty-five thousand nine hundred and sixteen pounds ten shillings and eight
pence, lawful money of the province of New York, (the same being the amount of
the goods and merchandise, which were unjustly seized and taken, as aforesaid,
by the Shawnesse, Delaware, and Huron tribes of Indians, aforesaid, from the
said William Trent, Robert Callender, David Franks, Joseph Simons, Levy Andrew
Levy, Philip Boil, John Baynton, Samuel Wharton, George Morgan, Joseph Spear,
Thomas Smallman, Samuel Wharton administrator of John Welsh, deceased; Edmund
Moran, Evan Shelby, Samuel Postlethwait, John Gibson, Richard Winston, Dennis
Crohon, William Thompson, Abraham Mitchel, James Dundas, Thomas Dundas, and
John Ormsby, in the aforesaid year, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Sixty-three,
whereof just and fair accounts have, on oath and affirmation, been produced,
interpreted, and explained to us; and which, at our desire, are now lodged and
deposited with the said Sir William Johnson, baronet: And for and in
consideration of the sum of five shillings lawful money, aforesaid, to us in
hand paid by the said William Trent, the receipt whereof we do hereby
acknowledge, do give, grant, bargain, and sell unto his said majesty, his heirs
and successors, to and for the only use, benefit, and behoof of the said
William Trent, in his own right, and as attorney aforesaid; all that tract or
parcel of land, beginning at the southerly side of the mouth of Little Kenbawa
Creek, where it empties itself into the river Ohio, and running from thence
south-east to the Laurel Hill, thence along the Laurel Hill until it strikes
the river Monongehela, thence down the stream of the said river Monongehela,
according to the several courses thereof, to the southern boundary line of the
province of Pennsylvania; thence westerly, along the course of the said
province boundary line, as far as the same shall extend, and from thence by the
same course to the river Ohio, thence down the said river Ohio, according to
the several courses thereof, to the place of beginning; together with all and
singular the trees, woods, under-woods, mines, minerals, ores, waters,
watercourse, fishings, fowlings, huntings, profits, commodities, advantages,
rights, liberties, privileges, hereditaments, and appurtenances whatsoever, to
the said tract or parcel of land belonging, or in any ways appertaining; or
which now are, or formerly have been accepted, reputed, taken, known, used,
occupied, or enjoyed, to or with the same, or as part, parcel, or member
thereof, and the reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders, rents,
issues, and profits, of all and singular the said premises above mentioned, and
every part or parcel thereof, with the appurtenances: And also all the estate,
right, title, interest, property, claim, and demand whatsoever; whether native,
legal, or equitable, of us the said Indians, and each and every of us, and of
all and every other person and persons whatsoever, of or belonging to the said
Nations, of, in, to, and out of, all and singular the premises above mentioned;
and of, in, to, and out of, every part and parcel thereof, with the
appurtenances; to have and to hold, all and singular the said tract, parcel and
parcels of land, given, granted, and bargained premises, with their
appurtenances, unto his said majesty king George the Third, his heirs and
successors, but to and for the only use, benefit, and behoof of the said
William Trent, in his own right, and as attorney aforesaid, his heirs and
assigns for ever: And the said Abraham, Sennghois, Saquarisera, Chenaugheata,
Tagaaia, and Gaustarax, for themselves, and for the Six United Nations, and all
and every other nation and nations, tribes, tributaries, and dependants on the
said Six United Nations, and their and every of their posterities, the said
tract and parcel of land and premises, and every part thereof, against them,
the said Abraham, Sennghois, Saquarisera, Chenaugheata, Tagaaia, and Gaustarax;
and against the said Six United Nations, and their tributaries and dependants,
and all and every of their posterities; to his said majesty, his heirs and
successors, but to and for the only use, benefit, and behoof of the said
William Trent, in his own right, and as attorney aforesaid, his heirs and
assigns, shall and will warrant, and for ever defend by these presents: In
witness whereof, we, the said chiefs and sachems, in behalf of ourselves
respectively, and in behalf of the whole Six United Nations aforesaid, have
hereunto set our hands and seals, in the presence of the persons subscribing as
witnesses hereunto, at a congress held at Fort Stanwix aforesaid, this third
day of November, in the ninth year of his majesty's reign, and in the year of
our Lord one thousand seven hundred and sixty-eight.

Abraham, or Tyahanesera, chief of The mark of his nation. (L.S.) the Mohawks.
The steel. William, or Sennghois, chief of The mark of his nation. (L.S.) the
Oneidas, The stone. Hendrick, or Saquarisera, chief of The mark of his nation.
(L.S.) the Tuscaroras. The cross. Bunt, or Chenaugheata, chief of The mark of
his nation. (L.S) the Onondagas. The mountain. Tagaaia, chief of The mark of
his nation. (L.S.) the Cayugas. The pipe. Gaustarax, chief of The mark of his
nation. (L.S.) the Senecas. The high hill.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of us
William Franklin, governor of New Jersey. Frederick Smyth, chief justice of
New Jersey. Thomas Walker, commissioner for Virginia. Richard Peter's, of the
council of Pennsylvania. James Tilghman, of the council of Pennsylvania. John
Skinner, capt. in the 70 th regiment. Joseph Chew, of Connecticut. John
Weatherhead, of New York. John Walker, of Virginia. E. Fitch, of Connecticut.
Thomas Walker, jun. of Virginia. John Butler, interpreter for the crown.
On the seventh day of January, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven
hundred and sixty-nine, before me Isaac Jones, esquire, mayor of the city of
Philadelphia, came the reverend Richard Peter's rector of the two united
churches of Christ Church and St. Peter's, in Philadelphia, one of the
subscribing witnesses to the within-written deed, and made oath on the Holy
Evangelists of Almighty God, that he was present, and did see the within-named
Abraham, or Tyahanesera, a chief of the Mohawks; William, or Sennghois, a chief
of the Oneidas; Hendrick; or Saquarisera, a chief of the Tuscaroras; Bunt, or
Chenaugheata, a chief of the Onondagas; Tagaaia, a chief of the Cayugas; and
Gaustarax, a chief of the Senecas, make the several marks in the within-written
deed, against their respective names, placed as the particular mark of each
nation; and did also see the said Abraham, or Tyahanesera; William, or
Sennghois; Hendrick, or Saquarisera; Bunt, or Chenaugheata; Tagaaia, and
Gaustarax, respectively seal, and, as their act and deed, deliver in behalf of
themselves, and the several nations which they effectually represented, the
within-written deed poll; and that the name Richard Peter's, subscribed thereto
as a witness of the same, is of his own handwriting: And also, that the said
Richard Peter's saw W. Franklin, governor of New Jersey; Fred. Smyth, chief
justice of New Jersey; Thomas Walker, commissioner for Virginia; James
Tilghman, of the council of Pennsylvania; John Skinner, capt. in the 70th
regiment; Joseph Chew, of Connecticut; John Walker, of Virginia; E. Fitch, of
Connecticut; Thomas Walker, jun. of Virginia; John Butler, interpreter for the
crown; subscribe their names as witnesses likewise to the signing, sealing, and
delivery of the within-written deed poll. Witness my hand and seal, the day and
year aforesaid.

I. JONES. (L. S.)

Minutes of the Congress at Fort Stanwix, in 1768.
AT a general congress held with the Six Nations, Shawnesse, Delawares, Senecas
of Ohio, and their Dependants, at Fort Stanwix, October 26, 1768.

PRESENT,

The Hon. Sir William Johnson, Bart. Superintendant of Indian affairs. His
Excellency William Franklin, Esquire Governor of the Province of New Jersey. Thomas
Walker, Esquire Commissioner from the Colony of Virginia. Hon. Frederick Smyth,
Chief Justice of New Jersey. Richard Peter's and James Tilghman, Esqrs.
Commissioners from the Province of Pennsylvania. George Croghan, Daniel Clause,
Esqrs. Deputy Agents of Indian Affairs. Guy Johnson, Esquire Deputy Agent, and
Secretary of Indian affairs; with sundry other gentlemen from the different
Colonies. Interpreters for the Crown.
John Butler, Esquire Mr. Andrew Montour, Philip Philips,

Indian Chiefs PRESENT,
Mohawks. Onondagas. Senecas. Abraham, The Bunt, Gaustarax, Kanadagaya,
Tewaruit, Onongot, etc. etc. etc. Kendrick, Diaguanda, Aroghiadecka,
Tawashughti, etc. etc. etc. Kayenqueregoa, Tobarihoga, Onohario, etc. etc. etc.

Oneidas. Cajugas. Tuscaroras. Ganaghquieson, Tagaaia, Saquarisera,
Nicholasera, Skanarady, Kanigot, Senughsis, Atrawawna, etc. etc. etc.
Tyagawehe, etc. etc. etc. Gajuheta, Tagawaron, etc. etc. etc.

Mingos of Ohio. Shawnesse. Delawares. Benevissica. Killbuck, Turtleheart. etc.
etc. etc.

BRETHREN,

Hearken to me, who have good words to speak to you, such as are for the
benefit of your whole confederacy, and of your children yet unborn.

You all remember, that three years ago I signified to you his Majesty's desire
to establish a boundary line between his people and yours; and that we then
agreed together, how some part of that line should run, whenever the same came
to be settled.

You all, I am hopeful, recollect the reasons I then gave you for making such a
boundary; nevertheless, I shall again repeat them: -- You know, brethren, that
the encroachments upon your lands have been always one of your principal
subjects of complaint; and that, so far as it could be done, endeavors have
not been wanting for your obtaining redress. But it was a difficult task, and
generally unsuccessful; for although the provinces have bounds between each
other, there are no certain bounds between them and you; and thereby, not only
several of our people, ignorant in Indian affairs, have advanced to far into
your country, but also many of your own people, through the want of such a
line, have been deceived in the sales they have made, or in the limits they
have set to our respective claims. -- This, brethren, is a sad case, which has
frequently given us much trouble, and turned many of your heads; but it is
likely to continue so, until some bounds are agreed to, fixed upon, and made
public between us. -- The great, the good king of England, my master, whose
friendship and tender regard for your interests I wish you may ever hold in
remembrance, has, amongst other instances of his goodness, after long
deliberation on some means for your relief, and for preventing future disputes
concerning lands, at length resolved upon fixing a general boundary line
between his subjects and you, and that in such a manner as shall be most
agreeable to you; in consequence of which, I have received his royal commands
to call you together for the establishment thereof; and after conferring with
the governments interested hereupon, you now see before you the governor of the
Jerseys, the commissioners on behalf of Aseregoa, governor of Virginia, and
commissioners from Pennsylvania, in order to give you the strongest assurances
on behalf of their respective governments, of their resolutions to pay due
regard to what shall be now entered into: the presence of so many great men
will give a sanction to the transaction, and cause the same to be known as far
as the English name extends. -- His Majesty has directed me to give you a
handsome proof of his generosity, proportioned to the nature and extent of what
lands shall fall to him. -- Upon the whole, I hope that your deliberations will
be unanimous, and your resolutions such as his majesty may consider as proofs
of your gratitude for all his favors. A fine new Belt.

The importance of this affair now before us, requires the most serious
attention; I will not burden you with any other subject until this is
generally settled; and therefore we shall adjourn, that you may have time to
think of it, and come fully prepared to give an agreeable answer.

Then Abraham, Chief of the Mohawks, after repeating what Sir William had said,
addressed him,

BROTHER,

We give you thanks for what you have said to us at this time; it is a weighty
affair, and we shall, agreeable to your desire, take it into our most serious
consideration. We are glad that so many great men are assembled to bear witness
of the transaction; and we are now resolved to retire and consult on a proper
answer to be given to all you have said; and so soon as we have agreed upon it,
we shall give you notice, that we may again assemble and make it known to you;
and we are all much obliged to you, that you have directed us to attend to this
great affair alone at this time, that our minds might not be burdened or
diverted from it by attending to any thing else.

AT a general congress held at Fort Stanwix with the Six Nations and other
Indians, on Tuesday November the 1st, 1768.

PRESENT as at the former Meeting.

The Indians being all seated, they desired to know, whether Sir William was
prepared to hear them; and on being answered in the affirmative, the speaker
stood up, and spoke as follows:

BROTHER,

We are hopeful that you will not take it amiss that we have delayed till now
our public answer on the subject you recommended to us; this was a great, and
weighty matter, requiring long deliberation, and should not be undertaken
lightly; we have accordingly considered it, and are now come to give you our
final resolutions thereon, to which we beg your attention.

BROTHER,

We remember, that on our first meeting with you, when you came with your ship,
we kindly received you, entertained you, and entered into an alliance with you,
though we were then great and numerous, and your people inconsiderable and
weak; and we know that we entered into a covenant-chain of bark with you, and
fastened your ship therewith; but being apprehensive the bark would break, and
your ship be lost, we made one of iron, and held it fast, that it should not
slip from us; but perceiving the former chain was liable to rust, we made a
silver chain to guard against it. -- Then, Brother, you arose, renewed that
chain, which began to look dull, and have for many years taken care of our
affairs by the command of the great King, and you, by your labors, have
polished that chain; so that it has looked bright, and is become known to all
nations; for all which we shall ever regard you, and we are thankful to you, in
that you have taken such care of these great affairs, of which we are always
mindful, and we do now, on our parts, renew and strengthen the covenant chain,
by which we will abide, so long as you shall preserve it strong and bright on
your part. A Belt.

BROTHER,

We are glad that you have opened the rivers and cleared the roads, as it is so
necessary to us both. We were promised, that, when the war was over, we should
have trade in plenty, goods cheap, and honest men to deal with us; and that we
should have proper persons to manage all this. -- We hope, that these promises
will never be forgot, but that they will be fully performed, that we shall feel
the benefits of an intercourse between us; -- that the roads and waters may be
free and open to us all, to go to the southward, or for our friends from
thence, with whom we are now at peace, to visit us; that we may have proper
persons in our countries to manage affairs, and smiths to mend our arms and
implements; and in the expectation of this, we do now, on our parts, open the
roads and waters, and promise to assist in keeping them so.

A Belt.

Then, after repeating all that had been said concerning the line, the speaker
proceeded.

BROTHER,

We have long considered this proposal for a boundary between us, and we think
it will be of good consequence, if you, or your parts, pay a due regard to it;
and we, in consequence thereof, have had sundry meetings amongst ourselves and
with you; and from all that you have said to us thereon, we have at length come
to a final resolution concerning it, and we hope that what is now agreed upon
shall be inviolably observed on your parts, as we are determined it shall be on
ours; and that no further attempts will be made on our lands, but that this
line be considered as final; and we do now agree to the line we have marked
upon your map, now before you, on certain conditions on which we have spoken,
and shall say more; and we desire that one article of this our agreement be,
that none of the provinces, or their people, shall attempt to invade it, under
color of any old deeds, or other pretenses whatsoever; for in many of these
things we have been imposed on, and therefore we disclaim them all. Which
bounds, now agreed to, we begin on the Ohio, at the mouth of the Cherokee
river, which is now our just right; and from thence we go up, on the south side
of the Ohio, to Kittaning* above Fort Pit, from thence a direct line to the
nearest fork of the west branch of Sasquehanna, thence through the Allegany
mountains, along the south side of the said west branch, till we come opposite
to the mouth of the creek called Tiadaghton; thence across the west branch, and
along the east side of that creek, and along the ridge of Burnets hills, to a
creek called Awandae, thence down the same to the east branch of Sasquehanna,
and across the same, and up the east side of that river to Owegy; from thence
eastward to Delaware river, and up that river to opposite where Tianaderrah
falls into Sasquehanna; thence to Tianaderrah, and up the west side thereof,
and its west branch, to the head thereof; thence by a straight line to the
mouth of Canada Creek, where it empties itself into Wood Creek, at the end of
the long carrying-place beyond Fort Stanwix. And this we declare to be our
final resolves, and we expect that the conditions of this our grant will be
observed. A Belt.

BROTHER,

Now as we have made so large a cession to the king of such a valuable and
extensive country, we do expect it as the terms of our agreement, that strict
regard be paid to all our reasonable desires. -- We do now, on this case, on
behalf and in the name of all our warriors of every nation, -- CONDITION, that
our warriors shall have the liberty of hunting throughout the country, as they
have no other means of subsistence; and as your people have not the same
occasions or inclinations, that the white people be restricted from hunting on
our side of the line, to prevent contention between us. A Belt.

BROTHER,

By this Belt we address ourselves to the great king of England, through you
our superintendant, in the name and in behalf of all the Six Nations,
Shawnesse, Delawares, and all other our friends, allies, and dependants; we now
tell the king, that we have given to him a great and valuable country; and we
know, that what we shall now get for it must be far short of its value: we make
it a condition of this our agreement concerning the line, that his majesty will
not forget or neglect to show us his favor, or suffer the chain to contract
rust; but that he will direct those who have the management of our affairs to
be punctual in renewing our ancient agreements: -- That as the Mohawks are now
within the line which we give to the king, and that these people are the true
old heads of the whole confederacy, their several villages, and all the land
they occupy, unpatented about them, as also the residences of any other of our
confederacy affected by this cession, shall be considered as their sole
property, and at their disposal, both now and so long as the sun shines; and
that all grants or engagements they have now or lately entered into, shall be
considered as independent of this boundary This Related to lands on the
Sasquehanna. etc.
; so that they, who have so little left, may not lose the benefit of the sale
of it; but that the people, with whom they have agreed, may have the land. We
likewise further condition, on behalf of all the Six Nations, and of all our
allies, friends, and nephews, our dependants, that as we have experienced how
difficult it is to get justice, or to make our complaints known, and that it is
not in the power of our superintendant to take care of our affairs in different
places without the king's help, that his majesty will give him help and
strength to do us justice, and to manage our affairs in a proper manner. We all
know the want of this, and we make it a point of great consequence, on which
this our present agreement is to depend, and without which, affairs will go
wrong, and our heads may be turned.

BROTHER,

We likewise desire, that as we have now given up a great deal of lands within
the bounds that Mr. Penn claimed a right of buying Mr. Penn claimed this
pre-emtion in virtue of King Charles's charter to him, of the 4th of March
1681; and of an act of assembly of Pennsylvania passed in 1700, prohibiting all
persons, except himself and his heirs, from buying any lands from the natives
within the limits thereof.
, that he may, in consequence of the agreement The proprietors of Pennsylvania
bought of the Six Nations a large tract of country at this Congress, and on
receiving their deed of conveyance for the same, the said proprietors paid the
Six Nations 10,000 Spanish milled dollars; being the consideration-money for
the said tract.
now entered into between us, enjoy what we have given within them limits. And
as we know, that Lydius of Albany did, in the name of several persons, lay
claim to lands in Pennsylvania, which we know to be unjust; and that the deeds
he pretends a right to were invalid, we expect that no regard will be paid to
them, or any such claims, now or hereafter; as we have fairly sold them to the
proprietors of Pennsylvania, to whom alone we shall sell lands within that
province; and we shall now give them a deed for that and other lands there. --
And in order to show that we love justice, we expect, -- the traders who
suffered by some of our dependants in the wars five years ago, may have a grant
for the lands we now give them down Ohio, as a satisfaction for their losses;
-- and as our friend Mr. Croghan long ago got a deed for lands from us, which
may now be taken into Mr. Penn's lands; should it so happen, we request that it
may be considered, and that he may get as much from the king somewhere else, as
he fairly bought it. -- And as we have given enough to show our love for the
king, and make his people easy, in the next place, we expect, that no old
claims, which we disavow, or new encroachments may be allowed of.

BROTHER,

We have now gone through this matter, and we have shown ourselves ready to
give the King whatever we could reasonably spare; we, on our parts, express our
regard for him, and we hope for his favor in return. -- Our words are strong
and our resolutions firm, and we expect that our requests will be complied
with, inasmuch as we have so generously complied with all that has been
desired, as far as was consistent with our interest. A Belt.

AT a general congress held at Fort Stanwix with the Six Nations, and other
Indians, on Friday, November 4, 1768.

PRESENT, as at the former Meeting.

Sir William, at the desire of the gentlemen commissioners from Pennsylvania,
acquainted the Indians, that they, the commissioners, had a present ready to
the amount of five hundred dollars, to give in full satisfaction of the
Conostoga lands, which, by the death of that people, became vested in the
proprietors. That they freely gave this sum, as a farther proof of the regard
of that province for them, and of their concern for the unhappy fate of the
Conostogas. Then Sir William told the Indians, that as the proprietaries did
not know, whether they would choose money or goods for the addition of land to
Pennsylvania, they were then unprovided; but that Sir William Johnson would be
answerable for the speedy payment of the purchase, and would propose to them,
either to receive it in money, to be sent on the commissioners return, or in
goods, as speedy as possible, or to wait till the next spring, by which time
they could have goods better, and more for the same money from England, which
was submitted to their determination.

As it grew late, Sir William dismissed the Indians till the next day, when
they were to subscribe to the deed of cession, and receive the consideration.

At night the chiefs came to Sir William, and told him, that they had
considered the proposal made by the commissioners of Pennsylvania, and they
preferred the receiving the purchase in cash, as the speediest payment; which
was agreed to, and security given, that the same should be paid in six weeks.

AT a congress with the several Nations, Saturday, November 5, 1768.

PRESENT, as before.

The deed to his majesty, that to the proprietors of Pennsylvania, with that to
the traders, being then laid on the table, were executed, in the presence of
the governor, commissioners, and the rest of the gentlemen.

After which, the chiefs of each nation received the cash, which was piled on a
table for that purpose, and then proceeded to divide the goods amongst their
people, which occupied the remainder of that day.

P. M. The governor and commissioners took leave, and returned to their
respective provinces; and that night Sir William took leave of the chiefs,
recommending it to them to remember what had been then transacted, and
cautioning them against committing any disorders at their departure, but to
pack up their goods, and return home in peace and good order.

TO all to whom these presents shall come, or may concern: We the sachems and
chiefs of the Six Confederate Nations, and of the Shawnesse, Delawares, Mingoes
of Ohio, and other dependant tribes, on behalf of ourselves and of the rest of
our several nations, the chiefs and warriors of whom are now here convened by
Sir William Johnson, baronet, his majesty's superintendant of our affairs, send
greeting:

WHEREAS his majesty was graciously pleased to propose to us in the year one
thousand seven hundred and sixty-five, that a boundary line should be fixed
between the English and us, to ascertain and establish our limits, and prevent
those intrusions and encroachments, of which we had so long and loudly
complained; and to put a stop to the many fraudulent advantages which had been
so often taken of us; which boundary appearing to us as a wise and good
measure, we did then agree to a part of a line, and promised to settle the
whole finally, whenever Sir William Johnson should be fully empowered to
treat with us for that purpose:

AND WHEREAS his said majesty has at length given Sir William Johnson orders to
complete the said boundary line between the provinces and Indians; in
conformity to which orders, Sir William Johnson has convened the chiefs and
warriors of our respective nations, who are the true and absolute proprietors
of the lands in question, and who are here now to a very considerable number:

AND WHEREAS many uneasinesses and doubts have arisen amongst us, which have
given rise to an apprehension that the line may not be strictly observed on the
part of the English, in which case matters may be worse than before; which
apprehension, together with the dependant state of some of our tribes, and
other circumstances, retarded the settlement, and became the subject of some
debate; Sir William Johnson has at length so far satisfied us upon it, as to
induce us to come to an agreement concerning the line, which is now brought to
a conclusion, the whole being fully explained to us in a large assembly of our
people, before Sir William Johnson, and in the presence of his excellency the
governor of New Jersey, the commissioners from the provinces of Virginia and
Pennsylvania, and sundry other gentlemen; by which line, so agreed upon, a
considerable tract of country along several provinces, is by us ceded to his
said majesty, which we are induced to, and do hereby ratify and confirm to his
said majesty, FROM THE EXPECTATION and CONFIDENCE we place in his royal
goodness, that he will GRACIOUSLY COMPLY with our HUMBLE REQUESTS, AS THE SAME
ARE EXPRESSED IN THE SPEECH OF THE SEVERAL NATIONS See page 27, 28, 29, 30, 31,
32, 33.
, ADDRESSED TO HIS MAJESTY, through SIR WILLIAM JOHNSON, ON TUESDAY, THE FIRST
DAY OF THE PRESENT MONTH OF NOVEMBER; wherein we have DECLARED OUR EXPECTATIONS
of the continuance of his majesty's favor, and our desire that our ancient
engagements be observed, and our affairs attended to by the officer who has the
management thereof, enabling him to discharge all the matters properly for our
interest: That the lands occupied by the Mohawks around their villages, as well
as by any other nation affected by this our cession, may effectually remain to
them, and to their posterity; and that any engagements regarding property,
which they may now be under, may be prosecuted, AND OUR PRESENT GRANTS The
grants they then made, and which are here alluded to, were as follows: one to
Mr. Tent; -- one to George Croghan, esquire; -- and one Messrs. Penns,
proprietors of the province of Pennsylvania.
DEEMED VALID on our parts, with the several other humble requests contained in
our said speech:

AND WHEREAS at the settling of the said line, it appeared that the line
described by his majesty's order, was not extended to the northward of Owegy,
or to the southward of Great Kanhawa river; we have agreed to, and continued
the line to the northward, on a supposition that it was omitted, by reason of
our not having come to any determination concerning its course, at the congress
held in one thousand seven hundred and sixty-five See page 3.
: -- And inasmuch as the line to the northward, became the most necessary of
any, for preventing encroachments, on our very towns and residences; and we
have given this line more favorably to Pennsylvania, for the reasons and
considerations mentioned in the treaty: -- We have likewise continued it south
to the Cherokee river, because the same is, and we do declare it to be our true
bounds with the southern Indians, and that we have an undoubted right to the
country as far south as that river, which makes our cession to his majesty much
more advantageous than that proposed: Now, therefore, Know Ye, that we the
sachems and chiefs aforementioned, native Indians and proprietors of the lands
hereafter described, for and in behalf of ourselves and the whole of our
confederacy, FOR THE CONSIDERATIONS HEREIN before mentioned, and also for and
in consideration of a valuable present of the several articles in use amongst
Indians, which, together with a large sum of money, amounts, in the whole, to
the sum of ten thousand four hundred and sixty pounds seven shillings and three
pence sterling, to us now delivered, and paid by Sir William Johnson, baronet,
his majesty's sole agent and superintendant of Indian affairs, for the northern
department of America, in the name and behalf of our sovereign lord George the
Third, by the grace of God, of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, king,
defender of the faith; the receipt whereof we do hereby acknowledge; we the
said Indians, have for us, our heirs and successors, granted, bargained, sold,
released, and confirmed; and by these presents, do grant, bargain, sell,
release and confirm, unto our said sovereign lord king George the Third, all
that tract of land situate in North America, at the back of the British
settlements, bounded by a line which we have now agreed upon, and do hereby
establish as the BOUNDARY between us and the British colonies in America;
beginning at the mouth of the Cherokee or Hogohege river, where it empties into
the river Ohio, and running from thence upwards along the south side of the
said river, to Kittaning, which is above Fort Pit; from thence by a direct
line to the nearest fork of the west branch of Sasquehanna, thence through the
Allegany mountains, along the south side of the said west branch, till it comes
opposite to the mouth of a creek called Tiadaghton; thence across the west
branch and along the south side of that creek, and along the north side of
Burnet's Hills, to a creek, called Awandae; thence down the same to the east
branch of Sasquehanna, and across the same, and up the east side of that river,
to Owegy; from thence east to Delaware River, and up that river to opposite
were Tianaderha falls into Sasquehanna; thence to Tianaderha, and up the west
side thereof and the west side of its west branch, to the head thereof; and
thence by a direct line to Canada Creek, where it empties into Wood Creek, at
the west end of the Carrying Place beyond Fort Stanwix; and extending eastward
from every part of the said line, as far as the lands formerly purchased, so as
to comprehend the whole of the lands between the said line, and the purchased
lands or settlements, except what is within the province of Pennsylvania;
together with all the hereditaments and appurtenances to the same belonging or
appertaining, in the fullest and most ample manner; and all the estate, right,
title, interest, property, possession, benefit, claim, and demand, either in
law or equity, of each and every of us, of, in, or to the same, or any part
thereof; To have and to hold the whole lands and premises hereby granted,
bargained, sold, released, and confirmed as aforesaid, with the hereditaments
and appurtenances thereunto belonging; under the reservations made in the
treaty, unto our said sovereign lord king George the Third, his heirs and
successors, to and for his and their own proper use and behoof, for ever. In
witness whereof, we the chiefs of the confederacy, have hereunto set our marks
and seals, at Fort Stanwix, the fifth day of November, one thousand seven
hundred and sixty-eight, in the ninth year of his majesty's reign.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of us.

Counselor DAGGE's Opinion on the Indian Grant of Lands to William Trent, and
others, viz.
THE writers on jurisprudence agree in the proposition that the original right
to all kinds of property arose from pre-occupancy, and that in a state of
nature every one might possess himself of, and retain any vacant subject.

The first occupant had a right to grant, cede, or transfer the subject he had
possessed himself of, to such persons, and upon such terms, as he thought
proper; and if before such grant, cession or transfer the occupant died, his
property descended to his children. The right of transmitting property always
resided in the owner, and civil institutions only prescribed the mode of
carrying that right into effect.

In that period of society when countries were formed, and their boundaries
fixed, we find that different districts were appropriated to the native owners,
the first occupants, or in case of vacant or derelict lands, to the first
discoverers. From those original proprietors each country was transmitted to
other proprietors, by the consent or by the conquest of the present owners.

In the case under consideration, I am of opinion that the Indians of the Six
Nations appear to have been entitled to the lands in question from
pre-occupancy, or from conquest, but however their right accrued, they are
acknowledged in express words by the deed of cession to the crown, made at Fort
Stanwix, November 5th, 1768, to have been at that time the true and absolute
proprietors of the lands in question; and so they were also acknowledged to be
in the public negociations between England and France, in the year 1755, and
so also, as is stated in the case, several treaties of peace and commerce
entered into with particular nations or tribes of Indians by the English
nation, consider and treat the natives or occupiers as the lawful possessors
and owners of the countries they respectively occupy.

The deed of cession to the crown, on the 5th of November, 1768, was made in
consideration of L 10, 460:7:3 sterling, then paid to the Six United Nations,
and for other considerations mentioned and expressed in that deed and the
treaties previous and preparatory to it.

This deed of cession, the conveyance to Mr. Trent, and the treaties in 1765
and 1768, must be considered together, as they all tend to illustrate the whole
transaction, and explain the intention of the contracting parties: And taking
the whole under consideration, it appears -- That the Six United Nations were
truly sensible of the great loss the traders had sustained by the treachery and
depredations of some of their tributary or dependant tribes -- That a
requisition was made to the Six United Nations in May 1765 for a grant of land
by way of compensating in some measure for the damages the traders had
sustained by the depredations of their dependants or tributary Indians -- That
the Six Nations, after deliberating from the 2d of May, when this requisition
was made, to the 6th of May, they agreed that the request of the traders should
be complied with, and that they would grant them some lands near Fort Pit.
That at the congress and treaty in November 1768, held at Fort Stanwix, the
chiefs and sachems of the Six United Nations again took this matter under their
consideration, and upon the first day of that month expressly declared, that in
order to show that they loved justice, they expected, that the traders who
suffered by some of their dependants in the war five years since, might have a
grant for the lands they then gave them down Ohio, as a satisfaction for their
losses.

On the 3d day of the same month of November, the Six Nations, by their sachems
and chiefs, executed the conveyance to Mr. Trent; which proceeds upon a
recital, that he had been empowered by several letters of attorney from the
suffering traders named in the said deed, to ask, solicit, demand and receive
from the Six Nations a grant of a tract of land as a satisfaction, compensation
or retribution for the goods, merchandise and effects of the said William
Trent, and of the said several traders which the said Shawnesse, Delaware and
Huron tribes, tributaries of the said Six Nations (contrary to all good faith,
and in violation of their repeated promises of safety and protection to the
traders, their servants and effects, while trading in their country) did
violently seize upon, and unjustly appropriate to their own use. -- The deed
then declares, that in consideration of the Sum of L 85, 916:1:8, lawful money
of the province of New York, the same being the amount of the goods and
merchandise which were unjustly seized and taken from the traders as aforesaid,
whereof just and fair accounts on oath and affirmation had been produced,
interpreted and explained to them, and which at their desire were then lodged
and deposited with the said Sir William Johnson. -- The chiefs and sachems of
the said Six United Nations, for the said considerations, and in consideration
of five shillings, did give, grant, bargain and sell unto his majesty, his
heirs and successors, to and for the only use, benefit and behoof of the said
William Trent, in his own right, and as attorney aforesaid, all that tract of
land described in the conveyance. To hold unto his majesty, his heirs and
successors, but to and for the only use, benefit and behoof of the said William
Trent, in his own right, and as attorney aforesaid, his heirs and assigns for
ever. This deed of conveyance seems to have been executed in the most public
manner, in the presence of the king's governor of New Jersey, and the
commissioners from Virginia and Pennsylvania, and several other persons who
attended the congress, and attested the execution of this conveyance, which by
that means received every degree of solemnity and sanction.

On the 5th day of the same month of November, 1768, the said chiefs and
sachems executed their deed of cession to his majesty, of a large tract of
country upon the river Ohio. In this deed of cession the Indians expressly
stipulate that their present grants [which words are explained in the minutes
of congress of November 5th, where the traders deed is mentioned with the other
grants then made] should be deemed valid on their parts, and they convey to the
king, not only in consideration of the present then made, and the money then
paid by the king, amounting to L 10,460:10:3, but also for the other
considerations in the deed before mentioned -- And the Habendum is to the king,
his heirs and successors, under the reservation made in the treaty -- So that
the deed of cession to the king virtually confirms the conveyance to Mr. Trent.
Upon the whole, I am of opinion, that Mr. Trent, in his own right, and as
attorney for the traders, has a good, lawful and sufficient title to the land
granted by the said deed of conveyance, subject only to the king's sovereignty
over the settlements to be established thereon, and over the inhabitants, as
English subjects.

Lincolns Inn, 20 th March, 1775. (Signed) HENRY DAGGE.

Sergeant GLYNN's Opinion.
I Entirely concur with Mr. Dagge in his opinion on this case. The property of
the soil conveyed to Mr Trent, for himself and as attorney, was certainly in
the Six Nations, and as incident to that property, they had a power of
alienating and transferring in any manner, or to any persons, unless they had
been restrained by their own laws.

In this case the supreme power of the country resided in the sellers, who had
therefore an absolute power of alienating; and the transaction being fair and
open, and for the express purpose of doing an act of public justice, must bind
the Six Nations in good faith. If we suppose, that the sovereignty of the land
still remained in the Six Nations, the property of the soil must be in the
grantee Mr. Trent, and cannot without violence and injustice be taken from him.
The very act however of the sovereign power of the Six Nations admits a
capacity in the grantee, to take under the deed, according to their laws, or
usage, and there is no law, that I ever heard of, that restrains the subjects
of the crown of England from purchasing in foreign dominions. The intention of
the parties here appears to have been to transfer the sovereignty to the crown
of England by the same instrument whereby the land was conveyed. If that
transfer of the sovereignty is effectual, it passed, and is confirmed by the
deed of cession to the crown, dated two days after; but subject, however, to
all the antecedent rights of property, the crown being entitled only to the
immediate property of vacant and unappropriated lands; but in this case the
lands are abandoned by the proprietors, and conveyed to the grantee. -- If the
crown had an original sovereignty, still the soil being the property of the Six
Nations, they and their alienee should be protected by that sovereignty in
their property. If the crown acquired the sovereignty by the grant to Mr.
Trent, or by the deed of cession, the title of the grantee is then under the
protection of the laws of England.

Upon the whole, I am of opinion, that in every way of considering this case,
the grant to Mr. Trent is good, sufficient and lawful; and is under the
protection of the laws of England.

Sergeants Inn, April 13 th, 1775. (Signed) JOHN GLYNN.

HAVING long since carefully studied these points, I concur fully with
Counselor Dagge and Sergeant Glynn in their opinions as above delivered.

Philadelphia, July 12 th, 1775. (Signed) B. FRANKLIN.

FROM principles which appear to me very clear, I concur in the above opinions.

Philadelphia, July 29 th, 1775. (Signed) P. HENRY, jun.


