The Christian Soldier's Duty Briefly delineated: IN A SERMON Preached at
KING's-BRIDGE, SEPTEMBER 7, 1777, BEFORE The AMERICAN CORPSE newly raised For
His MAJESTY'S Service.

By CHARLES INGLIS, A. M. RECTOR OF TRINITY CHURCH, NEW YORK,

PUBLISHED BY PARTICULAR DESIRE.

NEW YORK: Printed by H. GAIN, at the Bible and Crown in Hanover-Square.

TO His Excellency WILLIAM TRYON, Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief Of
the Province of New York, etc. Major General, etc. In Testimony of Respect For
DISTINGUISHED MERIT; And of unfeigned Esteem For VIRTUES, which however
conspicuous before, Were more fully displayed During the present wanton
Rebellion, By a steady and successful OPPOSITION to its Progress, Amidst
various Difficulties, By vigorous EFFORTS to suppress it, And By diffusive
MUNIFICENCE to Sufferers For the Cause of Loyalty: The following SERMON,
Published by Desire of His EXCELLENCY, And of those very worthy Gentlemen The
FIELD OFFICERS who were present When it was preached, Is Humbly inscribed.

New York, Sept. 24, 1777.
LUKE III. 14. And the Soldiers likewise demanded of him -- And what shall we
do? And he said to them, Do Violence to no Man, neither accuse any falsely, but
be content with your Wages.
AMONG a great Variety of Circumstances which the ancient Prophecies declared
would mark the Advent of the Messiah; one was, That he should be ushered in,
and his Presence announced, by a Messenger, who was to come in the Power and
Spirit of Elias, and prepare the Way before him.

THUS the Almighty, when silencing the Cavils that were then raised by
Infidelity against his Providence, and affording Consolation to the Faithful
and Pious, declares by the Prophet Malachi, -- Behold, I will send my
Messenger, and he shall prepare the Way before me; and the Lord whom ye seek,
shall suddenly come to his Temple. MALA. III. 1.


To the same Purpose, the sublime and evangelical Prophet Isaiah, pointing out
the Circumstances preparatory to our Savior's Appearance -- says -- The Voice
of him that cries in the Wilderness, prepare ye the Way of the Lord, make
straight in the Desert a Highway for our God. Every Valley shall be exalted,
and every Mountain and Hill shall be made low; and the crooked shall be made
straight, and the rough Places plain. ISAI. xl. 3, 4. ISAIAH prophesied about
800 Years before our Savior's Incarnation -- MALACHI about 400 -- he was the
last of the ancient Prophets.


THESE Words exhibit to us the Idea of a public Herald; who, at the Approach of
an illustrious Monarch, commands the Ways to be levelled, and every Thing
prepared for his Reception.

THIS metaphorical Language is borrowed from a Custom which may be traced up to
the remotest Antiquity; when Kings sent proper Persons to prepare Roads, and
every Thing else necessary for their March.

THUS it is said of ALEXANDER the Great, by an Author who wrote his History
Arrian.
-- He now marched toward the River Indus, his Army going before, to prepare
the Way for him; for otherwise those Places could not have been passed over.
Thus also JOSEPHUS tells us, when Titus marched to besiege Jerusalem, -- That
there went before him all the Royal Aids, and all the Auxiliaries, and those
who made the Ways plain.

THIS Prophecy of a Voice crying in the Wilderness to prepare the Way of the
Lord, received its literal Accomplishment in John the Baptist, who was the
Forerunner and Harbinger of our blessed Savior.

HE was the Messenger whom the Son of God sent to pepare the Way before him, by
preaching the Doctrine of Repentance and Reformation. The Baptist earnestly
exhorted to the Practice of Justice, Charity, Benevolence, Humility and
Contentment. Hereby Men's Hearts were prepared to receive the Messiah, then
just on the Point of making his public Appearance. Hereby the Valleys were
exalted, Mountains were depressed, and the crooked Places made straight --
which are only figurative Expressions to signify, that the Pride, Self
Righteousness and Iniquities of Man were laid low in the Dust; whilst the
humble and pious were raised to the Smiles and Favor of God. The Perverseness
and Folly of Sin and Error were exposed; those Virtues and Truths were
inculcated, which would remove every Impediment to a full Reception of the
Messiah, -- to an entire Acquiescence in his Dispensation, which was the last
that God would vouchsafe to Mankind.

THE interesting Doctrines taught by John the Baptist -- his Declaration that
"the Kingdom of Heaven," i. e. the Kingdom of the Messiah, "was at Hand" --
these, I say, joined to his extraordinary Sanctity, awakened the Attention of
all Men. They eagerly crowded round him, and anxiously waited to see the Issue
of those remarkable Circumstances. All the People were in Expectation, says the
Evangelist; and all Men mused in their Hearts of John, whether he were the
Christ or not.

THE Prophecies had pointed out this Period for the coming of the Messiah.
Accordingly, there was at this Time an universal Expectation among the Jews,
that the Messiah would shortly appear; as several Writers, Jewish and Heathen,
expressly testify JOSEPHUS, SUETONIUS, TACITUS, etc.
. This partly accounts for the vast Concourse of People which resorted to the
Baptist for Instruction, and to receive his Baptism.

THE Pharisees, the Sadducees, and Publicans came, desiring to be instructed;
and the Baptist wisely adapted his Instructions to their respective Cases.

AMONG others, the Soldiers, likewise demanded of the Baptist -- And what shall
we do? His Answer, which I have chosen for my Text, though suited to the
peculiar Circumstances of those who made the Inquiry, yet when duly explained,
will be found to contain the Duty of every Christian Soldier. Do Violence to no
Man, says the Heaven commissioned Baptist, neither accuse any falsely; but be
content with your Wages. Who those Soldiers were -- whether Heathens or Jews,
is a Point on which Commentators are much divided. As it is not a Matter of
much Consequence, I shall interfere no further than just to mention my Opinion,
and briefly set down the Reasons which support it. I think it is evident that
those Soldiers were not idolatrous Heathens; for had they been such, can we
suppose the Baptist would not, on their desiring his Instructions, exhort them
to renounce Idolatry which was so repugnant to the Spirit of divine Revelation
-- so utterly inconsistent with the Worship of the true God? From their
Attendance on the Baptist's preaching, applying to him for Direction, and
probably submiting to his Baptism, as the Jews did, it appears that those
Soldiers were possessed of the same Principles and Sentiments, with the Jews of
their Time. Hence I conclude they were either Proselytes to the jewish
Religion, such as I suppose CORNELIUS, Acts x. and the two CENTURIONS, Matthew.
viii, and Luke vii, to have been; or else natural born Jews. Judea was at this
Time a Roman Province; and when the State of Things there, during that Period,
is duly considered, there will appear but little Weight in the Objections which
are made against the Supposition that those Soldiers were Jews. The Jews, it is
true, frequently applied for, and obtained, an Exemption from serving in the
Armies of Heathen Princes, on Account of the Difficulties they met with in
observing the Laws relative to the Sabbath, Distinction of Meats, etc. Yet it
is certain the Jews often went into foreign Service. A large Body of Jews
attended the Army of XERXES, when he invaded Greece. Many of them served under
ALEXENDER the Great, in his Asiatic Expeditions. They composed a respectable
Corpse in the Army of PTOLOMY when he retreated from Syria, after the Defeat of
CELLES, his Lieutenant, by DEMETRIUS; and among them was the celebrated
MOSOLLAM, so famous for his Archery. Many other Instances of the same Kind, and
of a later Date, might be produced.


THIS I judged a proper Subject to dwell on, when addressing you, my Brethren,
who are now called into the Field, in Defense of legal Government, and of the
just Authority of your rightful Sovereign -- in Defense of your Lives,
Liberties and Property -- of all, in short, that is dear or valuable to Man on
this Side of Heaven, which the Hand of Violence, and Usurpation would wantonly
rend from you.

BEFORE I enter on an Explanation of the Duties recommended in my Text, it may
be proper to observe, That this Passage is a full Answer to the crude Notions
of those who assert the Unlawfulness of War, or of bearing Arms, on any
Occasion.

JOHN the Baptist was commissioned by the Almighty to prepare the Way for the
Messiah's Reception. This arduous office he faithfully discharged, by rebuking
Vice and Error boldly, and delivering Truths conducive to this End, by the
Authority of Heaven. Unawed by the Power of exalted Station, unbiassed by the
specious Veil of assumed Sanctity, neither of them could screen the Patrons of
Vice or Error from his severe Reprehensions. He rebuked the Pharisees, for
their Hypocricy and Wickedness -- the Publicans for their Extortion -- he
reproved even Herod for his flagitious Enormities.

Now can it be supposed, that when Soldiers applied to this faithful and
intrepid Servant of God for Instruction, he would not inform them of the
Unlawfulness of their Profession, if indeed it had been unlawful? Had it been
displeasing to God, would he omit declaring it to be so? Would he give
Directions for their Conduct in that Profession, thereby approving of it, and
affording it the Sanction of his Authority? No -- This the Baptist never would
have done, had the Profession of a Soldier been inconsistent with Christianity.

IT were indeed most devoutly to be wished that Hostilities, and all Occasions
of them, would cease among the Children of Men -- that Nation might not lift up
Sword against nation, nor learn war any more. But alas! this is a Blessing not
to be looked for in the present State of Things. Ambition, Selfishness, Malice,
and the other malignant Passions of our fallen Nature have a great Ascendency
over the Judgment, Principles, and Conduct of Mankind. These ever have, and it
is probable, ever will produce Violence, and unjust Encroachments, in some; and
these again will make Self-Defence indispensably necessary in others.

TO what a dreadful Situation would Mankind be reduced were they precluded from
Self-Defence! Society could not possibly subsist. The Weak and Helpless would
be a Prey to the Strong -- the Peaceable and Industrious would be sure Victims
to every lawless Invader, who spurned the Dictates of Humanity and Justice.
This whole Earth would be one wretched Scene of Disorder, Rapine and Oppression.

ON the other Hand, I may affirm, that as the beneficent Creator wills the
Happiness of his Creatures -- as their Happiness cannot be attained without
Society, as Societies cannot be preserved, nor their Ends obtained, without
Self-Defence -- On these Considerations I may affirm, that Self-Defence is
agreeable to the Will of the Deity. For he that wills the End, must will the
Means that are necessary for that End.

BUT enough of this -- I now proceed to unfold the Soldier's Duty, as laid down
in my Text.

THE different Professions and Stations in human Life, are liable to
Temptations peculiar to each: And such is the Wisdom and Goodness of God, that
he has given Instructions in his Word, adapted to those various Stations; by
which the Temptations and Vices, incident to them, may be guarded against.

THE Soldier, by his Profession, is frequently called on to face Dangers, and
engage in hazardous Conflicts. Hence Courage and Intrepidity are essential
Qualifications in his Character. These when guided by Principles of Benevolence
and Justice, constitute that generous Magnanimity, which is one of the greatest
Ornaments of our Nature. Through this, the Soldier becomes the gallant Asserter
of his Country's injured Rights, -- the Protector of the Innocent, the Scourge
and Terror of Oppressors, -- of the Seditious and Rebellious.

BUT these Qualities, through the Depravity of human Nature, sometimes
degenerate; they lead Men to oppress and over-bear, and commit various
Disorders.

AGAINST this Abuse, the Injunction in my Text "Do Violence to no Man" -- is
directed. The Original Word signifies to shake, or terrify by shaking; and may
be applied to any Kind of unjust Violence, in Order to insult, oppress, or
forcibly extort Money, or any Sort of Property from others.

ALL this is utterly inconsistent with the Soldier's Duty. Humanity and a
Regard to Justice, should direct all his Movements; even in the most rugged
Scenes of War -- for Benevolence and War are perfectly consistent. Humanity is
ever Characteristic of true Courage, just as Cruelty and Baseness are of
Cowardice. The greatest Heroes that have figured in History, were no less
distinguished by their Humanity and personal Bravery: And God forbid that so
good and righteous a Cause as you are engaged in, should ever be disgraced by
any Action, which is not warranted by Justice and true Magnanimity.

WHEN a Man becomes a Soldier, he ceases not to be a Christian, or a Member of
Society. The Duties, the Principles of the Christian and Citizen, he should
therefore keep in View, and never lose Sight of them. These should regulate his
Conduct, whilst vindicating his own civil and religious Rights, and those of
his Fellow Citizens, at the Hazard of his Life. And trust me, that this will be
so far from damping his Ardour, or depressing his Courage, that it will animate
both -- it will add Fortitude to his Breast -- Strength and Vigor to his
descending Arm.

BY this Injunction, all Violence to a Superior, or Disobedience to his
Commands, is also forbidden. Subordination is the very Life of military
Discipline; as that again is, humanly Speaking, what will most effectually
insure Success. The Want of Subordination and Discipline among our infatuated
Adversaries, affords you one very great Advantage over them. Their wild
Principles naturally lead to these and other Disorders; and so far tend to
defeat the Object they have in View.

FIX it therefore in your Minds, that a cheerful, ready Submission to the
Commands of Superiors, and a vigorous Execution of them, is a great and
indispensable Duty of the Christian Soldier.

THE next Thing injoined by my Text is, "to accuse no Man falsely;" which may be
done either out of Malice, or Self-Interest; thus employing the Authority of
others, where our own will not avail, to injure our Fellow Creatures. This is
so barefaced a Crime, and of so flagitious a Nature, that I need not enlarge
on it. I flatter myself that your own Hearts revolt against it in such a
Manner, and you so thoroughly detest it, that the Necessity of dissuading you
from committing it, is thereby superseded. For what more base or abominable,
than to give false Evidence against others; thereby to gratify Revenge, or
enrich ourselves with their Spoils!

I PROCEED therefore to the last Injunction of my Text -- Be content with your
Wages.

CONTENTMENT with that Station, in which the Will of Providence, and their own
Choice has placed them, is the Duty of all Men. A Disregard of this Duty, so
clearly inculcated by the united Voice of Revelation and Reason, is the Source
of numberless Evils -- perhaps of most of the Miseries of human Life.

A DISCONTENTED Mind is never at Rest. It finds Matter to prey upon, and to
nourish its Disease in every Place, and in every Situation. It sickens under
the choicest Blessings of Earth and Heaven -- These often serve only to
stimulate it on in the Pursuit of Measures which are utterly subversive of all
Happiness.

O HOW melancholy an Instance of this Truth, does this wretched Country afford
at present! Where a Land of Peace and Plenty -- a Land distinguished above any
other by its Civil and Religious Privileges, is turned into a Field of Blood --
a Scene of Devastation, Oppression and Misrule -- and all this through the
Discontent of those who were goaded on by Ambition to rise above their Fellows
-- and realize their crude, republican Schemes!

THE Sources of Discontent are various. A wrong Bias of Mind, inordinate
Affections and Desires, or an overweening Opinion of ourselves, which claims
more than others think fit to give, frequently produce this unhappy Temper. But
it is not my Design to investigate all the Springs from which it is derived;
and shall therefore only mention two, which seem to have a particular Relation
to my Text.

ONE of those is Covetousness; which may induce a Soldier to be dissatisfied
with his Wages, and to desire more than of Right he can claim. But this is
repugnant to every Dictate of Reason, since he should certainly be satisfied
with his stipulated Reward. He knew beforehand the Terms on which he engaged:
Should he not therefore be content with those Terms afterward? And certain it
is that no Soldiers in the Universe have less Reason to be discontented in this
Respect than British Soldiers; for no other State has made such ample Provision
for those who engage in that Profession.

THE other Cause of a Soldier's Discontent with his Wages, which I alluded to,
is Extravagance, or Profuseness, which his Wages may not be sufficient to
supply. When his Expenses thus become greater than his Income, it will not only
prevent his being content with his Wages; but may also put him upon using
unjustifiable Methods to increase his Income. -- It may lead him to do Violence
to others, or to accuse them falsely.

ONE Vice generally makes Way for, and introduces another. Drunkenness,
Dissipation, and criminal Pursuits, involve Men in extravagant Expenses beyond
their Abilities. They destroy Men's Health, enfeeble the Body, debase the Mind,
and bring on a Neglect of Principle and Duty. Profane Swearing, Discontent,
Turbulence and Impatience of just Restraint, with a long Train of other Evils,
are their inseparable Attendants.

YOU must perceive at first View how necessary it is for a Soldier to avoid
these; and how well the Precept in my Text -- "to be content with his Wages" --
is calculated to guard against them. This Preception Fact is the most important
of any that was delivered by the Baptist, to the Soldiers; and what effectually
secured an Observation of the Rest. The Soldier who is content with his Wages,
restraining his Desires and Expenses within proper Bounds, is under no
Temptation to do Violence to others, or accuse them falsely.

COLLECTED in himself, and mindful only of what is his Duty, he is prepared for
the vigorous Discharge of it. Anxious to distinguish himself in the honorable
Pursuit of Fame, and signalize his Prowess, he goes on steadily and undaunted.
He serves God, while he serves his King and Country; and forgets not that he is
a Disciple of the holy Jesus, -- a Candidate for Eternity, whilst he would
gather Laurels in the Field of hardy Conflict.

SUCH then is the Soldier's Duty, as prescribed by the Heaven-taught Messenger
and Forerunner of the Messiah. He does not tell the Soldier that his
Profession is unlawful, or displeasing to God -- He bids him not fling away his
Arms, abandon War, and renounce the military Character: But he teaches the
Soldier to act with Propriety in his Profession -- to avoid the Vices incident
to it -- and regulate his Conduct by the Rules of Religion, Benevolence and
Humanity.

I TRUST, my Brethren, these Out-lines of the Soldier's Duty and Character,
which I have briefly delineated, are so evidently reasonable, so congenial with
your own Sentiments, that you will faithfully copy them in your future Conduct
-- That you will thus do Honor to the Cause in which you are engaged, and
contribute as much as you can to its Success.

Never -- I will boldly and without Hesitation pronounce it -- Never was a more
just, more honorable or necessary Cause for taking up Arms, than that which
now calls you into the Field!

IT is the Cause of Truth against Falsehood -- of Loyalty against Rebellion --
of legal Government against Usurpation -- of Constitutional Freedom against
Tyranny -- in short, it is the Cause of human Happiness, the Happiness of
Millions, against Outrage and Oppression.

LET enthusiastic Republicans belie Heaven, if they will, by claiming its
Sanction to Schemes which have Falsehood, Rebellion and Usurpation, for their
Basis -- turning Faith into Faction, and the Gospel of Peace, into an Engine of
War and Sedition. We dare not thus prevaricate, or trifle with the living God;
or handle his Word deceitfully.

BUT on the other Hand, if Truth and Loyalty, if just Government and human
Happiness, are pleasing to the Almighty and agreeable to his Will -- and that
they are so, we have the express Declarations of his own unerring Word -- If
this, I say, be the Case, then we may humbly and confidently trust that the
just Ruler of the Universe favors our Cause -- that it has HIS Approbation
who is a God of Order.

EVERY Motive that can animate the human Heart to a vigorous Exertion, now
calls on you to step forth with undaunted Resolution.

YOUR generous Efforts are required to assert the just Rights of your amiable,
insulted Sovereign There is scarcely a Circumstance attending the present
unnatural Rebellion which can excite more Indignation in a generous Mind, than
the insolent Abuse and scurrilous Invectives that are slung out, by the
Abettors of it, against our gracious Sovereign: And yet his unparalleled Lenity
has been one Cause of the Rebellion's gathering such Strength. Averse from
shedding Blood -- willing to try what Effects Forbearance would produce, and
whether his deluded Subjects might not by Mildness, and their own Reflection,
be brought to a Sense of their Duty and Interest; his Orders restrained his
Troops and Ships of War here from acting offensively, even after Hostilities
had been commenced on the Part of the Rebels. Necessity at last compelled him
to draw the Sword, when every other Expedient to restore Peace, had failed of
Success. Through all the Stages of this unhappy Contest, he has taken no Step
in which he had not the Concurrence of his Parliament, and numerous Precedents
to guide him. He exerted no unconstitutional Authority. A better Prince -- a
Prince of greater Virtue, or more exemplary Character, in public and private
Life, or who desired more earnestly to promote the Happiness of his Subjects,
never adorned the British, or perhaps any other, Throne. To this Purpose is the
Testimony of a judicious, impartial Foreigner, M. DE PINTO.
who truly characterises him A Monarch, known to be one of the most virtuous
Men in his Kingdom; and a Sovereign the most pious and generous that ever
filled the Throne.
-- a Sovereign whose numerous Virtues add Luster to his Throne; yet is abjured
by those who owed him true Allegiance: They are required to restore your civil
Constitution, which was formed by the Wisdom of Ages, and was the Admiration
and Envy of Mankind -- under which we and our Ancestors, enjoyed Liberty,
Happiness and Security; but is now subverted to make Room for -- what? -- for a
motly Fabric, composed partly of the discordant Shreds of Heathen Republics,
and perfectly adapted to popular Tyranny!

YOUR bleeding Country, through which Destruction, Misery and Ruin are now
driving in full Career -- from which, Peace, Order, Commerce and useful
Industry are banished -- Your loyal Friends and Relatives groaning in Bondage,
under the Iron Scourge of Persecution and Oppression: All these now call upon
you for Succor and Redress!

IT is not wild, insatiable Ambition, which riots in the Misery and Spoils of
others -- which sports with the Lives and Fortunes of Mankind, that leads you
forth. You have taken up the Sword that those who are Captives, for Conscience
Sake, may be set at Liberty, and that the Prisoner may go free -- that
Desolation may be arrested in its baneful Course, and fell Discord banished
from our Land. Driven from your peaceful Habitations, The respectable Corpse to
which this Sermon was preached, is chiefly composed of Refugees, who fled from
Persecution. They were threatened with Bonds and Imprisonment, for refusing to
bear Arms against the King -- nay, several of them broke out of Jail, where
they were confined in Irons on that Account. They consist of wealthy Farmers,
or Yeomen, and their Sons. Many of the common Soldiers were possessed of
Estates, worth from L.1000 to L.5000; and their Property has been mostly
confiscated by the Rebels since their Flight. It is but Justice to say that
those new raised Troops have greatly distinguished themselves by their Bravery
on several Occasions. Their Regularity, Alertness and intrepid Conduct do them
the highest Honor.
for no other Cause than for honoring your King, as God has commanded, You
have taken up the Sword to vindicate His just Authority -- to support your
excellent Constitution -- to defend your Families, your Lives, Liberties and
Property -- to secure to yourselves and Posterity, that Inheritance of
constitutional Freedom, to which you were born: And all this against the
Violence of usurped Power, which would deny you even the Right of Judgment or
Choice -- which would rend you from the Protection of your Parent State, and
eventually place you -- astonishing Infatuation and Madness! -- place you under
the Iron Rule of our inveterate and popish Enemies -- the inveterate Enemies of
our Religion, our Country and Liberties!

NOT only to your Bosoms, but to the Bosoms of Thousands in every Province of
this Continent, be the melancholy Appeal for the Truth of these Facts -- for
the Truth of this Representation: A Representation, in which many Circumstances
of the more attrocious and malignant Kind, are omitted. For I really mean not
to kindle Resentment; but to recommend Earnestness, Fortitude and Perseverance
-- such as are founded upon Principle, and warranted by Reason and Humanity --
such, in short, as the Importance and Justice of our Cause demand!

HEAVEN forbid that I should attempt to widen a Breach, which is too wide
already; and which we should all be anxiously desirous of healing. For they
were not Enemies, our natural Foes, who occasioned those direful Scenes. They
were Brethren and Fellow Subjects -- those who were closely connected, and
endeared to us, by every social Tie.

WHILST therefore we lament their Infatuation, and deplore the dreadful Effects
it has produced -- whilst we justly abhor their Principles and Proceedings, we
should resolutely step forth to snatch them and our Country from utter Ruin;
and endeavor to restore to them the Blessings of Peace and good Government.

PEACE and Security are the Objects of every legitimate War; and no War can be
justified longer than it is carried on for the Attainment of these. If this is
the Case even in Foreign Wars; how much more should it be so in a Contest with
our deluded Countrymen! However criminal some of them have been; certain it is
that Deception held up her false Mirror, and represented Things in a distorted
Light to many more; and under the Influence of this Error, they act with
misguided Zeal. However infatuated they are; we should still remember they are
our Brethren, and endeavor to restore Peace and Happiness to them as well as
to ourselves. This is the Language of Humanity -- of the Religion of Jesus; to
which, I trust, none of you will ever turn a deaf Ear.

WITH such Sentiments and Views as these -- with such a Cause, and such Leaders
as you have: What is there to fear? What Bosom but must feel the warmest Glow
of Ardour to be foremost in so glorious an Enterprise!

THUS circumstanced as you are, every Obligation of Duty, Honor and
Conscience, -- every generous Motive of Humanity, Virtue, Religion and real
Patriotism -- every Consideration of Self-Preservation, Interest and Happiness,
unite to confirm you in your laudable Purpose -- to animate your Zeal, and
persuade you to persevere with unremiting Diligence and Ardour in obtaining
these most important of all earthly Objects.

LET this be the Case; and whilst you are engaged in this noble Cause, beware
of doing any Thing unworthy of it; or that would reflect Disgrace on it, or on
your Profession. Avoid Intemperance, Profligacy and other debasing Vices. Act
up to the Dignity of your Character, as Soldiers, as Citizens, as Christians.
Cherish a Spirit of Content, Subordination and Temperance. Resolve to meet with
Firmness, and to submit with Patience to, the Fatigues and Difficulties of your
present Station. Think not of the Blandishments of Ease and Indulgence whilst
engaged in Warfare -- a Warfare which cannot be of long Continuance, and in
which you are contending for every Thing that you hold dear or valuable on
Earth. Reverence the Name of your Creator. Arch Angels bend in low Adoration,
and tremble at that Name: Shall frail, sinful Dust and Ashes then presume to
dishonor it? Shall those especially who are going forth in the Shadow of
Death, profane it, and thereby insult the Almighty?

LET those who command, set a virtuous Example before their Inferiors; and let
those under Authority, look up to that Example, and copy it in their Conduct.
Cultivate the Temper, and aspire after the Character, of the real Hero; in
which Virtue, Magnanimity and Benevolence are necessary Ingredients. Superior
Force may overpower, or conquer; but it is Bravery, joined to Humanity and
Benevolence, that subdues the Heart, wins the Affections, and brings back the
Misguided to a proper Sense of their Duty.

WHIST you thus serve your Country, and honor your King; forget not also to
fear and serve your God. This will add peculiar Luster to the Soldier's
Character; make the several Parts of his Duty more easy, and give him Vigor in
discharging it.

THE Judgments of God are now abroad, and his Hand lies heavy on our Land. Our
Transgressions have provoked him to visit us with severe Chastisements: These
should therefore awaken us from spiritual Slumber. We should all humble
ourselves before him, deprecate his Displeasure, and turn to him with unfeigned
Repentance and Reformation.

WE should earnestly beseech him to call back the Sword from destroying; and
restore Peace, with its attendant Blessings, to our distracted Country. It is
he that stills the raging of the Sea, and the Madness of the People. We should
therefore pray that he would remove the Delusion of our misguided Brethren, and
turn their Hearts -- that they may see the Evil and Error of their Ways, and
know the Things which belong to their Peace, before it is too late.

WE should frequently supplicate the Throne of Grace for Blessings on our
gracious Sovereign -- that he may be blessed with length of Days, and Increase
of Happiness -- that he may be defended against all his secret and open Enemies
-- that his benevolent Designs for the Welfare of his People may not be
frustrated; but that he may fully accomplish what is the Favorite Wish of his
Heart -- the Establishment of Peace, Happiness and constitutional Freedom in
every Part of his Dominions.

IMPRESSED deeply with these Sentiments -- with all the Soldier, and all the
Christian glowing in your Bosoms -- proceed, my respected Brethren, resolutely
and gallantly proceed in the Line of your Duty; and may the God of Hosts go
with you! may his Shield cover and defend you in the Hour of Danger -- in the
Day of Battle! may he crown you with Success and Victory here -- with unfading
Felicity hereafter!

GRANT this, most merciful Father, for the Sake, and through the Merits of thy
dear Son, Christ Jesus; to whom, with Thee and the Holy Ghost, etc.


