Mr. GORDON's SERMON ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCY.

THE SEPARATION OF THE JEWISH TRIBES, AFTER THE DEATH OF SOLOMON, ACCOUNTED
FOR, AND APPLIED TO THE PRESENT DAY, IN A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE GENERAL
COURT, On FRIDAY, JULY the 4th, 1777. BEING The ANNIVERSARY of the DECLARATION
OF INDEPENDENCY.

BY WILLIAM GORDON.

PASTOR OF THE THIRD CHURCH IN ROXBURY.

BOSTON^ PRINTED BY J. GILL, PRINTER TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY. M, DCC, LXXVII.

STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS BAY. In the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES, July 4, 1777.
ORDERED, That Mr. Greenleaf and Col. Porter, with such as the honorable Board
may join, be a Committee to wait upon the Rev. Doctor WILLIAM GORDON, with the
Thanks of the General Assembly for his SERMON delivered at their Desire, before
them this Day, being the Anniversary of the DECLARATION of AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCY; and desire a Copy of it for the Press.

Sent up for Concurrence. R. T. PAIN, Speaker P. T.
In COUNCIL, July 4, 1777. Read and concurred, and Jeremiah Powell, Esquire is
joined. JOHN AVERY, Dep. Sec'y.

A SERMON, etc.
THE fullness and variety of scripture is such, that no occurrence, whether
public, domestic, or private, presents itself* but you may find a text suitable
to the same. How far I have been directed to choose the right, I submit to the
better judgment of this venerable audience: but I mean to improve the present
opportunity, by treating on the separation that happened amongst the Jewish
tribes in the time of Rehoboam, and to ground the discourse upon these words in
the 1 Kings 12th chapter 15th v.

1 KINGS 12 chapter 15 v. Wherefore the king hearkened not unto the people: for the
cause was from the Lord.

THE sacred oracles enable us to solve many a difficulty in the ancient and
modern history of the world. According to their doctrine, the Lord Jehovah, the
Creator of the universe, governs all his works, whether material or immaterial,
animate or inanimate, rational or irrational, men or angels, agreeable to an
infinitely wise plan formed from the beginning; and brings to pass his own
purpose, doing all his pleasure and causing his counsel to stand, amidst the
various jarring devices of created intelligent beings. He has wisdom and
strength. He has counsel and understanding. He does great things and
unsearchable; mavelous things without number. He sets up on high those
that be low; that those which mourn may be exalted to safety. He disappointeth
the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise.
He takes the wise in their own craftiness: and the counsel of the froward is
carried headlong. The deceived and the deceiver are his. He leads counselors
away spoiled, and makes the judges fools. He loses the bond of kings, and
breaks the rod of the oppressor. He pours contempt upon princes, and
weakneth the strength of the mighty. He takes away the heart of the chiefs of
the people of the earth, and causes them to wander in a wilderness where there
is no way. He plucketh up, pulls down, and destroys kingdoms. He builds
and planteth and prospers nations. In fine, his influence extends to all
events whether more or less important, that so each may work together, in its
respective place, toward the accomplishment of that perfect scheme of
universal government, which He has projected.

Thus we are taught to account for those grand revolutions that take place at
times in these lower regions; and that are brought forward by circumstances in
themselves apparently trifling; and that might easily have been prevented by a
prudent and speedy compliance with the reasonable requests of the aggrieved.

The Jewish state flourished amazingly, under the reign of Solomon; whose court
was the resort of the wise and noble; for there came of all people to hear the
wisdom of Solomon, from all kings of the earth, which had heard of his wisdom,
1 Kings. 4.34. The friendship of this wise king was courted by neighboring
states, who paid him their annual tributes. He enlarged his dominions so as to
rule over all the region on this side the river, the great river Euphrates,
from Tiphsah even unto Azzah, over all the kings on this side the river, and he
had peace on all sides round about him, 1 Kings* 4.24. Trade and commerce was
prosecuted with that spirit, and attended with such success, as that he made
silver and gold at Jerusalem as plenteous as stones, and cedar trees made he as
the sycomore trees that are in the vale for abundance. 2 Chro. 1.15. His
subjects enjoyed not only plenty but security: Judah and Israel dwelt safely,
every man under his vine, and under his fig tree from Dan even to Beer-sheba,
from one end of the country to the other, all the days of Solomon, 1 Kings 4.25.

One would have concluded, from the height the Jewish empire had reached, when
at its meridian in the reign of Solomon, that like the summer's sun it would
have been long in declining. But alas! how soon did the glory and fashion of it
pass away, through the bad policy that prevailed under the reign of his
successor. Solomon's funeral is scarce closed, before fatal dissentions arise:
the Jewish tribes separate through the imprudence and tyranny of Rehoboam; and
the empire is suddenly divided into two independent states.

Thus the most destructive events may be in the rear of the most successful. It
is not for a community, any more than a private person to say* glorying in
present appearances, My mountain stands strong. I shall not be moved, I shall
never be in adversity. When great mercies bestowed upon a sinful nation, are
productive of great vices, instead of leading to repentance and the practice of
virtue, divine justice may hurl it without further warning into the depths of
misery.

When George the 2d. of blessed memory, was upon the verge of eternity, the
British nation had nearly attained the summit of its glory. That worthy
sovereign had the happiness of his reign interrupted, by an unprovoked
rebellion and by wars with foreign powers; but it is close was like that of the
setting sun, with not a cloud about it, when the storm that loured in the sky
has been broken and dispersed. His loyal subjects enjoyed the glorious
circumstances, while they sincerely mourned it is being a sorting and not a
rising sun. However, they consoled themselves with the hopes, that his
successor would possess the royal virtues of his aged grandsire, and prove the
happy instrument of confirming and lengthening out the British glory; and
therefore hailed his ascension to the throne, with loud and hearty
acclamations. These had scarce ceased, ere it was perceived, that the baneful
influence, which George the 2d. foresaw, dreaded as big with misery to his
subjects, and spoke of with concern to his trusty servants was giving a wrong
bias to public measures. Old and experienced persons, conversant with
business, and who had the confidence of the people, were removed, that so an
ambitious favorite of high flying principles, with his clan of pliant
dependants, might be admitted into places of honor, power and profit. The
throne was soon surrounded by men of despotic sentiments; and the complexion of
the court was such, as that not only violent tories, but known Jacobites
repaired to it with confidence, while the stanch friends of the House of
Hanover were so coolly received, as to be really slighted. This occasioned many
converts from among those that were attached to the pretenders family; but as a
political writer wisely and severely observed, though they changed their idol
they retained their idolatry. They were, with the party they had joined, for
having the king absolute; but as Britons were strenuous for the forms of
liberty, though negligent as to liberty itself, they were for making him so by
law; which, as the nation was lost to public virtue, might easily be done by
corrupting and securing a majority in parliament. No wonder, that, while the
leading men had such principles and views, and the sovereign a temper well
adapted to second and support them, should he not be thought the first
promoter, unwarrantable methods were adopted for procuring moneys for the
purpose of ministry, without regarding the rights of those that were to pay
them; and that a firm determined opposition to such proceedings was deemed, and
treated as disobedience to legal authority. From hence has originated a
separation between those that were as nearly related and as strongly united as
the Jewish tribes Such was the warm affection that the Colonists had for
Great Britain, that they considered her as their home, and honored her as their
mother country. In all her afflictions, they were afflicted; and when she
rejoiced, they were glad. With what anxiety did they expect news, when her ruin
was threatened by rebellions or invasions! How did they wish that they could
cross the Atlantic in her defense! How did they exult in her salvations! And
how were their hearts enlarged in thanksgivings to God for her successes! But
how has the cruelty of the British legislature, and the tameness of the British
nation in suffering it, produced such an alienation of heart in the Colonists,
that many, very many, can scarce wish to be connected with her more, in any way
whatsoever! As a friend to the rights of mankind in general, and of this
Continent in particular, I cannot but pray that the King of kings would give his
sanction to what the Congress declared this day twelve month, and by succeeding
make the united States of America perpetually Free and Independent; being
assured that there is no alternative, but that or the most horrid slavery: And
yet as a native of Great Britain, and considering that that is the land of the
sepulchers of your forefathers, I cannot but wish, that, though we have been drove
into an independency, we may not be forced into a total separation. However, it
is likely that we shall see the words of Rehoboam's father verified -- a
brother offended is harder to be won than a strong city, and their contentions
are like the bars of a castle -- of an unsual size, beyond what are to be met
with in common among strangers, Prove. 18.19.

Return we to the sacred history.

Rehoboam repaired to Shechem, where all Israel met to make him king. The house
of David could plead a divine right to the throne; and yet God, designing to
intimate, that it is princes were to rule for the good of the subjects, were not
to lord it over his heritage, and would forfeit their right should they
commence tyrants, did leave the investiture in the hands of the people. Thus
upon every new instalment, the people had an opportunity of relating the
grievances they labored under during the preceding reign, and of insisting on
a redress ere they acknowledged the successor. Accordingly all the congregation
came and spoke unto Rehoboam, saying, thy father made our yoke grievous: now
therefore make thou the grievous service of thy father, and his heavy yoke
which he put upon us, lighter, and we will serve thee, v. 3, 4. We are not told
what were the particulars on which this general complaint was grounded. We may
conclude from the acknowledgment contained in Rehoboam's answer, that it was
not without foundation. The advantages enjoyed under the reign of Solomon were
uncommon; notwithstanding which, there were some things peculiarly disgustful,
that the people were not willing to submit to under his successor: and that
Rehoboam might not construe their silence into an acquiesence, they determined
upon speaking their minds freely, and stipulating with him upon what terms they
would serve him. Whether they thought the expenses of government multiplied
unnecessarily, or designedly mis-applied: whether they objected to the taxes as
too great, or to the mode of laying and raising them, or to the imperious,
insolent and oppressive behavior of crown officers: whether any, some, or each
of these were particular matters of complaint must remain an uncertainty: but
they considered themselves as having been under a heavy yoke and grievous
servitude. They therefore intimate to Rehoboam, that they would not serve him,
unless he would lighten their burden. This circumstance, plainly proves, that
they did not apprehend themselves bound to non-resistance and
passive-obedience, though Rehoboam should plead that he was king jure divino.
The language of their procedure was, we submit to no unconditional sovereignty.
You must solemnly promise, before we install you, and acknowledge ourselves
your subjects. Then we shall know what we have to trust to, and when our
obligation to obedience ceases. Do we approve of your proposals, we will serve
you: if not, we are at liberty to serve whom we please. Do we agree to your
proposals, we are bound to serve you while you keep to them; but do you vary
from them without our consent, the contract is ended, our allegiance is
absolved, we have a right to choose another sovereign, or to alter the mode of
government as we may judge most expedient. Let it be observed, that these were
the sentiments not of a dis affected party, but of all the congregation of
Israel -- at a period, not when the nation was overrun with ignorance, and
priestcraft influenced, but immediately after the Jews had been tutored in the
school of wisdom by the greatest and acutest genius that ever lived. Here I may
introduce with propriety the following words of the Rev. Dr. Thomas Newton,
wrote upon another occasion -- "not only in this particular, but in the general
the scriptures, though often perverted to the purposes of tyranny, are yet in
their own nature calculated to promote the civil as well as the religious
liberties of mankind. True religion and virtue, and liberty are more nearly
related, and more intimately connected with each other, than people commonly
consider. It is very true as St. Paul says, that where the spirit of the Lord
is, there is liberty: or as our Savior himself expresses it, if ye continue
in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth, and
the truth shall make ye free." Whether these, which were the sentiments of a
private clergyman, continue those of the Bishop of Bristol since advancement,
is immaterial to the public: but they will be perpetuated in his incomparable
dissertations on the prophecies, vol. 1 p. 313.

Rehoboam having heard what the people had to say, with seeming prudence defers
giving them an answer, till he bad time to consider the affair, and consult his
counselors, and so sends them away for the present, saying, depart yet for
three days, then come again to me. Had Rehoboam a good design in thus delaying
the matter, he ought to be commended for it; but the policy of princes is so
exceeding intricate and crooked, that he might only mean to gain time by it. He
might resent their conduct in presenting such a petition; artfully conceal his
displeasure; give it to all appearance a gracious reception; propose by that
means to make them secure, to deceive and to divide them; and think that within
the three days, what with corrupting some, wheedling others, and frightning the
timid, he should so weaken the opposition as to have nothing to fear from it.
Such policy would only have resembled that of modern times. Rehoboam however,
to keep up the farce, consulted with the old men that stood before Solomon his
father, while he yet lived, and said, how do ye advise, that I may answer this
people? The people when they heard he had consulted the old statesmen of the
former reign, might promise themselves a redress of grievances from their
wisdom, and be ready to congratulate each other upon the pleasing prospect. In
this George the third did not resemble Rehoboam. The reason for it may be
easily conjectured. He was well assured, that had he consulted the old men that
stood before his grandfather while he yet lived, they like Solomon's
counselors would have advised him to have complied with the petition of the
complainants; which, as he had no inclination to do, he might fear would
embarrass his affairs and disconcert his favorite projects.

The old men gave counsel to Rehoboam saying, if thou will be a servant to this
people this day, and wilt serve them* and answer them, and speak good words to
them, then they will be thy servants for ever. The old men had studied, been
long acquainted with, and knew the temper of the people; that they were not
given to change; that they did not seek occasion to separate from Solomon's
successor; that they sought nothing more than to have their petition complied
with; that their proposals were honest, whatever designing and interested men
might insinuate; and that they would keep their word with Rehoboam were they
gratified: therefore they do not hesitate to declare positively what would be
the happy consequence would he answer them graciously, and speak good words to
them.

Whether it was owing entirely to Rehoboam's not relishing this good advice; or
partly to that, and partly to the cunning practices of some selfish servants,
who were sensible, that, if he followed it, their schemes of aggrandizing
themselves and families would be totally ruined; so it was, that he forsook the
counsel of the old men, which they had given him, and consulted with the young
men that were grown up with him, and which stood before him.

The persons here styled young men, were not so very young in point of years;
for, from it is being said that they were grown up with Rehoboam, we must
conclude that they were of the same age with him; and he was forty and one
years old when he began to reign; but they were young men compared with the old
men that stood before Solomon; they were young also in point of political
knowledge, and the art of governing properly. They had lived long enough to
have been good politicians and wise counselors, if they had applied themselves
to the study of human nature, the tempers of mankind, and the history of states
and kingdoms; but they had neglected these particulars and had applied
themselves to the pleasing and getting the favor of the prince, to whom they
had been appointed companions when young, and with whom they were grown up.
They were raw and inexperienced, as to state affairs; and no ways fit to be
advised with in matters of the first importance, which required the greatest
sagacity, and a judgment matured by repeated practice. Men may have old heads,
and yet be incapable of giving proper counsel, for want of understanding what
they are consulted about. But as Rehoboam did not approve of the counsel of the
old men, he discovered his policy in applying to the young men that were grown
up with him: for there was no danger of their giving advice that would be
disagreeable to him. They had been so long about his person, that they knew his
temper, (perhaps better than what he himself did) what counsel would be
acceptable to him; and they would not run the hazard of being turned out of
place and removed from before him, by advising to measures that he might
dislike. Not only so, but they might have been so long habituated to adapt
their own inclinations to that of the prince with whom they had grown up, as
that harsh proceedings might please them no less than him. We cannot be
surprised therefore that they spoke unto him, saying, thus shall thou speak
unto this people* that spoke unto thee saying, thy father made our yoke heavy,
but make thou it lighter unto us: thus shall thou say unto them, my little
finger shall be thicker than my father's loins. And now whereas my father did
lade you with an heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke: my father has chastised
you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions. Rehoboam though
descended from Solomon, had very little of Solomon's wisdom, or he must have
known, that such an answer as this, would only inflame the people, and make
matters worse: but it so suited his arbitrary disposition, that when they came
to him on the third day according to appointment, he answered them roughly,
forsook the old men's counsel, and spoke to them after the counsel of the young
men. It must appear strange* that any one who was not quite a natural should
commit such a horrid blunder, and dream of bullying with great sounding words
of vanity a high spirited people* struggling for their liberties, and
determined not to submit to past hardships. But our text tells us how it came
about, and wherefore it was that the king hearkened not unto the people: he did
it not, for the cause was from the Lord, that he might perform his saying,
which the Lord spoke by Ahijah the Shilonite, unto Jeroboam the son of Nebat.
What the Lord spoke by Ahijah unto Jeroboam, was, that He would rend the
kingdom and give ten tribes to him. It was the will and design of heaven that
the ten tribes should be separated from Rehoboam, wherefore it was that the
king hearkened not unto the people. He was left to himself, to act a foolish
obstinate part, and to follow the worst advice, that so the purpose of the Most
High might be accomplished. This is the only rational way of accounting for
what happened: and thus was it according to the Latin adage -- those whom God
means to destroy, he first of all bereaves of senses. Rehoboam being so lost to
common sense as to give the answer above related, the people resented it with a
becoming spirit; and having nothing good to hope for, from one who could treat
them thus cavalierly as though they were his beasts of burden, should they enter
into further treaty with him; and being confident that it was not the will of
heaven that the Lord's free people should submit to be enslaved by a tyrant,
because he was descended from David whom the Lord had anointed to be king over
the tribes of Israel, they had a recourse to the unalienable rights of human
nature* declared themselves free and independent, saying, what portion have we
in David? neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse: to your tents O
Israel; now see to thine house David. In the warmth of their resentment they
seem to speak disrespectfully of David: but when persons are charged with cruel
treatment, and that after having meant well and honestly, it is not unusual for
them to utter those harsh expressions that they would not adopt in cooler
moments. So Israel departed unto their tents. Rehoboam was soon sensible of his
error; but in endeavoring to correct it, fell into another that made his
affairs still worse. He sent Adoram, who was over the tribute to treat with
them. The tribute we may suppose was one ground of complaint; and Adoram might
by his bad management in that department, have made himself peculiarly
obnoxious; unless it was so, we can scarce think that he would have fallen a
sacrifice to their rage in such a way, for all Israel stoned him with stones
that he died. Had Rehoboam sent one or more, who had the love and confidence of
the people, and were possessed of prudence, some good might possibly have come
of it, and a reconciliation have taken place: but that was not to be, and
therefore the aggrieved were insulted in the commissioner employed by him. When
Adoram was stoned, Rehoboam perceived that it would not be safe for him to
remain longer at Shechem, and therefore made speed to mount his chariot, and
fled to Jerusalem. When he got there, he thought the ten tribes were of too
much consequence to be lost, though before, being far from the seat of
government, they might have been slighted, and been spoken of in diminutive
terms by the courtiers; and he determined upon reducing them to obedience by
arms. Accordingly he assembled all the house of Judah, with the tribe of
Benjamin, an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men, who were warriors, to
fight against the house of Israel, to bring the kingdom to Rehoboam the son of
Solomon. What horrid scenes were now likely to commence! Countrymen, brethren
in blood, brethren in religion, falling upon and slaughtering each other with
the weapons of destruction! Houses on fire Towns in flames! Women and children
shrieking, crying, and flying, without conveniences, without necessaries, into
woods anodens and caves for safety! Sons* brethren, lovers, husbands, parents
and grand-parents wallowing in blood, and expiring in agonies! Scenes not to be
imagined without shuddering! But an infinitely merciful God interdicts the
whole by a most timely message. The word of God came unto Shemajah the man of
God, saying, speak unto Rehoboam the son of Solomon the king of Judah, and unto
all the house of Judah and Benjamin* and to the remnant of the people, saying
thus says the Lord ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren the
children of Israel: return every man to his house, for this thing is from me.
Did Rehoboams regard to the divine prohibition influence him to desist, it was
more to his credit than had he marched against and subdued the ten tribes; but
it is to be apprehended, from the temper he had before showed, that the
authority of the man of God to deliver such a message would have been disputed
by him, had not the Jews that cleaved to him been fully convinced of the
messages, being from the Lord, which at once disarmed them of all hostile
intentions against their brethren, though themselves accustomed to war. They
hearkened therefore to the word of the Lord, and returned to depart according to
the word of the Lord. Thus I have considered the revolution that commenced at
the death of Solomon, and the progress of that separation from the house of
David, that the ten tribes were drove into, by the insulting and tyrannical
conduct of Rehoboam -- an event of that nature and so circumstanced, that can
be accounted for only upon the principle assigned by the sacred historian --
the king hearkened not unto the people, for the cause was from the Lord. And it
is upon that principle alone that we can rationally account for the separation
that has taken place, between the united States of America and Great Britain.
That real friend to America and the rights of human nature, Dr. Price, was he
acquainted with all the anecdotes to be gained on this side the atlantic
relative to our affairs instead of wording himself so cautiously "I fancy I
see, would not hesitate in saying", "I see in these measures something that
cannot be accounted for merely by human ignorance". He would strike out I am
inclined to think that and boldly pronounce the hand of providence is in them,
working to bring about some great ends.

You must have applied already much of the discourse; for we have not been
alluding to things done in secret; and you cannot be dwellers in the
Massachusetts, and be strangers to them. This continent complained of real
grievances, and humbly petitioned. Whatever individuals of uncommon penetration
might wish, from foreseeing what would necessarily exist sooner or later; the
bulk of the people in every State, not this excepted, the body of the
delegates, would have been satisfied, would have rejoiced, would have been
happy, had their requests been complied with. No set of delegates could have
insisted upon more without breaking the union of the colonies. Instead of being
heard and relieved, the yoke was increased by fresh acts of cruelty, and new
burdens laid upon the continent. Our first grievances were spoken of, as if not
real: and as though we complained without cause, it was determined that we should
have cause for complaining. We had not been accustomed to a state of slavery;
therefore could not brook such treatment without resenting it. In the British
Parliament we were posted up to the world for poltroons, and the ministry
promised themselves a victory, over all our resolutions to be free, without any
slaughter. "The cabinet was in no disposition to give America any redress. The
king was our inveterate enemy, and ordered the ministers to persevere in the
old plan; and it was determined by the secret ruling power to distress us as
much as possible. This ruler, being the veryest coward that human nature can
know", Taken out of a letter from a gentleman at London to his friend in
Virginia, copied and sent over by the late Josiah Quincy, jun. Esquire whose death
was occasioned by his zeal to serve the American cause, no less than if he had
been slain in the field, as appears from the following minutes in his journal
-- "It is a good deal against my own private opinion and inclination that I now
sail to America. I have had no letter from thence since they knew of my
arrival. I know not what my next letters may contain. Besides, the fine season
is now coming on here, and Dr. Fothergill thinks Bristol air and water would
give me perfect health. On the other hand, my most intimate friends (except Mr.
Bromfield) insist upon my going directly to Boston. They say no letters can go
with safety, and that I can deliver more information and advice viva voce, than
could or ought to be wrote. They say my going now (if I arrive safe) must be of
great advantage to the American cause". He attempted to serve the cause in the
way advised to, notwithstanding the personal dangers attending it, and lost his
life in the attempt: Let him be numbered therefore with the heroes that have
fallen in the dispute.
no wonder that he was afraid lest we were falsely (...), and wished to have
the trifling military stores we had collected for service, in case matters were
brought to an extremity, destroyed: instructions for doing it were without
doubt transmitted: blood being wantonly spilt in attempting to execute them, we
were at once plunged into a defensive war, with the greatest power in the
world* what with her riches, her resources, her alliances, her armies and
navies. When we look back to that important period, and recollect that we were
without an army, without money and without ammunition, we are amazed* that
instead of being galled to the bone with the yoke of slavery, we are keeping
the anniversary of our independency! The sword being drawn and the ground
stained with the blood of its inhabitants, the people offered themselves*
willingly in the cause of liberty, and the colonies united more closely. Still
we were desirous, if possible, of an accommodation. We therefore petitioned
again, without rising in our requests, only enlarging them to take in new
grievances. Instead of having them redressed, we were deemed, and were to be
treated as rebels. The power of Great Britain was to be employed in reduceing
us, by fire and sword, by armies and navies. This inclined several of the
colonies to with for independency: but others would not hear of it though it was
known that the British ministry meant to employ Indians, Canadians and Negroes
against us. Union was essential to our safety: some colonies therefore could
not be gratified in their desires after independency, till it was the wish of
most or all. The delusive image of an inclination on the part of the ministry
to settle the dispute by treating, with which many in Britain were amused,
fascinated numbers on this side the Atlantic: but when it was found that the
commission given to the Howes was to be supported by an army of foreign
mercenaries, a change of sentiments among the beguiled Americans commenced, and
the advocates for independency multiplied greatly, the measure being made
absolutely necessary in order to self-preservation.

The deep laid scheme for destroying the army being discovered in a seasonable
moment, removed the difficulties still remaining in the breasts of several
well-affected to the cause and liberties of the continent; and brought every
colony without exception to unite in declaring for a state of independency, and
that they were absolved from all allegiance to the British crown, and that all
political connection between them and the state of Great Britain, was and ought
to be totally dissolved.

A variety of particulars conspire to evidence, that it becomes us to say of
this great event that it was from the Lord. The union of the colonies was
mavelous, considering the methods taken to hinder it; that they had their
distinct interests, their mutual jealousies, and their different forms of
government. The continuance of that union, notwithstanding the attempts made to
prevent it -- the general unanimity prevailing successively through the
Congress -- the ready compliance yielded to their recommendations and
resolutions through the continent -- the successes attending our military
operations -- the new modelling of most of our governments, that the people
might thereby attain to the enjoyment of their civil rights, to a degree beyond
what was before known -- the derangement of the plans concerted by the
adherents of the British ministry in different colonies -- the revolution in
peoples sentiments making them fond of a measure, that a few months before they
abhorred the thought of -- the oversight of king and parliament in neglecting
conciliatory measures, while there was an opening for them, though urged strongly
to it by the wisest statesmen in the kingdom -- the unanimity of the Congress
on a point which some weeks before would have occasioned a great division --
and Lord Howes not arriving till independency had been declared, which
prevented his having the opportunity of dividing the public and of obstructing
the measure by the subtle arts of negotiation -- These are matters so
remarkable as not to admit of our excluding the special influence of heaven.
Let others attached to a false philosophy, ascribe the separation of the united
States of America from Great Britain to moral and natural causes, without
taking into the account the providential concern of the Most High in order to
the accomplishment of his own divine purpose; but let every religious assembly
say, the king hearkened not unto the people, for the cause was from the Lord;
this thing is from God. And I heartily congratulate you upon his having brought
it to pass, as the only secure way for your continuing free. I see not how it
is possible for you to be ever more dependent upon Great Britain* without being
in a state of bondage, and feeling all the horrors of slavery. I have not a
doubt but that we are fully authorized by reason and religion for thus
seperating; and am persuaded that we are justified by the disinterested and
impartial world. May the spirit of wisdom return speedily to the British
councils* that so Britain may soon recover our friendship and secure our
connection by commercial treaties, ere it is too late, and her ruin is sealed!
But of this I have little hope, unless some important event should take place
in Europe, and oblige Britons to bethink themselves: I rather expect* that they
will strain every nerve to subdue us. And such is the impiety of the (...) (I
mean in (...) except the king) such (...) religion of Lords and (...), that was
a messenger (...) with the (...) of God to forbid the bloody purpose, he (...)
be rejected (...) without examining his credentials, and would probably be
ordered into confinement for a madman. An angel from heaven would have less
attention paid him, than a threatening express from a neighboring power. Has
not the God of nature declared again and again his disapprobation of their
bloody proceedings, by scattering their fleets, staying their voyages,
disconcerting their plans, delivering many of their stores into our hands, and
plunging them continually into greater difficulties. I might enumerate the
several interpositions of providence whereby we have been carried safely through
the first year of our independency: but your time will not permit it, and you
can scarce have forgot or be ignorant of them. Notwithstanding all* the British
ministry will still persist. O! when -- when -- will the vengeance of heaven
overtake them, by awakening an injured betrayed nation to avenge itself on such
treasonable rulers!

Bear with me somewhat longer, my honorable hearers, for methinks I perceive
in a private corner, a fly crafty and concealed enemy, whispering in the ear of
his well disposed but timid neighbor, why does he not proceed in the history,
and observe to us* that the separation of the ten tribes weakened and hastened
the ruin of all; and may not the like be feared with regard to Great Britain
and the united states of America? I answer. The ruin of Great Britain will
probably follow, unless prevented in the manner abovementioned. And though in the
heat of the present contest, and while engrossed in attending to our own
safety, we can scarce find time to pity her; yet when we have got through our
difficulties, we shall bitterly lament her fall, and curse the memories of
those who made it absolutely necessary for us to give her the mortal wound,
that so we might escape with life and liberty. As to the united states of
America, there is no reason to fear that it will be with them as it was with
the ten tribes, do we improve by their errors. What led on to their ruin, was,
their choosing another king when they had rejected Rehoboam, and not erecting a
form of government that should keep out tyranny, after they had cast off the
tyrant. They must needs call Jeroboam unto the congregation, and make him king
over all Israel: and he through jealousy, lest the people by frequenting the
worship of the Lord God at Jerusalem should be induced at length to return to
Rehoboam, adopted a policy that made Israel to sin, and forfeit the blessing
and protection of heaven.

But we are not bound to repair to the metropolis of Great Britain that we may
do homage to the Sovereign of the universe. Our separation from her can be no
injury to the continent. Should she think of denying episcopal ordination to
persons of that persuasion, she only endangers her own establishment: and
conscientious persons of that communion will soon be able to procure episcopal
ordination elsewhere. No damage can ensue to the continent, on the score of
religion, from its separation. Nay, we may derive a benefit from it, even
beyond what is enjoyed in Britain, by embracing the present happy moment for
establishing to all the peaceable enjoyment of the rights of conscience, while
they approve themselves good members of civil society, be their religious
principles what they may.

In civil concerns, let us divest ourselves of that selfish partiality and
oppressive temper which have so disgraced us of late, and benumbed those
patriotic principles which animated us in the commencement of the present noble
contest, turning numbers into sons of rapine and extortion that once passed for
and called themselves high sons of liberty. The nature of the times must
unavoidably make the necessaries no less than the superfluities of life much
dearer than formerly, so that it would be folly to say, that all that advance
which has taken place has been owing to oppression and extortion. But if men in
this day will not be content with a livelihood, and will make themselves
fortunes, immense fortunes, out of the distresses of the people, I say, let the
curse of heaven fall upon their substance, their unhallowed gains, till the
same are providentially dispersed among the sufferers. It Is not a curse that is
causeless. Says the wisest of men, he that withholdeth corn, the people shall
curse him: but blessing shall be upon the head of him that sells it, Prove.
11, 26. -- to corn we may add, meat, wool, flax, sugar, salt* in a word all the
necessary articles of life, whether raised in the country by the farmer, or
brought in by the merchant or persons engaged in privateering. And I can
heartily deliver over to satan* in the name of the people, such oppressive
withholders, for the destruction of their flesh and of their substance, that so
their spirits may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. I aim not this stroke
at any particular order of men; and have been vexed at the weakness and
wickedness that have appeared in that animosity which has existed between the
merchant and countryman. Fix their proportion, and I will venture to bring as
many honest upright patriotic individuals from the one as from the other, and
as many from each of the opposite character. But to hear some talk against
trade and merchandise, as though they were of course a nuisance to society and
the country could do without them, is an exercise for patience. Those very
persons forget, that had it not been for trade and merchandise, the country had
never been settled by their forefathers, had never been peopled and cultivated
as now, had remained a wilderness and the residence of Indians. They forgot,
that without trade and merchandise we must have been enslaved, for we could
have had neither arms, nor ammunition, tents, medicines, and so on. The
countryman says, and remember sir, that if it had not been for the country you
would not have had your men, your provision and the like -- True, my friend,
and this shows that the country and commercial interest ought not to be
contrasted to each other, that for the public good and the well-being of
community, providence has designedly joined them together, and what God has
joined together let no man put asunder.

I am greatly mistaken, or before the sword was drawn, they were both joined in
one in whom we are all united, and to whom we are all more indebted than to any
one man upon the continent -- a -- I recollect myself and name him not; 'twould
be like showing the sun after having described it -- Was not the worthy and
honorable President of the Congress our own -- a merchant also? Some of the
first characters in the civil and military department were merchants or
traders; and now I have said so much upon this head. I hope little more will be
said upon it henceforward but what will be healing.

I go on to mention, let us mould the governments of the respective sttates,
and the representative body of the united, viz. the Congress, so as not only to
exclude kings but tyranny* and as ever to retain the supreme authority in the
people, together with the power, no less than the right of calling their
delegated agents to an account, whether they sit in the assembly, the council,
the chair, or the Congress. We are not fighting against the name of a king, but
the tyranny; and if we suffer that tyranny under another name, we only change
our master without getting rid of our slavery. Take heed therefore my brethren,
and stand fast in that liberty wherewith you have been made free. Let no single
individual, let no collective body exalt itself above measure, and assume to
itself powers that do not belong to it, and with which it has never been
entrusted, neither implicitly nor expressly. Now is the golden opportunity for
banishing tyranny as well as royalty out of the American states, and sending
them back to Europe from whence they were imported.

I might enlarge, but must forbear. It Is expedient and opportune however to
mention that would we have our independency perpetuated, let us repent of our
sins, attend to religion, and live the doctrines of christianity; then may we
reasonably expect, that future generations will joyfully commemorate this
anniversary, and that the names of those who boldly stood forth in the cause of
liberty, and acted a consistent and uniform part will be blessed.

My honorable audience, I am as much tired with speaking, as you can be with
hearing me; but I must take a little notice of what strikes the ear of my
imagination, from one oppressed with the difficulties of the day -- if these
are the fruits of independence, better be dependent as before! -- My honest
friend, they are not the fruits of independence, but of Britain's attempting to
enslave us. They originate truly and properly from those we were before
dependent upon. Blame them therefore for all your difficulties, and hate more
than ever being brought into bondage to them. Your difficulties are great, but
don't mistake the cause, charge them to the real authors. I pity you under
them, and recommend it to every man to ease you of them as far as he is able.
But, my friend, have you ever read the history of your own country wrote by
Mather, if not, you have heard of it, let me recommend it to your perusal* you
will then find, that your difficulties are vastly short of what your
forefathers endured. And let me further tell you, that I do not recollect
reading of any people since the creation that ever secured their liberties
without undergoing far, far more than what we have experienced. I (...) fancy I
see, a distant dawning that indicates we are not far from the end (...)
troubles. But if not, be of good (...), the horrors of slavery, after having
exasperated our enemies by so animated and brave an opposition, are more to be
dreaded than greater difficulties. Look upon your little ones, the darlings of
your soul, and consider what will be their lot should the arms of Britain
prevail. They will be forced to cry out. O that we had been born Africans
instead of Americans! I now leave it with your good sense, and have done, my
friend. I cannot but hope that the Lord will save us for his own names sake.

AMEN! So let it be!
ERRATA. -- Page 11 six lines from the bottom for unsual read unusual. Page 20
thirteen lines from the top for charged read enraged. Page 32, last line for
forgot read forget.

The following HYMN from Dr. WATTS'S collection, somewhat altered, was sung
upon the occasion.
NATURE with all her powers shall sing
God the creator and the King;
Nor air, nor earth, nor skies, nor seas,
Deny the tribute of their praise.
Begin to make his glories known,
Ye seraphs that sit near his throne,
Tune your harps high, and spread the sound
To the creation's utmost bound.
All mortal things of meaner frame,
Exert your force, and own his name;
Whilst with our souls, and with our voice,
We sing his honors and our joys.
To him be sacred all we have,
From the young cradle to the grave;
Our lips shall his loud wonders tell,
And every word a miracle.
This western soil, our native land,
Lies safe in the Almighty's hand;
Our foes of conquest dream in vain*
We'll never submit to wear the chain.
Raise monumental praises high,
To him that thunders through the sky,
And with an awful nod or frown,
Shakes an aspiring tyrant down!

