THE CASE OF GEORGE M'INTOSH, Esquire, A Member of the late COUNCIL and
CONVENTION of the State of GEORGIA; WITH The PROCEEDINGS thereon in the Hon.
the ASSEMBLY and COUNCIL of that State.

Audi alteram Partem!

Printed in the Year MDCCLXXVII.

THE case of GEORGE M'INTOSH, Esquire having engrossed much of the public
attention in Georgia, and as it may probably have been the subject of
conversation in the neighboring States, it may not be improper to lay before
the candid impartial public, a full and true state of the matter; in order to
prevent their being imposed on by misrepresentations, to enable them to judge,
whether Mr. M'Intosh is guilty or innocent, and whether or not in the
proceedings against him, that attention has been paid to the Liberty, Safety
and Security of the Subject, which is consistent with the principles on which
the present Struggle for Freedom is founded. If in the subsequent pages the
Reader should observe any inaccuracies in the style, he will readily excuse
them, as Truth, not Elegance of Language, is the object of the Author.

MR. M'INTOSH resides at Sappello-River, in St. Andrew's Parish, in the State
of Georgia, (fifty miles from, and south of Savannah, the metropolis) where he
was born, and lived almost the whole of his life, and where he acquired
handsome and independent fortune by his own industry. He never was concerned in
any Trade, nor hardly had a correspondent, or any kind of connection out of his
native country, or with any men in place or power in it, but chiefly lived
contentedly with his family in an easy, hospitable and genteel manner, upon his
plantation; the produce of which was generally sold in Savannah, where he
chiefly dealt.

He early saw the injustice and iniquity, intended by the claims of the British
Parliament upon the Colonies, and was among the first to exert himself upon the
occasion with vigor and zeal; in which line he continued to act invariably and
firmly, without desiring or accepting any place of profit, or other advantage
or emolument, than that of seeing himself and fellow-citizens independent, free
and happy. When Georgia acceded to, and joined in the association with her
Sister Colonies, in the year 1775, the inhabitants, who depended altogether
upon a foreign supply for every necessary article except provision, were
greatly distressed, when that was stopped, especially the planters of rice; but
in the latter end of that year, a resolve of Congress gave them some hopes the
ports would be opened the first of March following, which occasioned a demand
for rice a short time; and in December Mr. M'Intosh sold and sent one hundred
and eleven t^erces to Mr. George Houstoun, his merchant in Savannah, which was
all he could dispose of that year, out of 6 or 700 barrels, then lying useless
by him. The next and only chance he had since for his rice, was in the
beginning of June, 1776, when a small brigantine of 240 barrels burden, was
lying in Sappello-River, near his plantation, and Mr. M'Intosh joined two of
his neighbors, Robert Baillie and Sir Patrick Houstoun, in purchasing, and
agreed to load her with rice, to Surinam, and return with the value, in Dutch
goods, to Georgia. In the mean time, William Panton, who was acquainted with
those concerned in the brigantine, (...) lately a merchant in Savannah, but was
then often at an Indian store he purchased on St. John's River, in
East-Florida, and had liberty to go and come into Georgia, upon his private
business, at pleasure, happened (unfortunately for Mr. M'Intosh) to come to
Sappello at that very time. He (Mr. Panton) plead hard, (whether with an ill
intent then, or not, is not easily discovered) to be a fourth part concerned in
the brigantine and cargo, saying, that he had co^respondents in Surinam; that
he was acquainted with trace (which none of the others were) and would take all
the trouble off their hands, and continue the business from Surinam to Georgia,
which must prove very beneficial to all the concerned; and prevailed at length
with Mr. M'Intosh (though with much reluctance, as they differed so widely in
political sentiments) who unluckily agreed to it, and let Panton have a share,
and the direction of the brig and cargo, and never troubled or concerned
himself afterward about her, only to get a clearance for the brig at Savannah
for Surinam, and give bond in L.1000 sterling for the performance of the
voyage, as he stayed himself chiefly in town attending the Council, of which he
was then a member. Mr. M'Intosh heard nothing further of the brig till some
time in August afterward, when it was reported that she had, for certain,
discharged her cargo of rice at St. Augustine, and was then loading in St.
John's River, with skins and lumber, for Europe, which raised the first clamor
against him: Upon which Mr. M'Intosh declared in Council, that if it was so, he
was altogether ignorant of it; that Mr. Panton must have deceived him, with
intent to make the whole his own property; that every one must be convinced,
that any person of common senle, for the profit that could be made upon sixty
barrels of rice, which was his share of the cargo, would not forfeit a bond of
L.1000 sterling, which was only promised before, but then Mr. M'Intosh
delivered it ready executed to the President, Mr. Bulloch, desiring it might
put in force, if ever he was found to be privy to the brig's going to
East-Florida at all, as was reported; which fully satisfied the President,
Council, and every other person at that time. A short while afterward, the
deceased Mr. Gwinnett, who was a near neighbor of Mr. M'Intosh's, got
information some way, and unravelled the whole mystery to him, which gave him
great satisfaction; which was, that the rice was not sold in Augustine; that
Panton had only ordered the brig into the River St. John's, in order to get a
pass from Governor Tonyn to secure her in her voyage from British men of war;
that, in the mean time, Capt. Osborne's men boarded her to make her a prize,
which obliged Capt. Johnston to destroy the Georgia clearances, and by that
means escaped condemnation, and Mr. Panton to get a new register and clearances
from Augustine, for the island of Tobago, whither she had sailed, with only the
same cargo she took on board at Sappello; but, at the same time, told Mr.
M'Intosh he should never see a farthing for his share of her; which he (Mr.
M'Intosh) was indifferent about, and happy that his reputation was cleared.
This soon became generally known, and no more was said or thought of it to the
prejudice of Mr. M'Intosh, until Governor Tonyn's letter to Lord George
German was intercepted, carried to the honorable the Congress, and by them
sent to the President and Council of Georgia; which was thought, and is said,
to be first delivered to Mr. Bulloch, while he was President, and before he
died, some time in February; but that he took no notice of it, as the part Mr.
George M'Intosh always acted was too well known, and his supplying Augustine
with rice, fully canvassed and cleared before in the Council, but after his
death fell, with other public papers, into the hands of his successor, Mr.
Gwinnett, and was made the pretense for all Mr. M'Intosh's persecution, and
such cruel and inhuman usage, that it must alarm every individual. The day Mr.
Gwinnett was chosen President, Mr. M'Intosh's wife died, which prevented him
and her brother, Mr. John Houstonn, from attending in Council; but some days
after Mr. M'Intosh was there, when the President's commission was prepared and
presented for signing to the members, which Mr. M'Intosh positively refused
doing, and told the President he was not present at his election, and if he
had, he would be the last person in the world he would choose; to which Mr.
Gwinnett replied, "By G -- d then, this will be the last day you and I will
ever sit together in Council;" and so it happened, for Mr. M'Intosh, who was
then sick, was obliged to take to his bed the next day, extreme ill, out of
which he was taken by the Provost-Marshal and a party of men, in a harsh, cruel
manner, carried to the dirtiest and most offensive gaol perhaps in the world,
with felons, and there fettered in irons; his estate taken into possession, as
if already forfeited, and wantonly wasted and abused, by order of the
President, without advice or knowledge of his Council, or application to the
Chief Justice, or other Magistrate, and without informing the unhappy prisoner,
or any of his friends, who applied to him for that purpose, what crime he was
charged with, among whom were some of the Council, who had a right to know it,
as well as the President, which prejudiced the people out of doors so much,
that they could not be persuaded but some horrid crime was actually proved
against Mr. M'Iutosh, which removed all their pity and compassion for him, or
dread of the conseqnences of such arbitrary proceedings to themselves. Some
days afterward, the President went out of town to go upon the expedition to
the Southward, and then the Council met, and sat upon the affair of Mr. George
M'Intosh, who being brought before them, and examined, upon oath (ungenerously
offered him by one of the members, but afterward insisted upon by himself
declared, among other things mentioned, That he never shipped, or was concerned
in shipping, any rice to any part of the world, out of the State of Georgia,
except his concern in the brigantine Betsey and Nancy, Capt. Johnston, intended
for Surinam last June, as mentioned before, and that he never had any kind of
correspondence with any person, either in East or West-Florida, by writing,
message, or otherwise; that he was at a loss to guess or conceive the motive or
view Governor Tonyn could have in asserting such falsities in his letter to
Lord George German* respecting the examinent, or William Panton, who he
thinks must have informed the Governor, unless it was vanity to recommend
themselves to each of their respective patrons, officiousness, or, which is
worse, designed villainy. In consequence of, and after the examination of Mr.
M'Intosh, the Council passed the following resolve. viz.

At a Council held at Savannah, Wednesday, the 19 th of March, 1777.
PRESENT, Honorable JONATHAN BRYAN, Esquire Chairman in Council.

GEORGE M'INTOSH, Esquire being brought up, agreeable to order, and being heard,
upon oath, by his own desire, as to the charge preferred against him; it was
unanimously resolved, that the said George M'Intosh be enlarged, upon his
giving sufficient security, in the penalty of twenty thousand pounds Georgia
currency, for his appearing; and being forthcoming, to answer the said charge,
whenever further proof and evidence shall be brought against him, and he shall
be duly summoned to answer the same; and that, in the mean time, he shall not
depart the State, or remove, or cause to be removed, any part of his property
out of the State aforesaid, without leave first had and obtained for that
purpose. It was also resolved, that the said George M'Intosh have leave to
write a letter, to be perused by this board, to any person in St. Augustine,
and to endeavor to procure therefrom any affidavit tending to exculpate and
acquit him of said charge; and that he, George M'Intosh, Esquire have leave to send
a person with such letter, at his own expense, under the inspection of this
board. Also unanimously resolved that, upon the above mentioned security being
given, the guards placed upon the plantation of the said George M'Intosh be
withdrawn, and that no steps be taken further in regard to his estate, until
after a trial. Also unanimously resolved, that in case the said George M'Intosh
shall, at any time, between this and October next, desire to repair to the
Continental Congress, there to answer this charge, that he shall be at liberty
to do so, upon giving security for that purpose, in the same penalty as before
mentioned, and defraying the expense of any evidence which this State shall
think necessary to send to the Congress against him.

A true Copy from the Minutes, JAMES WHITFIELD, Secretary, C.



IN consequence of this resolve of Council, a bond was immediately given, in
the enormous and excessive sum of 20,000l. sterling, in which most of the
Members of the Council, and many other respectable characters joined, and many
more crowded in, who had not room, but not a single Tory, as has been
iniquitously asserted; and Mr. M'Intosh was suffered to go at large. Expecting
and assuring himself, now the faith of the State was engaged for the
performance of every thing contained in the resolve, he immediately wrote a
letter to William Panton, in East-Florida, which was approved of by the
Council, but desired to defer sending it, until the expedition to the Southward
was over, for fear of giving intelligence, which he thought reasonable, and
readily acquiesced in, and remained quite satisfied and happy, expecting no
further trouble, and confident he could easily clear himself of every charge
against him, to the satisfaction of all his fellow citizens, at the next
October sessions. But alas! how uncertain the best secured happiness and
expectations of this life are. The beginning of May, the first Assembly,
agreeable to the new Constitution of the State of Georgia, met, and, among
other business, passed a resolve, which approved of the proceedings of the late
President, for putting Mr. George M'Intosh into close custody, and censured
that of the late Council, for letting him out upon bail, and ordering he should
be sent, under a strong guard, to the Continental Congress, as soon as
possible. It is said, the arguments made use of in the house (for all was
transacted with shut doors, and in profound secrecy) were the same that were
made use of when Mr. M'Intosh was taken first into custody, viz. That as the
Continental Congress had positively ordered him into custody, no power
inferior to them, could release, try, or acquit him, however innocent; also
that Mr. Hancock, in his letter, says, that Governor Tonyn's letter "contains
the most convincing proof of the treasonable conduct of Mr. George M'Intosh."
But, with the utmost submission to so distinguished a character, as the
President of the honorable the Congress, it is presumed he went rather too
far, before he heard the other side of the question, and was better informed.
With the like deference and respect to any honest member of the Assembly of
Georgia, it is humbly apprehended the Honorable the Congress do not pretend to
act as a Judicial Court. These matters they leave to the local laws of the
particular States, with respect to their own members, having things of far
higher importance, fully to employ their time; and would be falling into the
same error with the British Parliament, whereof we so much complained, in
carrying persons for their trial, where they have neither, friends,
acquaintance, or money. The Constitution of Georgia, will not suffer the
members of one county to be tried in, or appeal to another county, being out of
the vicinage; and in the present case, it is presumed, it would be better to
send first, and know the pleasure of the Congress, if they really thought there
was any difficulty in the case, rather than make a precedent, which may
hereafter be dangerous in its consequences to the individual of every State.
While government was unsettled, many things must have been done irregularly and
out of order, conformable to times and circumstances; but we are now happily
got over that: Constitutions and Forms of Government are settled and fixed in
every State on the continent; and unless they are religiously observed in every
tittle, all must fall into anarchy and confusion again in that State. But, with
respect to Mr. George M'Intosh, these arguments, I apprehend, to be altogether
needless; his case is very clear and plain. The Honorable the Congress, upon
receiving a letter, which appeared to them suspicious respecting a person,
whose character they were unacquainted with, as well as the particular
circumstances of the charge, and nor having the means of information, they very
wisely and properly, instead of ordering him into custody, and carried before
them, only " recommended to the executive power of Georgia, to proceed
immediately to apprehend, and secure George M'Intosh, and take such effectual
measures therein, as they shall judge necessary. for the safety of the United
States of America." By which it is very evident the Honorable the Congress
referred Mr. M'Intosh and his trial to the laws of his own State, to which he
gave his assent, and lived under their protection, and for that purpose sent
all the proof they had. Besides the injustice to an innocent man, which the
following affidavits will evidently prove him to be, the danger of the
precedent, which is alarming to every one, and the great expense of himself,
evidences and guards, it is a worse punishment than death itself to a man of
character or any reputation, to be carried with infamy, like a felon, as a
spectacle, 1000 miles, through the States of the Continent. He is now, at the
thought of it, grown a mere skeleton, worn off his legs, and hardly able to
stand, and is grown indifferent to his family, property, and every thing else.
Will not this be an everlasting reflection upon the justice of the free State
of Georgia? Or can it be called free, if the innocent are liable to be so
severely punished in their persons, property, and reputation, before they are
found guilty? Can the authority of the Assembly of Georgia, which, by their own
constitution, is altogether legislative, or can all the authority upon earth,
give sanction to, or justify an act, that is, in itself, unjust and
unreasonable? Surely it should not! Yet, it is said, that the Governor and
Council are tied down, and cannot avoid sending Mr. M'Intosh to Congress,
agreeable to resolve of assembly, however innocent they may think him; and, in
consequence of the resolve, they gave orders to the Provost Marshal, to produce
the body of George M'Intosh, Esquire which appears by the following summonses,
similar to those sent to the other securities.

MR. MARTIN presents his compliments to General M'Intosh: acquaints him he is
called upon to produce George M'Intosh* Esquire before his Honor the Governor and
Council this morning; he therefore requests the general would intimate the same
to Mr. M'Intosh, as speedily as possible, in compliance with the condition of
the bond.

Saturday morning, 9 o'clock, (10 June, 1777)



SIR, Savannah, 13 th June.
I Yesterday received a positive order from the Governor and Council, to
produce the body of George M'Intosh, Esquire before them. In compliance thereto, I
now apply to you (as one of the securities) to immediately produce him,
agreeable to the tenor of the bond; otherwise the same will be forfeited, as I
have called on the other securities in town to the same effect. I waited on the
General three days since, who informed me he had wrote to Mr. George M'Intosh,
at his plantation, but that he was not there; that he would enquire for him,
and acquaint him of it, but have not heard from him as yet. I am, respectfully,
Sir, your most humble servant,

(Signed) JOHN MARTIN.
P.S. You will please send me an immediate answer per bearer (Signed) J.M. To
John Houstoun, Esquire.





MR. MARTIN presents his compliments to General M'Intosh; acquaints him, that
on application to the Governor and Council, he is allowed till Monday morning
to produce the body of George M'Intosh, Esquire which Mr. M expects will be
punctually observed by the securities.

Saturday morning, 9 o'clock, (June 14th.)



AND upon his thus summoning the securities, for that purpose as above, Mr.
M'Intosh delivered himself up on ^onday June the 16th, by which, it is clear,
the bond became void, to all intents and purposes, and his securities, of
course, could have charge of him no longer: He desired a hearing before the
Governor and Council, where he used every possible argument, to no purpose, to
have his trial in Georgia, and endeavored to show, in every point of view, the
violation offered to that constitution, they were sworn to maintain, as well as
the injustice of sending him to Congress under guard, and that he probably may
be sent back in the same manner again; for want of proper information and
proof. The answer still was, the resolve of Assembly bound them, and they were
determined to comply with it, in every particular. When every reason failed,
Mr. M'Intosh then begged the Council's permission to send for Mr. Panton, as
the only person who could throw some light upon the matter; disprove, unsay, or
give some reason for what he asserted to Governor Tonyn, as he (Mr. M'Intosh)
was singular in being the only unhappy person obliged to disprove (instead of
proving) any slander uttered against him, which was also denied; saying, they
would hang Panton if they saw him. He then desired leave to write to Panton,
that he might send an affidavit of all he knew concerning the affair, agreeable
to a resolve of the former Council, by which he humbly apprehended the faith of
the State was engaged; and that he should be treated on his journey, as a
Gentleman; both of which were allowed, and entered on their minutes; provided
he could have an answer to his letter in three weeks from that day, sent to,
and approved of by Council: Which he was very thankful for, and said, his
former letter, which then laid before them, and approved of by the late
Council, would do; but as that was refused him, he promised to send another to
them the next morning, and said the time was rather short to get an answer, or
even to prepare himself, for so long a journey, but he would try and exert
himself. Accordingly, the next morning the Council sat, and Mr. M'Intosh sent
them a new letter he wrote to Panton, and attended at their door, still in
custody of the Provost Marshal, who followed him from nine o'clock in the
morning, till past one in the afternoon, but was not called in, nor had any
answer from Council; at which he was much surprised and uneasy, fearing (as was
very natural for a person in his situation) that something had changed their
opinion, and that he would not be allowed to send a letter to Panton, as he
expected, and was promised; but he still continued preparing for his journey,
in hopes the three weeks would be allowed him, agreeable to their own minutes
and order to the Provost-Marshal, while every thing (except out of door rumor)
was kept in the most profound secrecy, although there were Councils held almost
continually. Kept in this disagreeable suspense, and before he finished his
examination, which was to be taken before the Chief Justice, and while a Tailor
was taking his measure for a suit of clothes, he received the following summons:

MR. MARTIN presents his compliments to Genesis M'Intosh; acquaints him, he has
received a fresh order from the Honorable the Council, to produce the body of
George M'Intosh, Esquire. He therefore calls on the General, as one of the
securities, to produce Mr. M'Intosh, which he expects will be immediately
complied with.

Thursday morning, 20th June, (Friday)



THE sudden, unexpected disappointment this billet occasioned; the secret,
hidden proceedings he observed for some days before, and a report, that he was
to be sent to Congress with men who were utter strangers to him, under a guard
of twenty men, when there were military officers going there upon the
recruiting service, of known reputation and honor, and who had ample fortunes
in the State to secure their fidelity, startled Mr. M'Intosh. He considered the
whole matter maturely; he not only expected ill usage, perhaps to be carried in
irons, but apprehended there might be some danger of his life; he was sure his
securities were safe, and their bond became null and void, when he delivered
himself first to the Provost Marshal, in consequence of his summons. The faith
of the State to him, he apprehended, was already repeatedly violated, and he
had passed no parole or promise to the Provost Marshal; therefore he thought it
prudent to retire out of the way for a while, until he saw how matters went on,
or his fellow citizens took the alarm at the precedent, and interfere in his
behalf; or at least till he could get some certain security for tolerable
usage; and that God and man must justify his conduct, in doing so, without
caring what was done with his property, which was already too much squandered,
neglected, and dispersed. He was besides informed, a certain Delegate of
Congress, and prime instrument in getting the resolve passed last session of
Assembly, declared publicly, that Mr. George M'Intosh should be sent to
Congress, and that he would take care he (Mr. M'Intosh) should never return
again; which was showing no great respect to that uncorrupted and august
Senate, to display his own importance and influence. Another person, high in
office, one of that Delegate's associates, and the declared enemy of Mr.
M'Intosh, who from the beginning of his present persecution could not hear with
any degree of patience any thing offered in his favor, if never so reasonable,
goes about now (June 30th, 1777) with a grave face, and far more industry than
ever he served the public, declaring, with his hand upon his heart, and a deep
sigh, that he always thought Mr. M'Intosh perfectly innocent till now, but his
absconding fully convinces him of his guilt; that he is only sorry for his
securities (thus he endeavors to alarm them) as Mr. M'Intosh is certainly gone
to Augustine (although he saw a letter in ten hours from him); yet this worthy
personage goes fervently to his prayers morning, noon and night. It is not,
however, a singular instance, for Malice, Enmity and Personal Pique, to assume
the garb of Sanctity. The covering is indeed thin, and it requires but little
acquaintance with the manners of the world to guard against the deception. But
as the bulk of mankind judge from the mere exteriors, it is generally found to
be one of the most successful methods of hurting a man's reputation. Mr.
M'Intosh is not the only innocent person who has felt the truth of this
observation, for

-- Men that make
Envy and crooked Malice Nourishment,
Dare bite the best. --
These, amongst many other things of the kind that might be mentioned, are only
to show that Mr. M'Intosh has every reason to apprehend the utmost rigor shown
him; and that the good People of Georgia, for their own security and safety,
may be more careful whom they choose for their Rulers, and bring those to
condign punishment who dare to infringe, break, or suffer others to encroach
upon the part entrusted to them, of the best Constitution or Form of Government
on the Continent of America if strictly complied with by those who execute the
several departments. The present worthy Governor sometime ago declared, that
to his knowledge, when he was a Member of the late Council, Mr George M'Intosh
was perfectly innocent of every thing charged against him; and that he was the
most cruelly and iniquitously persecuted of any man. But the mentioning names
here is carefully avoided, as improper in the present unhappy and divided
situation of the State, that persons of all parties may deliberately peruse and
compare the following Affidavits, without partiality or prejudice; which will
afford all the proof in favor of Mr. George M'Intosh, that the nature of the
case can possibly admit of; and must clearly convince all persons who are not
determined not to be convinced, and will twist and wrest every thing to their
own purposes: To such this is not addressed, but to the honest, wellmeaning
men, who are ignorant of the affair* and liable to be imposed on by
misrepresentations. Governor Tonyn's letter will be given first, as far as
respects Mr. George M'Intosh, which contains all the charge against him, and
afterward every evidence that has yet appeared, or can be found, either for or
against him, and then let the Public judge for themselves.

Extract from TONYN's Letter to the Right Hon. Lord George German, as far as
respects Mr. George M'Intosh.
I HAD also the honor to write your Lordship that I expected from sundry
places supplies of provisions, but have not so effectually succeeded in any of
them, as I have in those taken up by Mr. Panton. He has now brought four
hundred barrels of rice, into St. John's River, a thousand more are shipped,
and expected to arrive every hour. Mr. Panton executed this business with great
hazard to life and fortune. He has been greatly (...) by Mr. George M'Intosh,
who is compelled to a tacit acquiescence with the distempered times, and is one
of the Rebel Congress of Georgia, intentionally to nullify and temporize, and
to be of all the service in his power. I am informed his principles are a loyal
attachment to the King and Constitution. He would, my Lord, be in a dangerous
situation, was this known.

A true Copy, (Signed) EDWARD LANGWORTHY, Secretary.



In CONGRESS, January 1, 1777.
AN intercepted letter from PATRICK TONYN, Esquire Governor of East-Florida, to
the Right Hon. Lord George German, dated St. Augustine, 19th July, 1776,
being laid before Congress,

Resolved, That a letter be written by the President to the President and
Council of the State of Georgia, enclosing a copy of the said intercepted
letter, recommending to the said President and Council, that they proceed
immediately to apprehend and secure George M'Intosh, and take such effectual
measures therein as they shall judge necessary for the safety of the United
States of America.

By Order of Congress, (Signed) JOHN HANCOCK, President.



Baltimore, January 8, 1777. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to enclose you a copy of an intercepted letter from the
Governor of East-Florida to Lord George German, containing, among other
things, the most convincing proof of the treasonable conduct of Mr. George
M'Intosh of your State. This Gentleman, it seems, is a Member of the Congress
in Georgia, and under that character is secretly supporting, by every act in
his power, the designs of the British King and Parliament against us.

The United States of America have hitherto suffered extremely from the
misrepresentations of their enemies, but much more from the baseness and
perfidy of their pretended friends. I have it therefore in command from
Congress to request, that you will cause the said George M'Intosh to be
immediately apprehended, and take every other step in this matter which shall
appear to you to be necessary for the safety of the United States of America. I
have the honor to be, with great respect, Sir, your most humble servant,

(Signed) JOHN HANCOCK, President.
To the Honorable the President and Council of the State of Georgia.





ANDREW COOK's Affidavit.
PERSONALLY appeared before me, Raymond Demere, one of the Colony Justices for
the parish of St. Andrew, in the State of Georgia, Andrew Cook, who being duly
sworn on the Holy Evangelists of Almighty God, makes oath, that he has lived
with Mr.George M'Intosh since the month of November, 17^5, in the capacity of
an Overseer or Manager of his plantation, to the day of the date hereof. During
all that time the deponent solemnly declares that no rice, or any other
provision, was sent or shipped from the said plantation, except about one
hundred barrels of rice, sold to Mr. George Houstoun, and shipped on board his
schooner (Haig master) for Savannah, in the month of December, 1775, and what
was shipped on board the brig Betsey and Nancy, in the month of June last; also
a few barrels of old rice, sent at different times to his indigo plantatation
for his negroes provisions, and what was also sold in small quantities to the
neighbors in the parish for provisions, not exceeding in the whole twenty
barrels of rice.

(Signed) ANDREW COOK.
Sappello, Parish of St. Andrew, taken at, and sworn to, before me, this 25 th
Day of March, 1777. (Signed) RAYMOND DEMERE, J. P.



GEORGE HOUSTOUN's Affidavit.
STATE of GEORGIA.
GEORGE HOUSTOUN, of Savannah, in the State aforesaid, Merchant, being duly
sworn, makes oath, that in the month of December, which was in the year of our
Lord One thousand seven hundred and seventy-five, the deponent sent a schooner,
one George Haig master, to the plantation of George M'Intosh at Sappello, in
the said State, to fetch from thence a load of rice; that in the beginning of
January following, the said schooner returned to Savannah with one hundred and
eleven barrels of rice, which were delivered on account of the deponent, and
lodged in the stores of Mr. Francis Knowles, wharsinger in Savannah; and the
deponent further says, that he has not since that time purchased or received
any rice whatsoever from the said George M'Intosh, or from his plantation; nor
has any schooner or vessel, belonging to the deponent, brought or taken on
board any rice from thence, to or from any persons whatsoever, to this
deponent's knowledge or belief since that time.

(Signed) GEORGE HOUSTOUN.
Sworn this 19 th of June, 1777, before (Signed) JOHN GLEN, C. J.



AFFIDAVIT of JAMES JOHNSTON, Master of the Brigantine Betsey and Nancy.
THE examination of Capt. James Johnston, master of the brig Betsey and Nancy,
taken upon oath the 23d of June, 1777. -- Sometime, about the beginning of June
last, I being mate of the brig Betsey and Nancy, then lying in Sappello River,
Capt. Vallence master of said brig, informed me, that Mr. George M'Intosh and
Sir Patrick Houstoun, had chartered the brig to go to Surinam, with a cargo of
rice, at the freight of ten shillings per barrel, and desired me to get the
vessel ready to take in as soon as possible, which I accordingly did. When the
brig was near loaded, and had dropped down as far as Mr. Roderick M'Intosh's
Bluff, Capt. Stewart, the owner of the brig, arrived from the Northward, and
would not allow her to proceed on her voyage, as I was told by the captain,
without he could sell her. The day after the captain informed me that Capt.
Stewart had sold the brig, and that he intended to return to the Northward,
with Capt. Stewart, to see his family, who, he was told, were very uneasy at
his long absence. Mr. George M'Intosh (who I was informed was just returned
from Savannah) sent for me, and asked me if I would go master of the brig, on a
voyage to Surinam. I told him I had no objection. We accordingly agreed. I took
charge of the vessel, and proceeded down the river. He told me at the same
time, that Mr. William Panton, who was then at Sappello, would give me
directions and letters to some merchants in Surniam, and that I should proceed
on the voyage immediately. When I got down to Sappello Sound, Mr. William
Panton and his brother Thomas Panton, came on board, the former of whom told me
that his brother Thomas was to have the direction of the vessel and cargo, and
that it was by desire of Mr. George M'Intosh, and Sir Patrick Houstoun. I asked
if they had any orders from under those Gentlemen's hands to me; he told me
not. I then intended going up to see Mr. M'Intosh, as I was displeased to have
Thomas Panton put on board, and the direction of the vessel given to him; but
was told, that Mr. George M'Intosh had returned to Savannah, therefore did not
go up, but proceeded over the bar. When we got out, Mr. Thomas Panton desired
me to make for St. John's River, in East-Florida. I told him my clearance was
for Surinam; he then said I was to get a clearance from Florida also, to secure
the vessel and cargo from the men of war. I accordingly went to St. John's, and
was there boarded by sixteen armed men Belonging to Osborne, which made Thomas
Panton destroy the Georgia clearances. He went to St. Augustine, and took out a
new register and clearance for the Island of Tobago, and got the vessel clear
from Osborne. During the time we stayed in St. John's River, which was about
five weeks, not a barrel of rice was taken out of the brig, nor the hatchway
ever opened, except a few barrels Mr. William Panton ordered out of the cabin,
to supply his Indian store up the river. I believe it was ten barrels, but
cannot be positive. During our stay there, we took no kind of lumber on board,
or any thing else, but wood and water. We set sail the 9th of August (Thomas
Panton still on board) for our destined port, Tobago, but could not make it,
our sails being in bad order, and we also in want of water. We then run down to
Antigua, and got water. Mr. Thomas Panton endeavored to sell the cargo there,
but could not agree. We then proceeded to Jamaica, and sold the cargo; which
consisted of 230 barrels of rice. Mr. Thomas Panton then purchased rum, sugar
and coffee, to the amount of the whole cargo. We then left Jamaica, and arrived
at St. Augustine the 6th day day of January last. This is all I know concerning
that voyage. During our stay in St. John's River, which was from the 4th of
July to the 9th of August, no vessel arrived there with rice, nor could I hear
of any that was expected, except some prizes Osborne carried into St.
Augustine. I will also add, that from the conversation I had with Mr. George
M'Intosh, at his own house at Sappello, and the frequent conversations I had
afterward with Mr. William Panton in Florida, I do sincerely believe that Mr.
George M'Intosh never knew any thing to the contrary, but that the brig was
destined and intended to proceed to Surinam, agreeable to her Georgia
clearances: nor did I know any thing to the contrary, until I received my
clearance in East-Florida for Tobago; but I believe that Mr. Thomas Panton*
considering himself as entrusted with the vessel and cargo, was minded to fall
upon the safest way of conducting her to Surinam, and with this view intended
taking out a clearance from East-Florida, to serve against any men of war he
might meet on the way; and it is my sincere opinion, that had we not have been
boarded by sixteen armed men, as is before mentioned, in St. John's River,
which occasioned Mr. Panton to destroy his Georgia clearances, we should have
gone to Surinam, and immediately returned from thence to Georgia again; and I
do firmly believe that this circumstance (which happened altogether
accidentally) was the cause of the voyage being altered, and that the same was
done by Mr. Panton himself, without the privity or knowledge of the shippers,
Mr. M'Intosh or Sir Patrick Houstoun, who, in my opinion, fully intended the
vessel and cargo for Surinam, and were, I have good reason to think, much
surprised and offended with Mr. Panton for doing otherwise; and I also upon
oath believe Mr. Panton has never accounted for, or remitted any part of the
proceeds of the voyage to the shippers, but has kept the whole in his own
hands, and applied the whole to his own use.

(Signed) JAMES JOHNSTON.
Sworn to this 23 d of June, 1777, before me (Signed) JOHN GLEN, C. J.



TO confirm the above affidavit still more, and put it beyond all doubt, that
the rice shipped at Sappello in the brig Betsey and Nancy (otherwise called the
St. Andrew) was not landed in East-Florida, nor never intended to be landed
there, as is falsely asserted by Governor Tonyn in his letter, and by others,
Capt. Johnston produced, before Chief Justice Glen the original permit, sent to
him from Augustine, before he left St. John's River, signed with the
Governor's own hand, and is as follows, viz.

EAST-FLORIDA.
(Seal.) By his Excellency PATRICK TONYN, Esquire Captain General, Governor and
Commander in Chief, in and ^ver His Majesty's said (...), Chancellor,
Vice Admiral and Ordinary of the same.
IN pursuance of an act passed in the present session of Parliament, entitled.
An Act to prohibit all Trade and Intercourse with the several Colonies therein
mentioned, I do hereby authorize, license and permit James Johnston, master of
the brigantine called the St. Andrew, of the burden of forty tons or
thereabouts, to proceed with the said brigantine and cargo, consisting of two
hundred and sixty barrels of rice, and five thousand staves for dunnage, from
the River St. John's, in this Province, to his Majesty's Island of Tobago,
there to unload and deliver the said cargo, and to return from thence, with the
said brigantine, to the port of St. Augustine. This license to subsist and be
in force from the day of the date hereof, until her return as aforesaid.

Given under my hand and seal at St. Augustine, the third day of August, Anno
Domini 1776, and in the 16th year of his Majesty's reign.

(Signed) PATRICK TONYN.
By his Excellency's Command, (Signed) DAVID YEATS, Secretary.
To all Flag Officers, Captains, Commanders, and other Commissioned Officers,
in his Majesty's Pay; and also, to all others, to whom these Presents shall or
may concern.





STATE of GEORGIA.
PERSONALLY appeared before the Honorable JOHN GLEN, Esquire Chief Justice of the
State of Georgia, James Johnston, master of the brigantine St. Andrew, who
being duly sworn, makes oath, that the above is the original permit of
Governor Tonyn, of East-Florida, sent from Augustine to the deponent in St.
John's River, where the brigantine then lay; that the brigantine's name was
then altered from the Betsey and Nancy, to that of St. Andrew, and was the very
identical vessel he sailed in, and was master of, from Sappello River in this
State last June; and her cargo mentioned in the above permit, the same that was
then taken in at Sappello by this deponent.

Sworn this 1 st July, 1777, before (Signed) JOHN GLEN, C. J.



THE preceding affidavits show clearly there was no more rice shipped from Mr.
George M'Intosh's plantation since the month of November, ^7^5, (and crops of
rice are seldom or ever prepared ready for market before that month or season
of the year) but 111 barrels in December, in Mr. George Houstoun's schooner for
Savannah, and what was shipped in the brigantine Betsey and Nancy, in June 1776
following, for Surinam; which, by the imprudence of Mr. Panton, appears to have
been sent into St. John's River, between 40 and 50 miles north of Augustine,
with an intention of getting a permit from Governor Tonyn to secure the brig
from British men of war on the voyage; but the accidental circumstance of being
taken in the mean time by Osborne in that river, occasioned the Georgia papers
to be destroyed, to save her, and to get a new register and clearances from
Augustine for the Island of Tobago, as they could not be got for any foreign
port; all of which was done without the knowledge or privity of Mr. George
M'Intosh. And it is very evident the rice was not landed in Augustine, as has
been so often alleged, and so industriously circulated; and that the brig
carried only 200 barrels of rice, and not 400 as Governor ^onyn asserts in his
letter. It also appears by the following affidavit of Capt. Styles, and many
others that might be got for the same purpose, that Tonyn was equally
misinformed and mistaken in the thousand barrels of rice said in his letter to
be shipped in the month of July, 1776, the date of that letter, and expected
then at Augustine every hour; as it is well known in Georgia that no vessel
went from that State with rice until the month of October following, when Le
Conte and Kelsall's brig sailed from Ogechee-River, and Philip Moore's brig in
December after. But if there were ten thousand barrels sent there, it is clear
that Mr. George M'Intosh had no kind of concern with them, or in any other
vessels* except the brig Betsey and Nancy, Capt. Johnston, as already
mentioned. Nor is Governor Tonyn better informed with respect to the risk Mr.
Panton run of his life and fortune by going into Georgia, as it is well known
he had liberty at that time to come and go at pleasure, and was often in
Savannah before the affair of the brig Betsey and Nancy; and it is pretty well
known he had no fortune to lose: Therefore, if all the assertions in Governor
Tonyn's letter are proved to be false, surely the idle conjectures of his own
brain, respecting the sentiments and principles of Mr. George M'Intosh* whom he
neither knew or ever had the least correspondence, connection or concern with,
must be concluded to be so also; or what other method, under Heaven, can any
person have to disprove another's conjectures or opinion of him, without any
kind of foundation, than proving his own positive assertions to be false, as
has been already done; with respect to Tonyn's letter?

Capt. SAMUEL STILES's Affidavit.
STATE of GEORGIA.
PERSONALLY appeared before the Honorable JOHN GLEN, Esquire Chief Justice for the
State of Georgia aforesaid, Capt. Samuel Styles, who is owner of a plantation
upon Ogechee-River, in the said State and was master and part owner of the
schooner Race-Hors, taken and made a prize of by the pirate Osborne, of
Augustine, in the month of July last, up that river; being duly sworn, makes
oath, that he had very good means of information, being a seafaring man, and
having gone to East-Florida to try to recover the said schooner taken by
Osborne as above mentioned, and declares, that to the best of his the
deponent's knowledge, no other rice was sent from this State to East Florida
since last June, 77, except about two hundred barrels taken and made prize of
as abovementioned by Osborne; in the schooner Race-Horse, out of
Ogechee-River; also the brig (...) with about four hundred barrels of rice,
belonging to Le Conte and Kelsall, which sailed out of the said River Ogechee
in October, and was afterward said to be taken near the bar of Augustine and
carried in there, and the brig Beaufort, with about seven hundred barrels of
rice, belonging to Philip Moore, then of, and in this State, which sailed also
out of the said river Ogechee, in December last: And the deponent verily
believes, that no other rice than what is mentioned above, was sent from this
State to East-Florida since June last, 1776. The deponent further says that
when he was in East-Florida after the said schooner, he (the deponent) was
informed the brig Betsey and Nancy, afterward called the St. Andrew, Capt.
James Johnston, sailed out of the River St. John's, for Tobago, without
unloading her cargo in East-Florida, the day before the deponent arrived there.

(Signed) SAMUEL STYLES.
Sworn this 1 st day of July, 1777, before (Signed) JOHN GLEN, C. J.



TO put this matter of Mr. M'Intosh's beyond all doubt, with every honest
impartial person, who will be convinced, the two following affidavits of Mr.
Baillie and Mr. Demere are inserted, being near neighbors of Mr. M'Intosh; the
first a professed Tory, or advocate for the old British Government, but deemed
a very honest man; the other (Mr. Demere) always a zealous friend for the cause
America is now engaged in: They are chosen on purpose for being of different
political sentiments, amongst many others, who will declare to the same effect,
if necessary, to show clearly that Mr. George M'Intosh not only entered early,
but always continued firmly and invariably attached and active in the great
contest his country is now supporting, and can be proved by the whole tenor of
his conduct, and all his acquaintance; but also to prove, as far as such a
vague charge or the nature of the case will admit, that he never had any
private conversation with Mr. Baillie, who was Mr. M'Intosh's brother-in-law,
and lived in sight of each other, which discovered any disaffection to the
cause he (Mr. M'Intosh) espoused, and was engaged in; but, on the contrary,
always differed so much, that they were (though otherwise on good terms) ever
contesting and wrangling on their political sentiments, when and wherever they
met. And it must be impossible if he was otherwise inclined or biassed in the
least, that Mr. Baillie should be ignorant of it, or that any one plausible
conjecture can be formed for Mr. Panton's information to Governor Tonyn, than
to show the Governor his own importance, and recommend himself; or, urged by
motives of mistaken friendship for Mr. M'Intosh, as Mr. Baillie, by the
following affidavit, seems to think, that some favors might be shown to Mr.
M'Intosh, in case Carolina or Georgia fell into the hands of the British fleet
and army then lying before Charlestown, which seems to have been Mr. Panton's
opinion at that time.

The AFFIDAVIT of ROBERT BAILLIE, Esquire.
PERSONALLY appeared before me Raymond Demere, one of the Colony Justices for
the Parish of St. Andrew, in the State of Georgia, Robert Baillie, Esquire who
being duly sworn on the Holy Evangelists of Almighty God, declares, that some
time in the beginning of last year, the brig Betsey and Nancy, Capt. Vallence,
was lying at his landing, and as the captain was frequently at his house,
expressed his apprehensions of the brigantine's being burned by the armed
vessels. He, the deponent, asked him in course of conversation, if he would
sell or charter the brig, as he wished to have a vessel to remove his family
and effects to some other country, mentioning Demarara or the Musquito-Shore.
Capt. Vallence readily said he would do either, but as he, this deponent,
apprehended great danger from the men of war, he for that time dropped all
thoughts of it; only begged Capt. Vallence to give him the preference, and
acquaint him before he either sold or chartered her, which he promised to
comply with. Some time after Mr. William Panton called at this deponent's
house, in his way to St. Augustine, when he, the said deponent, mentioned the
great desire he had to leave this province, on account of the unhappy
disturbances which he imagined would greatly distress it, and in all
probability be involved in an Indian war; and mentioned to Mr. Panton the views
he had of the brig, asking him if he thought it possible to procure in East
Florida a new register and clearances, in order to screen her from the men of
war. Mr. Panton answered, that he did not think it would be possible; but if
he, this deponent, chose it, he would try. This deponent then sent for Capt.
Vallence, and after talking the matter over, and convincing him that it would
be the most effectual method of securing his owner's property, he consented,
and gave Mr. Panton a bill of sale of the brigantine, which was to remain
secret. Some considerable time afterward, Capt. Vallence informed this
deponent, that Mr. George M'Intosh wanted to charter the brig, and the deponent
not having heard from Mr. Panton as he expected, consented to Capt. Vallence's
acting as he thought proper. Soon after Mr. Panton returned, and told this
deponent it was not in his power to procure a register from Florida for the
brig, as she was not there. This deponent then informed Mr. Panton, that Mr.
George M'Intosh and Sir Patrick Houstoun were about chartering the brig to go
to a foreign market with a load of rice. Mr. Panton then informed this
deponent, that he had brought a few goods with him to sell, but that he would
not part with them without he had leave to ship the returns. The deponent
advised Mr. Panton to apply to the Committee, which he did, and obtained leave
to dispose of his goods, and to ship the returns for a foreign market, upon his
giving security agreeable to the resolves of Congress. After disposing of the
goods, Mr. Panton finding the proceeds to be more than he could carry in his
small vessel, expressed a desire to be concerned in the cargo of the brig, and
this deponent desired him to go and speak to Mr. George M'Intosh about it, and
to mention that this deponent would be glad to be concerned also. After several
conversations with Mr. George M'Intosh, it was agreed that Mr. Panton and this
deponent should be concerned with Mr. George M'Intosh and Sir Patrick Houstoun.
It was then determined to send the brig to Surinam, consigned to a house there,
the firm of which this deponent does not recollect, and the charter party was
accordingly drawn and executed by the parties, at the rate of ten shillings per
barrel, for the port of Surinam, and Mr. M'Intosh soon after sent a clearance
from Savannah for the said port. But it was privately agreed between this
deponent and Mr. Panton, that the brig should touch at St. Mary's or St. John's
for a register and clearance, in order to secure the vessel from men of war,
which was to be concealed from the knowledge of Mr. George M'Intosh, knowing
that he would not concur in it; and to the best of this deponent's belief,
imagines it was so. When the brig was near loaded, the owner of her, Capt.
Stewart, arrived from Philadelphia, and insisted the vessel should not proceed
on her voyage without he could sell her; upon this the parties concerned agreed
to purchase her, rather than the vessel should be longer detained, which was
accordingly done. Capt. Vallence being unwilling to proceed on the voyage,
returned to the Northward with Capt. Stewart, in whose place James Johnston,
the mate, was appointed master, who the deponent firmly believes was
unacquainted with the vessel's touching at any other place than the port of
Surinam. As Thomas Panton was desirous of going passenger to the West Indies,
the direction of the voyage and sale of the cargo was given to him by his
brother William Panton, as this deponent believes. And this deponont further
declares, that he knows of no rice, or any other kind of provisions, being
shipped from Sappello-River for twelve months before or since that period,
except a few barrels of rice that came round to this river, and shipped on
board Capt. Nichols's schooner, and 150 bushels of rough rice this deponent
sold to Capt. Tailor some time before. This deponent also declares, that since
the sailing of the brigantine from this river, he has never heard from Mr.
Panton by letter, message or otherwise; and at the time the report prevailed of
the brigantine's being in St. John's River, Mr. M'Intosh frequently expressed
great uneasiness to this deponent, saying he was afraid Mr. Panton had deceived
us. The deponent having seen an extract of a letter from Governor Tonyn to
Lord George German, respecting Mr. George M'Intosh, induces him to declare
upon his oath what he knows of that gentleman's political sentiments. In every
conversation the deponent had with Mr. George M'Intosh, he ever found him to be
a warm friend to the American cause: And this deponent further declares, that
he believes it was owing to Mr. George M'Intosh's indefatigable pains, that
most of the people, in this parish signed the Association so early as they did,
and was the principal means of keeping up the public Meetings and Committees.
This deponent further says, that during Mr Panton's short stay at his house in
June last, political disputes frequently arose between Mr. Panton and Mr.
George M'Intosh, when the latter always warmly supported the measures of the
Continent, and over appeared uniform in avowing his attachment to the American
Cause. Mr. Panton often in private mentioned to this deponent, his concern for
George M'Intosh on account of the active part he had taken in these disputes
and that he was very apprehensive Mr. George M'Intosh would be a very great
sufferer, as he was convinced South Carolina would shortly be reduced by the
British fleet and army then before it, and that this province would inevitably
follow its fate. All this strongly induces this deponent to believe that Mr.
Panton, urged by motives of friendship and regard to Mr. George M'Intosh, was
his reason for representing to Governor Tonyn what he thought would prove
favorable to Mr. George M'Intosh, in case matte^s terminated as he had
suggested.

(Signed) ROBERT BAILLIE.
Sappello, Parish of St. Andrew, taken and sworn to before me the 27 th Day of
March, 1777. (Signed) RAYMOND DEMERE, J. P.
Sworn the ^3 th Day of June, 1777, at Savannah, in Georgia, before me (Signed)
JOHN GLEN, C. J.



The AFFIDAVIT of RAYMOND DEMERE, Esquire.
PERSONALLY appeared before me JOHN GLEN, Esquire Chief Justice of the State of
Georgia, Raymond Demere, of St. Andrew's Parish, in the said State, who being
duly sworn on the Holy Evangelists of Almighty God, makes oath, that he has
resided in the said Parish for three years last past, and is a neighbor of
George M'Intosh, Esquire of the said parish, who this deponent unde^stands has
lately been accused of holding a traitorous correspondence with the enemies of
the United States of America. In order to do common justice to his gentleman's
character, this deponent is induced to declare what he knows concerning his
conduct and political sentiments since the commencement of hostilities with
Great Britain. This deponent has had frequently the honor, with Mr. George
M'Intosh, to represent the parish of St. Andrew in Convention, and has ever had
the strongest reason to believe him to be a warm friend to the American cause,
and supporter of the interests hereof, not only in Convention, but by a
declaration of his sentiments, and actions on different occasions. This
deponent further declares, that Mr. George M'Intosh was among the first of
those advocates in this State who early stood forth at the hazard of life and
fortune, to support the measures of the Continent; and has, to the best of this
deponent's knowledge and belief, uniformly conducted himself in avowing his
attachment to the cause, and supporting its interests. And this deponent
further declares his belief, that it was owing to Mr. George M'Intosh's
indefatigable pains, that most of the people in St. Andrew's Parish signed the
Association so early as they did, and was the pri^cipal means of keeping up the
Public Meetings and Committees in the said Parish. This deponent further
declares, that he knows of no one action or circumstance of the said Mr. George
M'Intosh's conduct, that ever gave him realon to think otherwise than that he
was a true and just friend to the American Cause, in which he so early engaged.
As one of the principal charges against Mr. George M'Intosh is his having
supplied our enemies in East-Florida with provisions, this deponent declares
that he knows of no one instance that has the least tendency toward the
support of such an accusation, and the deponent thinks it scarce possible that
such a communication could have been carried on with East-Florida without his
knowledge.

(Signed) RAYMOND DEMERE.
Sworn to before me the 12 th April, 1777, (Signed) JOHN GLEN, C. J.



THE two last affidavits from men so widely different in political sentiments,
and who had every means of knowledge and information, not only sufficiently
prove Mr. George M'Intosh's conduct, conversation and practices to be always
uniform, steady, and agreeable to his pofessions in the great Cause of the
Continent, from the beginning of our contest with Britain, but are also a
further confirmation and proof, if any more are necessary, that he never
supplied our enemies in East Florida with any provision, or ever intended, or
was concerned in supplying them. If it is also considered that Mr. M'Intosh is
amongst the very few in Georgia whose patriotism was divested of every view of
profit or parade, ^s he neither fought or would accept of any office for
advantage, it will afford another proof in his favor; as if cannot be supposed
a man so fond of a domestic easy life, could be tempted by any thing the
enemies of his country could offer, or what but a love of freedom, natural to
an American, could rouse him, when few in his country appeared for it. The
truth is, Mr. M'Intosh, who had no lucrative motives himself, ever opposed
those who had no other, and who had designs against the liberties of their
country, which is solely the cause of his present persecution. His enemies are
afraid to try him in the State* well knowing that nothing can be found against
him, and are determined to punish him some way, or oblige him him to fly the
country.

But let us now turn to the other side of the question, and see what further
ev^dence appeared before the Honurable House of assembly against Mr. George
M'Intosh. To find proof that the cargo of the brigantine Betsey and Nancy was
originally intended for, and afterward landed, sold and delivered in
Augustine, if it could be done, can only forfeit the ^ond intended for that
very purpose. The Reader will doubtless, besides that, expect some clear and
convincing proof of treasonable practices in Mr. M'Intosh, to occasion such
violent and flaming resolves in the House, as irrevocable as the laws of the
Medes and Persians, insomuch that the Governor and Council have not the power
to deviate in the least from them, however the matter may appear to themselves;
to begin a precedent so dangerous in sending a fellow citizen a thousand miles
for his trial, which is clear by the resolve of Congress was not intended by
that wise Senate: and also, to be the only instance wherein the late Council
were blamed for their conduct.

GEORGIA.
HOUSE of ASSEMBLY June 5, 1777.
THE House having taken into consideration the letter from the President of the
Continental Congress, dated January 8, 1777, accompanied with a copy of a
letter from Patrick Tonyn* of East-Florida, to Lord George German, which were
sent to the late President and Council of this State, with a particular
recommendation from the said Congress to apprehend George M'Intosh, Esquire. And
having also considered the proceedings thereon had by the said late President
and Council, with some further evidences which have been laid before this House
respecting the charge against him the said George M'Intosh:

Resolved, as the opinion of this House, that the said George M'Intosh ought to
be considered as a prisoner taken into custody for the United States in
general, as well as this State in particular.

Resolved, as the opinion of this House, that from the nature of the crime with
which he the said George M'Intosh is charged, and the present critical and
dangerous situation of this State, it is highly expedient and necessary, that
notwithstanding the attempt to enlarge him on bail, he should be held in close
custody as a prisoner of the United States, and a proper guard, be sent forward
to the Continental Congress, to be disposed of as they shall think proper;
together with all the proceedings of the said late President and Council, had
in his case, and also with the several depositions taken before this House
respecting the charge laid against him, the said George M'Intosh, on which he
was apprehended.

Ordered therefore, that the Sheriff, in whose custody the said George M'Intosh
now is, do deliver him over into the custody of such guard, as the Governor
and Council of this State shall appoint to receive him the said George
M'Intosh, to be conveyed to the Continental Congress; and that authenticated
copies of the proceedings of the late President and Council, and like copies of
the proceedings of this House with this order, be presented to his Honor the
Governor and Council, and that they be requested to forward the same with the
said George M'Intosh to the Continental Congress, as soon as conveniently may
be done.

A true Copy from the Minutes. HENRY CUYLER, Clerk.



GEORGIA.
PERSONALLY appeared before me Edward Langworthy, one of the Justices appointed
to keep the peace for the State aforesaid, James Johnston, who being duly
sworn, says, that Mr. George M'Intosh shipped him, the said deponent, on board
the brig Betsey, as master, and told him that the voyage was to Surinam, and
that it appeared to the said deponent that Sir Patrick Houstoun was pa(...)t
owner of the said brig Betsey. This deponent says also, that the said brig's
loading consisted of about two hundred and thirty barrels of rice and a few
staves, which said rice the verily believes belonged and was shipped by George
M'Intosh and Sir Patrick Houstoun; that the deponent dropped down
Sappello-River with the said brig without signing any bills of lading whatever,
and then Messrs. Panton came on board in Sappello Sound, and told the deponent
that they had purchased the said brig and cargo; and the deponent seeing an
intimacy between Messrs. Panton, George M'Intosh, and Sir Patrick Houstoun, and
their readiness in shipping the cargo, was induced therefrom to obey their
orders in the further destination of the voyage. The deponent further says,
that by the orders of one of the Pantons, who remained on board the brig, he
proceeded from Sappello to the River St. John's, where the deponent signed
bills of lading, and obtained a clearance for the Island of Tobago, in the
West Indies. That when the deponent sailed from the River St. John's, Mr.
Panton ordered him to proceed to the Island of Tobago, but for want of water
and other reasons, the deponent made the Island of Antigua, from whence the
deponent sailed to the Leeward, and touched at St. Kitts to try the markets,
from whence the deponent sailed for Jamaica, where Mr. Panton sold the cargo of
the said brig Betsey; that in Jamaica Mr. Panton purchased a cargo of rum*
sugar and coffee, and shipped the said articles on board the aforementioned
brig (whose name on leaving St. John's River was changed to the name of St.
Andrew) and then sailed to the port of St. Augustine, in East Florida, where
the said brig was unloaded. The deponent also says, that at the time he sailed
down Sappello-River, there was a sloop sailed down likewise before him, and
that she appeared to be loaded, and that the deponent verily believes he saw
the same sloop in the River St. John's.

(Signed) JAMES JOHNSTON.
Sworn before me this 31 st day of May, 1777. (Signed) EDWARD LANGWORTHY, J. P.



GEORGIA.
In the HOUSE of ASSEMBLY, May 29, 177^.
ANDREW COOK was brought before the bar of the House, and being duly sworn was
examined respecting the charge against Mr. George M'Intosh, and said that some
time last June he was overseer to Mr. M'Intosh, and that upwards of one hundred
and seventy barrels of rice belonging to hie employer, were shipped on board
the brig Betsey, Capt. Johnston, master, then lying in Sappello-River, and that
there were* more barrels of rice from Mr. Robert Baillie's, and from Sir
Patrick Houstoun's, shipped at the same time on board the said brig; that Mr.
M'Intosh told him that the rice was consigned to Messrs. Pantons* who were
frequently, together with Sir Patrick Houstoun and Robert Baillie, at the house
of Mr. M'Intosh; that a sloop loaded with Sir Patrick Houstoun's rice went down
the River Sappello with the abovementioned brig; that Mr. M'Intosh shipped one
hundred and eleven barrels of rice on board another schooner, which schooner he
supposed belonged to Mr. George Houstoun, the master one Bradley.

A true Copy from the Minutes, HENRY CUYLER, Clerk.



GEORGIA.
In the HOUSE of ASSEMBLY, June 5, 1777.
ALEXANDER TODD was brought before the bar of the House, and being duly sworn,
was examined respecting the charge against Mr. George M'Intosh, and said that
he saw the Pantons frequently at Mr. Baillie's, he being gardener to the
family; that there was a sloop in Sappello-River loaded with rice, and he heard
it belonged to Sir Patrick; but as he was seldom from home he knew very little
of these matters, or how far Mr. George M'Intosh might be concerned in them.

ROBERT BAILLIE was brought before the bar of the House, and being duly sworn,
and asked whether he knew any thing of Mr. George M'Intosh's shipping any rice
on board the brig Betsey, Capt. Johnston, in Sappello-River, upon which he
acknowledged that he, Robert Baillie, Sir Patrick Houstoun, and Mr. George
M'Intosh shipped the said rice; that it was done by permission of the Parochial
Committee, and that he apprehended it was to be carried to Surinam; being asked
whether he knew that the brig and cargo were to be under the direction of Mr.
Panton, jun. he answered in the affirmative.

A true Copy from the Minutes, HENRY CUYLER, Clerk.



WE will conclude with only one remark, which must strike every one who
carefully peruses and compares the foregoing affidavits. It would be
uncharitable to suppose that Capt. Johnston, Andrew Cook, and Robert Baillie,
when upon oath, would not give the same evidence to the best of their knowledge
at all times; yet the difference here in them all is very observable, before
different magistrates. Mr. Baillie says, he gave upon oath before the House, to
the best of his remembrance, the substance of all he swore to 27th March, 1777,
before Mr. Demere, and afterward confirmed the ^3th June, 1777, before the
Chief Justice. But we will now confine ourselves only to Andrew Cook's
affidavits before Mr. Demere and Mr. Langworthy. The first (which was taken
after he was discharged) shows clearly that Cook was overseer and manager to
Mr. George M'Intosh from November, 1775, to the 25th March, 1777, the day he
was turned off for assisting the people of St. John's Parish, in breaking and
plundering the house of his employer: That in all that time, and consequently
for some time before (as crops of rice are seldom or ever beat out or ready for
market before November) Mr. M'Intosh never shipped any other rice but one
hundred and odd barrels in Mr. George Houstoun's schooner in December, 1775,
and is proved by Mr. Houstoun's affidavit to be landed in Savannah, and that
his schooner brought none since, and what was shipped on board the the brig
Betsey and Nancy, Capt. Johnston, in June, 1776; whereas it would appear in
Cook's affidavit before Mr. Langworthy in the House, that he was overseer to
Mr. M'Intosh only in the month of June, 1776; that more rice might have been
shipped before and after that date, unknown to him, and that the rice shipped
on board Mr. Houstoun's schooner was in the same month, and might have gone to
Augustine the same time with the brig Betsey and Nancy, Capt. Johnston, which
shall be left to the world to make what remarks upon they please. Cook's
evidence only is taken notice of, because it made a great clamor out of doors,
while all was secret within, and was said to have discovered a great deal with
respect to Mr. George M'Intosh.

Upon the whole, it were to be wished for the honor of Georgia, the United
States, with whom they are so nearly connected, and the cause of Justice and
Humanity, in which they are all so deeply interested and engaged, that
unanimity, peace and order, would once take place in that distracted State Our
enemies exult and rejoice in such divisions, which furnish them with fresh
arguments for their obstinacy: And where parties prevail and are violent, they
will ever retard the public good, thwart each other in the best measures, and
will create animosity, enmity and malice, and the most barbarous, cruel and
unjust usage and persecution of their best fellow citizens; while Tories, and
those who are really inimical to their country, are suffered to live at their
ease and unmolested, and the most despicable of them taken into favor to
strengthen a party; and those who stood foremost at the risk of their lives, as
well as fortunes, when few supported the cause, are cried down, as is now the
case with Mr. George M'Intosh and others.

To show that George M'Intosh is not gone to Augustine, as is industriously
reported, and as some would wish, an extract of a letter from him is given,
dated St. Andrew's Parish, 4th July, 1777, viz.

SINCE I wrote you last, the Parish of St. John's men (they say by the
Governor's orders) have again taken possession of my estate, destroyed all my
crop on the ground by turning their horses into it, killed and drove off all my
stock of every kind, broke open my house barn and cellar, plundered and carried
off every thing of value they could find, and still continue there, wantonly
committing every waste in their power.

I would only ask any honest man, by what law* or shadow of justice, they do
all this? They have not proved one single crime against me with all their art
and malice, and they are afraid to give me a fair hearing, either before the
Legislative, Executive or Judicial Departments; well knowing and convinced,
that I can clear myself of every thing they lay to my charge: But that would
not suit their wicked and -- purposes. I am now without house or home, in my
native country, and what property I have been collecting in an honest way,
these twenty years past, arbitrarily and unjustly taken from me* without any
form of trial; my poor unfortunate and helpless children made beggars, and
myself wandering from place to place through the woods like a vagabond and an
outlaw. Unjustly drove to such extremities, God and man would justify every
means of redress; or can I be said to be subject to any laws that afford me no
protection? But I am resolved to stand it a while longer, and see what lengths
my enemies will go. I find few of my friends dare speak their mind, or say a
word in my behalf* though conscious of my innocence. They are afraid to lose
their popularity or their property, though I think they are taking the most
effectual steps to lose both. By this time, I expect people are convinced my
securities have nothing further to do with me, as I have been twice in custody.
It is my opinion the resolve of Assembly made the bond void of itself, and I
believe* if you examine it, you will think so too, etc.

P. S. The gallant St. John's men have drove my faithful and trusty overseer
off my plantation. Excuse the writing, as it is upon my knee, and under a tree.





Extract of another Letter from George M'Intosh, dated St. Andrew's Parish, the
6th July, 1777.
I AM just informed one of my trusty negroes upon my indigo plantation was
cruelly whipped until he died in the rope, because the poor fellow could not
tell where I was. The slaves of my brother William, his son John, and James
Spalding, with their overseers, are also taken into custody, and carried to St.
John's Parish, just when they were ready to make their indigo, a fine crop,
which must now be lost, upon what pretense I cannot yet find, but it is said
until I am produced. These people seem to delight in nothing but cruelty,
destruction and plunder; they have now nearly depopulated and finished the ruin
of St. Andrew's Parish, the largest, best, and one of the oldest and most
flourishing in the State of Georgia, as they threatened, and boasted to be
their intention, by joining it in one country with St. John's. The men of any
property are almost all now drove to settle as best they can in some other
parts of the State, leaving their fine improvements and settlements behind
them; the poor also, and those who depend for a living upon their little
stocks, are plundered of all they had, and reduced to the necessity of moving
down to the Oyster-Banks, with their wives and children for subsistence: Those
who yet remain, are trembling, expecting daily the vengeance of those pious
tyrants, and think seriously now of moving to Carolina, or some other State,
for safety of their persons. If they should be obliged to leave their property
behind them, which evidently seems to be the aim, surely the good people of
Georgia must be ignorant of the transactions in Liberty County (as it is
falsely called) otherwise they would fall upon some means of redressing the
unsufferable grievances and horrid oppression of so many of their fellow
citizens, which must reflect disgrace upon the wisdom and justice of the State,
and dishonor upon the Glorious Cause we are engaged in. Deplorable as my own
situation is, not knowing yet what I shall be drove to, my heart bleeds for the
distresses of some of the poor people, the oldest settlers and natives of my
country.



FINIS.

