Mr. French's SERMON AGAINST EXTORTION.

A Practical Discourse AGAINST EXTORTION, From EZEKIEL XXII, 12. Delivered at A
LECTURE In the South Parish in ANDOVER, January 1, 1777.

By JONATHAN FRENCH, A. M. Pastor of said Parish.

Published at the Desire of the Hearers.

BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: PRINTED BY T. AND J. FLEET, 1777.

A Practical Discourse, etc.
EZEKIEL 22.12. -- Thou have greedily gained of thy neighbors by extortion,
and have forgotten me, says the Lord GOD.


THE Author of mankind has seen fit to give us such social capacities, and
form us for a constitution, under which we are so necessarily dependent on one
another, that no one can act against the interest of his community without
endangering his own happiness. He has laid us under the strongest obligations,
by the mutual ties of the benefit of society and our own good, to observe the
strictest rules of benevolence, justice, and every public virtue. And that we
might not be at a loss to know what is our duty to one another, he has
mercifully given us this plain rule, and fixed the standard in every man's own
breast, whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them.
And to enforce this, he has added the severest threatenings against it is
violators, and every possible encouragement for it is observers; so that no one,
unless he is under the prevailing influence of an exceedingly depraved, wicked
heart -- and is actuated by a detestably covetous, selfish disposition, can
plead ignorance of what is right in his common dealings with mankind. And yet
how common is it for men, both to their own, and to the detriment of the
public, to leap the bounds prescribed them by this divine law of nature and
revelation? -- This was remarkably the case with the Israelites --. After the
death of King Solomon, under whose reign, never were a people, perhaps, more
united and happy, Rehoboam succeeded to the throne --. Under him the people
soon grew uneasy, complained of their heavy burdens; and a universal murmur
arose, throughout the kingdom --. Petitions were prefered to the King, but were
answered with no other than those irritating, afflictive expressions, my father
made your yoke heavy, but I will add thereto: my father chastised you with
whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions. Upon this the people grew
desperate, and cried out; what portion have we in David? and we have none
inheritance in the son of Jesse: every man to your tents, O Israel: and now
David see to thine own house. Every tribe, Judah and Benjamin excepted,
unanimously revolted from him. Distressing wars immediately commenced between
the ten tribes of Israel on the one side, and the two houses of Judah, and
Benjamin on the other. God made them instruments of punishment to each other,
because neither served him. The Lord testified against Israel, and against
Judah, because they hardened their necks, and would not believe in the Lord
their God. And all was a dismal scene of wars, and judgments upon the land,
till both Judah and Jerusalem, were so weakened, and destroyed as to become an
easy prey to foreign powers; and the Babylonians made a complete conquest over
them. In the time of their captivity, while they suffered the most cruel
servitude, and were groaning under the burdens imposed on them by their new
masters, they murmured against GOD, and grew exceedingly vicious among
themselves. The cry of their iniquities reached the heavens; and the Lord sent
his Servant, Ezekiel, to reprove them for their sins --. With all the zeal,
boldness and faithfulness of a Prophet, he lifted up his voice like a trumpet,
and pathetically exclaimed against the sins of Jerusalem, sparing no order of
men, as all were verily guilty. Their Princes, and Rulers were exceedingly
cruel and oppressive -- they even threw off the natural ties of kindred, set
light by father, and mother, oppressed the stranger, and vexed the fatherless,
and the widow, to promote their own honor, wealth and dominion. Their chief
men, who ought to have done every thing they could to promote virtue and
religion among the people, cast off the fear of the Lord, despised holy things,
and became the sad examples of lewdness, and abomination --. Next to these, he
lashes the vices of the Priests; for they in Jerusalem were culpable as well as
others: her Priests, says God, have violated my law, and profaned my holy
things; they have put no difference between the holy and profane -- and have
hid their eyes from my Sabbaths, and I am profaned among them. -- And her
prophets have daubed them with untempered mortar. These, and many other sins,
prevailed in Jerusalem; which raised the anger, and indignation of the Lord
against them. But it is commonly the case in all declensions, perhaps, in every
period of the world, that some one sin is more general, and prevalent than any
other, at that time. -- If we attend to the chapter, in which the text is
inserted, we shall find this to have been the case with the Jews -- Their
predominant sin, which the Prophet charges upon every order of men among them,
as their circumstances afforded them the opportunity to practice it, seems to
have been, Extortion; or internal oppression. Which was the more inexcusable in
them, as they, at the same time, were complaining of oppression from their
enemies -- But so inconsistent is mankind, that the very things they esteem
most grievous in others, they frequently practice themselves. So it was with
Jerusalem. Her Princes, Rulers, Judges and great men, were like wolves
devouring their prey, destroying the people to increase their own wealth. --
The Prophets prophesied for gain, and stripped the people of their riches, at
the same time they neglected their souls -- yea, says the Prophet, they have
devoured souls, have taken the treasure and precious things, and made her
(Jerusalem) many widows in the midst thereof --. "Which they did," says that
learned Expositor, Mr. Hust, one while, by raising persecutions, cutting off
husbands from their wives; another while, and which agrees most with the place,
persuading, encouraging, and bewitching Zedekiah, and the Princes, and People,
to hold out the war, and run all hazards and extremities of that siege, which
filled Jerusalem with dead husbands, and forlorn widows. And the people of the
land have used oppression, and exercised robbery, and have vexed the poor and
needy: yea, they have oppressed the stranger wrong fully. Forgetting this
eternal rule of right, love thy neighbor as thy self, they devoured one
another, with an insatiable thirst for gain. So that, upon supposition, there
might be some individuals, who kept themselves free from their reigning sins,
yet, to every order of men among them, taken collectively. the words of our
text might sutably apply; -- thou have greedily gained of thy neighbors by
extortion, and have forgotten me, says the Lord GOD.

To draw a parallel between the sins and circumstances of the Jews and our own,
is not my intention. The heavy Judgments, with which we are visited, and that
cry of extortion, and oppression, which rings through the land, assimilaes us
in some degree at least.

And now, seeing Almighty God, notwithstanding our exceeding ingratitude, and
unthankfulness toward him, has given us this day to see the beginning of a
New-Year, can we do better then to turn aside from our secular affairs, and
employ a few moments in reflecting upon the increasing, predominant evil, with
which we have closed the last? -- O may we humble ourselves before God, and
devoutly pray for a speedy reformation, that by his sovran, rich grace, we may
begin, and end this year in a better manner than we have done the proceeding.

In order to illustrate the subject, and as much as possible to accomodate it
to the present purpose, it will be convenient for us, in the first place, to
consider the import of the word, Extortion.

Secondly, to make some remarks upon the origin of this evil.

Thirdly, to consider something of its evil nature, and hurtful tendency.

First, let us consider the import of the word, Extortion, made use of in the
text.

In our language, it is not in all cases, exactly of the same signification
with the word oppression; though they are both frequently used in the same sense.
Oppression, is a more general term, and is rather applied to authority, and
signifies various kinds of injustice; such as unrighteous laws, -- iniquitous
taxes -- infringments of liberty, and the rights of conscience -- and all such
impositions as are inimical to society, and contrary to the natural laws of
justice, and equity. But the word Extortion, seems rather limited to the
actions of individuals; and is applied to those more private advantages which
men take of the necessities of others, in their common dealings, especially in
cases of buying, and selling -- but notwithstanding there may be this
difference in strictness, yet by common usage, they are both frequently applied
to the same purposes; and sometimes bear the same sense in scripture, lev.
25.14. If thou sell ought unto thy neighbor, or buyest ought of thy neighbors
hand; ye shall not oppress one another.

Secondly, let us make some remarks upon the origin of this evil.

This evil in strictness, no doubt takes its rise from the grand source of all
other sins, the depravity of the human heart. This is the root of all our moral
calamities. From whence come wars and sightings among you? come they not hence,
even of your lusts, that war in your members?

But notwithstanding all our sinful actions spring from the same source yet
they are not all alike. As in the branches of a tree, some take their more
immediate rise out of others, and make a very different appearance, though all
are nourished by the same stock, so many sins, take their rise out of others,
and put on different appearances, and yet are all sed by the same original
fountain. To instance in covetousness, and prodigality; sins as unlike as sins
can be; these spring more immediately from different hists, or inclinations,
and yet both are nourished from the same corrupt fountain, a depraved heart.

Extortion seems to be the progeny of an amazing avaricious lust after worldly
gain. For an inordinate desire after the world, may as properly be called a
lust, as any sin of which mankind may be guilty --. And so it is denominated in
the holy scriptures: hence says the Apostle James, when speaking of such; ye
adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is
enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, is the
enemy of God. Extortion therefore we may conceive, arises from an insatiable,
avaricious desire of gain; a lust which seduces men into a train of oppressive
actions, and unjust, and iniquitous practices, to increase their own private
interests; and betrays a mind, almost too contracted, mean, and base to be
called human.

Thirdly, let us consider something of the evil nature, and hurtful tendency of
Extortion.

To give an adequate idea of the evil nature or to paint the hurtful tendency
of this detestable practice, language would be insufficient, and the power of
description fail. To hint at a few things only, which are plain and obvious to
every impartial observer, is all I shall attempt.

1. Extortion is a breach of the natural laws of justice and equity; for these
all require, that in every species of dealing with mankind, we should become
mutually advantageous to each other. But the tendency of extortion is to
advance a man's own private interest and bring (...) upon others. He who takes
(...) of his neighbor, diminishing his (...) his own, by not rendering (...)
he receives, is a violator of the laws of justice and equity. And the man whose
impartial conscience cannot answer in the affirmative to this simple question,
in every instance of trade, have I done, as I would be done by? must plead
guilty.

2. Extortion is a violation of the laws of mercy, kindness, and benevolence.
These all require us to extend our pity and compassion to our fellow creatures.
But the Extortioner exercises none of these -- His heart, his eyes, his hands,
and every bowel of love, and mercy are shut against the distresses and wants of
others; and his ears deaf to all their complaints -- He matters not how great a
diminution others sustain in their wealth, and happiness, if he can but secure
his own. -- Lost to every social virtue, he puts of the man, and assumes rather
the character of some voracious animal, who, to satiate his own greediness,
would devour all around him. Extortion in a special manner, is very unmerciful,
and destressing to the poor -- The want of the outward necessaries of life is a
sore calamity, and what mercy requires us not only to commiserate; but to do
all that is in our power to relieve --. The poor are of this denomination --
their circumstances call for our pity and compassion -- But what does the
Extortioner? Instead of affording relief, he adds to their miseries, and wants.
Yea, further, is not Extortion, in a great measure, the cause of their misery?
does it not bring the distressing calamity of pinching want upon thousands, who
otherwise might have been strangers to such deep affliction forever! What a
shocking reflection does this afford! What complacency can the Extortioner take
in his unjust gain, while many, from whom he has extorted it, and who were
entitled to his mercy and compassion, may be now groaning and dying for want?
At least it is not owing to his benevolence if they are not. How contrary is
this to the rules of the benevolent Gospel; which teaches us not to be anxious
for the meat that perishes, but to abound in good works, and in the grace of
liberality? especially to extend mercy to the poor -- for he that has pity on
the poor lends to the Lord -- And says the Psalmist, blessed is he who
considers the poor.

3. Extortion is a breach of the natural laws of society. For it is not only
cruel and unjust treatment of individuals; but is exceedingly detrimental to
the community, by weakening society, and endangering the state. The strongest
bond of society is mutual interest. But to this, Extortion is diametrically
opposed. Sinister motives are always opposed to the public good; but these are
the principles which bias the soul, and influence the conduct of Extortioners.
And as Extortion increases, the public interest is lessened; as all supplies
become proportionably dearer. But besides this it creates jealousies, excites
feuds, and animosities, destroys mutual confidence, and becomes the bane of
that public union in which chiefly the strength of a State consists.

4. The Extortioner is a foe to himself; for by acting against the community,
so far as his influence, and importance extend, so far he endangers his own
happiness, by destroying that on which the protection of his person and
property depends. So that in one view an Extortioner is as much a foe to the
public and himself, as an enemy appearing in open arms; and in some sense more
so; for while the other shows his intention, he is a more secret enemy knawing
out the bowels under the mask of a friend; and therefore ought as much to be
opposed.

5. The Extortioner is not only a foe to himself, his neighbor, and his
country, but to his GOD; For he, who is such a friend of the world, is the
enemy of GOD. He makes the world his God, and forsakes the fountain of living
waters. Thus says the text, thou have greedily gained of thy neighbors by
extortion, and have forgotten me, says the Lord God. But further, Extortioners
may be said to forget God, in their violating several of his particular
commands. For instance, their conduct is a breach of the sixth command; for
that requires every lawful endeavor to preserve the lives of others as well as
of our own. But they would destroy life, by distressing the poor and the needy,
the widow and the fatherless. "The curses of many ready to perish come upon
them."

They violate the eightth command, which requires us to promote the wealth or
outward estate of others. But they unrighteously take it from them, invert the
command of the Apostle, and look every man on his own things, but not on the
things of others.

Once more, they are transgressors of the tenth command, which forbids every
species of covetousness, and manifest an unreasonable, avaricious desire after
the wealth of others: Their covetous hearts knowing no bounds, like the
horse-leach continually cry give, give. They are like greedy animals which can
never have enough. -- They all look to their own way, every one for his gain.
-- They covet greedily all the day long -- yea also, as in the language of the
prophet, they enlarge their desire as hell, and as death, and cannot be
satisfied. Consequently, they are exposed to the displeasure, and judgments of
God here, and to his wrath, and eternal indignation hereafter; for no
Extortioner shall enter the Kingdom of Heaven. So that let us view extortion in
what light we please, we shall find it detestable in it is nature, and dreadful
in it is consequences.

Thus we have considered something of the evil nature, and hurtful tendency of
the sin of extortion, that foe to God and man, which has invaded the land, and
with merciless, unrelenting fury, threatens destruction all around!

Internal oppression was not peculiar to the Jews -- Mankind, under like
circumstances, are generally the same -- When opportunities have favored it,
others have discovered the same disposition, and run into similar extremes,
even the more enlightened age of the world, and the highest professing people
not excepted; as the present times are a melancholy witness! This destroying
evil has pervaded our borders; and it is increasing rapacity has become
exceedingly calamitous! The threatening aspect calls upon every friend of God,
of justice, mercy, and benevolence to arise, and exert every social faculty to
stop it is progress. -- The voice of God, more especially, calls upon the
ministers of Christ, in some measure, as Moses did upon the children of Israel,
when they had made themselves naked with their idolatrous sins; who is on the
Lord's side? gird on every man his spiritual sword, and go in and out from gate
to gate throughout the camp, and slay every man his sin, and pull down the
iniquity that has sprung up among us.

Christ's ministers are set as sentinels upon Jerusalem's walls; and are under
indispensable obligations to warn the wicked of their danger. The solemn charge
to Ezekiel, was in these words: Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto
the house of Israel: therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning
from me. When I say unto the wicked, thou shall surely die, and thou give him
not warning nor speak to warn the wicked from his wicked way to save his
life: the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I
require at thine hand. Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his
wickedness -- he shall die in his iniquity: but thou have delivered thy soul.
-- Son of man, I do send thee unto the house of Israel; for they have
transgressed against me. -- And thou, son of man, be not afraid of them,
neither be afraid of their words, -- nor be dismayed at their looks -- I do
send thee, -- and thou shall speak my words unto them, whether they will hear,
or whether they will forbear -- Though Christ's ministers are not now
commissioned in this extraordinary manner, yet their obligations to be faithful
are as solemn, and as binding, as in the prophetic days.

Having this sufficient warrant, I shall endeavor, by the assistance of him,
whose cause I am now pleading, to deliver my soul, and whether you will hear or
forbear, plainly, and I hope faithfully, apply the subject. May the fear of GOD
ever keep me from that fear of man, which brings a snare. And may that text
be ever written upon my heart as with the point of a diamond: Cursed be he that
does the work of the Lord deceitfully.

From what has been said, we can be at no loss for the primary causes of the
reigning sin of extortion at the present day. It obviously springs from that
love of money which is the root of all evil: which while some covet after they
err from the faith, and pierce themselves through with many sorrows. That
greediness of gain, -- that insatiable lust after the world which induced
Iscariot to betray his Lord and Master, is no doubt an inducement with some to
betray their country -- and as it were, to sell their God.

But let us make some inquiry into the more external or secondary causes of
this evil, which has occasioned such loud complaints; and which threatens us,
at this critical period, with internal destruction.

The complaints in the country are chiefly levelled against the merchants, in
the maritime towns; -- that they have taken advantage of the times and laid
extravagant prices on almost every article, which the necessities of the people
have compelled them to purchase --. The country perceiving this, and knowing
the trading towns could no more subsist without the produce of the lands, than
they themselves without the wares of the merchant, immediately raised the price
of almost every necessary of life, carried into the markets, as high as the
general demand would admit them. This has occasioned an increase of
extravagance on each side, till the conduct of both has become exceedingly
oppressive. Taking matters as it were by the gross, and these will no doubt be
acknowledged, as the more ostensible causes of the present extortion; if we
judge of things according to the general complaints. But if we more critically
examine the matter, we shall perhaps find, that this evil is not effected by
any one cause alone, but by a number of accidental causes combined together --.
May not these be the causes? I shall not presume to be judge in the matter; or
pretend to determine possitively what are the causes, but only hint at some
things by way of inquiry. Have not the scarcity of wares, and want of employ
induced a number to become adventurers in foreign trade; the hazard now being
extremely great, and the few comparatively who return with good voyages, have
raised insurances so very high, besides all extra-expences in manning and
fitting out, etc. which every one knows must be much greater than before the
war, that honest trading merchants have been necessitated to advance the prices
of goods obtained at such a risk, and with such costs? Not to mention the
losses they have sustained since the war, by the stagnation of trade, and
otherwise, are not these reasons sufficient to justify them? The honest
second-hand dealer may be obliged to advance upon the prices of his goods, as
his suppliers advance upon him; and yet compared with other times, and with
other things in the present times, his interest may really sink rather than
gain. Now ought we not in justice to make great allowances for these things?

But have not others, who have sustained no such losses, nor run any such
hazards, taken advantage of these things, and extorted in their demands for
every article they had to dispose of, merely for the sake of private gain?

Are there not some, who, seeing the circumstances of the times gave them the
opportunity, that peoples necessities would compel them to purchase at almost
any rate, have not had virtue enough to withstand the temptation; but deaf to
the voice of justice, reason and conscience, and dead to the feelings of
benevolence and humanity, have carried their extortion to the greatest possible
length!

Are there not some others, who had large stocks on hand, for which some might
be deeply indebted to merchants abroad, and had it not been for the present
unhappy war, before this day might have entered the list of Bankrupts; who have
extorted upon their goods, that they might enable themselves to purchase the
West India produce which has been wafted so plentifully into our ports, that
they might keep the trade in their own hands, purposely to obtain what advances
they pleased?

Again, is it not a fact well known to many in the trading towns, that when
foreigners have risked a trade with us, and offered their commodities for sale
in our ports, at reasonable prices, that some of the larger trading merchants
have purchased their whole cargoes; giving not only more than they need to have
done, but even more than was demanded; with a view to keep up the value of the
goods they had on hand? So much have some valued their own interest above the
good of the public.

Are not such monopolizings and forestallings as these, the crime of Extortion
of the blackest hue!

But if we revert our thoughts to the country, shall we not find the same
avaricious disposition equally prevailing in most places, in proportion to the
trade carried on, and as the circumstances of people give them an opportunity?
Does it not seem as if the whole country was contaminated with a spirit of
selfishness? Is there any other difference between the Merchant and the Farmer
in this respect, than what arises from their different circumstances? Although
the merchants might have been first in this iniquity, yet have not the country
people eagerly followed; till both have become jealous of each other, and seem
as if resolved, in some instances, to out do in Extortion! -- From an impartial
inquiry into these affairs, does it not appear probable, at least, that from
such causes combined this destructive evil takes it is rise? And yet, how ready
is every one to excuse himself from blame, and cast the fault upon others? --
When perhaps, the greater part, if not all who are any ways concerned in trade,
whether in Town or Country, are either in a greater or less degree promoters of
this internal oppression; in addition to our other calamities. Does not the
text therefore seem pertinent to our present circumstances, and apply is well
to the Farmer, as to the Merchant; thou have greedily gained of thy neighbors
by Extortion, and have forgotten me, says the Lord God.

Let us next consider who are the more immediate sufferers by this internal
oppression. But this is easily discerned --. Neither the Merchant nor the
Farmer, as individuals; for these are apparently gainers -- and those who are
employed in public business, many of them at least, the poor soldiers excepted,
may find ways and means by their Salaries, Perquisites, or otherwise, to add as
much to their private interests as to balance their own losses, if not more.
None of these therefore are so sensibly affected by it, as others: but all who
depend alone upon fixed salaries, or their own private incomes, having no
concern in trade, etc. are immediate and heavy sufferers. Their interests are
every day sinking, and their properties falling by the hand of extortion. In a
word, every class of men, those in public employ or some trade or other
excepted, are suffering under the iron hand of merciless internal Oppression.
But the distresses of the Poor especially must be inexpressibly great. I do not
mean of every kind however; some of these doubtless know how to make advantage
of the times, as well as other men; and for ought we know, may have as great a
hand in Extortion, according to the sphere in which they act. It is with them,
no doubt, as with some in higher rank, money never flowed in upon them so fast
before in life. -- But what, my Friends, must become of the Aged and Infirm,
the Widow and the Orphan? What will become of thousands, who before these
difficulties were but one remove from pinching want? What can they subsist on
now? Will not their complaints reach the Heavens, and bring down the judgments
of God still heavier upon us? O where are those bowels of mercy, and
compassion, which all the ties of nature, humanity, and religion bind us to
exercise toward our fellow creatures? Are we dead to every tender feeling, and
benevolent affection! Are we sinking into that hardened state of the Jews, when
oppression swallowed up the needy, and made the poor of the land to fail? Have
we not reason to say with the Prophet, we look for judgment, but there is none;
for salvation, but it is far from us: For our transgressions are multiplied --,
and our sins testify against us --. In transgressing and lying against the
Lord, departing from the truth, speaking oppression and revolt -- Judgment is
turned away backward, justice stands afar off; truth is fallen in the street,
and equity cannot enter.

While the Merchant complains of the Farmer, and the Farmer of the Merchant,
are not both enriching themselves with the spoils of the poor? -- But the
Merchant perhaps will plead, that notwithstanding he has greatly advanced the
prices of his wares, yet considering the circumstances of the times, the loss
of trade, etc. he is not upon the whole a gainer by his traffic --. The Farmer
may likewise plead, that the wares of the Merchant have risen more in
proportion to former prices than the produce of the Farm, therefore
notwithstanding the high demands he makes for all his vendible articles, yet
upon the whole he is not a gainer --. Now if this be a fact, that both have
enhanced the prices of your commodities, and yet neither gain any thing by it,
you must be the more inexcusable still: for if this be the case, then you must
certainly extort for the sake of oppression, even without a temptation! But
this supposition will not readily be granted; therefore admitting that neither
increase your real, or personal estates, by your present trade, yet it is
presumed you still retain your interests by grinding the face of the poor. So
that view the matter in what light you please, you cannot exculpate yourselves
from blame. What a melancholy case is this? Will not these words of the Prophet
apply to us; the Lord will enter into judgment with the ancients of his people:
-- for ye have eaten up the vineyard; the spoil of the poor is in your houses.
What mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor?
says the Lord God of Hosts. Are we not the generation, the wise man speaks of,
whose teeth are as swords, and their jaw-teeth as knives, to devour the poor
from off the earth, and the needy from among men?

These are some of the evils that individuals suffer by the present Extortion
-- but if we consider it in a more public view, how greatly does it injure, and
endanger the community? It affects the public in these several ways.

1. It discourages, and makes uneasy all those, who are oppressed; and has a
natural tendency to create divisions, and destroy that harmony and union, in
which the strength and happiness of societies greatly consist.

2. It enhances the prices of almost every Article, necessary for the public
supply -- for which there is now the greatest demand; and consequently,
amazingly increases the public debt --. And here, if I mistake not, the
Extortioner is a sinner against himself; for to discharge the load he must in
time, at least refund a share of his unrighteous gain.

3. These things occasion the Emission of such floods of Paper-Currency, as
necessarily depreciates its own value; and so much the more involves the public
in difficulty. So that in fact, Extortion most rapidly increases the debt,
depreciates the Currency, and sinks the credit of the public; and consequently
is the greatest impolicy. And unless a speedy stop can be put to its progress,
by some means or other, it will soon bring inevitable ruin upon the public, and
render the increasing burdens of thousands quite intolerable! But where then
is our boasted love for our country? Where our patriotism, and pretended zeal
for the public good? Have not these been tipped about from tongue to tongue?
Was all this feigned? or was it a dream or mere delusion? or was it a cloak to
hide a spirit as selfish as -- man? Were indifferent beings to view our
conduct, what would they think of us? Were the false colorings, with which men
paint their actions to be wiped off, and the mask fairly taken away, would not
the high pretensions of patriotism, and zeal for the public good, of multitudes
appear to be little more than ambition and hypocrisy? Instead of love and zeal
for our country, would not craft, avarice, and self interest immediately be
thrown to view? Instead of honesty, purity of heart, and benovelence, should we
not see partiality, corruption, infidelity, and Extortion of the vilest kind,
stalking through the land?

But if we consider the matter in a more religious view, how calamitious and
threatening is the present aspect of the times? Can there be a more certain
evidence of the decay of religion, and the increase of impiety, than the
present internal oppression? It looks, in short, as if God had in some degrees
forsaken us. It is certain, so far as this iniquity (...), we have forsaken
him. The Almighty (...) this abomination; and considers it as a reproach
against himself: for he that oppresses the poor, reproacheth his maker: but he
that honoreth him, has mercy on the poor. Have we not reason to tremble at the
threatenings once denounced against Jerusalem for like sins? Cast a mount about
her, said the Lord of hosts, this is the city to be visited, she is wholly
oppression in the midst of her. As a fountain casts out her waters, so she
casts out her wickedness: violence and spoil is heard in her, before me
continually is grief and wounds. Be instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul
depart from thee: lest I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited. Jerusalem
would not hear the voice of the Lord: and that great city, once the glory of
the world, is no more! O that we might be wise enough to shun the rocks, which
others have split against, lest we share the same fate! -- But what can the
Extortioner expect? Nay, what can he pray for? Let his professions be what they
may, to be consistent with himself, his prayer, if ever he does pray, must be
something like this:

O thou, Sovran Lord of the universe, accept of a tribute of thanks from thy
professing, worthy servant, who rejoices, that thou have permitted those public
calamities, which have given so happy an opportunity for the exercise of my
unbounded, avaricious lusts. I congratulate myself at what I have already
accumulated by extorting from others.

May my merchandise still prosper, or my husbandry increase: but may scarcity
and want still be the fate of my country; and more and more abound. May the
time speedily come, when I shall be able to buy the poor for silver, and the
needy for a pair of shoes. May all my countrymen be brought low; and I be made
Lord over them. -- O satiate my ambitious, avaricious desires, which are all as
unbounded as the Ocean -- and give me, if possible to live always: but if this
may not be granted, though I cannot bear the thought of ever dying; and deprecate
the horrible idea of parting with my possessions, yet when I can enjoy my
earthly paradise no longer, then give me the largest portion in the paradise
above.

How shocking to a pious mind would it be, to hear a man in earnest, address
his maker thus! yet I dare appeal to the Extortioner's own conscience, if he
has any, if this does not correspond with his real desires? The essence of
prayer consists in the real desires of the heart. Let a man express what he
will in words, his real prayer is only what he wishes.

But are Merchants, Traders, and Farmers the only set of men concerned in our
internal oppression? At the time when the Prophet addressed the Jews in the
text, every order of men among them, each in their own way, whether Priests,
Rulers, or People, apparently acted from sinister motives; and were promoters
of their own calamities, by oppression. Some individuals indeed might have had
the fear of God before them: but this number compared with the whole was
doubtless small: but taken collectively, every order among them either in a
greater or less degree were culpable. From the least of them even unto the
greatest of them every one was given to covetousness.

But is this the case with every denomination among us? are we all gone out of
the way? Has a selfish, ambitious, avaricious spirit diffused its baneful
influences through our land? Do the clergy grow inattentive to the vices of men,
and less zealous for the Lord of hosts? have they sufficiently sounded the
alarm and as loudly exclaimed against our own sins as the sins of others? have
they been as watchful against internal oppression, which is the greater evil,
as against oppression from abroad? Do they daub with untempered mortar, healing
the hurt of the daughter of God's people slightly, saying peace, peace, when
there is no peace? -- and do the people love to have it so? Are our rulers
tinged with the same disposition? Are our Politicians bending their wits, and
racking their inventions, to exalt themselves? Are our Statesmen practicing
every species of State-Craft, to promote self interest and self honor? -- Have
appointments, both in the civil and military departments, been under the
influence of sinister views? -- has the promotion of Friends and Connections
been more attended to, than the public good? -- Have many disgraced their
Country, and the office they sustained; while others, who would have done
honor to both, have been wholly neglected? Are those, who are employed in
public business, too much actuated by the same spirit? In a word are avarice,
ambition, and selfishness, combined together, become the governing Principle of
the Times? I mean only to put individuals upon self inquiry. I mean not to cast
the least reflection upon any order of men whatever: nor would I willingly say
a word to stir up any groundless surmises: For I revere the true Patriot, the
Friend to his Country, and the Liberties of mankind: but detest the man, called
by whatever name, "who owes his greatness to his country's ruin." But although I
mean not to charge this crime of Extortion and selfishness upon every man, yet
does not the complexion of the times urge us to these inquiries? If these
things be true of us, what a deplorable situation are we in! Our circumstances
urgently request a mournful tear, from every pitying eye, over ourselves, and
our Country! Without a speedy reformation, how soon will the lamentation, of
our all benevolent Savior over Jerusalem, with a little variation, apply to us!
O New England, New England, how often would I have gathered thy children
together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would
not! O that thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day the things
that belong to thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes.

But let us search our own hearts; examine our own practices; and apply the
subject more closly to ourselves. Have we not followed the multitude to do
evil, and greedily gained of our neighbors by Extortion, distressing
individuals, and damaging the public? I would not be understood to suggest that
the people are worse here, than in other places: I have no reason to think they
are. Nor would I have a word, said in this discourse, understood as intended to
convey the least personal complaint, my Hearers, against you -- justice and
gratitude require the contrary, having experienced much of your kindness and
liberality, ever since I have have had the happiness to live among you: a
grateful sense of which, may I always retain upon my heart.

But, my Friends, does not extortion abound here as well as in other places?
Who can say, I have washed my hands in Innocence, and am free from this sin of
the times? Have we not more or less of the same disposition in each of our
hearts? I presume not to clear myself; though God has indeed, in his wise and
merciful Providence, placed me in a situation, where I am not tried with the
temptation to exercise it. But should the case ever be otherwise, I humbly
pray, and I ask your prayers for me, that I may be kept from so great an evil.
If we are concerned in this abhorred sin, let us now pause a moment, and
reflect what an awful thing it is for us to bring such guilt upon ourselves,
and upon the land! -- Let me entreat you by every bowel of mercy, and
benevolent passion, to consider what you do! -- This life, with all its most
pleasurable enjoyments, is but a vapor: and gain, greedily gotten by
extortion, is but a treasure of guilt and misery to accompany you into the
eternal world! Will you take so much pains, and seeming pleasure in that which
must cost you the keenest, and most bitter repentance in this life; or else
produce a great degree of guilt and anguish to torture you in a world to come!
For the Lord has spoken it, and will not go back; -- nor covetous -- nor
extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of GOD.

But you will plead perhaps, that the Merchants began first, and therefore you
are not to blame. But will this excuse you? So Eve was first in the
transgression, but did that excuse Adam, who willingly followed? Will you like
him, follow others in iniquity, and plunge yourselves into the same guilt and
misery; and then as he did cast all the blame on others? rather than virtuously
stand alone? Perhaps, self-interest has so biased, and prejudiced your minds,
that you do not discern this evil in yourselves, though you may see it in others.
And some may argue, that as they are obliged to pay exorbitant prices for what
they purchase, there is no iniquity in asking the like for what they sell. But
while there are more purchasers than venders, this way of reasoning must be
forever unjust. And if it made as much against your present interest as it does
for it, would you not readily see it? Let us suppose a case. What if the public
authority should encourage the extravagant demands of the Merchants; and at the
same time, force your commodities from you at the former usual prices? would
you not see the injustice of this? would you suffer it? would not every mouth
be filled with the cry of oppression? and every exertion be made to suppress
it? Equal injustice is now practiced by the Merchant and Farmer both; and yet
you do not feel it, or, if sensible of it, do not reform.

One peculiar aggravation attends this sin: If those who are guilty of it,
should at last be so happy, as to find repentance and forgiveness, yet from
it is very nature, it will not admit of restitution. How cutting the reflection
of a penitent just going into eternity, that he cannot right the injuries of
the multitude he has wronged by his extortion!

But however willing we are to excuse ourselves from blame, do we not see this
sin in others, and professedly abhor it? Are we not then in danger of being
numbered with those the Apostle speaks of, who knowing the judgments of GOD,
that they who commit such things are worthy of punishment, and yet do the same?

But you will say perhaps, we are not insensible of the evil; we acknowledge we
have been faulty, -- but here we are --. How shall we go back? or by what means
shall we stop it is course? What will it avail for one to attempt it alone? His
conduct will not influence the whole. The consequence of the attempt, would be
his own ruin, without effecting any good. Each one may therefore say, it is not
my duty to make the trial. If others would reform, so would I --. This is as
much as to say, when a sin is become general, it is no sin in an individual to
practice it; or that it is no sin to follow a multitude to do evil. But what
says our blessed Savior? If any man will come after me, let him deny himself,
and take up his cross and follow me. And he that does not comparatively even
hate every worldly comfort, and is willing to forego them all for the sake of
his duty to God, and his fellow creatures, cannot be Christ's disciple. The
meaning is, that whenever our Duty and temporal Interest become competitors,
the latter must give way to the former. For what is a man profited, if he shall
gain the whole world, and lose his own Soul? or what shall a man give in
exchange for his Soul? The benevolent Jesus gave up even life itself to redeem
us. And yet we are unwilling to give up a little of our worldly interest to
redeem our brethren and country from distress. But we must deny ourselves. The
voice of reason and conscience, revelation and justice, the cries of the poor,
and groans of our bleeding Country all require it! And now, my Friends, you
have an opportunity to try your virtue. On the one hand, you have temporal
interest strongly inviting you to comply with the Exorbitancy of the times, on
the other, duty to God, compassion for the poor, regard for justice, and love
for your country, all urging you to desist. And now which will you do? Still
follow after the mammon of unrighteousness, forsake your God, devour the poor,
and destroy your country, or nobly display your virtue, by every exertion, to
suppress extortion; and put a stop to the increasing calamities in the land?
And even reduce yourselves to that state of poverty and want, which many,
either do or will suffer, whom you may have oppressed, rather than violate your
duty or deal unjustly with your fellow men. Or, regardless of all these
benevolent motives, will you like the young man in the gospel, go away
sorrowful?

But the question still returns, though we are all sensible of the evil, yet how
shall a reformation be effected? What can one do alone? It may be replied, if
you are all sensible of this, you are not alone. Unite therefore in your
exertions; fixing it in your minds, that there must be a reformation; or else
we are an undone people. For all the law, says the Apostle, is fulfilled in
one word, even this; Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. But if ye bite
and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another. But
do you say, it is a difficult thing to bring about a reformation? and ask how
it shall be effected? Let me ask how you came into this way? Did you find that
a difficult thing? Have not many taken pains to find out the highest pitch of
exorbitancy, lest they should not have an equal hand in it? Are there not many,
to their shame, and remorse of their own consciences, were they not seared as
with a hot iron, who have hoarded up their goods, and withheld supplies even
from the necessitous, purposely to extort upon them! -- Were half the pains
taken, and desires manifested to effect a reformation, would it not be done?
Inquire therefore how this extortion arose, and go back the same way.

But you will say perhaps, the evil is now become general; and consequently a
stop cannot be put to it, unless the whole are agreed.

It is become too general, we grant, and therefore the more calamitous! But how
came this to be so? Was it not produced by the influence of individuals? All
public sins become general in the same way --. A total declension never took
place in an instant. These evils begin first with a few individuals -- and by
their influence diffuse themselves, and become general by degrees. -- So it is
with reformations: they have always began with individuals. If a reformation
was not to commence, without the concurrent voice of the community, we might
despair of it forever. If there is any such thing as reasoning from Analogy, we
can in this way have no reason ever to expect it. To reform a community is for
individuals to begin, and act with all the influence they have. "Such is our
state," as one observes, that each individual has a proportion of influence on
some neighbor at least; he on another, and so on; as in a river the following
drop urges that which is before; and every one through the whole length of the
stream, has the like influence. We know not what individuals may do. We are not
at liberty to lie dormant until we can at once influence the whole. We must
begin with the weight we have. Should the little springs neglect to flow till a
general agreement should take place, the torrent that now bears down all before
it, would never be formed. These mighty floods have their rise in single drops
from the rocks, which uniting creep along till they meet with another
combination so small that it might be absorbed by the traveller's foot: These
unite, proceed and enlarge 'till mountains tremble at their sound! Let us
receive instruction from the stream. You know not therefore what you may do
till you make the experiment. If you would exert yourselves, unite, combine,
exclaim against the abhorred evil, and manifest your detestation of it by your
own example, who can tell what effect it might have? Should you, with a single
eye to the honor of God, the happiness of your fellow creatures, and good of
your country, nobly resolve by divine grace to lose all, suffer every thing,
and even become beggars, rather than follow the multitude in sin, who knows but
through your influence a general reformation might take place? And what a
glorious thing would that be! You would no doubt be the happier for it to all
eternity! Should you be unsuccessful in the attempt, yet still remember it is
inexpressibly better to be singularly virtuous, than fashionably vile; and
infinitely more glorious to stand alone in a good cause with a conscience
unspotted from the world, than to follow the current of vice, with numberless
millions for our companions. The testimony of a good conscience in death will
be infinitely preferable to thousands of worlds like this. It will be but a
poor consolation in the regions of despair, that we did but follow the
multitude. As the damned are no doubt tormenters of one another, so the more
companions there in misery the greater will be the sufferings. Dives in Hell
deprecated his brethren's coming there, no doubt, lest his own misery should be
increased. Be entreated then to take this matter into your serious
consideration, as we must all answer for our conduct at the bar at GOD another
day!

It is said, the public Authority have taken the matter under their
considerations. What will be the result of their deliberations and debates upon
it we know not. Since the above discourse was delivered, the General Court have
passed an act, regulating all capital articles of trade, and produce of the
country; which, though it cannot alter the disposition of the people, yet if
strictly observed, must put a check upon the ruinous avarice, and extortion of
the times. -- It affords us a melancholy reflection, that our degeneracy has
become so exceedingly great, within the space of two years, as to require such
an extraordinary measure! Nothing but dire necessity, we may presume, would
induce the Court to make the attempt.

The operation of this act will, perhaps, for the present, affect the private
interest of some individuals. But notwithstanding this, whoever considers the
difficulty of framing such a bill, and at the same time, the absolute necessity
of it, under our present circumstances, if a friend to justice, his neighbor,
and his country, can he do less than exert himself to the utmost to carry it
into execution? As few exceptions perhaps can be taken against it, as against
any bill of such a nature, that might be formed.

Can the generous soul, the christian, the friend of man, and lover of his
country, be so destitute of public virtue, so selfish, contracted, and unjust,
as to see his neighbor devoured, the poor of the land fail, and his country
sink in ruin, rather than forego a little of his own private interest to
prevent such amazing calamities! Charity forbids the thought! --


Perhaps they will effect more, than by many is expected. It doubtless behooves
them, I speak with freedom, and boldness, to mark out the peoples duty by their
own Example. And does it not equally become the Ministers of the Gospel,
Merchants, Traders, Farmers, and every other denomination of men, to rouse up,
and exert themselves to the utmost, in their particular spheres, to stop the
growing evil, which threatens destruction to our country? But whatever others
may do, let us resolve, through Christ, whatever may be the consequence, that we
will serve the Lord. Let whatever will await us here, let us through the Redeemer
secure an interest in a better country, even an heavenly one.

But perhaps all that has been said will have little or no effect. Our public
virtue and true concern for our country may be so weak, our affections and
charity so cold; and our temptations, and passion for the world so strong and
urgent, that after all the warnings we have had, we shall still perhaps
continue in the same course, as did the Jews, till involved in complete
destruction!

But whether you will hear, or forbear, God commands his Ministers to cry
aloud, and not spare to show his people their transgressions. I am commissioned
in the service of Christ; and ye are witnesses, that I am sworn to be faithful.
Therefore, while I have a finger to write, or tongue to speak, Christ Jesus
strengthening me, I will speak, declare, and bear testimony against the
abominations of the land.

I therefore again urge your attention to this important affair. The cause I am
pleading is the cause of GOD, and my country, the cause of the poor and
oppressed. I am this day an advocate for the poor, the widow, and the
fatherless. My heart aches for the distressed! I tremble for my Country! and for
all of you, my Hearers, who are involved in the general guilt! O my dearly
beloved flock, for whose souls I am to watch, as one that must give an account,
be entreated; by the tender mercies of our Lord Jesus Christ, to come out from
among the sins, and abominations of the times, of every denomination. Methinks,
the voice of God to you is, come out, my people, from among them, and be ye
separate; touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you. Come out from
among them, -- be no longer partaker of their sins, lest ye be partaker of
their plagues! I therefore again beseech your attention to this matter: and
urge you, by every bond of christianity, equity and justice -- by every tender
feeling of humanity, and compassion for the poor; and by every tie of love and
friendship to your country to desist from extortion, and oppression of every
kind! Let the expressive threatening and encouraging language of the sacred
scriptures, deter you from this evil; -- For he that by unjust gain increases
his substance, shall gather it for him that will pity the poor. -- Woe to him
that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, -- that he may be delivered
from the power of evil. -- He that oppresses the poor to increase his riches,
shall surely come to want. -- For the oppression of the poor, and the sighing
of the needy, now will I arise, says the Lord. -- And I will be a swift
witness against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow, and
the fatherless. -- But he that despises the gain of oppression, that shakes
his hands from holding of bribes, that stops his ear from hearing of blood,
and shuts his eyes from seeing of evil: He shall dwell on high: his place of
defense shall be the munition of rocks, bread shall be given him, his waters
shall be sure.

I would once more urge your most speedy and vigorous efforts to suppress the
growing calamity, from a consideration of the goodness, and mercy of God toward
us through the course of the last year, as we would wish for a more happy one in
the ensuing. The favor of God has been extended toward us in numberless
instances. Have we not been carried through another calamitous year; and still
live to praise him, while thousands, who lived the last New Year's Day are no
more! What is the language of divine goodness in this? Is it not expressed in
these words of our Savior? This is my commandment that ye love one another, as
I have loved you. But where is our love if we bite and devour one another?
Great and important events are before us, which, as some imagine, will in a
great measure determine our public controversy, either for or against us before
the year closes, upon which we have this day entered. Who of us may live to see
it, God alone knows! O let us suffer the things then, which have been
suggested, deeply to impress, and affect our minds, as we would hope for the
smiles of Providence upon us, and our land. O may every one, who has a heart to
pray, most devoutly solicit the throne of grace, that God, for Christ's sake,
would pour out a spirit of reformation upon us, and upon our land. For,
according to all human probabilities, unless this takes place, we are a
devoted, undone people! Should the time come, in which we shall all see it,
then I trust you will be witnesses for me, that in this particular, I am free
from the blood of my Country, and of your Souls.

AMEN.

