GOD ARISING AND PLEADING HIS PEOPLE'S CAUSE; OR THE AMERICAN WAR IN FAVOR OF
LIBERTY, AGAINST THE MEASURES AND ARMS OF GREAT BRITAIN, SHOWN TO BE THE CAUSE
OF GOD: IN A SERMON PREACHED OCTOBER 5TH, 1777 AT AN EVENING LECTURE, IN THE
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN NEWBURY-PORT, By ABRAHAM KETELTAS, A. M.

Published by particular desire.

NEWBURY-PORT: PRINTED BY JOHN MYCALL, FOR EDMUND SAWYER, AND TO BE SOLD AT HIS
SHOP IN NEWBURY. MDCCLXXVII.

PSALM 74, Verse 22. Arise O GOD! Plead thine own Cause.


WHEN David, the inspired Penman of this Psalm, was greatly distressed,
unjustly blamed on account of the Amalekites invading, spoiling, and burning
Ziklag; and carrying away captive the women that were (...) in, and when the
people talked of stoning him on (...) account, we read, that under these
afflicting circumst^^ces, he encouraged himself in the Lord his God. 1 Samuel ^ 6.
In this respect, the royal Psalmist exem^lified ^n (...) conduct, the exercise
of every believer. They (...) to God for refuge in time of trouble, and expect
^^^fort and relief from his power and grace, from his glorious perfections and
precious promises. The language of their hearts, in any deep distress, is that
of Asaph, Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth that I
desire besides thee; my flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of
my heart and my portion for ever; although the Fig tree should not blossom,
though there should be no fruit on the Vine, though the labor of the Olive
should fail, though the field should yield no meat, though the stock* should be
cut off from the fold, and though there should be no herd in the stall, the
believer will rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of his salvation. If
prospects should look dark, earth should shudder on her basis, and no light nor
relief should appear to the eye of sense, yet the believing heart will trust in
the name of the Lord, and stay itself upon its God. Should all the powers of
earth and hell combine, for the destruction of God's people, should evil
tidings assault the ear from every quarter, and human understanding be at a
loss for means of deliverance and safety, yet the believer's heart is fixed,
trusting in the Lord. He expects eve^^ thing from the divine power and all
sufficiency; he looks up to his God in time of trouble for relief, he cries out
with the royal Psalmist in my text, Arise, O God, and plead thine own cause.

In discoursing on these words I shall endeavor by divine assistance,

I. To show you what we are to understand by the cause of God.

II. What is meant by his arising and pleading this cause; and what
encouragement his people have that he will effectually do it.

1st Then I am to show you what we are to understand by the cause of God.

By the c^use of God we are to understand the whole system of divine truth. Our
blessed Lord, when he was arraigned before Pilate, declared, for this end was I
born, and for this end came I into the world, that I might bear witness to the
truth. This also was the grand design of all the dispensations of God to men.
The old and new Testament were both of them written, and have been hitherto
preserved, that they might exhibit to men a scheme of truth. God has di^play'd
to our view the volume of nature, that we may therein read his sublime glories
and perfections, for the heavens declare his glory, and the firmament shows
forth his handy work, and from the things that are made, are clearly seen his
eternal power and Godhead. The invisible things of him are discovered, by a
survey of the creation.

All the doctrines contained in the old and new Testament, from that system of
truth, of which we are speaking, amongst these doctrines, those most essential
to man, are his fall in Adam, and redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ, the
necessity of being regenerated and sanctified by the spirit of God, and being
justified by the righteousness of his son imputed to them, and received by
faith, the necessity of holiness in order to happiness, and of conformity in
heart and life to the nature and will of God: These, and all the other
doctrines of his word, are the cause of God. For this cause he sent prophets
and apostles to preach and teach mankind, by their discourses and writings: For
this cause he sent his son and spirit in the world. These doctrines have been
maintained by the saints in all ages, at the peril of their lives and all they
held dear: This cause, Christ, his apostles, martyrs, and confessors, have held
so dear, that they have sealed them with their blood. This is a cause that God
loves and upholds, he has styled himself the God of truth, Deuteronomy. 32 4. David
declares, that the Lord keeps truth for ever, Ps. 146.6. Jeremiah cries out,
O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth, Jer. 5 3.

But 2dly. By the cause of God, we are ^o understand, the cause of universal
righteousness: The moral law, or the ten commandments is the rule of this
righteousness, and besides the moral law, all those duties which are incumbent
upon us, as fallen creatures; such as the great duties of faith, repentance and
conversion, which imply the forsaking of every sin, and the practice of every
virtue. This righteousness in^ludes whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are pure; whatsoever things are honest, lovely, and of good rep^^^. It
includes a temper and conduct, entirely conformable to the truth revealed in
the holy scriptures. This righteousness includes our duty to God, our fellow
creature, and ourselves; it implies that we love God supremely, that we worship
him in spirit and in truth, with reverence and godly fear, that we submit with
patience and resignation to all the strokes of his rod, that we trust in his
providence, rely on his mercy, goodness, truth, and other glorious perfections,
that we fear to offend him, and strive to please him, always endeavoring to
obey his will and commandments; it implies benevolence, justice, charity,
integrity, truth, and kindness in our conduct to our fellow creatures, that we
love our neighbor as ourselves, and do to others as we would they should do
unto us, that we forgive our enemies, and do good to all as we have
opportunity. That we be meek, sober, humble, heavenly minded, patient under
injuries, contented with our condition, temperate, as to the use of earthly
enjoyments, zealous for God's glory, and advancement of truth and religion in
the world -- The above particulars constitute that righteousness which is God's
cause, a great part of which is the image of his own nature and perfections:
This is what he delights in, for he loves righteousness, and hates
iniquity; he gave his laws to mankind that they might be holy, as he is holy;
he gave his word and spirit to sanctify the souls of men; he gave his only
begotten and dearly beloved son, to redeem us from all iniquity, and to purify
us unto himself, a peculiar people, zealous of good works. All the
dispensations of divine providence, prove God's love of holiness. All the
favors of his goodness to the righteous, and the awful judgments executed on
the ungodly, prove how much righteousness is the cause of God. The incarnation,
agonies and sufferings of Immanuel, were to magnify the law, and make it
honorable, and demonstrate how much the righteous God loves righteousness.

3dly. I add the welfare of the people, who believe and profess the
abovementioned system of divine truths, and practice the righteousness just
now described, is the cause of God. They are a society of holy and regenerate
souls, trusting in the mercy of God through Christ, conforming the temper of
their minds and the tenor of their lives, to the nature, will, and perfections
of God; they are represented in Scripture, as a kingdom, of which Jesus Christ
is the monarch, as a body, of which the son of God is the head: They are
described by St. Peter, as a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy
nation, a peculiar people, destined to show forth the praises of him who called
them from darkness to his mavelous light: They are in scripture styled Zion,
Jerusalem, the kingdom of God, and the Church of Christ* This society are
called elect, as being chosen out of the world, saints as being sanctified and
made holy by the spirit, and beloved of God, as being the favorites of the most
high. He loves them with a distinguishing love; as a father pitieth his
children, so the Lord pitieth those his servants that fear him. God loves his
people, infinitely more than all the rest of the world: He loves the gates of
Zion, more than all the dwellings of Jacob. Zion is represented by the prophet
Isaiah, under a melancholy gloom, complaining, the Lord has forsaken me; and
my GOD has forgotten me: to which complaint, the Father of mercies most
graciously replies, Can a woman forget her sucking child, so as to have no
compassion for the son of her womb, yea they may forget, yet will I not forget
thee: I have graven thee on the palms of my hands, and thy walls are
continually before me -- Thus you see the tender and inexpressible love that
God bears to Zion; no affectionate parent ever loved the most amiable child, no
fond enraptured bridegroom ever loved the most charming bride, as God loves his
people: Listen a little longer to the voice of inspiration to be convinced of
this comforting, reviving truth. God's portion is his people, and Israel the
lot of his inheritance -- he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as
the apple of his eye, as an Eagle stirs up her nest, fluttereth over her
young, spreads abroad her wings, takes them, bears them on her wings, so
the Lord alone did lead them. God so loved the church, that he redeemed it by
his own blood, he spared not his own Son, but gave him for his chosen people;
Christ loved the church, and gave himself for it, gave himself to a life of
sorrows, to inexpressible agonies, and to the accursed death of the cross.
Immanuel regards the injuries and favors done the church, as if done to
himself: When Saul persecuted the church, he said unto him, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me, and at the last day he will say to those who have fed the
hungry saint, given drink to the thirsty believer, clothed his naked
disciples, visited the sick and imprisoned members of his invisible body,
inasmuch as ye have done it to the least of these my brethren, ye have done it
unto me. When the true believer is injured, oppressed, persecuted, plundered,
imprisoned, tormented, and murdered, he looks upon their cause as his own,
precious in his sight is the death of his saints: he is the father of their
fatherless children, the God and protector of their widows, the friend of their
friends, and the enemy of their enemies. The enraptured Psalmist thus
celebrates the kindness of God to his people: The Lord upholdeth all that fall,
and raises up all that be bowed down, the Lord is righteous in all his ways,
and holy in all his works; the Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him,
to all that call upon him in truth, Ps. 140 146. He will fulfill the desire of
them that fear him, he will also hear their cry and will save them. The Lord
preserves all them that love him, but all the wicked will he destroy: Happy is
he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God,
which made heaven and earth, the sea and all that in them is; who keeps truth
for ever: who executes judgment for the oppressed, who gives food to the
hungry: The Lord loses the prisoners: the Lord opens the eyes of the blind:
the Lord loves the righteous: the Lord preserves the strangers, he relieveth
the fatherless and the widow, but the way of the wicked he turns upside down:
the Lord does build up Jerusalem, he gathers together the outcasts of Israel:
he delights not in the strength of the horse; he takes not pleasure in the
legs of a man: the Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in those that
hope in his mercy. Thus you see my brethren, that the cause of truth, the cause
of religion, the cause of righteousness, the cause of his church and people, is
the cause of God: It is, as the Psalmist expresses it, his own cause.

Thus my brethren, I have shown you what is meant by the cause of God.

I now proceed to explain what we are to understand by God's pleading this
cause, which was the second point proposed.

The Hebrew word here translated plead, may be rendered litigate, strove,
contend, sight, but being here connected with cause, it is best translated, by
the English word plead, a term very familiar to most of us, which signifies an
advocate, lawyer, or patron's arguing, supplicating, interceeding, contending
for his client, and representing his case to the best advantage, espousing or
patronizing it, or taking it in his own hands and managing it. The phrase of
God's pleading his people's cause, frequently occurs in scripture. Thus David,
Psalm 35.1, invokes the divine help saying, plead my cause O Lord with them
that strive with me, fight against them that fight against me: and when Saul
unjustly persecuted him and sought his life, he thus accosts the cruel tyrant,
1 Samuel 24 15. the Lord therefore be Judge, and judge between me and thee, and
see and plead my cause, and deliver me out of thine hand: and in the 143d Psalm
he says, Judge me O God and plead my cause against an ungodly nation: O
deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man. Solomon exhorts, Proverbs 22 23.
Rob not the poor because he is poor; neither oppress the afflicted in the gate;
for the Lord will plead their cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoiled
them: And again he says in the next chapter: Remove not the old land marks, and
enter not into the field of the fatherless, for their Redeemer is mighty; he
shall plead their cause with thee: See also Jeremiah 50, 33 34. Thus says the
Lord of Hosts, the children of Israel and the children of Judah were oppressed
together, and all that took them captives, held them fast, they refused to let
them go. Their Redeemer is strong, the Lord of Hosts is his name, he shall
strongly plead their cause, that he may give rest to the land and disquiet the
inhabitants of Babylon. There is a remarkable passage in the ensuing chapter,
in which God speaks of the injuries done to his people, as if done to himself;
he makes their cause his own, and declares that he will plead it. See Jeremiah
51, 33 etc. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon has
devoured me, he has crushed me, he has made me an empty vessel, he has
swallowed me up like a dragon, he has filled his belly with his delicates, he
has cast me out. The violence done to me and to my flesh, be upon Babylon,
shall the inhabitant of Zion say; and my blood upon the inhabitants of Chaldea,
shall Jerusalem say, therefore thus says the Lord, behold I will plead thy
cause, and take vengeance for thee: and this was by punishing Nebuchadnezzar in
a most signal manner, and by destroying the inhabitants of Babylon. See the
declaration of God's injured Church, Micah 7.8, etc. Rejoice not against me, O
mine enemy: when I fall I shall arise: when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall
be a light unto me. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: he
will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness. Then
she that is mine enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her which said unto
me, where is the Lord thy God? mine eyes shall behold her: now shall she be
trodden down as the mire in the streets. Thus you see that God will plead his
own and his people's cause, against their common enemies. But how does God
plead for his people, how does he plead his own cause? I answer, he pleads it
by his word, his spirit, and his providence.

1. He pleads his own and his people's cause by his word, both in a general and
particular manner. He forbids all injustice, oppression, tyranny, murder,
theft, plunder, adultery, slander, false witness, unjustly coveting our
neighbor's property: he inculcates universal love, benevolence, compassion,
humanity, peace, and righteousness: he commands all christians to love their
neighbor as themselves, and to do to others as they would that others should
do unto them: he commands brethren to dwell together in unity, concord, and
mutual forbearance; he declares that to subvert a man in his cause, is not
right; he forbids the injuring our neighbor's name, life, or property; he
pronounces a woe against them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write
grievousness which they have prescribed, to turn the needy from judgment, and
to take away the right of the poor of his people; he commands that he who
rules over men, must be just, ruling in the fear of the Lord; he commands
magistrates to be a terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that do well.

God pled the cause of liberty with the Israelites, when they foolishly desired
a king to reign over them: he told them the prejudice it would be to their
freedom and happiness, in order to discourage them from it: he said, this will
be the manner of the king that shall reign over you; he will take your sons and
appoint them for himself, for his chariots and to be his horsemen, and some
shall run before his chariots, and he will appoint him captains over hundreds,
and over fifties, and will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his harvest;
and he will take your fields and your vineyards, and your olive yards, even the
best of them, and he will take your men and maid servants, and your goodliest
young men, and your asses, and put them to his work, and ye shall be his
servants. God commanded the Israelites, saying, ye shall not oppress one
another. Leviticus 25, 14 17. When the ten tribes had revolted from Rehoboam,
because of oppression, and when Rehoboam and Judah went out to fight against
them to bring them back to subjection, God sent his prophet to Rehoboam and
Judah, saying, ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren 1 Kings 12
24. God declared to Abraham, I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them
that curse thee. See also 1. Chron. 16 22, compared with Psalm 105 15, where
Jehovah is represented, saying, touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no
harm: i. e. God's anointed people, and not kings, because it is said in the
preceding verse, he suffered no man to do them wrong, yea, he reproved kings
for their sake. I need not multiply arguments, to prove that God by his word,
pleads his own and his people's cause, what has been said is sufficient -- I
shall now point out some particular instances, in which God has by his word,
pled his people's cause. He pled the cause of pious Abel, against cruel Cain,
Genesis 4 10. And he said, what have thou done? the voice of thy brother's blood
cries unto me from the ground. And now thou art cursed from the earth, which
has opened her mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy hand. When thou
tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength. A
fugitive and a vagabond shall thou be in the earth God pled the cause of
righteous Lot, to save him as a brand out of the burning of Sodom; see Genesis 19
17: He said, escape for thy life; look not behind thee, neither stay thou in
all the plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed. When Laban
pursued Jacob with persecuting rage, God came to Laban the Syrian in a dream by
night, and said unto him, take heed that th^^ speak not to Jacob either good or
bad, Genesis 31 24. Th^^ he pled his cause. He pled for the life of Joseph (...)
the mouth of Reuben, and he pled the cause of Isra^^ by the mouth of Moses, to
Pharaoh, saying, thus sai^^ the Lord God of Israel, let my people go, Exodus 5.
^ God pleads his people's cause by the mouth of all h^^ faithful ministers,
admonishing mankind to do the ^ duty to each other, and perpetually praying and
inte^ceeding for the peace, prosperity, and enlargement o^ the church of
Christ; their cry is, spare thy people bless thine inheritance. He frequently
raises up faithful counselors, and able advocates, to plead his people ^
cause. Thus he raised up Esther and Mordecai in the court of Ahasuerus, to
intercede for the people of the Jews, who were devoted to destruction. God pled
for his distressed people, by the mouths of Ezra, Nehemiah, Daniel, Shadrach,
Meshac, and Abed-nego, at the courts of the kings of Babylon and Persia. See
the affecting prayers made by the above eminent servan^^ of the most High, and
by the mouths of the prophe^^ and apostles, in behalf of his people. Now as
the^ were moved to these prayers, by the inspiration and influence of the Holy
Ghost, those prayers may be regarded as God's wrestlings for his people.

In all ages of the world, God has raised up me ^ who have by their writings
and public speeches, ple^ his people's cause. How many able advocates in bot^
houses of parliament, have warmly pled and espoused the cause of this much
injured country. How many learned, sensible, and excellent pamphlets have been
written, both in England and America, to vindica^^ our rights and Liberties,
and prevent our destruction ^ and blessed be God, that all true christians, in
ever^ part of the world, who plead the cause of truth, libe^ty, and virtue, are
in effect interceeding for us. Ho^ many fervent prayers are continually
ascending from millions of sanctified and benevolent hearts in our behalf, to
the throne of grace; and what is more important than all these, we are deeply
interested in the all-powerful and all-prevailing intercession of Jesus our
merciful High Priest. We have an infinitely important friend at the court of
Heaven, a friend who so loved us, as to die for us; a friend who has all power
in Heaven and upon earth, and who is omnipotent to ^^ell the rage, and subdue
all the efforts of earth and hell. See the intercession of this glorious
Advocate: I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them which thou
have given me, for they are thine, and all thine are mine, and I am glorified
in them. And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I
come to thee. Holy Father, keep through thine own name, those whom ^hou have
given me, that they may be one as we are. I have ^^ven them thy word; and the
world has hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of
^^e world. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that
thou should keep them from the evil. ^hey are not of the world, even as I am
not of the world. ^anctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth. As thou
have sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them ^^^o the world. And
for their sakes I sanctify myself, that the^ ^lso might be sanctified through
the truth. Neither pray (...) these alone, but for them also which shall
believe on (...), through their word. That they all may be one, as thou ^^^ther
art in me, and I in thee; that they also may be one (...) us; that the world
may believe that thou have sent me. Thus we are interested in the all
prevailing intercession (...) Jesus Christ. But

II. God pleads his own and his people's cause, by (...) omnipotent,
omniscient, and omnipresent spirit: (...) sets home his divine word upon the
hearts of men; he removes their enmity against God and his people: he convinces
and converts the unconverted; he sheds abroad the love of God and man on the
human soul* he melts the obdurate heart, and fills it with pity and compassion
toward God's suffering servants; he opens the blind eyes, and convinces
misguided souls of their errors; he makes the enemies of the righteous their
friends; he alarms the guilty mind with a consciousness of its sins, and makes
their knees smite together. Of stones he raises up children to Abraham -- he
excites in the breasts of men, a glowing zeal for Christ, his kingdom and
subjects -- he is continually making intercession for them, in the hearts of
the faithful, (...) groanings that cannot be uttered -- he turns wolves into
lambs, softens the savage disposition, promotes t^^^h and righteousness, and
thus pleads the cause of God and his people. This glorious and divine spirit,
has all hearts (even of kings) in his hand, and turns them as the rivers of
waters, whithersoever he pleases; he fills the souls of God's people with faith
and courage, and those of their enemies with terror and dismay; he causes the
wicked to fly when no man pursues, but makes the righteous bold as a Lion --
he can cause the wrath of men, their most turbulent and headstrong passions to
praise God, and promote the interests of his people, and the remainder of that
wrath he can restrain. How happy for the church that she has so irresistible,
and omnipotent a spirit to plead her caus^* No mortal upon earth can resist his
all conquering energy. It was this spirit that pled the cause of Abraham, and
of Isaac, with Pharaoh and Abimelech, and prevented them from dishonoring the
wives of those illustrious Patriarchs. He pled powerfully in the heart of
Reuben for the life of Joseph: he even melted the hard hearted Esau into pity
and love toward his brother Jacob, against whom he had entertained the most
deadly hatred. He prevailed over the obdurate heart, stubborn disposition, and
otherwise inflexible resolution of Pharaoh, and constrained him to let Israel
go: He was a powerful advocate in the breast of Pharaoh's daughter, in behalf
of the infant Moses: He disquieted Ahasuerus on his royal couch, and rendered
him favorable to the devoted Jews: He influenced Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar,
Cyrus, Darius, Artaxerxes, and other monarchs to be kind to them, and pled
powerfully in their behalf, in the hearts of kings. This glorious spirit is
continually convincing the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment to
come, and pleads the cause of universal truth and holiness in the souls of men.

Lastly. God pleads his own, and his people's cause by his providence. The
whole history of it, from the creation of the world, is a series of wonderful
interpositions in behalf of his elect. The sacred writers scarce mention the
affairs of any other nations, save those that were connected with the church,
as though God regarded nothing in the world, save the church, and when all the
elect shall be gathered in; the present earth, and all the works that are
thereon, shall be burnt up. For the^ the sun stood still in Gibeah, and the
moon in the valley of Ajalon; and the stars in their courses fought against
Sisera: For them, he dried up the red sea, to make them a passage, and drowned
Pharaoh and his host in a watery grave: he went before them with a pillar of
cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night: (...) ^ed them with manna and
quails in the wilderness, and brought them water out of the flinty rock: to
^romote the cause of truth and righteousness, he has performed the most
surprising prodigies, and shaken heaven and earth. God has pled for his people,
by confering the most signal favors upon their friends, and by executing the
most awful judgments upon their enemies. For them he stopped the mouths of
lions, quenched the violence of fire, turned aside the edge of the sword, of
weak made them strong and valiant in battle, and put to flight and destroyed
whole armies of their enemies. The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them
that fear him, and delivers them: the Lord forsakes not his saints, they are
preserved forever. God showed favor to Potipher, Pharaoh, and the Egyptians,
for the sake of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and their posterity, and he severely
punished the kings and people of Egypt, Assyria, Canaan, Philistia, Babylon,
and Syria, for the injuries they offered to his chosen. He saved Noah and his
family from the flood that drowned the old world -- he preserved righteous Lot
from the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha. David from Readiness fury, Daniel in
the Lion's den, and the three children in the burning fiery furnace -- he
enabled Abraham with his own servants (amounting to little more than three
hundred) to defeat the combined army of the four kings. When Israel repented of
their sins, and cried to him for deliverance, he enabled them and their Judges,
with inferior numbers, to conquer and rout large armies of their foes -- he
pled the cause of Israel, when by the hand of Gideon, with only 300 men, he
defeated an host of Midianites as nume^ous as the grasshoppers in the fields. He
pled the cause of his people against Pharaoh, by ten successive plagues, and by
the death of all the firstborn of the land of Egypt -- he pled in favor of Asa
and the children of Judah, when he enabled them (although only a handful) to
defeat a vast army of the Ethiopia^ (...) most inumerable; and he sent his
destroying an^ (...) the camp of the Assyrians, who in one night (...) 85,000
of the adversaries of Jerusalem and her (...) king.

I might easily show from profane, as well as (...) history, that God has pled
his own and his pe^ (...) cause; the cause of religion, liberty, and virtue.
(...) only mention two instances of modern history.

The first I shall relate, is the revolt of the seven united provinces of the
Netherlands.

Philip the 2d, king of Spain, was on the throne of the most powerful kingdom
in the world; he had not only great dominions in Europe, Spain, and Portugal,
under his command: but he had the East and West Indies, and the mines of Mexico
and Peru. He oppressed the Dutch, and began to abridge their civil and
religious liberties; they petitioned for a redress of their grievances; but
they were ignominiously styled Geux, that is beggars, and their petitions with
the greatest scorn and contempt: whereupon, relying on God, they, although but
a handful of men, against a mighty monarchy, rebelled against Spain, under the
conduct of the prince of Orange, and at length, after a long, and arduous
struggle, were acknowledged by their tyrants, to be FREE and INDEPENDENT STATES!

The Swiss cantons, long oppressed by the mighty house of Austria, at last
formed the glorious and magnanimous resolution of throwing off the abhorred yoke
of slavery and vile subjection; they fought against multitudes, a most unequal
match; but what they wanted in numbers, was supplied in bravery and resolution.
The goodness of their cause, and the blessing of God was in the stead of armies
-- they fought with unparaleled intrepidity against the slaves and instruments
of arbi^^^ry power, and they gloriously triumphed, and esta^^^shed their
liberties upon a strong foundation, which remains unshaken to the present day
-- they are now ^he freest people upon earth; nay, they are supposed to be the
only free people in three quarters of the ^^^^^neous globe.

Thus I have shown you how God has pled his own, and his people's cause. I
shall now just touch upon (...) P^almist's petition, that God would arise and
plead (...) ^^use. This word seems to allude to the Ark of the covenant, on
which the cloud of glory, the symbol of God's presence, rested. This ark was
carried by the Levites on their shoulders, when the Israelites marched to
attack their enemies. When the march began, and the Levites were about to take
up the ark, they sang, Let God arise; let his enemies be scattered: let those
that hate him, flee before him. So that this custom teaches us, that the
Israelites looked to, and depended entirely upon God for the success of their
military enterprises -- they sought his aid, they invoked his blessing,
presence, and protection; they did as it were, cry out with Moses, Lord if thy
presence go not along with us, suffer us not to go up hence. Arise O God, like
an almighty conqueror; exert thine almighty power, make bare thine everlasting
arm in our behalf: go before us, direct our way, and succeed our operations. O
Lord, make speed to save us; O God make have to help us.

Thus my brethren, I have explained the text: Let us proceed to the application
of it.

From the preceding, discourse, I think we have reason to conclude, that the
cause of this American Continent, against the masures of a cruel, bloody, and
vindictive ministry, is the cause of God. We are contending for the rights of
mankind, for the welfare of millions now living, and for the happiness of
millions yet unborn. If it is the indisputed duty of mankind, to do good to all
as they have opportunity, especially to those who are of the household of faith,
if they are bound by the commandment of the supreme lawgiver, to love their
neighbor as themselves, and do to others as they would that others should do
unto them; then the war carried on against us, is unjust and unwarrantable, and
our cause is not only righteous, but most important: It is God's own cause: It
is the grand cause of the whole human race, and what can be more interesting
and glorious. If the principles on which the present civil war is carried on by
the American colonies, against the British arms, were universally adopted and
practiced upon by mankind, they would turn a vale of tears, into a paradise of
Go^: wh^reas opposite principles, and a conduct, founded upon them, has filled
the world with blood and sl^ughter, with rapine and violence, with cruelty and
injustice, with wretchedness, poverty, horror, desolation, and despair: We
cannot therefore doubt, that the cause of liberty, united with that of truth
and righteousness, is the cause of God. This is the glorious cause in which
Great Britain herself, has frequently and strenuously contended against tyrants
and oppressors, Not to mention preceding struggles for liberty, when Charles
the first invaded the rights of his people, the Lords and Commons, aided by
their adherents, rose up in arms, and waged a war against him, which terminated
in the loss of his crown and life: and when his infatuated son, James the
second; imitating his father's fatal example, endeavored to introduce popery
and arbitrary power into his kingdom; the people of England, invited the prince
of Orange to vindicate their liberties, who expelled the tyrant from his throne,
and was placed on it himself, by the votes of a free parliament. For the sake
of liberty and the protestant religion, during the reign of this glor^ous and
ausp^cious king, the Pretender was excluded from the throne, and the succession
to it, was s^t^led in the royal house of Hanover. Great Britain cannot in
justice ^l^^e us, for imita^ing her in those noble struggles for liberty, which
have been her greatest glory -- ^he cannot condemn us, without condemning the
conduct of her greatest patriots and heroes, virtually denying her king's right
to his crown, and a^^i^^ in ma^i^e^t opposition to the spirit and in^erest of
her own excellent constitution. I am bold to affirm, that all the surpassing
glory, by which she has eclipsed other nations, has been owing to this
admirable form of government, so favorable to the rights of mankind. She never
has been more illustrious at home or abroad, never more remarkable for her
internal glory or external splendour, her peace, plenty and prosperity at home,
or her victories, atchievments, and conquests abroad, then when her liberties
flourished, and a patriot king swayed the scepter; as she never has been
poorer, more miserable and inglorious, never been more impotent in herself, or
made a meaner figure in the eyes of her neighbors, than when her liberties were
violated, and a tyrant sat upon the throne. The attentive reader of English
history, who compares the auspicious reigns of William, George the first and
second, and part of Queen Ann's, with the fatal administrations of the former
and latter James and Charles, will see the striking contrast, and be fully
convinced of the truth of this remark. England, during the last war, happy in a
king that loved his people, and favored their rights, happy in a people that
loved their king, and were zealous for his honor, triumphed, gloriously
triumphed over the united fleets of France and Spain, and the confederate
powers of tyranny. England I am bold to say, has prospered, as her liberty
prospered, and declined, as despotism has prevailed, When principles of
liberty, and a ministry and parliament under their influence have governed
Great Britain, how happy have her subjects been? how formidable to her enemies?
but when opposite principles, and rulers have been predominant. What misery has
overwhelmed her inhabitants? and what a contemptible appearance did she make in
the sight of other nations? How has she been torn to pieces by civil broils,
and been covered with her own blood? How evident is this from the present
unnatural war, waged against her own children, to establish arbitrary power?
How have her once victorious troops fled ignominiously, before an army of
undisciplined peasants, commanded by officers, most of them utterly
inexperienced in war! How have her sturdy veterans been led captive by country
boys, and her transports, merchantmen and military stores, been taken by our
privateers? What insults does she not continually meet with from her enemies,
without daring to resent them? And unhappily divided against herself, does she
not totter on the brink of destruction, and owe her present precarious respite
from ruin, to the policy and forbearance of her foes? O England! thou once
beloved, happy, and glorious country! Thou land of freedom and delight! How is
thy gold become dim, and thy fine gold changed! It was full of judgment;
righteousness lodged in it, but now murderers. Thy rulers are companions of
thieves, every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards: they judge not
the fatherless, neither does the cause of the widow come unto them.

You see my brethren, from the preceding observations, the unspeakable
advantages of liberty, to Great Britain, and how fatal to her have been the
invasion and decline of this inestimable blessing. How absurd then! how
inglorious! how cruel and unjust is her conduct, in carrying on this bloody
war, to ruin and enslave us -- Liberty is the grand fountain, under God, of
every temporal blessing, and what is infinitely more important, it is favorable
to the propagation of unadulterated christianity. Liberty is the parent of
truth, justice, virtue, patriotism, benevolence, and every generous and noble
purpose of the ^oul. Under the influence of liberty, the arts and sciences,
trade, commerce, and husbandry flourish, and the wilderness blossoms like the
rose.

O Liberty, thou Object heavenly bright
Profuse of bliss, and pregnant with delight.
Eternal pleasures in thy presence reign,
And smiling Plenty leads thy joyful Train.
Eased of her load, subjection grows more light,
And Poverty looks cheerful in thy sight.
Thou make the gloomy Face of Nature gay,
Giv'st Beauty to the Sun, and Pleasure to the Day*
ADDISON. Under the auspicious smiles of Liberty, riches increase, industry
strains every nerve, secure of property, and joy and plenty smile on every
side. How inestimable a blessing then must liberty be, and how inconceivably
great its loss!

But if liberty is thus friendly to the happiness of mankind, and is the cause
of the kind parent of the universe; certainly tyranny and oppression are the
cause of the devil, the cause which God's soul hates. The holy scriptures
abound with instances and prophecies of his judgments against tyrants and
oppressors; and not only sacred, but profane history, prove the fulfillment of
those prophesies.

You have seen the truth of this observation, from the preceding discourse,
how extremely odious and detestable tyranny and oppression are in his sight.
How signal was the divine vengeance against king Ahab and his Queen, for falsely
accusing Naboth, murdering him upon groundless pretenses, and unjustly seizing
upon his property? Hear the tremendous judgments denounced by the Lord against
those vile oppressors; and O that it might ring in the ears and consciences, of
all the authors, abettors, and voluntary executioners of this unnatural,
unprovoked, iniquitous, fellonious war. Arise said the Lord, to Elijah the
Tishbite, Go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, who is in Samaria: behold he is
in the vineyard of Naboth, whither he is gone down to possess it, and thus
shall thou speak unto him saying: Thus says the Lord, in the place where the
dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine. Behold
I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy posterity, and will cut off
from Ahab his male children. And of Jezebel (by whose advice Ahab slew Naboth,
and took possession of his vineyard) spoke the Lord also, saying, the dogs
shall eat Jezebel, by the wall of Jezreel. Him that dies of Ahab in the city,
shall the dogs eat, and him that dies in the fields, shall the birds of the
air eat. This curse was awfully and punctually executed, and stands recorded on
the Bible, as a tremendous warning against tyranny and oppression. God has
shown his vehement abhorrence of these attrocious crimes, by smiting the
perpetrators of them with loathsome diseases, and has commissioned lice, worms,
and vermin to crawl within and upon them, to devour them alive, to render them
a living carrion, spectacles of horror and deformity, and insufferable stench
and abomination to all about them. Thus has God, in the most lively characters,
written his hatred and detestation of tyranny and oppression, upon the bodies
of those who have been guilty of those heaven daring offenses -- thus has he
shown how much he detests, and how severely he will punish cruelty and
injustice, the murder of the innocent, and the invasion of their rights and
property. And now are there any who call themselves christians, who dare avow,
espouse and support, the invasion of liberty, and the murder of those who rise
up in its vindication? Yes, to the disgrace of human nature be it spoken, there
are such inveterat^ foes to mankind: and who are They? they are the ministry
and parliament of Great Britain with their adherents and abettors. The ground
work of their present destructive measures, is this most iniquitous decree --
That the parliament of Great Britain, has power, and of right ought to have
power, to make laws and statutes to bind these colonies in all cases
whatsoever. This decree is contrary to the laws of God and man, to the British
constitution, Magna-Charta, the bill of rights, the Charters of the Colonies,
and the express stipulations of preceding kings and their representatives; and
as the cause is iniquitous in itself, so the war to support it, has been
carried on, in the most inhuman, cruel, and injurious m^^ner. The houses and
possessions of the friends to ^h^^^ country, have been seized and plundered,
rich and valuable furniture has been wantonly destroyed, or meanly seized and
carried away: Our negroes, who have been nourished and brought up by us, and
the savages of the wilderness, for whose temporal and eternal welfare we have
labored, have been instigated to mangle, scalp, and murder us. Every engine has
been employed to ruin our commerce, t^^de, husbandry and religion: Every method
(...) contrived and executed, to deprive us of the necessaries of life, and
cause us to perish for the want of food, clothing, and the means of defense.
Our ships have been seized and confiscated, our poor brethren, taken in them,
compelled to fight against us: our prisoners starved to death; our wives and
daughters have been ravished: numerous families of little ones compelled to
leave their own habitations and provisions, wander about in a strange land, beg
their bread, and expose themselves to all the severity of the season.

Ye cruel and bloody authors of this unjust, unnatural war ^ what desolation,
what misery have ye not brought on this once happy land? How many old men's
sighs, and widows moans! how many orphans water standing eyes; men for their
sons, wives for their Husbands fate, and Children for their Parents timeless
death, shall rue the hour that ever ye were born, how many tents of affliction?
how many weeping Rachels have ye made? how many disconsolate mothers, bewailing
the death of their children, and refusing to be comforted, because they are
not? how many bleeding bosoms reproach you with the murder of their beloved?
what distressed multitudes upbraid you with the loss of their dwellings, their
comforts, and the means of their subsistence? Go to Charlestown my brethren, go
to Norfolk, go to New York, go to Danbury, and to other places, and let the
smoking ruins of well finished and valuable houses, by their speechless, but
flaming oratory, melt you into tears, over your country's ruin, and enkindle
your indignation against her barbarous, unrelenting foes. Behold your ministers
mocked, insulted, buffeted, marked out for destruction, for their attachment to
religion and liberty, and their zeal against illegal and oppressive measures.
Behold numbers of the most pious and respectable characters and families,
compelled to fly from their habitations and churches, and seek for refuge in
the uninvaded parts of the land. Behold those houses of God, where the great
Father of the universe, was worshipped without superstition, in spirit and in
truth, where the glad tidings of great joy were published to the adoring throng
-- where Jesus Christ was held forth crucified, and the whole counsel of God
was faithfully declared -- behold those sacred, magnificent, and costly
structures, destroyed by (...) and levelled with the ground, or converted into
magazines for warlike stores, receptacles for rapine and plunder, riding
schools, for the exercise of horsemanship, theaters, for profane and wanton
plays, or prisons, for starving, groaning, expiring captives. See our unnatural
foes, exulting over the ruins they have made, soliciting foreign aid, and
hiring at an expensive rate, German mercenaries, to butcher their own best
friends, and 'till cruelly and unjustly invaded and slain, their most
affectionate children. Hear the shrieks of ravished women, the cries of
helpless orphans, and the groans of murdered patriots. Are these things right?
is a cause, that stands in need of, and encourages such measures, the cause of
God? is it not glaringly the cause of the devil? can God give a privilege to
any man, or number of men, to violate his own sacred and immutable laws?
Reason, conscience, humanity, recoil at the horrid thought!

Can any man yet think, that the measures of the British ministry, in invading
the lives, liberties, and properties of the inhabitants of these colonies, are
right; let him then read the protests of Lords and Commons, the petitions,
addresses, and remonstrances of whole islands, and the most respectable
corporations in England, against those measures -- let him read and attentively
reflect upon the excellent pamphlets and speeches, made in England itself in
our behalf; hear the worthy Bishop of St. A^^ph: "My Lords" (says he) "we seem
not to be sensible of the high, and important trust, which providence has
committed to our charge. The most precious remains of civil liberty the world
can now boast of, are lodged in our hands; and God forbid that we should
violate so sacred a deposit! By enslaving your colonies, you ruin, not only the
peace, the commerce, and the fortunes of both countries; but you extinguish the
fairest hopes, shut up the last asylum of mankind. I think my lords, without
being weakly superstitious, that a good man may hope, that heaven will take
part, against the execution of a plan, which seems big, not only with mischief,
but impiety."

The time would fail me, if I should produce extracts from the speeches, and
addresses, of some of the wisest and best men in England, and in both houses of
parliament, who have, with indignation, reprobated the measures of the
ministry, and warmly espoused the cause of America.

The right honorable the Earl of Chatham, the ablest and best friend of
Great Britain now living: a man, to whose great endowments, vast seize,
wise, faithful, and glorious administration, she was, under God, indebted, for
all the great and important conquests she made the last war. This illustrious
Statesman, distinguished Patriot, and unrivaled benefactor of his country, has
been, from the beginning, a warm advocate for America. Lord Camden, that
celebrated chancellor, that great oracle of the law, that unshaken Patron of
the rights of mank^^d, that counselor of unsullied honor, and incorruptible
integrity, who sacrificed a most lucrative, and highly dignified office, to the
love of truth and justice: this excellent man has, with the irresistible force
of demonstration, pled and justified our cause. Many noble lords, and
distinguished gentlemen, whose eloquence, virtue, genius, and learning, are the
greatest ornaments of their country, have been zealous in our behalf, and
approved our resistance to the infringement of our rights. Is not then the
cause good, which is applauded, patronized, and defended, by such consummate
politicians, and exalted worthies.

The iniquity of our enemies, in striving to crush this cause, will appear
highly aggravated, if we consider the ingratitude with which their military
operations in this country, are attended. Against whom does Great Britain wage
war? Against those who were once her most affectionate children, her most
faithful and hearty friends, and who still, notwithstanding the unparallelled
injuries, suffered from her, earnestly deprecate her ruin, and pray for her
peace and prosperity.

But once more. Whom does Great Britain dedestroy, whose blood does she shed,
whose houses does she burn, whose Temples does she demolish, whose lands does
she dosolate, whose ruin does she seek? Why of those who have rejoiced in her
happiness, bewailed her calamities, earnestly prayed for her welfare, implored
the greatest earthly blessings, and the unspeakable joys of immortality, in
behalf of her sovereign, and his royal house -- who have rendered her the most
signal, and important services, enabled her to make the most glorious, and
extensive conquests; caressed, and honored her officers and soldiers, treated
them with distinguished hospitality, kindness, and respect; fought, and bled at
her side, and assisted her in the last war, with so liberal a generosity, that
she frankly aknowleged, we had gone vastly beyond the bare line o^ duty, and
our exact proportion of service.

Besides all this, the principles of liberty, upon which we act, are the same,
which expelled James the second, from the British throne, and seated his
present majesty, and his royal ancestors upon it; and if those principles and
measures, according to which the present ministry conduct themselves, had
prevailed, at the time of the revolution, they would effectually have prevented
their accession to it. How hard! how cruel! how painful the thought; that the
best friends to the principles upon which this throne was erected and
established, should suffer from it, all the horrors of war, at the instigation
of its worst enemies!

We have this further consolation to support us under our present affliction;
that all our assemblies on the continent, and the Congress at two several
times, have endeavored, by the most humble and earnest petitions to the throne,
to prevent the fatal war, which now rages and desolates our land. Every
expedient, that human sagacity could dictate, to divert the gathering storm,
has been tried: both houses of parliament, and the people of England and
Ireland, have been most affectionately addressed and supplicated, to pity and
relieve us, and suffer us to enjoy our ancient privileges; and it was not until
every pacific measure failed, and our petitions were scornfully treated, and
rejected, and a powerful fleet and army had actually invaded us and shed our
blood; that we took up arms, in behalf of our lives and liberties. Our cause
therefore, my dear brethren, is not only good, but it has been prudently
conducted: Be therefore of good courage; it is a glorious cause: It is the
cause of truth, against error and falsehood; the cause of righteousness against
iniquity; the cause of the oppressed against the oppressor; the cause of pure
and undefiled religion, against bigotry, superstition, and human inventions. It
is the cause of the reformation, against popery; of liberty, against arbitrary
power; of benevolence, against barbarity, and of virtue against vice. It is the
cause of justice and integrity, against bribery, venality, and corruption. In
short, it is the cause of heaven against hell -- of the kind Parent of the
universe, against the prince of darkness, and the destroyer of the human race.
It is the cause, for which heroes have fought, patriots bled, prophets,
apostles, martyrs, confessors* and righteous men have died: Nay, it is a cause,
for which the Son of God came down flo^^ his celestial throne, and expired on a
cross -- it (...) a cause, for the sake of which, your pious ances^^r^ forfook
all the delights and enjoyments of Engla^^ ^ that land of wealth and plenty,
and came to this o^ ^ howling wilderness, destitute of houses, cultiva^^^^
fields, the comforts and conveniences of life. The ^ a cause, for the
prosperity of which, millions of sa^^ ^ are praying, and our gracious High
Priest is interc^ding: it is a cause, which thousands, and ten th^^sands of our
friends in England and Ireland, are ^^tronizing, and for which, even the
consciences of (...) very enemies are pleading: therefore do not despo^^ my
dear brethren, at the present gloomy prospects.

The cause of God -- his own cause, must prosper, ^ spite of earth and hell --
God will effectually plead ^ he will plead it by his almighty word, his all
conqu^^ing spirit, and his over ruling providence. No w^^pon formed against
Zion, shall prosper: every tong^^ that rises up against her, shall be
condemned: Go^ ^ in the midst of her, she shall not be moved: God (...) help
her, and that right early: Trust ye therefore ^ the Lord Jehovah, for in the
Lord Jehovah there is ^verlasting strength. Cast all your burdens and ca^ ^
upon the Lord, and he will sustain you -- he will ne^ ^ suffer the righteous to
be moved. Eminent Divine ^ celebrated poets, have given it as their opinion,
the ^ America will be a glorious land of freedom, knowledge ^ and religion, --
an asylum for distressed, oppressed, a^ ^ persecuted virtue. Let this
exhilerating thought, (...) your souls, and give new ardor and encouragement ^
your hopes -- you contend not only for your own happiness, for your dear
relations; for the happiness ^ the present inhabitants of America; but you
conte^^ for the happiness of millions yet unborn. Exert the^^^ore, your utmost
efforts, strain every nerve, do all you can to promote this cause -- plead
earnestly with God, in its behalf, by continual prayer and supplication, by
repentance and reformation, by forsaking every vice, and the practice of
universal virtue. Be ready to fight for it, and maintain it to the last drop of
your blood. Herein was the love of God manifested, that he laid down his life
for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. Pray for the happy
period when tyranny, oppression, and wretchedness shall be banished from the
earth; when universal love and liberty, peace and righteousness, shall prevail;
when angry contentions sh^^^ be no more, and wars shall cease, even unto the
en^ ^ of the earth. When the Jews shall be brought in ^ ^he christian church,
with the fullness of the Gentile ^ and all Israel shall be saved. When the
celestial cou^^ and the heaven of heavens shall resound with joyf^^^
acclamations, because the kingdoms of this world, a^^ become the kingdoms of
our Lord and of his Christ Hasten this blessed, this long wished for period, O
Father ^ mercies, for thy dear Son's sake. AMEN, and AMEN.


