A TREATY AND CONVENTION, FOR THE Sick, Wounded, and Prisoners of War, OF THE
LAND FORCES of His Majesty The KING of GREAT BRITAIN, AND OF His Most CHRISTIAN
MAJESTY.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOHN DUNLAP. MDCCLXXVII

A TREATY AND CONVENTION, etc.
WE, HENRY SEYMOUR CONWAY, Major General of His Majesty's Forces, Colonel of a
Regiment of Horse, and Groom of His Majesty's, Bedchamber.

IN the name of His Majesty, the King of Great Britain, by virtue of the full
powers given to Us,

MAKE KNOWN, That we have agreed upon the articles hereafter specified to have
their full force and entire execution, between the troops of their Britannic
and Most Christian Majesty's, in whatever part of the world the belligerant or
auxiliary armies of the two nations may be; and have concluded the present
treaty accordingly, by virtue of the full powers respectively communicated, as
follows.

ART. I.
ALL prisoners of war, of what quality, sort or condition soever, without any
exception, made during the present war between the land forces of the two
powers, in what country soever it may be, shall be exchanged, or ransomed
within the space of one month, to commence from the day of signing the present
cartel, as is more fully explained in the 24th article. And the Generals
commanding the belligerant or auxiliary armies, in what part of the world
soever it may be, shall agree upon a place where the first exchange or ransom
shall be made, of the prisoners to be on each side reciprocally delivered.

ART. II.
ALL prisoners of war of the said troops without any exception, who shall be
made on either side after the first exchange or ransom, shall be sent back bona
fide, fifteen days after their detention, or as soon as may be, by exchange of
prisoners of like ranks or equal value, or others making compensation for the
difference, or shall pay their ransom upon the terms hereafter mentioned, viz.
in German florins, at the rate of sixty kreutzers each, making two livres, ten
sols, French money, or two shillings and two pence farthing English.

ART. III.
A REGISTER book shall be kept of the prisoners made by the belligerant and
auxiliary armies, in which the numbers sent back on each side in every month
shall be specified, in order that upon the first day of every subsequent month,
there may be transmitted on each side, a list of those who shall have been
received and returned, in order that within eight days afterward, the
exceeding numbers which one side may owe to the other may be exactly and
without difficulty paid. The advance money which shall have been made to the
prisoners, shall also be then reckoned, that it may be re-imbursed at the same
time, and all accounts settled and discharged without being carried to the next
month. And upon the first exchange or ransom of prisoners on each side, the
advances which may have been made to them, shall be liquidated according to
true lists which shall be produced.

ART VI.
As often as prisoners shall be sent back on either side, a list shall be sent
with them, and delivered to the commanding officer at the place to which they
shall have been conducted, who shall give a receipt specifying the numbers and
ranks of those he receives, in order to be accounted for every month, as is
above mentioned.

ART. V.
AND to the end that no difficulty or dispute may arise, either with respect to
the posts or ranks of officers on either side, or to the ransoms which ought to
be paid for each of them, it has been thought proper to specify the posts and
ranks which are in the belligerant and auxilliary armies, and to fix the prices
of them as follows.

ART VI. POSTS and OFFICERS serving in the armies and garrisons of His Majesty
the King of GREAT BRITAIN.
German Florins. Captain General, or Field-Marshal 25,000 General, commanding
in chief 20,000 General of Horse and Foot 10,000 Lieutenant General 5,000
Master of the Ordnance 6,000 Major General 1,500 Commissary-General 3,000
Deputy Commissary-General 250 Adjutant-General 500 Deputy Adjutant-General 100
Quarter-Master-General 500 Deputy Quarter-Master-General 100 Major of Brigade
150 Aids de Camp 150 Deputy Pay-Master-General 250 His Deputy, or Principal
Commis 150 Other inferior Commis or Assistants 50 Brigadier 900
Waggon-Master-General 50 Captain of the Guides 50 Proveditor, or Assistant to
the Quartermaster General, Commissary General, Waggon-Master-General, or
Captain of the Guides 25

ART. VII. HORSE and GRENADIER GUARDS.
German Florins. Captain of a troop of Horse-Guards 1,000 Captain and Colonel
of a troop of Grenaider-Guards 1,000 First Lieutenant of Horse-Guards 600
Lieutenant and Lieutenant Colonel of Grenadier-Guards 600 Second Lieutenant of
Horse Guards 500 Major of Grenadier-Guards 500 Cornet of Horse-Guards 500
Adjutant of Horse-Guards 150 Guidon of Horse-Guards 300 Exempts of Horse-Guards
250 Lieutenant and Captain, or Guidon of Grenadier-Guards 250 Brigadiers of
Horse-Guards, or Sub-Lieutenant of Grenadier-Guards 150 Adjutant of
Grenadier-Guards 125 The Sub-Brigadiers, Quarter Masters, Sergeants, Corporals,
Trumpeters, Kettle-Drummers, Drummers, Hautboys, and Private Men, as well of
the Horse-Guards as Grenadier-Guards, shall pay one month of their pay.

ART. VIII. FOOT GUARDS.
German Florins. Colonel of Foot-Guards 1,500 Lieutenant Colonel 750 Major 300
Captain 150 The Lieutenants, Quarter Masters, Adjutants, Ensigns, and others,
down to the Private Men inclusive, shall pay one month of their pay.

ART. IX. INFANTRY.
German Florins. Colonel 600 Lieutenant Colonel 300 Major 120 Captain 70
Adjutant 30 Quartermaster 30 Lieutenant 24 Second Lieutenant, or Ensign 20
Sergeant 10 Corporal, Drummer, Fifer and Private Men 4

ART. X. CAVALRY.
German Florins. Colonel 700 Lieutenant Colonel 300 Major 150 Captain 100
Lieutenant 40 Adjutant 40 Cornet 30 Quartermaster 14 Kettle Drummer, and
Trumpeter 10 Corporal, Farrier, and Trooper 7

ART XI. DRAGOONS.
The Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, Major and Captain, shall pay their ransom, as
officers of Horse; all below the rank of Captain, down to the private dragoon
(inclusive) shall pay as the Foot.

ART. XII. ARTILLERY.
German Florins. Lieutenant General of the Artillery 700

The Commissaries and other officers, as also the Cartwrights, Wheelwrights,
Harness-makers, Fire-workers, Smiths and Farriers, shall pay one month of their
pay.

ART. XIII. Royal Regiment of ARTILLERY.
The Field-officers and other officers of the Royal Regiment of Artillery,
shall be treated and pay according to their rank as officers of Foot, and the
Bombardiers, Gunners and Matrosses, as soldiers in the regiments of Foot.

ART. XIV. MINERS.
Both officers and soldiers shall pay one month of their pay.

ART. XV. ENGINEERS.
German Florins. Chief Engineer 150 Principal Engineer in armies or places 75
All other Engineers 50 Overseers of fortifications 25 Other Assistants 15

ART. XVI. Militia, Independent Troops and Companies, etc.
All Militia, or Provincial regiments, as likewise all free or independent
troops or companies, whether of Horse, Dragoons or Foot, shall be treated and
pay ransom, as well officers as private men, according to their ranks, in the
same manner as the regular troops of the same kind and denomination
respectively.

ART. XVII.
THE GOVERNORS, Lieutenant-Governors, Commandants, Majors, Adjutants and
Capitaines des Ports de Place, shall on each side pay one month of their
appointments for their ransom; and if it happens that they have other posts
from which greater appointments actually accrue to them, they shall pay upon
the footing of those appointments: And for as much as some
Lieutenant-Governors, Commandants, or Majors of Places, may not have any
appointments in those posts, their ransoms shall be regulated upon the foot of
the highest post they hold.

ART. XVIII.
ALL those who have different posts shall pay their ransoms upon the footing of
the highest post they hold, and in proportions thereto shall be exchanged, or
shall pay their ransoms, without any officer made prisoner on either side being
obliged to be exchanged, or pay ransom upon an higher footing than of the rank
in which he was employed in the army, or in places.

ART XIX.
ALL other officers who may have been omitted in this cartel, shall be released
as abovementioned, paying one month of their appointments; and if any disputes
relating to the qualities or appointments of any officers made prisoners,
should arise, they shall be determined on both sides by a certificate from the
General of the army, Commandant of the province, or Governor of the nearest
place.

ART. XX.
NO reduced officers shall pay more than one month of the appointments they
enjoy.

ART. XXI.
THE volunteers serving in the armies who have no rank, shall be immediately
returned on both sides, and shall have the liberty of continuing to serve in
the armies to which they belong; but those who have rank shall be exchanged as
the troops of the said armies.

ART. XXII.
THE Provost-General, his Lieutenants, and other Officers and Gardes de la
Connetablie; the Auditor-General, his Lieutenant, the Judge Advocate and
others; the Directors, Secretaries, and Clerks of the War-Office; Secretaries
to the Generals, and Intendants to the Treasurers, to the Commissaries General,
and other Secretaries; the Chaplains, Ministers, Post Masters, their Clerks,
Couriers and Postillions, Physicians, Surgeons, Apothecaries, Directors, and
other officers serving in the hospitals or armies; the Masters of the Horse,
Stewards, Valets de Chamber, and other servants, shall not be subject to be
made prisoners of war, and shall be sent back as soon as possible.

ART XXIII.
THE footmen made prisoners shall be returned on each side without any
difficulty. Those who shall desert without taking any thing or robbing in the
army they leave, may enjoy such passport as shall be given them. With regard to
thieves, what they steal is always to be restored, without their being sent
back, but it shall be left to the respective Generals to do it if they think
fit in cases of murder or assassination.

AS to robberies committed by soldiers who desert, what is stolen shall be
restored without its being required under any pretense whatever that the
deserters shall be returned; each side leaving it to the will of the respective
Generals to return them or not, when they may have committed murders or other
crimes.

ALL deserters, servants, or others, who shall go over from one side to the
other, shall be stopped at the first posts, where the officer commanding shall
be careful to have them searched, and cause an account to be taken in writing
of the effects they have with them, not permitting them to sell or give any
thing away, after which he shall cause them to be conducted to his General,
where the said deserters, servants or others, shall be detained during three
days, in order that if they should be found to have robbed, there may on each
side be time for reclaiming them.

ART. XXIV.
THE exchanges and ransoms of prisoners, as well the first as the subsequent,
shall be made man for man, and officer for officer, of equal posts, till there
shall be no more of the like rank remaining in the armies or prisons, and after
all the said exchanges shall have been made of the officers that shall be
found, officer for officer, and of troopers, dragoons, and soldiers, for as
many men of the like sort; if it then be found that one of the two parties has
still remaining more officers than soldiers, or more soldiers than officers, it
shall be allowed to give officers for troopers, dragoons, or soldiers,
according to the tarif inserted in the present cartel; and if after all the
exchanges shall have been made in the above manner, one of the two parties find
they have still prisoners remaining, whom they may not have been able to have
exchanged, the other party may have them again, paying for the ransoms, and to
this effect an account shall be drawn up and delivered on each side, of the
numbers and qualities of the prisoners which shall have been made, as well in
battles and rencounters, as in the cities, forts and places which shall have
been taken.

ART. XXV.
THERE shall be given to each prisoner of war a ration of bread, such as the
said troops receive, and three kreutzers and three fifths of a kreutzer, making
one penny and twenty-three fortieths of a penny English, or three sols French
every day. It shall be respectively allowed to send them succors, and each
General commanding the armies shall have liberty to cause an Officer or
Commissary with a passport to be stationed in the places where the said
prisoners shall be kept, in order to have the care of the succors that shall
be given them.

AN account shall be made out each month of the bread that shall have been
delivered to the prisoners on each side, in order that what shall appear due on
either part, may be reimbursed without difficulty, at the rate of two
kreutzers, and one third of a kreutzer, each ration making one penny and one
fiftieth of a penny English, or twenty three deniers and one third of a denier
French.

AN account shall also be made out at the end of each month, of the sums
furnished on each side, for the advance agreed on for the subsistence of each
prisoner; and the said sums received on either part shall be paid as above;
promising reciprocally to keep the prisoners in proper places with good straw,
and to let then have fresh every week.

ART. XXVI.
THAT care shall be taken of the wounded on each side, that their medicines and
food shall be paid for; that the expense shall be made good on either side;
that it shall be allowed to send them Surgeons and their servants with
passports from the Generals; that moreover those who shall have been made
prisoners, as well as those who were not, shall be sent back under the
protection and safeguard of the Generals, with liberty of being conveyed by
land, or by water, according to the best conveniences and accommodations of
the places where they may be, and by the shortest routs, on condition that
those who have been made prisoners shall not serve till they are exchanged or
ransomed.

ART. XXVII.
THAT the sick on each side shall not be made prisoners, that they shall remain
in safety in the hospitals, where it shall be free for each of the parties at
war, or auxiliaries, to leave them a guard, which as well as the sick, shall be
sent back with passports of the Generals respectively by the shortest rout, and
without being molested or stopped.

IT shall be the same with regard to Commissaries, Chaplains, Physicians,
Surgeons, Apothecaries, men servants attending the hospitals, women servants or
other necessary persons for the sick, who cannot be deemed prisoners, and shall
likewise be sent back.

ART. XXVIII.
THE safeguards shall enjoy on both sides a perfect security, and in case they
shall be found too near the armies, they shall be sent back, without receiving
the least violence or ill treatment.

ART. XXIX.
THE prisoners shall not in any manner be forced to enlist.

ART. XXX.
THE prisoners shall be permitted to give notice of their being detained, by a
letter left open.

ART. XXXI.
THERE shall be granted passports on either side to the Maitres d'Hotel, or
Purveyers of Generals, to go in search of provisions, upon condition that they
shall not approach the respective armies and fortified places nearer than two
leagues.

ART. XXXII.
IF it should happen that there be any officer whose ransom is not regulated by
the present cartel, or any difficulty should arise, it shall be settled by both
sides, and what shall be so resolved on, shall be observed and looked upon the
same, as if it was inserted in the present treaty, pursuant to the certificates
which shall be given by the Generals of the armies, or Governors and
Commandants of places.

ART. XXXIII.
AND for the full and entire execution of the present cartel, We have signed
it, and have put thereto the seals of our arms, so that it shall be of full
force to be inviolably observed, as if it had been signed by their Majesty's
Our Sovereigns; and for farther assurance of the same, having obtained powers
from their Majesty's for that purpose, We declare that it shall even be
ratified by them if thought necessary at the first requisition made by either
of their Majesty's.

DONE at Sluys in Flanders, the Sixth of February, One Thousand, Seven Hundred,
Fifty-nine.

HENRY SEYMOUR CONWAY. LOUIS JACQUES CHARLES, Marquis du BARAIL.


Separate ARTICLE.
WE further declare in the names of their Majesty's, that they will immediately
appoint Commissaries, who shall meet as soon as can be, in such place or places
as shall be thought proper, in order to regulate the sums which shall be found
due on each part, as well for the ransoms as for the subsistence of prisoners
of war, previous to the signing the present cartel, or for any moneys advanced
to them, and the sums which shall appear due on either side for the said
ransoms, subsistence or advance money as above, shall immediately after the
settling of the said accounts, be duly and without difficulty paid.

HENRY SEYMOUR CONWAY. LOUIS JACQUES CHARLES, Marquis du BARAIL.



