Mr. DEVOTION'S ELECTION SERMON, MAY 8th, 1777.

The Duty and Interest of a People to sanctify the LORD of HOSTS.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT, AT
HARTFORD, ON THE DAY OF THE ANNIVERSARY ELECTION, MAY 8th, 1777.

By JOHN DEVOTION, A. M. Pastor of the third CHURCH in SAYBROOK.

HARTFORD: Printed by EBEN. WATSON, near the GREAT BRIDGE. M DCC.LXXVII.

At a General Assembly of the Governor and Company of the State of Connecticut,
in New England, in America, holden at Hartford, on the Second Thursday of May,
A. D. 1777.
ORDERED, That the Honorable JABEZ HUNTINGTON, and Colonel WILLIAM WORTHINGTON,
return the Thanks of this General Assembly, to the Reverend Mr. JOHN DEVOTION,
for his Sermon preached before them on the eighth Day of May Instant, and
desire a Copy of the same, that it may be printed.

A true Copy of Record, Examined by GEORGE WYLLYS, Sec'ry.

An Election SERMON.
ISAIAH, VIII.13. Sanctify the LORD of hosts himself, and let him be your fear,
and let him be your dread.


THE words chosen as the theme of the ensuing discourse, come recommended to us
at this day of tribulation, as the direction given to the suffering Jews, to
support their minds under the terror and troubles of persecutors, while they
suffered for righteousness sake: But their pertinence in this day of war, may
appear from their connection with the scripture history which gives occasion to
them; which therefore I beg leave to narrate; not, my hearers, because you are
ignorant of it, but because a fresh remembrance of it gives me an advantage in
laying out my plan.

AHAZ, at the time of this prophecy, was king of Judah, as Pekah, son of
Remaliah, was of Israel; the capital of whose kingdom was Samaria. Upon the
throne of Syria was Rezin, whose metropolis was Damascus. There was also
Assyria upon the river Euphrates, with a powerful monarch then on the throne.

REZIN and Pekah entered into a confederacy, against the king of Judah, to
dethrone him, and set up in his room the son of Tabeal. The news of this
confederacy occasioned great fear to the house of David. The LORD therefore
ordered the prophet Isaiah to go forth with his son Shear-Jashab, (whose name
signified a remnant shall return) to meet Ahaz, and say to him, take heed and
be quiet; fear not, neither be faint hearted; and to assure him, that the evil
counsel which Syria and Samaria had taken against him, should not come to pass;
but that within three score and five years, Ephraim, i. e. Samaria should be
broken, that it should not be a people. -- However, their belief of this was
required, as a condition of fulfillment, if ye will not believe, surely ye shall
not be established. The LORD moreover commanded Ahaz to ask a sign; but he,
accounting this a tempting the LORD, refused. GOD, after rebuking him, gave
this sign, Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call his
name Immanuel -- For before the child shall know to refuse the evil and choose
the good, the land that thou abhorest shall be forsaken of both her kings. That
is the child Shear-Jashub, says Mr. Henry.

"MOREOVER, the LORD" commanded the prophet to take a great roll, and write in
it with a man's pen, concerning Mahar-shalal-hash-baz, perhaps to enrol his
name as one promised by GOD to him: whereupon he went in unto the prophetess,
i. e. his wife, and she conceived and bear a son, and the LORD commanded him to
"call his name Maharshalal-hash-baz," i. e. make speed to the spoil, or hasten
to the prey. Whence the prophet says, Behold, I and the children whom the LORD
has given me, are for signs and for wonders in Israel. This promise is also
added, For before the child shall have knowledge to cry, My father and my
mother, the riches of Damascus, and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken away
before the king of Assyria. It is worthy of notice, that some in the kingdom of
Judah, which was the most righteous and equitable government then on earth,
were uneasy under it, and desirous of being under Rezin and Pekah, which is
elegantly expressed, For as much as this people refuses the waters of Shiloah
that go softly, and rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah's son, etc. whence, it is
evidently no uncommon thing, for persons to be uneasy, under the most mild and
righteous government, which the GOD of heaven has established.

WHEN the king of Judah, and his nobles heard of this league between Rezin and
Remaliah's son, they were all so fast, for entering into a confederacy with
some power to assist them, which was disagreable to to the LORD of hosts; for
he would have his people have their dependence upon him, and look to him for
salvation. The prophet was therefore instructed of GOD, to divert them from a
confederacy. He therefore represents the alliance of Syria and Samaria, and the
futility of their league, v. 9, 10, and lays before them the instruction GOD
gave him respecting that affair; For the LORD spoke thus to me with a strong
hand, and instructed me that I should not walk in the way of this people,
saying, Say ye not A confederacy to all them to whom this people shall say, A
confederacy; neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid. GOD impressed his mind
fully -- made him strong against the prejudices of the people who at that day,
seemed to think of no other way of deliverance, but by confronting force with
force. The way of that people which GOD would not have him walk in, was also a
sinful fear, to the neglect of a religious dependence upon GOD's almighty arm
for salvation. They neglected repentance and reformation, and were about to
guard themselves against distressing fear, by a confederacy. Our text points
out to us the will of GOD at such a time. "Sanctify the LORD OF HOSTS himself,"
etc.

IN a time of eminent danger, when multitudes combine against the people of
GOD, instead of mitigating their fear by a confederacy, it is their duty and
interest to sanctify the LORD of hosts himself, and make him their fear, and
dread. The preacher means to handle the subject theologically, not politically,
and thinks it proper to enter this caveat, lest any might suspect an innuendo
from his use of the word confederacy.


THIS subject may naturally be considered in two parts.

I. To show wherein this sanctification of the LORD of Hosts consists. II. THAT
it is the duty and interest of GOD's people, thus to sanctify him in such a
time of danger.
AS it was the distressing fear of an invasion, that occasioned this direction,
which GOD would cure by turning this passion to its true object: suffer me to
remark a word upon it in this place.

FEAR is of all passions in man the most frantic, and least under the
government of reason, and yet of all passions the most natural and deeply
rooted in sensitive nature; therefore, common to man with all other creatures,
which have any considerable degree of sense; creatures which scarce betray any
other passion, evidence the force of this, in flying danger. While the object
of fear, whether real or imaginary, is strongly painted on the imagination in
all the horror of dreadfuls, all the reasoning of men cannot allay it. You may
as well attempt to reason a dead man to life, as to conjure down fear by
reason. There is no cure for it in nature, but this in our text, (nam.) placing
before the mind an object more fearful, yet an object of trust; so turning men
from a sinful to a religious fear. This is the way GOD takes to bring all undue
passions in fallen nature to regularity, by placing them upon their genuine
objects, where there is no danger of excess.

PASS now to show wherein this sanctification of the LORD of hosts consists;
where, for brevity sake, it may be remembered, that the word sanctification
conveys different ideas, according to the agent acting, or the object toward
which it is acted. When GOD is the agent, and inanimate matter the object
sanctified, it is setting a part any thing from common to holy uses. When GOD
is the agent, and rational yet fallen man the object, it is the renewing such
"after the image of him that created him." When man is the agent, and GOD the
object, as in our present discourse; it is the acting forth, holy dispositions
and affections of renewed nature suitably, toward the various perfections of
DEITY; and since religious fear with reverence is due in regard to all his
perfections, attributes and manifestations, the whole of religion is summed up
in the fear of the LORD. Sanctifying the LORD of HOSTS, and letting him be our
fear and our dread, are but synonimous, though explanative terms. This
sanctification of the LORD of HOSTS consists in a belief of the being of GOD;
this is the great foundation of natural religion, without which there can be no
true religion. "For he that comes to GOD must believe that he is." To pretend
sanctity, or labor to establish vital piety, gospel holiness in men's hearts,
without this foundation principle, is as absurd as to pretend to lay the top
stone in the air before the foundation is laid on the ground. When St. Paul
went to gospelize the Romans, then an heathen nation, he first labored to
establish this foundation principle, showing them, that their idolatrous
practices stood in the face of natural religion. "For the invisible things of
him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead, etc." The same weapon
did he use, to cast down Athenian superstition, which he had evidence of from
the "altar, with this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD, whom therefore ye
ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you." And this was but following GOD's
own method of dealing with Israel, when they had been hundreds of years in
sight of Egyptian idolatry. To establish them in a belief of his being, and
supreme power over all pretended gods, were directed the miracles of Moses
before Pharaoh -- their deliverance at the red sea -- the pillar of "the cloud
by day," and "the pillar of fire by night," the daily supply of manna, and the
preservation of their clothing upon them. To this end, after disciplining them
by the greatest General of that, or perhaps of any other age, he led them on to
battle, and victory, (Moses praying to Israel's GOD) and afterward in answer to
Joshua's request, made the "sun stand still upon Gibeon, and" the "moon in the
valley of Aijalon," to convince them that he was the author of nature, and LORD
of the hosts of Heaven. This, after the purposes of heaven were accomplished
upon that unbelieving generation, laid the foundation for that eminent piety,
which was the glory of that nation; and was ever after remembered by GOD with
complacency. "I remember thee the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest
after me in the wilderness."

IN a steadfast belief that he is the LORD of HOST, that all hosts of angels,
men, animals, insects, yea and devils, are under his supreme command and sovran
control. To establish this foundation principle -- this most effectual guard
against idolatry, did the GOD of heaven work a miracle, and constrained the
proud monarch of Babylon to acknowledge, that his "dominion is an everlasting
dominion, and his kingdom is from generation to generation. And all the
inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing: and he does according to his
will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth: and none
can stay his hand, or say unto him, what do thou?" This truth, fully
believed, shows us, that angels, or men, or animals, or insects, or the hosts
of heaven, or the elements, must act according to his command; either as
instruments of vengeance to correct a backsliding people, or as ministers of
salvation to his chosen ones. "Fire and hail, snow and vapor," with "stormy
wind fulfilling his word." Angels as ministering spirits, ministering to them
who shall be the heirs of glory, or ministers of vengeance, to his people's
adversaries -- the stars in their course to fight against whom he pleases. In
consequence of this sovran authority, he has an uncontroubled influence over
the minds of men; either to inspire them with greatness of soul, to perform the
services to which he calls them, in his providence, as upon Readiness promotion to
royalty "GOD gave him another heart," or to deprive the wisest counselors of
their wisdom. "He leads counselors away spoiled, and makes the judges fools
-- he loses the bands of kings, and girdeth their loins with a girdle. He
leads princes away spoiled, and overthrows the mighty. He removes away the
speech of the trusty, and takes away the understanding of the aged. He pours
contempt upon princes, and weakeneth the strength of the mighty." It is common
with GOD, to suffer a spirit of deception to come upon the counselors of a
people, when he means to destroy them. "The princes of Zoan are become fools,
the princes of Noph are deceived, they have also seduced Egypt, even they that
are the stay of the tribes thereof. The LORD has mingled a perverse spirit in
the midst thereof; and they have caused Egypt to err in every work thereof, as
a drunken man staggereth in his vomit." At other times he suffers a panic to
seize the mind, and thus routs formidable armies. The dream of a common
soldier, told in the camp of Midian, with the sudden maneuver of Gideon
according, to GOD's direction, accompanied with but three hundred men, became
the occasion of a complete rout, and total overthrow of that numerous host.
These instances show the sovran influence of the LORD of hosts over kings,
princes, and powerful armies. Are hosts of men raised, armed, and directed
against a kingdom, nation, or people? It is by the permission of the LORD of
hosts* they are under his direction and control. "Hitherto shall thou come,
but no further." Senacherib must not come into the city, "nor shoot an arrow
there, nor come before it with shield, nor cast a bank against it."

THE LORD of hosts, sends powerful oppressing monarchs against the rod of his
inheritance, sometimes as the rod in his hand, to correct, and chasten his
people for their sins; some times to show his people his power and presidency
over all hosts, and to humble them who blaspheme the GOD of Israel. The
destruction of Pharaoh and his hosts in the red sea -- of Senacherib's army,
and the breaking in pieces Syria, and Samaria, whose combination occasioned
such consternation to the house of Judah, evidence this; neither can we
sanctify the LORD of hosts, without such or similar conceptions of him, and of
his power over all hosts of angels, men, yea and all nature.

TO sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself men are to have their dependence upon
him, as the supreme ruler over all, to defeat the devices of their proud
enemies, and prevent them from accomplishing their intended enterprise. The sin
of GOD's people at that day was, that upon hearing of a league between Rezin
and Pekah, they endeavored to allay their fear by a confederacy. When GOD
smites his people to bring them to a repentance of their sins, and to trust in
him, it is an unhappy mistake in them, to seek relief from their fears by a
confederacy; The preacher is acting the part of a divine, not of a politician.
However confederacies may be lawful in certain cases, yet a trust in them to
the neglect of trust in the LORD of Hosts, is sinful in all instances.
as though an human arm could defeat the purposes of Heaven; or the Almighty
wanted to see "the young men arise and play before him." This is both our sin,
and our misery, as it leads the mind off from the grand object.

HOLY David, seeing the inclination of men to place their dependence upon an
arm of flesh, to a neglect of the true GOD, said, "Put not your trust in
princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help." As though he had
said, -- you may see the insufficiency of such helpers, from the consideration
of their being but mortal, short lived creatures: "His breath goes forth, he
returns to his earth, in that very day his thoughts perish." Wherefore,
instead of putting your trust in them, whether prince, people, a mighty host,
or in a confederacy -- sanctify the LORD of HOSTS himself; make him the object
of your fear and dependence; "Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his
help, whose hope is in the LORD his GOD." Making a league, and trusting in that
and in man for salvation out of the hand of enemies, are opposite to
sanctifying the LORD of HOSTS himself.

AS our GOD is a GOD of invariable justice, righteousness, truth and
faithfulness, so, to sanctify the LORD, we are not only to approve of them in
speculation, but become followers of him in the practice of them, "as dear
children," which, when done in the fear of the LORD of HOSTS, and in obedience
to his commands, is true practical knowledge of GOD. "Did not thy father eat
and drink, and do judgment and justice, and then it was well with him? He
judged the cause of the poor and needy, then it was well with him, was not this
to know me? Says the LORD." Where there is neither sense nor practice of
equity -- moral honesty -- no regard to moral obligation, there can be no true
religion. A righteous, holy GOD holds himself bound to punish all violators of
such solemn obligations. "Seeing he despised the oath by breaking the covenant
(when lo, he had given his hand) and has done all these things, he shall not
escape."

THIS LORD of HOSTS whom our text calls us to sanctify, is no other than
ELOHEIM -- the great "Captain of our salvation," who appeared unto Joshua as
Captain of the LORD's host. Unto him has the father committed all power "in
heaven and in earth," and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places,
far above all principalities and powers, and might and dominion, and every name
that is named not only in this world, but also in that which is to come. And
has put all things under his feet. For he is by nature, and by the act of
creation, their lord and proprietor. "For by him were all things created that
are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be
thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: All things were created by
him and for him. And he is before all things, and by him all things consist."
St. Peter sums up gospel holiness in the words before us, "But sanctify the
LORD GOD in your hearts:" Opposed to this, stand, profanation of GOD's name,
titles, attributes and word; -- rejecting CHRIST the son of GOD, a divine
person, with his doctrines and precepts; also covetousness, which is idolatry.
This fruitful source of evil ought to be exposed to view, for it sets up the
world, and the things of it in the place of God. "That he may set his nest on
high, that he may be delivered from the power of evil." That dependence which
holy ones have upon GOD, in the way of his wise and kind protecting providence,
the covetous place in gold "which is their hope," and in "fine gold" which is
their "confidence." Mammon is sparing of cost for things that respect GOD or
godliness. It may spare a little to keep its votaries in countenance among men;
but it is liberal even to profuseness and dissipation toward its friends, "the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life." This very
profusion the coveteous man presses into his service, as an invincible
argument, that he is free from covetousness. The liberality of the idolator
toward his beloved lust, is a perfect description of the covetous man, in
regard to his darling lust. "They lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh silver
in the balance, and hire a goldsmith, and he makes it a GOD: They fall down,
yea they worship." This opens to view that seeming contradictory behavior of
the covetous man's sparing parsimony in matters that respect GOD -- acts of
benevolence and deeds of charity, to them that are in distress. From this
source spring oppression, extortion, and the avaricious unmerciful exactions,
of the covetous, to magnify their GOD. Mammon in the heart dissolves moral
obligations, breaks over the bonds of justice, mercy and fidelity; or rather by
its sorcery makes them appear, but silly bands fit only to bind scrupulous
consciences. From this view see how effectually it will prevent men under its
influence, from sanctifying the LORD in their hearts.

ONCE more. The lust of domination greatly opposes this sanctification of the
LORD. As the law of gravitation acts upon matter, pressing it to the center,
unless some superior power resists it: So the love of superiority, -- the lust
of domination runs through fallen nature. The author of nature many times
suffers this to balance, and counteract itself. When it arises to tyranny and
cruel oppression, the love of power and liberty, joined to resentment of
injury, urges on the oppressed to curb and destroy it in the tyrant. This lust,
when entrenched behind powerful armies, or the shadow of a righteous
constitution, whose vitals are consumed by venality, bribery and corruption, is
the plague of mankind. When mortal men, by art, or stratagem, or superior
craft, have attained to despotic sway, this lust still rages; it thirsts for
all power, that no one may have opportunity to oppose, control, or cast it
down. This, through a kind of state magic, brings persons over whom such
lordship and authority are exercised to call them benefactors. Such will always
rejoice in the adulatory addresses of fawning sycophants: Because by these they
have the confession of them over whom they exercise this authority; that they
are their benefactors; and so are by their own concessions cut off from any
pretext to oppose such domination. This lust, though most visible and odious,
in persons at the upper end of the world, may however be seen in every class of
men, from Nimrod, the "mighty hunter," down," down to the punster in the
meeting of merry Andrews. He that dispairs of gaining this superiority by arms,
will seek it in some other way: some in dress, others in popularity, others in
a little exaltation in office. From this springs envy at the promotion of my
neighbor above dear me: Hence canvassing at elections for places of honor and
power: So equity, righteousness and public good are often sacrificed to this
lust of domination: So dear self is adored; but the LORD of Hosts not
sanctified, The only cure of this evil is by the sanctification of the soul,
which brings it to esteem superiority in righteousness and goodness, -- "And
the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning."

PRAYER, comprised by our Savior under the term of thanksgiving, is a duty
which would have been obligatory upon man though he had remained innocent.

THE gift of a Savior, and the blessigs of that "covenant ordered in all
things and sure," lays a foundation for petition, for pardon of sin, and
deliverance from evils. This Moses the servant of the LORD used, when GOD's
people were encountering their enemies. Our GOD would have us sensible, that we
are dependent upon him for victory. "Some trust in chariots, and some in
horses, but we will remember the name of the LORD our GOD."

SINCE Moses has set the example, we may safely determine that it will be no
dishonor to the greatest General, to join this spiritual, with the carnal
weapons of warfare. It is only by the LORD that men can triumph over enemies.

IN such faith and practice, fear of man may be overcome by a christian fear of
the LORD of Hosts, and such may (through grace) say with Holy David, "Though an
host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear: Though war should rise
up against me, in this will I be confident." Other instances of sanctifying the
LORD of Hosts, are passed over.

II. It is the duty and interest of GOD's people to sanctify him, especially in
times of iminent danger. The private sentinel, under the wisest and ablest
General on earth, is not under so powerful obligations, to an implicit
observation, of general orders, as we are to obey this King of Kings. Upon him
we are dependent for "life, breath, and all things." The obligation arises from
the relation God has put us in to him, by creation: All is from him and all due
to him; and for disobedience we are holden unto judgment, not merely the loss
of temporal, but also of eternal life. The obligation is renewed upon us, by
that gracious act of redemption. "Ye are bought with a price; therefore glorify
GOD in your body, and in your spirit, which are GOD's."

ALL the benefits of the new covenant are as so many cords binding us. By all
these "tender mercies of the Lord" are we befought. He is the greatest
benefactor of man: Gratitude calls for it. Man's mouth in innocence was filled
with arguments for this service. The very situation of man in respect to the
other creatures -- Lord over them, as though the great high priest, over the
lower creation, to offer up a tribute of praise on their behalf, points him to
this duty; but the constitution of Heaven, committing all power to the "Captain
of our salvation," and the express requirement of it by Israel's God, from a
covenant people, make all other arguments needless.

IN point of interest, this is the only thing that can give safety. Real
holiness is the best defense. When salvation is the walls and bulworks of a
people, they must be happy. "The eyes of the LORD are upon the righteous, and
his ears are open to their cry. The face of the LORD is against them that do
evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth." When vital piety
reigns in the hearts of GOD's people, their light shall "break forth as the
morning, and their health shall spring forth speedily; and thy righteousness
shall go before thee; the glory of the LORD shall be thy rereward" When a man's
ways please the LORD, he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him. This
holy fear of our GOD, is the alone principle, except that of stupidity, or
carnal security, or presumption, that can prevent the fear of man, and of their
threatenings. -- Our LORD ever applied this, as the allsovran remedy against the
fear of man. "Fear not them that are able to kill the body," etc. When his
disciples were thrown into consternation, at the thought of his departure;
observe the cure prescribed by this infalliable physician -- "Ye believe in
GOD: believe also in me." The apostles, sanctifying the Lord in their hearts,
possessed their souls in peace. "None of these things moved them." -- They
rejoiced in the LORD, and went on quiet, in the midst of most eminent dangers.
This is a certain way to secure his protection, to obtain dominion over
enemies, and to enjoy the real enjoyments of "the glory of all lands." "O that
my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways! I should
soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries.
The haters of the LORD should have submitted themselves unto him: but their
time should have endured forever. He should have fed them also with the finest
of the wheat: and with honey out of the rock should I have satisfied thee."

IMPROVEMENT.
THE LORD of hosts is to be sanctified in the great affair of war: contrary to
which, is boasting at putting on the harness; or in case of success,
sacrificeing "unto their net, and burning incense unto their drag," as though
there was no peculiar presidency of the LORD of hosts in the whole affair.

WHEN nations confederate against GOD's professing people, the voice of
heaven's king to them is "sanctify the LORD of hosts himself," -- put your
trust in him, make him your help and shield.

OUR text, in connection with the context, shows us, that vital piety, a sacred
regard to justice, mercy, humility, fidelity, and sanctity, is the readiest way
to an honorable, and safe issue, of a war that threatens the very being of a
state.

BESIDES, the view we have taken, of the absolute dependence, and subjection of
all created beings, to the will, and direction of the LORD of hosts, plainly
invites us, to make him our father and friend. Then may we boldly say, "The
LORD is my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me."

SINCE the LORD of hosts points out sanctification of his name, as the sure way
to salvation, from the power of an enemy; it is lamentable to find gentlemen of
the military department, so frequently dealing in open profanation of his name;
and it is for a lamentation, that our militia, as soon as they set their faces
camp-ward, seem to think themselves set free, from all obligation, to reverence
the GOD of armies. Is it not for this, that "many have been weak and sickly
among you, and many sleep?" The affair of Achan, should teach all christian
people, that cursed things are mortal causes of defeats.

THE abounding of wickedness, the lust of inordinate gain, the apparent
covetousness, leading men on to extort from, and oppress their follow servants,
because they have it in their power, are doubtless some of the moral causes why
the LORD of hosts suffers our enemies, to make some parts of our land, which
was "as the garden of Eden before them, behind them a desolate wilderness."

Finally, SINCE all created beings, from the highest among principalities, and
powers in heavenly places, to the lowest reptile in earth, are under the
direction, and management of the LORD of hosts; see that our safety in this
militant state stands, in nearness to GOD, and under the shadow of the
almighty. "Fear not, Abraham: I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward."
The LORD of hosts has set before us a remarkable testimony of his displeasure
against a spirit of self-confidence, and vain glorying, from the beginning of
this dispute by arms, both on the one side, and the other. Humble souls,
trembling to see this evil spirit, have been almost able to foretell consequent
defeats, by the abounding confidence, of our own and the forces of the enemy.
But this I must pass over.

BRITONS, elate with confidence in martial skill, looking down with disdainful
contempt on sons of America, marched out to Lexington, in all the pride of vain
glorying. American annals record the memorable morn. Ye fields, be witnesses of
innocent blood, -- that first opening of the sluices not yet shut. They
returned under the influence of a panic, which the LORD of Hosts suffers to
fall upon self-sufficient creatures. When our brethren, not yet suitably
arrang'd, near Charlestown, took the ground: fierce wafted over the British
Legions came, boasting their intended route through Cambridge, Roxbury and
Boston Neck: like sheep to the slaughter, their road "through the dark valley
of the shadow of death," often trod by mortals never to return, till the arch
angel, with the trump of GOD arouse them. The glory of British arms was that
day tarnished. Loud was his voice in providence, "Let not him that puts on
the harness boast, as he that pulls it off." May it now be spoken without
tears, that sons of America took the disease? Hear from Long and York Islands;
our fortresses are so strong and numerous that we fear them not. The preacher
has good authority to assure his readers, that gentlemen at the upper end of
affairs, thought very differently: but that this was camp language, before the
evacuation of Long and York Islands is very sure.


HOW soon did GOD teach them and us "salvation comes not from mountains and
hills." GOD removed these vain dependencies. When lo! in the field, the last
place where America thought herself able to speak to advantage, with the enemy,
Britons and Hessians retreat before us. And now* "how slow of heart" to
understand? Hark from the North, to the noise of the strength of our armament
upon the Lake, and be ye witnesses of the confidence of men, in the works of
their own hands, to prepare us for the doleful tidings, that almost all our
armament there is destroyed. So true the wise man's observation, "Pride goes
before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall." Once more, my
hearers, look to the Jersies, there see this observation more abundantly
verified. Who has not heard of the intended Christmas, of British and Hessian
troops at Philadelphia? When now our troops, through short inlistments, reduced
to an handful, as though to show the finger of GOD; look! behold! the proud
boasters are checked, they retreat, they are as they are. O that christians
would consider, "that when Ephraim spoke trembling, he exalted himself in
Israel; but when he offended in Baal, he died." The cure of this evil is before
us, "sanctify ye the LORD of HOSTS himself."

MEN, brethren and fathers, may I presume upon your patience a few minutes
longer, to show you that I have yet to speak on GOD's behalf? Know then, that
the rapid progress of luxury among us -- the excessive attachment to imported
superfluities -- the tyranny of lust and fashion, nursed pride, effeminated the
inhabitants, and squezed the industrious, yea, almost forced multitudes to
injustice, or knavery, or extortion, to keep pace with the prevailing custom of
the times. Nothing short of nonimportation, could recover men to their senses,
and bring us to value our flax, wool, and finest of the wheat, above baubles.
All the teaching and reasoning of the ablest among us, backed with the
authority of GOD's word, could not avail to arouse this people out of their
lethargy. "Ephraim is joined to idols," and after them he would go. The hard
necessity of war, and of such a war as dried up the streams of luxury in a
great measure, must force us to industry, frugality and economy. The GOD of
heaven saw it, and this rod of chastisement has he stretched out over us. He
that seeks the moral cause of these calamities, within two or three years past
only, levels the arrow far on this side the mark. Righteous and discerning
ones, have long observed, that some in a land of vision, had either forgot, or
were willingly ignorant," that to do justice between man and man, that a sacred
regard to moral obligation, joined to mercy, were essential parts of real
religion. How many were as little concerned to pay their just debts, as though
neither conscience, nor heaven stood in any relation to it? What evasions --
what breaches of promise -- what demuring in courts, and what not? to keep the
just dues of creditors in their own hands, while they lavished gold out of the
bag, upon luxuries and superfluities: yea, while poor creditors, defrauded of
their just dues, suffered for want of bread. What dependence could be placed
upon the promises of some, if by evading them, they could make a little more
profit some other way? Is this the character of a citizen of Zion?

THIS disregard to justice -- this failure of moral honesty, is the bane of
godliness. From one concomitant symptom, we have great reason to fear,
hypocrisy is one of the crying sins of the present day, " Hypocrisy commonly
ushers in profaneness, and, as a lad thrust in at a window, opens the door to
the greatest monsters: for there is nothing more common, than for men, who are
not very discerning, to contemn all piety, when they see the blackest crimes
prosecuted under that silken mantle, and men, with the temple of the LORD in
their mouths, abuse both the temple, and the GOD that dwells in it." Harneck's
preface to the Great Law of Consideration.
"He looked for judgment, but behold oppression -- for righteousness, but
behold a cry." If we remember that covetousness is the source of this eyil, we
may see a remarkable similarity between GOD's present dealing with us, and his
ancient people. "For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth and smote
him: I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly, in the way of his
heart."

SHOULD it please GOD to give us a name among the nations of the earth, it was
necessary to discipline us to frugality, moral honesty, and self-government; or
virtue, with a free trade, could no longer dwell among us. When the GOD of
Israel was about establishing them in national state, in a land flowing with
"milk and honey," he led them forty years in the wilderness, to humble them,
and prove them, and know what was in their heart, whether they would keep his
commandments. The circumstances into which he has cast us, answer this purpose,
at least to prove us, and show us there was such wickedness in our hearts, as
would utterly disqualify us for good in our "latter end" unless it were
checked, and purged out. May it have the happy effect also of humbling us.
Never, perhaps, had any people a greater trial of virtue and patriotism, than
Americans now have, in one particular instance; and it is greatly to be wished
that virtue and patriotism might triumph over this temptation. The scarcity of
money, while we were colonies to Britain, and the plenty of European goods,
with provisions of our own produce, quick exchanged for an abounding plenty of
bills of credit, scarcity of foreign goods, with a large demand of provisions
for supply of our army; becomes a temptation almost too powerful for flesh and
blood. True patriotism should teach us, in defiance of the temptation, to
maintain the credit of our currency, even though it were but iron or leather,
stamped with public authority.
Who could have believed, ten years ago, that men could have been found in this
land, who would have taken advantage of a scarcity, or of a neighbor's
necessity, to extort double, yea, thrice the common value of a commodity? Had
we cautioned a neighbor against such extortion, ten years ago, would he not
have said, "Is thy servant a dog, that he should do this great thing?" Yet how
many such have been found? The preacher does not imagine the sin of
covetousness rages at this day, so much above what it has in years past, as the
price of goods is enhanced. The peculiar circumstances of the day, afford
abundant occasion for manifestation of this sin. The enhanced price of goods,
proceeds at least, in a great measure, from other causes. Engrossing and
monopolising, are justly chargeable to this evil disease; but would have
appeared in past times, had circumstances favored them, as now.
Who could have thought, that while we were complaining of oppression, and have
so universally judged it right to withdraw ourselves from the domination of
Britain, on that account; so many should be found guilty of this sin, which
endangers us more than all the armies of Britain? Are these sons of liberty?
Are they not rather slaves of lust? For of whom a man is overcome, of the same
is he brought into bondage. Surely, in regard to their soul's salvation, they
may as well be the slaves of other men's lusts, as of their own. To these, add
engrossers and monopolizers, the canker worms of a community, which destroy the
fair fruits of the tree of liberty.

WHEN now upon trial, we see what wickedness has been, and still is in the
hearts of some: can we wonder that "his anger is not turned away, but his hand
is stretched out still?" O that such would remember, and practice that
apostolic command "Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on
the things of others." This public virtue is as necessary for the well being of
a state, as private virtue is for the existence of a christian: "but the rod
has blossomed, and pride," with covetousness "has budded;" yea, brought forth
the bitter fruit. With foreign commodities imported into our populous, maritime
towns, have come men, whose religion may be summed up in this short creed,
"Gain is godliness." The importation of foreign luxury, cultivated by men of
this principle; to which you may add, cargoes of convicts emptied like jakes
upon us, bid fair to nurse up a race of infidels.

A BELIEF of the being of GOD, and of his providential government, is the
foundation principle, without which there can be no religion. To this
foundation principle, our GOD seems to be calling us. Where is his
superintending influence more manifest, than in the great affair of war? To
what but his providence can we attribute it, that an army so great with an
artillery so immense, with a navy sufficient to defy all we can do, have made
no greater inroads upon us? If GOD had not done more for us than we have done
for ourselves, what would our case have been! Infidels, henceforth cast away
your infidelity, and join with us to sanctify the LORD of HOSTS himself, and
let him be your fear, let him be your dread.

An ADDRESS to His HONOR, The GOVERNOR, and COMMANDER IN CHIEF of the State of
CONNECTICUT.
HONORED SIR,
UNDER the accumulated burdens, which devolve upon your Honor, the only one
among thirteen governors, whom the love of his people -- of his country --
religion and liberty, have persuaded, not fearing the wrath of the king, to
risk life and character, to live honorably, or die with the liberty of your
country; pecuniary considerations are no adequate compensation for the
incessant fatigues of office.

THERE are, indeed, many motives to a patient continuance in well-doing -- that
you may deserve an honorable rank among your many worthy predecessors in office
-- that you may appear really worthy of the place GOD in his providence has
placed you in -- first Governor in this free and independent State of America
-- that you may continue to deserve the approbation of your constituents --
that you may promote your country's welfare -- that you may obtain the
testimony of your own conscience, respecting fidelity in these. But, Sir, is
there one consideration that can give you more satisfaction, than the testimony
of conscience, that you have sanctified the LORD of HOSTS himself, and made him
your fear and dread, and have used your influence to engage the numerous bands
under your command, to follow your example.

THE good pleasure of the MOST HIGH, in choosing and placing your Honor in such
a peculiar situation -- last Governor of the Colony of Connecticut -- first in
this free and independent State; where labors indeed, have been more abundant;
-- raising you up for this very purpose, and girding your loins, to go through
the work which, in its consequences, may have connection with the happiness of
unborn multitudes, even through eternity, may well excite gratitude to your
great Master, who has thought fit to employ you in so great and honorable
service. This thought was in the mind of St. Paul; "And I thank CHRIST JESUS,
our LORD, who has enabled me, for that he counted me faithful, putting me into
the ministry." This will not sail to raise your mind above the toils of mortal
life, while you have a consciousness of integrity, aiming at the glory of the
great supreme over all.

THE pleasing thought that your Honor's name will stand enrolled in the annals
of America, among the first of her worthies, who live at this important crisis,
has the LORD of hosts allowed you, as a balance for the far more exceeding
labors and fatigues that attend this day of America's tribulation. This, in
regard to earthly honors, is thy portion from the LORD.

LET those who have not learned to extend their views beyond pecuniary
emoluments, and fulsome adulation, feast upon the smiles of earthly monarchs,
and stretch themselves on beds of ivory; but more substantial joys be thy
portion.

IT was spoken to the praise of the angel of the church of Thyatyra, "I know
thy works, and charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy
works; and the last to be more than the first." Works done in love to GOD* and
man, service done, in faith, patience, and works abounding more at last than
first, will not fail of a reward. The well grounded expectation of this,
affords a most animating support. May your Honor's life be spared -- your
usefulness be increased -- your loins be girded to go through the work which
GOD in his providence allots you, and your reward in contemplating the connxion
which your labors have with the great design of forming a people for GOD; but
especially, your joyous participation with them, in the glorious manifestation
of wisdom, mercy, love and grace, in the presence of GOD, and the LAMB; be
exceeding, abundantly above all that we can ask or think. Honored Sir, Farewell.

An ADDRES to his HONOR the DEPUTY GOVERNOR, the Honorable ASSISTANTS in
COUNCIL, and Worthy REPRESENTATIVES of the FREEMEN of this STATE.
HONORED GENTLEMEN,
IN as much as civil institutions, are a substitute for lost innocence, used by
GOD to curb the violent passions of men, and constrain them to regard
righteousness, and social virtues: The work allotted to you, Gentlemen, in your
legislative character, is very serious, solemn, and important; and ever ought
to be entered upon, with a becoming sense of accountableness to him, whose is
the kingdom. Permit me first to say with due deference, "Worship him all ye
gods." Nothing can better quality you for this important service, than
extensive knowledge, joined to the fear of the LORD. Be entreated to bear in
your minds; the great ends of government, even to reform the morals of the
subject. GOD has called you to be "strong rods," to correct the wicked; or in
St. Paul's words, to be "the minister of GOD, a revenger to execute wrath upon
him that does evil." In this view ye are ministers of GOD for good to his
people, constraining them by civil rules to "walk honestly as in the day." The
security of property by righteous ordinances, and protection of the subject, in
lawful and useful employments, gives them opportunity, to "lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty." To which end, righteousness
should be the basis of law -- an additional force to the dictates of well
informed conscience. The obligation of the ruled to obey, should seldom depend
solely upon, " Be it enacted, etc." Men may feel the force of law by it is
penalty; but will not be formed to virtue by such ordinances.

GOD's servants in authority, should imitate him "all whose ways are judgment;"
who speaks "in righteousness." America groaning under the most barbarous
treatment -- condemned, unheard -- her children pronounced rebels, when in the
peace of GOD and the king -- praying for the welfare of the king, and nation:
sentenced to be dragged away in chains to Britain, upon suspicion of crimes: --
troops let loose upon us, sheathing their swords in the bowels of them, whose
honest industry fed great numbers in the British isle: loudly calls upon you,
to form laws in righteousness, consonant to the mild and equitable government
of Zion's King, One great design among others is, by civil ordinances to lead
men to reverence, and honor the GOD's among men: that their minds being
habituated to reverence superiors, may be prepared to reverence and sanctify
the LORD of HOSTS. Therefore, it becomes very important for you, to maintain
your authority, and the dignity of law: -- to see that no laws be trampled upon
with impunity: -- that there be no formido avium: that fines and penalties be
duly exacted. It is no mercy to a community, to use excess of lenity toward
transgressors. Great is the importance of having executive officers faithful,
to put into execution the good laws of the State. Is there not a deficiency
here? Why does profane swearing abound, while there are good and wholesome laws
to suppress it? Why are the sabbaths of the LORD profaned, and so little notice
taken of offenders? Why so few prosecucutions upon the late law against
oppression, when there are known (...) taken of offenders? Such neglects,
destroy the majesty of authority, and teach men to despise dominion, and speak
evil of dignities; the morals of the people are hereby corrupted, while the
hands of rulers are weakened, and one of the great ends of government
frustrated. What other measures ought to be taken, to stir up under officers to
faithfulness, and to revive ancient zeal for the support of authority, belongs
to the civil department to determine.

IF there is a defect here, may not lovers of order and virtue believe, that
the zeal and watchful care of this honorable body, will soon quicken the
slothful, and support the faithful?

AS the religion of our blessed LORD is the most complete system of morality,
ever yet taught in our world, best calculated to render men good subjects of
civil society: so it claims the support of a christian magistracy. All who
profess a belief of the being of one GOD -- the Messiahship of JESUS of
NAZARETH -- the necessity of the saving influences of the Holy Spirit, and that
the "lively oracles" of the old and new testament, are the revealed will of
GOD, the appointed rule of faith and manners; have a just claim to protection
from the magistrate. To require such to support this system of morality, for
the benefit of civil community, is no more absurd, than to require them to
support schools of education, to render youths good members of society.
Arguments for religious establishments, should stand upon the ground of
morality. This takes the plea of conscience out of the mouths of particular
sects. Such as openly plead, that it is against their consciences, to support
morality for the good of civil community, forfeit all claim to the benefit of
law and protection.


EVERY religious sect, within the above description, ought to enjoy a due
proportion of the expense they contribute, for the support of this system, to
employ if they please, teachers of it, according to their own tenets; but if
they refuse to use it this way, may it not become the civil power to set it
apart, to the support of morality in the education of youths, or some other way?

WHILE your attention is drawn to the "battle of the warrior -- and garments
rolled in blood;" there is not a little danger of neglecting the arts of peace.
The necessity of education, to the very being of a free government, is shown by
the author of America's Appeal to the Impartial World, Page 67, 68.
to good advantage -- want of time forbids a recital. To solicit a benevolence
of a pecuniary kind, for the muses at this time, when there are such abundant
demands, for immediate defense; might appear inconsiderate. The smiles of this
body, in every reasonable way, "will be as the light of the morning, when the
sun rises; even a morning without clouds;" a strengthening of free government,
therefore to be desired, by all lovers of virtue, knowledge, education, and
true liberty. Are not these instances within your department, in which ye may
sanctify the LORD of Hosts, and influence others also? May your hearts be
inclined to arise up and do the work, and the LORD give you wisdom and
understanding in these things.

AN ADDRESS to GENTLEMEN of the MILITARY DEPARTMENT; especially those of the
standing army.
GENTLEMEN,
THE calling to which GOD's providence and your country's distresses have
called you, has justly been deemed honorable, ever since martial achievements
have been subject matter of history. No cause, except that, when the LORD of
Hosts was king in Jeshurun, has abounded with more honorable motives or more
pressing inducements to valor, intrepidity and heroism. You draw the sword to
defend an injured, oppressed people: -- you fight for friends, your children,
your wives, and your religion. The enemy shone the last war, in martial glory,
victories and conquests. Victory over them will blazon American arms. You are
marshalled under a General, the darling of America. It is an honor to sustain a
military post under him. You compose part of the first real standing army, of
the States of America. -- You fight for empire extensive. -- You have before
your eyes, that which cannot but touch the spirit of men of honor, -- your
fellow soldiers redeemed from captivity, dragging along their emaciated
infected carcases, dying from town to town, proclaiming British barbarity,
unspeakably greater, than ever we experienced, from the heathen savages of the
wilderness. You go to the scene of action, to hear hushands bewail their chaste
wives, rent from the embraces, and their virgin daughters ravished before their
eyes. To you, under GOD, we look, and into your hands the sword is committed, to
avenge your country's wrongs. Sanctify the LORD of HOSTS himself, place your
trust in him; profane not his holy name, nor suffer it to be profaned, by
them under your command. Engage his presence with you, so shall he be "thy
shield of the help, the sword of thy excellency!" Go forth humble, yet
undaunted; let the sight of the enemy fire your martial souls, and American
annals record your glorious deeds. "The LORD hear thee in the day of trouble,
the name of the GOD of Jacob defend thee, send thee help from the sanctuary,
and strengthen thee out of Zion." Gentlemen of the sword, we thus bless you out
of the house of the LORD.

An ADDRESS to the CLERGY. To my FATHERS and BRETHREN in the MINISTRY.
REVEREND SIRS,
None of you can be more surprised to see me in this desk upon this occasion,
than I was at his Honor's call to it. But at a day, when providence, and our
country call every one to exert themselves, who durst withold their best
endeavors? The work GOD has allotted to us, to be instruments in his hands, to
lead men to sanctify the LORD GOD in their hearts, is truly great, excellent
and divine. This, standing in connection with the design of civil magistracy,
ought to unite our hearts and hands with them, in preparing a people for the
LORD. Moses and Aaron should walk hand in hand; and duty demands our prayers
for them. The visible sins of the day, profaneness, hypocrisy, greediness of
gain -- the want of public virtue and moral honesty; ought not to escape our
notice, in our pastoral labors. I need not mind you, that to us it belongs to
teach the pure doctrines of the gospel, with uncorruptness, gravity and
sincerity -- to urge the necessity of regeneration by the spirit of GOD -- of
justification freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in JESUS
CHRIST -- to press gospel motives to holiness, with the precious promise of
assistance here, and immortal life in the heavenly world; with the terrors of
the LORD, to awaken the careless and secure; and all with an humble sense of
the utter impotency of men and means, without GOD's blessing. May no 'vain
jangling hinder us from pursuing "the end of the commandment," even "charity,
out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience* and of faith unfeigned." May it
please GOD (strengthening and assisting us by his grace) to make us
instrumental of turning many "from darkness to light;" in which we have the
greatest inducement to industry and fidelity; from the love of CHRIST toward
us -- from love to the souls of men -- from the admonition given us by our
LORD, in the removal of so many of our order, who were not suffered to
"continue" another year, "by reason of death;" Since the last anniversary, have
fallen asleep the Rev. Messieurs Woodbridge, Eells, Judson, Baldwin, Meriam,
Wells, Huntington, Whitman, Rawson, Gibbs.
and from desire of a gracious reward. "They that be wise shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, as the
stars forever and ever."

An ADDRESS to the numerous auditory now present.
FRIENDS, and FELLOW CHRISTIANS,
THAT this is a day of darkness and perplexity, none can deny -- that this sore
dispensation of heaven is sent upon us for our sins, none but infidels will
doutb. If it is the design of heaven, to give us a name among the nations, it
is necessary we should be purged. That boasting at putting on the harness,
which had such a run last year, would, unchecked, render us offensive to GOD,
and intolerable to men. The LORD of HOSTS found a way to humble us. And if it
is the will of GOD that we should emerge out of these troubles, there is more
yet to be done. The sin of covetousness, now too manifest to be denied, needs
to be removed. The sin of profaneness, is highly displeasing to GOD. That
selfish spirit which leads to extortion is greatly alarming. These enemies
among ourselves, endanger us more than all the embattled troops of Britons and
mercinaries. To avoid oppression, we judged it lawful to resist Great Britain.
Shall we show ourselves the oppressors -- dig our own grave, and seal our own
destruction? GOD has in his providence, cast us into this furnace to prove us
-- to show us what was in our hearts; yet who is humbled, who is reformed? If
judgments don't produce repentence, let mercy in judgment, bring you to
ingenuous sorrow for your transgressions.

THROUGH undeserved mercy, GOD's conduct has hitherto been, toward us, as it
was toward Israel, in the days of Jehoahaz; when they were oppressed by Hazael
king of Syria. "And the LORD was gracious to them, and had compassion on them,
and had respect unto them; because of his covenant with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, and would not destroy them, neither cast he them from his presence as
yet."

WHY if GOD had written Lo-ammi upon us, did he not withhold the blessing of
fullness in the latter harvest? Why were not the enemy suffered to overrun all
these States? Why were our brethren victorious at Charlestown in
South Carolina? Why did GOD suffer that seasonable supply of powder to fall
into our hands, by the brave Capt. MUGFORD? (whom we could have wished a better
fate.) Why was the manufacture of Saltpeter brought to perfection in a few
months: by which two favors our privateers were enabled to afford supplies of
West India goods, and much clothing? Why have we been favored with success
near Harlem -- at Trenton and Princetown, and the enemy driven back? These
things should support our minds under the rebuke, and animate us to amend every
thing that is amiss. The language of GOD to his people once was, "You only have
I known of all the families of the earth: Therefore will I punish you for all
your iniquities." Let us then open our "ears to discipline," and pateintly
accept this punishment upon this family which has been near to GOD. "Break off
your sins by righteousness, and" your "iniquities, by showing mercy to the
poor." Then GOD will find other employment for your enemies. But if this people
are resolved to walk each one after the sight of his own eyes, and in the
imagination of his own heart, and say, "we are delivered to do all these
abominations," behold the feet of them who have wasted towns, and pilaged the
inhabitants, are at the door!

To CONCLUDE,
I WOULD leave with you all, rulers and ruled -- with this State, and all the
United States -- and with the Israel of GOD every where, that blessing which
the LORD commanded Aaron and his sons to pronounce upon the children of Israel.

THE LORD bless thee, and keep thee: The LORD make his face to shine upon thee
and be gracious unto thee The LORD lift up his countenance upon thee, and give
thee peace.

AMEN.
INDEPENDENCE, an ANTHEM, By the AUTHOR; composed for this Occasion.
Lamentatione.
AFFLICTED oppressed, she cried to Albion's King.
From tribes of America, the theme was supplication
Louring, Bass sol. Silent, Treble sol. Haughty, dumb the Monarch, Chorus.
Black tempest, vengeful fury on his brow. Chorus.
Hark! Hark! Hark!
Pristo, sharp Key.
The grand council announces, nor whips nor scorpions,
Bondage ceaseless, clanking chains:
Rivit them, sons of Mars, British forces,
Brunswick's troops, Hessian bands,
Native Indians, Affric's sable sons,
Ships of war, thundering cannon, hissing bombs,
Confused noise of warriors, with garments rolled in blood.
Sons of Freedom, Treble sol. Daughters of America, Tenor sol.
Join your plaintive moan Bass sol. to heaven's king.:S: Chor.
Chorus.
Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself;
Make him your fear, make him your dread.
From the Crystal throne,
I heard, Treble sol, I heard, Counter, I heard Tenor, the solemn sound, Tutt.
Chorus.
As of many waters,
Trust ye the Lord Jehovah,
Make him your help and shield.
Gratioso.
Lo! the angel Gabriel comes.
From him that sits upon the throne;
All nations hear the great Jehovah's will:
America, henceforth separate,
Sit as Queen among the nations.
Piano.
Sister States, heaven's care, Philadelph the center:
Brotherly love the bond of union, heaven cement them,
Rays divine dart effulgence on the CONGRESS;
Wisdom, firmness, moderation virtue, still attend them.
Granda.
Live, Live, Live,
Beloved of the Lord, until he comes,
Whose right it is to reign:
Call her FREE and INDEPENDENT STATES of AMERICA!
Hallelujah, Praise the Lord. AMEN.

