THE American CRISIS. NUMBER II.

BY THE AUTHOR OF COMMON SENSE.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by STYNER and CIST, in Second-street, six doors
above Arch-street.

[Price Four-pence single; or One Third of a Dollar per dozen.]

Where also may be had No. I. [Price Twopence.]

TO LORD HOW.
"What Is in the name of LORD that I should fear,
"To bring my grievance to the public ear.
CHURCHILL.
UNIVERSAL empire is the prerogative of a writer. His concerns are with all
mankind, and though he cannot command their obedience, he can assign them their
duty. The Republic of Letters is more ancient than monarchy, and of far higher
character in the world than the vassal court of Britain; he that rebels against
reason is a real rebel, but he that in defense of reason, rebels against
tyranny, has a better title to "DEFENDER OF THE FAITH" than George the Third.

AS a military man your Lordship may hold out the sword of war, and call it the
"ULTIMA RATIO REGUM:" The last Reason of Kings; we in return can show you the
sword of justice, and call it, The best Scourge of Tyrants. The first of these
two may threaten, or even frighten, for a while, and cast a sickly languor over
an insulted people, but reason will soon recover the debauch, and restore them
again to tranquil fortitude. Your Lordship, I find, has now commenced author
and published a proclamation; I too have published a crisis; as they stand,
they are the antipodes of each other; both cannot rise at once, and one of them
must descend: And so quick is the revolution of things, that your Lordship's
performance, I see, has already fallen many degrees from its first place, and
is now just visible on the edge of the political horizon.

IT is surprising to what pitch of infatuation blind folly and obstinacy will
carry mankind, and your Lordship's drowsy proclamation is a proof that it does
not even quit them in their sleep. Perhaps you thought America too was taking a
nap, and therefore, chose, like satan to Eve, to whisper the delusion softly,
lest you should awaken her. This Continent, Sir, is too extensive to sleep all
at once, and too watchful, even in its slumbers, not to startle at the
unhallowed foot of an invader. You may issue your proclamations, and welcome,
for we have learned to "reverence ourselves" and scorn the insulting ruffian
that employs you. America for your deceased brother's sake would gladly have
shown you respect, and it is a new aggravation to her feelings that How should
be forgetful, and raise his sword against those, who at their own charge raised
a monument to his brother. But your master has commanded, and you have not
enough of nature left to refuse. Surely! there must be something strangely
degenerating in the love of monarchy, that can so completely wear a man down to
an ingrate, and make him proud to lick the dust that kings have trod upon. A
few more years, should you survive them, will bestow on you the title of an old
man, and in some hour of future reflection you may probably find the fitness of
Woolsey's despairing penitence, Had I served my God as faithfully as I have
served my king, he would not thus have forsaken me in my old age.

THE character you appear to us in is truly ridiculous. Your friends, the
Tories, announced your coming with high descriptions of your unlimited powers;
but your proclamation has given them the lie, by showing you to be a
Commissioner without authority. Had your powers been ever so great, they were
nothing to us, farther than we pleased; because we had the same right which
other nations had, to do what we thought was best. "THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA," will sound as pompously in the world or in history as "The Kingdom of
Great Britain;" The character of General Washington will fill a page with as
much luster as that of Lord How; and the Congress have as much right to
command the King and Parliament of London, to desist from legislation, as they
or you have to command the Congress. Only suppose how laughable such an edict
would appear from us, and then, in that merry mood, do but turn the tables upon
yourself, and you will see how your proclamation is received here. Having thus
placed you in a proper position in which you may have a full view of folly and
learn to despise it, I hold up to you, for that purpose, the following
quotation from your own lunarian proclamation "And We (Lord How and General
How) "do command, (and in his Majesty's name forsooth) all such persons as are
assembled together under the name of general or provincial Congresses,
Committees, Conventions, or other Associations, by whatever name or names known
or distinguished, to desist and cease from all such treasonable actings and
doings.

YOU introduce your proclamation by referring to your declarations of the 14th
of July and 19th of September. In the last of these, you sunk yourself below
the character of a private gentleman. That I may not seem to accuse you
unjustly I shall state the circumstance: By a verbal invitation of yours
communicated to Congress by General Sullivan, then a prisoner on his parole,
you signified your desire of conferring with some members of that body as
private gentlemen. It was beneath the dignity of the American Congress to pay
any regard to a message that at best was but a genteel affront, and had too
much of the ministerial complexion of tampering with private persons; and which
might probably have been the case, had the gentlemen who were deputed on that
business, possessed that easy kind of virtue which an English courtier is so
truly distinguished by. Your request however was complied with, for honest men
are naturally more tender of their civil than their political fame. The
interview ended as every sensible man thought it would; for your Lordship
knows, as well as the writer of the Crisis, that it is impossible for the king
of England to promise the repeal, or even the revisal, of any acts of
parliament; wherefore, on your part, you had nothing to say, more than to
request, in the room of demanding, the entire surrender of the Continent; and
then, if that was complied with, to promise that the inhabitants should escape
with their lives. This was the upshot of the conference. You informed the
conferees that you were two months in soliciting these powers. We ask, what
powers? for as Commissioner you have none. If you mean the power of pardoning,
it is an oblique proof that your master was determined to sacrifice all before
him; and that you were two months in dissuading him from his purpose. Another
evidence of his savage obstinacy! From your own account of the matter we may
justly draw these two conclusions; first, that you serve a monster; and
secondly, that never was a commissioner sent on a more foolish errand than
yourself. This plain language may perhaps sound uncoothly to an ear viciated by
courtly refinements; but words were made for use, and the fault lies in
deserving them, or the abuse in applying them unfairly.

SOON after your return to New York you published a very illiberal and unmanly
hand bill against the Congress; for it was certainly stepping out of the line
of common civility, first to screen your national pride by soliciting an
interview with them as private gentlemen, and in the conclusion to endeavor to
deceive the multitude by making an hand bill attack on the whole body of the
Congress; you got them together under one name, and abused them under another.
But the king you serve and the cause you support afford you so few instances of
acting the gentleman, that out of pity to your situation the Congress pardoned
the insult by taking no notice of it.

YOU say in that hand bill, that they, the Congress, disavowed every purpose
for reconciliation not consonant with their extravagant and inadmissible claim
of Independence. Why, God bless me! what have you to do with our Independence?
we ask no leave of yours to set it up; we ask no money of yours to support it;
we can do better without your fleets and armies than with them; you may soon
have enough to do to protect yourselves without being burdened with us. We are
very willing to be at peace with you, to buy of you and sell to you, and, like
young beginners in the world, to work for our own living; therefore, why do you
put yourselves out of cash, when we know you cannot spare it, and we do not
desire you to run into debt? I am willing, Sir, you should see your folly in
every view I can place it, and for that reason descend sometimes to tell you in
jest what I wish you to see in earnest. But to be more serious with you, why do
you say "their" Independence? To set you right, Sir, we tell you, that the
Independency is ours not theirs. The Congress were authorized by every State on
the Continent to publish it to all the world, and in so doing are not to be
considered as the inventors, but only as the heralds that proclaimed it, or the
office from which the sense of the people received a legal form; and it was as
much as any or all their heads were worth, to have treated with you on the
subject of submission under any name whatever. But we know the men in whom we
have trusted; can England say the same of her parliament?

I come now more particularly to your proclamation of the 30th of November
last. Had you gained an entire conquest over all the armies of America, and
then put forth a proclamation, offering (what you call) mercy, your conduct
would have had some specious show of humanity; but to creep by surprise into a
province, and there endeavor to terrify and seduce the inhabitants from their
just allegiance to the rest by promises, which you neither meant nor were able
to fulfill, is both cruel and unmanly: Cruel in its effects; because, unless you
can keep all the ground you have marched over, how are you, in the words of
your proclamation, to secure to your proselytes "the enjoyment of their
property?" What are to become either of your new adopted subjects, or your old
friends the Tories, in Burlington, Bordentown, Trenton, Mountholly, and many
other places, where you proudly lorded it for a few days, and then fled with
the precipitation of a pursued thief? What, I say, are to become of those
wretches? What are to become of those who went over to you from this city and
State? What more can you say to them than "Shift for yourselves?" Or what more
can they hope for than to wander like vagabonds over the face of the earth? You
may now tell them to take their leave of America and all that once was theirs.
Recommend them, for consolation, to your master's court; there perhaps they may
make a shift to live on the scraps of some dangling parasite, and choose
companions among thousands like themselves. A traitor is the foulest fiend on
earth!

IN a political sense we ought to thank you for thus bequeathing estates to the
Continent; we shall soon, at this rate, be able to carry on a war without
expense, and grow rich by the ill policy of Lord How and the generous
defection of the Tories. Had you set your foot into this city you would have
bestowed estates upon us which we never thought of, by bringing forth traitors
we were unwilling to suspect. But these men, you will say, "are his majesty's
most faithful subjects;" let that honor then be all their fortune, and let his
majesty take them to himself.

I am now thoroughly disgusted with them; they live in ungrateful case and bend
their whole minds to mischief. It seems as if GOD had given them over to a
spirit of infidelity, and that they are open to conviction in no other line but
that of punishment. It is time to have done with tarring, feathering, carting,
and taking securities for their future good behavior; every sensible man must
feel a conscious shame at seeing a poor fellow hawked for a show about the
streets, when it is known that he is only the tool of some principal villain,
biased into his offense by the force of false reasoning, or bribed thereto
through sad necessity. We dishonor ourselves by attacking such trifling
characters, while greater ones are suffered to escape; it is our duty to find
them out, and their proper punishment would be to exile them from the Continent
for ever. The circle of them is not so great as some imagine; the influence of
a few have tainted many who are not naturally corrupt. A continual circulation
of lies among those who are not much in the way of hearing them contradicted,
will in time pass for truth; and the crime lies not in the believer but the
inventor. I am not for declaring war against every man that appears not so warm
as myself: Difference of constitution, temper, habit of speaking and many other
things will go a great way in fixing the outward character of a man, yet simple
honesty may remain at bottom. Some men have naturally a military turn, and can
brave hardships and the risk of life with a cheerful face; others have not, no
slavery appears to them so great as the fatigue of arms, and no terror so
powerful as that of personal danger: What can we say? We cannot alter nature,
neither ought we to punish the son because the father begot him in a cowardly
mood. However, I believe most men have more courage than they know of, and that
a little at first is enough to begin with. I knew the time when I thought that
the whistling of a cannon ball would have frightened me almost to death; but I
have since tried it, and find I can stand it with as little discomposure, and
(I believe) with a much easier conscience than your Lordship. The same dread
would return to me again were I in your situation, for my solemn belief of your
cause is, that it is hellish and damnable, and under that conviction every
thinking man's heart must fail him.

FROM a concern that a good cause should be dishonored by the least disunion
among us, I said in my former paper, No. 1. That should the enemy now be
expelled, I wish, with all the sincerity of a Christian, that the names of Whig
and Tory might never more be mentioned; but there is a knot of men among us of
such a venomous cast that they will not admit even one's good wishes to act in
their favor. Instead of rejoicing that Heaven had, as it were, providentially
preserved this city from plunder and destruction, by delivering so great a part
of the enemy into our hands with so little effusion of blood, they stubbornly
affected to disbelieve it till within an hour, nay half an hour, of the
prisoners arriving: And the Quakers put forth a testimony, dated the 20th of
December, signed "John Pemberton," declaring their attachment to the British
government. I have ever been careful of charging offenses upon whole societies
of men, but as the paper referred to is put forth by an unknown set of men, who
claim to themselves the right of representing the whole; and while the whole
society of Quakers admit its validity by a silent acknowledgment, it is
impossible that any distinction can be made by the public; and the more so
because the New York paper, of the 30th of December, printed by permission of
our enemies, says that the Quakers begin to speak openly of their attachment to
the British constitution. We are certain that we have many friends among them,
and wish to know them.
These men are continually harping on the great sin of our bearing arms, but
the king of Britain may lay waste the world in blood and famine, and they, poor
fallen souls, have nothing to say.

IN some future paper I intend to distinguish between the different kind of
persons who have been denominated Tories; for this I am clear in, that all are
not so who have been called so, nor all men Whigs who were once thought so; and
as I mean not to conceal the name of any true friend when there shall be
occasion to mention him, neither will I that of an enemy who ought to be known,
let his rank, station or religion be what it may. Much pains have been taken by
some to set your Lordship's private character in an amiable light, but as it
has chiefly been done by men who know nothing about you, and who are no ways
remarkable for their attachment to us, we have no just authority for believing
it. George the Third was imposed upon us by the same arts, but TIME, at length,
has done him justice, and the same fate may probably attend your Lordship. Your
avowed purpose here, is to kill, conquer, plunder, pardon and enslave; and the
ravages of your army through the Jersies have been marked with as much
barbarism as if you had openly professed yourself the prince of ruffians; not
even the appearance of humanity has been preserved either on the march or the
retreat of your troops; no general order, that I could ever learn, has ever
been issued to prevent or even forbid your troops from robbery wherever they
came, and the only instance of justice, if it can be called such, which has
distinguished you for impartiality, is, that you treated and plundered all
alike; what could not be carried away have been destroyed, and mohogony
furniture have been deliberately laid on the fire for fuel, rather than the men
should be fatigued with cutting wood. As some people may doubt the truth of
such wanton destruction, I think it necessary to inform, that one of the people
called Quakers, who lives at Trenton, gave me this information at the house of
Mr. Michael Hutchinson (one of the same profession) who lives near to Trenton
ferry, on the Pennsylvania side; Mr. Hutchinson being present.
There was a time when the Whigs confided much in your supposed candor, and
the Tories rested themselves on your favor; the experiments have now been
made, and failed; and every town, nay every cottage, in the Jersies, where your
arms have been, is a testimony against you. How you may rest under this
sacrifice of character I know not, but this I know, that you sleep and rise
with the daily curses of thousands upon you; perhaps the misery which the
Tories have suffered by your proffered mercy may give them some claim to their
country's pity, and be in the end the best favor you could show them.

IN a folio general order book belonging to Colonel Rohl's battalion, taken at
Trenton, and now in the possession of the Council of Safety for this State, the
following barbarous order is frequently repeated, His Excellency the COMMANDER
IN CHIEF orders, that all inhabitants which shall be found with arms, not
having an officer with them, shall be immediately taken and hung up. How many
you may thus have privately sacrificed we know not, and the account can only be
settled in another world. Your treatment of prisoners, in order to distress
them to enlist into your infernal service, is not to be equalled by any
instance in Europe. Yet this is the humane Lord How and his brother, whom the
Tories and their three quarter kindred the Quakers, or some of them at least,
have been holding up for patterns of justice and mercy!

A bad cause will ever be supported by bad means and bad men, and whoever will
be at the pains of examining strictly into things, will find that one and the
same spirit of oppression and impiety, more or less, governs through your whole
party in both countries: Not many days ago I accidently fell in company with a
person of this city, noted for espousing your cause, and on my remarking to
him, "that it appeared clear to me, by the late providential turn of affairs,
that GOD Almighty was visibly on our side," he replied, "We care nothing for
that, you may have HIM, and welcome; if we have but enough of the devil on our
side we shall do." However carelessly this might be spoken matters not, it is
still the insensible principle that directs all your conduct, and will at last
most assuredly deceive and ruin you.

IF ever a nation was mad and foolish, blind to its own interest and bent on
its own destruction, it is Britain. There are such things as national sins, and
though the punishment of individuals may be reserved to another world, national
punishment can only be inflicted in this world. Britain, as a nation, is in my
inmost belief the greatest and most ungrateful offender against GOD on the face
of the whole earth: Blessed with all the commerce she could wish for, and
furnished by a vast extension of dominion with the means of civilizing both the
eastern and western world, she has made no other use of both than proudly to
idolize her own "Thunder," and rip up the bowels of whole countries for what
she could get; -- like Alexander she has made war her sport, and inflicted
misery for prodagality sake. The blood of India is not yet repaid, nor the
wretchedness of Africa yet requitted. Of late she has enlarged her list of
national cruelties by her butcherly destruction of the Caribbs of St. Vincents,
and in returning an answer by the sword to the meek prayer for "Peace, Liberty
and Safety." These are serious things; and whatever a foolish tyrant, a
debauched court, a trafficing legislature or a blinded people may think, the
national account with Heaven must some day or other be settled: All countries
have sooner or later been called to their reckoning; the proudest empires have
sunk when the balance was struck; and Britain, like an individual penitent,
must undergo her day of sorrow, and the sooner it happens to her the better. As
I wish it over, I wish it to come, but withal wish that it may be as light as
possible.

PERHAPS your Lordship has no taste for serious things; by your connexions in
England I should suppose not: Therefore I shall drop this part of the subject,
and take it up in a line in which you will better understand me.

BY what means, may I ask, do you expect to conquer America? If you could not
effect it in the summer when our army was less than yours, nor in the winter
when we had none, how are you to do it? In point of generalship you have been
outwitted, and in point of fortitude outdone; your advantages turn out to your
loss, and show us that it is in our power to ruin you by gifts: Like a game of
drafts we can move out of one square to let you come in, in order that we may
afterward take two or three for one; and as we can always keep a double corner
for ourselves, we can always prevent a total defeat. You cannot be so
insensible as not to see that we have two to one the advantage of you, because
we conquer by a drawn game, and you lose by it. Burgoyne might have taught your
Lordship this knowledge; he has been long a student in the doctrine of chances.

I have no other idea of conquering countries than by subduing the armies which
defend them: Have you done this, or can you do this? If you have not, it would
be civil in you to let your proclamations alone for the present; otherwise, you
will ruin more Tories by your grace and favor than you will Whigs by your arms.

WERE you to obtain possession of this city, you would not know what to do with
it more than to plunder it. To hold it, in the manner you hold New York, would
be an additional dead weight upon your hands; and if a general conquest is your
object, you had better be without the city than with it. When you have defeated
all our armies, the cities will fall into your hands of themselves; but to
creep into them in the manner you got into Princetown, Trenton, etc. is like
robbing an orchard in the night before the fruit be ripe, and running away in
the morning. Your experiment in the Jersies is sufficient to teach you that you
have something more to do than barely to get into other people's houses; and
your new converts, to whom you promised all manner of protection, and seduced
into new guilt by pardoning them from their former virtues, must begin to have
a very contemptible opinion both of your power and your policy. Your authority
in the Jersies is now reduced to the small circle which your army occupies, and
your proclamation is no where else seen unless it be to be laughed at. The
mighty subduers of the Continent are retreated into a nutshell, and the proud
forgivers of our sins are fled from those they came to pardon; and all this at
a time when they were dispatching vessel after vessel to England with the great
news of every day. In short, you have managed your Jersey expedition so very
dexterously that the dead only are conquerors, because none will dispute the
ground with them.

IN all the wars you have formerly been concerned in, you had only armies to
contend with; in this case you have both an army and a country to combat with.
In former wars, the countries followed the fate of their capitals; Canada fell
with Quebec, and Minorca with Port Mahon or St. Philips; by subduing those, the
conquerors opened a way into, and became masters of the country: here it is
otherwise; if you get possession of a city here, you are obliged to shut
yourselves up in it, and can make no other use of it, than to spend your
country's money in. This is all the advantage you have drawn from New York; and
you would draw less from Philadelphia, because it requires more force to keep
it, and is much farther from the sea. A pretty figure you and the Tories would
cut in this city, with a river full of ice, and a town full of fire; for the
immediate consequence of your getting here would be, that you would be
cannonaded out again and the Tories be obliged to make good the damage; and
this, sooner or later, will be the fate of New York.

I wish to see the city saved, not so much from military as from natural
motives. It Is the hiding place of women and children, and Lord Howe's proper
business is with our armies. When I put all the circumstances together which
ought to be taken, I laugh at your notion of conquering America. Because you
lived in a little country where an army might run over the whole in a few days,
and where a single company of soldiers might put a multitude to the route, you
expected to find it the same here. It is plain that you brought over with you
all the narrow notions you were bred up with, and imagined that a proclamation
in the king's name was to do great things; but Englishmen always travel for
knowledge, and your Lordship, I hope, will return, if you return at all, much
wiser than you came.

WE may be surprised by events we did not expect, and in that interval of
recollection you may gain some temporary advantage: Such was the case a few
weeks ago, but we soon ripen again into reason, collect our strength, and while
you are preparing for a triumph we came upon you with a defeat. Such it has
been, and such it would be were you to try it an hundred times over. Were you
to garrison the places you might march over, in order to secure their
subjection, (for remember you can do it by no other means) your army would be
like a stream of water running to nothing. By the time you reached from
New York to Virginia you would be reduced to a string of drops not capable of
hanging together; while we, by retreating from State to State, like a river
turning back upon itself, would acquire strength in the same proportion as you
lost it, and in the end be capable of overwhelming you. The country in the mean
time would suffer, but it is a day of suffering, and we ought to expect it. What
we contend for is worthy the affliction we may go through. If we get but bread
to eat, and any kind of raiment to put on, we ought, not only to be contented,
but thankful. More than that we ought not to look for, and less than that
Heaven has not yet suffered us to want. He that would sell his Birthright for a
little salt, is as worthless as he who sold it for porridge without salt. And
he that would part with it for a gay coat, or a plain coat, ought for ever to
be a slave in buff. What are salt, sugar and finery to the inestimable
blessings of "Liberty and Safety?" Or what are the inconveniences of a few
months to the tributary bondage of ages? The meanest peasant in America,
blessed with these sentiments, is a happy man compared with a New York Tory; he
can eat his morsel without repining, and when he has done, can sweeten it with
a repast of wholesome air; he can take his child by the hand and bless it,
without feeling the conscious shame of neglecting a parent's duty.

IN publishing these remarks I have several objects in view: On your part they
are, to expose the folly of your pretended authority as a Commissioner; the
wickedness of your cause in general; and the impossibility of your conquering
us at any rate. On the part of the public my meaning is, to show them their
true and solid interest; to encourage them to their own good, to remove the
fears and falsities which bad men had spread and weak men had encouraged; and
to excite in all men a love for union, and a cheerfulness for duty.

I shall submit one more case to you respecting your conquest of this country,
and then proceed to new observations:

SUPPOSE our armies in every part of the Continent were immediately to
disperse, every man to his home, or where else he might be safe, and engage to
re-assemble again on a certain future day; it is clear that you would then have
no army to contend with, yet you would be as much at a loss in that case as you
are now; you would be afraid to send your troops in parties over the Continent,
either to disarm, or prevent us from assembling, lest they should not return;
and while you kept them together, having no army of ours to dispute with, you
could not call it a conquest; you might furnish out a pompous page in the
London Gazette or the New York paper, but when we returned at the appointed
time, you would have the same work to do you had at first.

IT has been the folly of Britain to suppose herself more powerful than she
really is, and by that means have arrogated to herself a rank in the world she
is not entitled to; for more than this century past she has not been able to
carry on a war without foreign assistance. In Marlborough's campaigns, and from
that day to this, the number of German troops and officers assisting her have
been about equal with her own; ten thousand Hessians were sent to England last
war to protect her from a French invasion; and she would have cut but a poor
figure in her Canadian and West-Indian expeditions, had not America been lavish
both of her money and men to help her along. The only instance in which she was
engaged singly, that I can recollect, was against the rebellion in Scotland in
forty-five and forty-six, and in that, out of three battles, she was twice
beaten, till by thus reducing their numbers (as we shall yours) and taking a
supply ship that was coming to Scotland with clothes, arms and money (as we
have often done) she was at last enabled to defeat them. England was never
famous by land; her officers have generally been suspected of cowardice, have
more of the air of a dancing master than a soldier, and by the sample we have
taken prisoners we begin to give the preference to ourselves. Her strength of
late has laid in her extravagance; but as her finances and her credit are now
low, her sinews in that line begin to fail fast. As a nation she is the poorest
in Europe; for were the whole kingdom, and all that is in it, to be put up to
sale like the estate of a bankrupt, it would not fetch as much as she owes: Yet
this thoughtless wretch must go to war, and with the avowed design too of
making us beasts of burden, to support her in riot and debauchery, and to
assist her afterward in distressing those nations who are now our best
friends. This ingratitude may suit a Tory, or the unchristian peevishness of a
fallen Quaker, but none else.

IT IS the unhappy temper of the English to be pleased with any war, right or
wrong, be it but successful; but they soon grow discontented with ill fortune,
and it is an even chance that they are as clamorous for peace next summer, as
the king and his ministers were for war last winter. In this natural view of
things, your Lordship stands in a very ugly critical situation: Your whole
character is staked upon your laurels; if they wither, you wither with them; if
they flourish, you cannot live long to look at them; and at any rate, the black
account hereafter is not far off. What lately appeared to us misfortunes, were
only blessings in disguise; and the seeming advantages on your side have turned
out to our profit. Even our loss of this city, as far as we can see, might be a
principal gain to us: The more surface you spread over, the thinner you will
be, and the easier wiped away; and our consolation under that apparent disaster
would be, that the estates of the Tories would become securities for the
repairs. In short, there is no old ground we can fail upon, but some new
foundation rises again to support us. We have put, Sir, our hands to the
plough, and cursed be he that looks back.

YOUR king, in his speech to parliament last spring, declared to them, That he
had no doubt but the great force they had enabled him to send to America, would
effectually reduce the rebellious Colonies. It has not, neither can it; but it
has done just enough to lay the foundation of its own next year's ruin. You are
sensible that you left England in a divided distracted state of politics, and,
by the command you had here, you became a principal prop in the court party;
their fortunes rest on yours; by a single express you can fix their value with
the public, and the degree to which their spirits shall rise or fall; they are
in your hands as stock, and you have the secret of the ally with you. Thus
situated and connected, you become the unintentional mechanical instrument of
your own and their overthrow. The king and his ministers put conquest out of
doubt, and the credit of both depended on the proof. To support them in the
interim, it was necessary you should make the most of every thing; and we can
tell by Hugh Gaine's New York paper what the complexion of the London Gazette
is. With such a list of victories the nation cannot expect you will ask new
supplies; and to confess your want of them, would give the lie to your
triumphs, and impeach the king and his ministers of treasonable deception. If
you make the necessary demand at home, your party sinks; if you make it not,
you sink yourself; to ask it now is too late, and to ask it before was too
soon, and unless it arrive quickly will be of no use. In short, the part you
have to act, cannot be acted; and I am fully persuaded that all you have to
trust to, is to do the best you can with what force you have got, or little
more. Though we have greatly excelled you in point of generalship and bravery
of men, yet, as a people, we have not entered into the full soul of enterprise;
for I, who know England and the disposition of the people well; am confident
that it is easier for us to effect a revolution there, than you a conquest
here: A few thousand men landed in England with the declared design of deposing
the present king, bringing his ministers to trial, and setting up the duke of
Gloucester in his stead, would assuredly carry their point, while you were
grovelling here ignorant of the matter. As I send all my papers to England,
this, like COMMON SENSE, will find its way there; and though it may put one
party on their guard, it will inform the other and the nation in general of our
design to help them.

THUS far, Sir, I have endeavored to give you a picture of present affairs:
You may draw from it what conclusions you please. I wish as well to the true
prosperity of England as you can, but I consider Independence as America's
natural Right and Interest, and never could see any real disservice it would be
to Britain. If an English merchant receives an order and is paid for it, it
signifies nothing to him who governs the country -- This is my creed of
politics. If I have any where expressed myself overwarmly, it is from a fixed
immovable hatred I have, and ever had, to cruel men and cruel measures. I have
likewise an aversion to monarchy, as being too debasing to the dignity of man;
but I never troubled others with my notions till very lately, nor ever
published a syllable in England in my life. What I write is pure nature, and my
pen and my soul have ever gone together. My writings I have always given away,
reserving only the expense of printing and paper, and sometimes not even that.
I never courted either fame or interest, and my manner of life, to those who
know it, will justify what I say. My study is to be useful, and if your
Lordship love mankind as well I do, you would, seeing you cannot conquer us,
cast about and lend your hand toward accomplishing a peace. Our Independence,
with GOD's blessing, we will maintain against all the world; but as we wish to
avoid evil ourselves, we wish not to inflict it on others. I am never
over-inquisitive into the secrets of the Cabinet, but I have some notion, that
if you neglect the present opportunity, that it will not be in our power to
make a separate peace with you afterward; for whatever treaties or alliances
we form, we shall most faithfully abide by; wherefore you may be deceived if
you think you can make it with us at any time. A lasting independent peace is
my wish, end and aim; and to accomplish that "I pray God the" Americans may
never be defeated, and I trust while they have good officers, and are well
commanded, and willing to be commanded, " that they NEVER WILL."

COMMON SENSE.
Philadelphia, January 13, 1777.

