AN ADDRESS TO THE Inhabitants of Pennsylvania, BY Those FREEMEN, of the CITY
of Philadelphia, who are now confined in the MASON's LODGE, BY VIRTUE OF A
GENERAL WARRANT. SIGNED IN COUNCIL BY THE VICE PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL OF
PENNSYLVANIA.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by ROBERT BELL, in Third-Street. MDCCLXXVII.

THE political Liberty of the Subject, is a tranquillity of Mind arising from
the Opinion each Person has of his safety. In Order to have this Liberty, it is
requisite the Government be so constituted as one Man need not be afraid of
another. When the Legislative and Executive Powers are united in the same
Person, or in the same Body of Magistrates, there can be no Liberty; because
Apprehensions may arise, lest the same Monarch or Senate should enact
Tyrannical Laws to execute them in a Tyrannical Manner.

Montesquieu's Spirit of Laws, Book IX. Chap. vi. AN ADDRESS TO THE Inhabitants
of Pennsylvania.
HAVING in the course of the present week, laid before the Public, some
Remonstrances, which our present situation called on us to make to the
President and Council, and in which we conceived you were equally (though not so
immediately) concerned with ourselves, and perceiving that advantage is taken
of our situation, to represent us to you, as men dangerous to the community: We
think ourselves bound, by the duty we owe to our country, to our families, to
those who have heretofore held us in esteem, and to the general welfare of
society, to address you, and lay before you, a particular state of a most
dangerous attack, which has been made upon the cause of civil and religious
freedom, by confining, and attempting to banish, from their tenderest
connections, a number of men, who can, without boasting, claim to themselves,
the characters of upright and good citizens.

FOR some time past, it has been a subject of public conversation, that lists
were made out of great numbers of the citizens of Philadelphia, who were to be
confined for offenses, supposed to have been committed against the interests of
America -- These reports were generally presumed to arise from intemperate
zeal, and personal animosities; and, until the attempt, which creates the
necessity of calling your attention to us, little regard seemed to be paid to
them.

BUT a few days since the scene opened, and we, the subscribers, were called
upon, by persons, not known as public officers of justice, to put our names to
a paper, promising not to depart from our dwelling-houses, and to be ready to
appear, on the demand of the President and Council of the state of
Pennsylvania, and to engage to refrain from doing any thing injurious to the
United Free States of North America, by speaking, writing, or otherwise, and
from giving intelligence to the Commander of the British forces, or any other
person whatever, concerning public affairs.

CONSCIOUS of our innocence, in respect to the charges insinuated in this paper
against us, and unwilling to part with the liberty of breathing the free air,
and following our lawful business beyond the narrow limits of our houses,
disdaining to be considered in so odious a light, as men who by crimes had
forfeited our common and inherent rights, we refused to become voluntary
prisoners, and rejected the proposal. We demanded with that boldness, which is
inseparable from innocence, to know by what authority they acted, of what
crimes we were accused meriting such treatment; and though to some of us the
small satisfaction was given, of acquainting us, they acted in pursuance of a
recommendation of Congress; and to others was read, part of a warrant, from the
President and Council; yet, not one of us, was allowed the indisputable right,
of either reading or copying it. Although the great number of messengers,
employed in the execution of this warrant, and of the persons who were the
objects of it, varied some of the circumstances attending it, yet the general
tenor of their conduct was uniform, and marks the spirit which actuated them.
We were all upon our refusal to subscribe, either immediately, or in some short
time conducted to this place, where we remained in close confinement, under a
military guard, for twenty-four hours, expecting to be informed of the cause of
our being taken, and to have an opportunity of defending ourselves; but finding
no notice taken of us by our persecutors, we at length, unitedly demanded of
one of the principal messengers, a copy of the warrant, by virtue of which we
were seized, in order that we might know from thence, what heinous crimes were
charged on us, to justify such rigorous treatment. After consulting his
employers, and causing some delay, he thought proper to grant our demand -- But
how were we astonished to find a General Warrant, specifying no manner of
offense against us, appointing no authority to hear and judge, whether we were
guilty or innocent, nor limiting any duration to our confinement! -- Nor was
this extraordinary Warrant more exceptionable in these respects, than in the
powers given to the messengers to break, and search not only our own, but all
the houses their heated imaginations might lead them to suspect. It would be
tedious to remark all the gross enormities contained in this engine of modern
despotism: We therefore present you with a copy, from the bare perusal of
which, you will form a better idea of the arbitrary spirit it breathes, than
from any description we could possibly give it.

IN COUNCIL.
Philadelphia, August 31, 1777.
"WHEREAS the Congress of the United States of North America have, by their
Resolve of the 28th inst. (August) recommended to the Executive Powers of the
several states, to apprehend and secure all persons, who have in their general
conduct, and conversation, evidenced a disposition inimical to the cause of
America; particularly Joshua Fisher, Abel James, James Pemberton, Henry
Drinker, Israel Pemberton, John Pemberton, John James, Samuel Pleasants, Thomas
Wharton, Senior, Thomas Fisher, (Son of Joshua,) and Samuel Fisher, (Son of
Joshua,) together with all such papers in their possession, as may be of a
political nature, and that the persons so seized, be confined in such places,
and treated in such manner, as shall be consistent with their respective
characters, and the security of their persons; and that the records and papers
of the Meeting of Sufferings of the Society of the People called Quakers, in
the several states, be forthwith secured, and that such parts of them, as may
be of a political nature, be forthwith transmitted to Congress.

AND WHEREAS it is necessary, for the public safety at this time, when a
British army has landed in Maryland, with a professed design of enslaving this
free country, and is now advancing toward this city, as a principal object of
hostility, that such dangerous persons be accordingly secured. -- Therefore

RESOLVED, That a suitable number of the friends to the public cause, be
authorized, forthwith to seize and secure the persons of the said "Joshua
Fisher, "Abel James, "James Pemberton, "John Pemberton, "Henry Drinker, "Israel
Pemberton, "Samuel Pleasants, "Thomas Wharton, Senior, "Thomas Fisher, (Son of
Josh.) "Samuel Fisher, (Son of Josh.) John James.
AND ALSO, "Miers Fisher, Elijah Brown, "Hugh Roberts, "George Roberts, "Joseph
Fox, "John Hunt "Samuel Emlen, Junior, "Adam Kuhn, M D. "Phineas Bond, "William
Smith, D D. " Rev. Thomas Coombe, "Samuel Shoemaker, "Charles Jervis, William
Drewet Smith, "Charles Eddy, "Thomas Pike, "Owen Jones, Junior "Jeremiah
Warder, William Lenox, "Edward Penington, "Caleb Emlen, William Smith, Broker,
"Samuel Murdoch, Alexander Stedman, Charles Stedman, Junior. "Thomas Asheton, (
Merchant) William Imlay, "Thomas Gilpin, "Samuel Jackson, and "Thomas Affleck.


RESOLVED, That the following instructions be also given,

EARLY attention should be given to John Hunt, who lives on the Germantown
road, about five miles off the city, and to John Pemberton, Samuel Emlen, and
other leaders in the Society of Quakers, concerning books and papers -- As to
the rest, your own prudence must direct.

CONGRESS recommend it, and we wish to treat men of reputation, with as much
tenderness, as the security of their persons and papers will admit -- We desire
therefore, that if the persons whose names in the list are marked with turned
comma thus" The Original is marked with a Cross.
offer to you, by a promise in writing, to remain in their dwellinghouses, ready
to appear on demand of Council, and mean while to refrain from doing any thing
injurious to the United Free States of North America, by speaking, writing, or
otherwise, and from giving intelligence to the Commander in Chief of the
British forces, or any other person whatever, concerning public affairs, you
dismiss them from further confinement of their persons: But if such engagement,
or a promise equivalent thereto cannot be obtained, we desire that, in such
case, you confine the refusers, together with the others, to whose names the
said mark is not prefixed, in some convenient place, under a guard, with which
the Town Major, Colonel Nicola, will supply you. -- The Free-Mason's Lodge may
be perhaps procured; it would serve as well as any other place for this
purpose. You may perceive that Council would not, without necessity, commit
many of the persons to the common goal, nor even to the state prison.

RESOLVED, That the following persons be appointed and authorized to carry into
execution, the resolves of yesterday, respecting the arresting such persons, as
are deemed inimical to the cause of American Liberty, viz.

William Bradford, Sharp Delany, James Claypole, William Heysham, John
Purviance, Joseph Blewer, Paul Cox, Adam Kemmel, William Graham, William Hardy,
Charles Wilson Peale, Captain Mc. Culloch, Nathaniel Donnell, Robert Smith,
William Carson, Lazarus Pine, Captain Birney, John Downey, John Galloway, John
Lile, James Loughead, James Cannon, James Kerr, William Tharpe, and Thomas
Bradford,
TOGETHER with such other persons as they shall call to their assistance.

GEORGE BRYAN, Vice President.
THE power to search, must necessarily extend to the opening of locks.

GEORGE BRYAN, V. P. (A true Copy.) WM. BRADFORD."




YOU will observe, that the President and Council, who know our characters, and
to whom (but for their prejudice, and want of candor in this instance) we could
have appealed for the innocence of our conduct and conversation; they have nor
undertaken to charge us with any offense, but rely as a foundation for their
proceedings, on the information contained in a recommendation of Congress, to
whom the greater part of us are scarcely known but by name, and who must have
formed the hard judgment they pronounced against us unheard, from reports
whispered by our enemies.

CAN any thing more decisively evidence the want of proof against us, and the
injustice of the insinuations, than this stubborn incontrovertible fact. -- We
have demanded as a matter of right, to be heard before both those bodies, who
have hitherto declined it. -- A demand reasonable in itself, founded on the
immutable principles of equity, and warranted by the constitution under which
the Council derive every power they claim.

THE powers granted by this warrant are such, as in any free country, where the
laws and not the will of the governors, are the standard of justice, would be
reprobated, as over-turning every security that men can rely on -- Your houses,
which by the law of the land, are your castles against invaders, your chambers,
your closets, your desks, the repositories of your deeds, your securities, your
letters of business, or friendship, and other domestic concerns, which every
man naturally wishes to keep within the circle of his own family, are permitted
to be broken, searched, exposed to the prying eye of malignant curiosity, and
all this, without any well-founded cause of suspicion. This is not declamation,
nor an idle apprehension of imaginary grievances, but a true representation of
what some of us have experienced, in the execution of this unprecedented
commission. -- Nor can any man think himself safe, from the like, or perhaps
more mischievous effects, if a precedent of so extraordinary nature, be
established by a tame acquiescence with the present wrong.

BY perusing the following Remonstrance, made to the Council, by three of us,
you will find that application was made for relief from our oppressions.

A REMONSTRANCE this day presented to the President and Council, by the Hands
of their Secretary.
To the President and Council of Pennsylvania. The REMONSTRANCE of Israel
Pemberton, John Hunt, and Samuel Pleasants,
THAT Lewis Nicola, is about to deprive us of our Liberty, by an order from
you, of which the following is a copy, viz.

IN COUNCIL, September 3, 1777.
Ordered, THAT Colonel Nicola, Town-Major, do take a proper guard, and seize
Israel Pemberton, John Hunt, and Samuel Pleasants, and conduct them to the
Free-Mason's Lodge, and there confine them under guard, till further orders.

WE are advised, and from our own knowledge, of our rights and privileges as
Freemen are assured, that your issuing this order, is arbitrary, unjust, and
illegal, and we therefore believe it is our duty, in clear and express terms,
to remonstrate against it.

THE order appears to be arbitrary, as you have assumed an authority, not
founded on law or reason, to deprive us, who are peaceable men, and have never
born arms of our Liberty, by a military force, when you might have directed a
legal course of proceeding -- unjust, as we have not attempted, nor are charged
with any act, inconsistent with the character we have steadily maintained, of
good citizens, solicitous to promote the real interest, and prosperity of our
country, and that it is illegal, is evident, from the perusal and consideration
of the constitution of the government, from which you derive all your authority
and power.

WE, therefore, claim our undoubted right as Freemen, having a just sense of
the inestimable value of religious and civil Liberty, to be heard before we are
confined, in the manner directed by the said order; and we have the more urgent
cause, for insisting on this our right, as several of our fellow-citizens have
been some days, and now are confined by your order, and no opportunity is given
them to be heard; and, we have been informed, that it is your purpose, to send
them and us, into a distant part of the country, even beyond the limits of the
jurisdiction you claim, and where the recourse, we are justly and lawfully
entitled to, of being heard, and of clearing ourselves from any charge or
suspicions, you may entertain, respecting us, will be impracticable.

WE fervently desire, You may be so wise, as to attend to the dictates of truth
and justice, in your own minds, and observe the precepts of our Lord Jesus
Christ, whom you profess to believe in; All things whatsoever ye would, that
men should do to you, Do ye even so unto them, Matthew vii. 12. and then, We
have no doubt, You will comply with this just claim we make, which will be duly
acknowledged, by your real friends and well-wishers,

ISRAEL PEMBERTON, JOHN HUNT, SAMUEL PLEASANTS.

Philadelphia, 4th 9mo. 1777.
"WE the said subscribers, attended at the door of the Council Chamger, and
made application by the Secretary, to be admitted, in order, to deliver our
Remonstrance, to which we could, after repeated applications, obtain no other
answer, than that "Council had issued the arrest, in consequence of a resolve
of Congress, and cannot now admit you to be heard."

WE therefore delivered our Remonstrance to the Secretary, and waited, until He
came out on another occasion, and told us, "it had been read to the Council,
and they afterward proceeded to the other "business which was before them."
Immediately after which, we were conducted by Lewis Nicola, to the Free-Mason's
Lodge, where we are now confined, with a number of our fellow-citizens, with
whom we have joined, in a more full Remonstrance to the President and Council;
and this evening, William Bradford, came to us, and read us a letter, of which
the following is a Copy, viz.

SIR,
COUNCIL have resolved, to send the prisoners, now confined at the Free-Mason's
Lodge, to Stanton, in the county of Augusta, in the state of Virginia, there to
be secured, and treated in such manner, as shall be consistent with their
respective characters, and the security of their persons, which you are
requested to communicate to them, and inform them, that carriages will be
provided for their accommodation in the journey, unless they choose to provide
themselves therewith. -- It is proposed that they go off Saturday morning next.

I am, with great Respect, Your humble Servant, T. MATLACK, Secy.
Thursday, Sep. 4, 1777. To Colonel W. BRADFORD. (COPY.)
The above is a true copy of the letter I received this evening from T. MATLOCK.

W. BRADFORD.




BY the letter published at the foot of it, you will see what are the ideas of
justice entertained by the Council; instead of the required hearing, to avoid
such application, they resolved to banish us, unheard, into an obscure corner
of a country, near three hundred miles distant from our parents, our wives, our
children, our dear and tender connections, friends and acquaintance, to whom we
owe, and from whom we expect protection, assistance, comfort, and every
endearing office, to a country where the President and Council have no pretense
of jurisdiction, from whence we may be liable to be farther banished.

BEFORE the receipt of that letter, we had prepared and sent the following
Remonstrance: To the President and Council of Pennsylvania. The Remonstrance of
the subscribers, Freemen, and Inhabitants of the City of Philadelphia, now
confined in the Mason's Lodge.
SHOWS,
THAT the subscribers have been by virtue of a warrant signed in Council by
George Bryan, Vice President, arrested in our houses, and on our lawful
occasions, and conducted to this place, where we have been kept in close
confinement, under a strong military guard, two or more days -- that although
diverse of us demanded of the messengers who arrested us, and insisted on having
copies of the said warrant, yet we were not able to procure the same, till this
present time, but have remained here unaccused and unheard. We now take the
earliest opportunity of laying our grievances before your body, from whom we
apprehend they proceed, and of claiming to ourselves the Liberties and
Privileges to which we are entitled by the fundamental rules of justice, by our
birthright and inheritance, the laws of the land; and by the express provision
of the present Constitution, under which your board derive their power.

WE apprehend, that no man can lawfully be deprived of his Liberty, without a
warrant from some persons having competent authority, specifying in offense
against the laws of the land, supported by oath or affirmation of the accuser,
and limiting the time of his imprisonment until he is heard, or legally
discharged, unless the party be found in the actual perpetration of a crime.
Natural justice, equally with law, declares that the party accused should know
what he is to answer to, and have an opportunity of showing his innocence. --
These principles are strongly enforced in the ninth and tenth sections of the
Declaration of Rights, which form a fundamental and inviolable part of the
Constitution, from which you drive your power, wherein it is declared,

IX. "THAT in all prosecutions for criminal offenses, a man has a right to be
heard by himself and his Council, to demand the cause and nature of his
accusation, to be confronted with the witnesses, to call for evidence in his
favor, and a speedy public trial by an impartial jury of the country; without
the unanimous consent of which jury, he cannot be found guilty -- Nor can he be
compelled to give evidence against himself; nor can any man be justly deprived
of his liberty, except by the laws of the land, or the judgment of his peers."

X. "THAT the people have a right to hold themselves, their houses, papers, and
possessions, free from search or seizure, and therefore warrants without oaths
or affirmations first made, affording a sufficient foundation for them, and
whereby any officer or messenger may be commanded or required to search
suspected places, or to seize any person or persons, his or their property not
particularly described, are contrary to that right and ought not to be granted."

How far these principles have been adhered to, in the course of this business,
we shall go on to show.

UPON the examination of the said warrant, we find it is, in all respects,
inadequate to these descriptions, altogether unprecedented in this or any free
country, both in its substance, and the latitude given to the messengers who
were to execute it, and wholly subversive of the very Constitution you profess
to support. -- The only charge on which it is founded, is a recommendation of
Congress to apprehend and secure all persons who in their general conduct and
conversation have evidenced a disposition inimical to the cause of America, and
particularly naming some of us, -- but not suggesting the least offense to have
been committed by us.

IT authorizes the messengers to search all papers belonging to us, upon a bare
possibility, that something political may be found, but without the least
ground for a suspicion of the kind.

IT requires papers, relative to the sufferings of the people called Quakers,
to be seized, without limiting the search to any house, or number of houses;
under color of which, every house in this city, might be broke open.

TO the persons whom the Congress have thought proper to select, the Warrant
adds a number of the inhabitants of the city, of whom some of us are part;
without the least insinuation, that they are within the description given by
the Congress, in their recommendation.

IT directs all these matters to be executed (though of the highest importance to
the Liberties of the people) at the discretion of a set of men, who are under
no qualification for the due execution of the office, and are unaccustomed to
the forms of executing civil process, from whence probably, have proceeded the
excesses and irregularities committed by some of them, in diverse instances, by
refusing to give copies of the process to the parties arrested, by denying to
some of us, a reasonable time to consider of answers, and prepare for
confinement. -- In the absence of others, by breaking our desks and other
private repositories -- and by ransacking and carrying off domestic papers,
printed books, and other matters not within the terms of the Warrant.

IT limits no time for the duration of our imprisonment, nor points at any
hearing, which is an absolute requisite to make a legal Warrant; but confounds
in one Warrant, the power to apprehend, and the authority to commit, without
interposing a judicial officer between the parties and the messenger.

UPON the whole, we conceive this Warrant and the proceedings thereupon, to be
far more dangerous in its tendency, and a more flagrant violation of every
right which is dear to Freemen, than any that can be found in the records of
the English constitution.

BUT when we consider the use to which this GENERAL WARRANT has been applied,
and the Persons upon whom it has been executed, (Who challenge the World to
charge them with offense) it becomes of too great magnitude to be considered as
the cause of a Few. -- It is the cause of every Inhabitant, and may, if
permitted to pass into a Precedent, establish a System of Arbitrary Power
unknown but in the Inquisition, or the despotic Courts of the East.

WHAT adds further to this alarming stretch of power is, that we are informed
the Vice President of the Council, has declared to one of the Magistrates of
the City, who called on him to enquire into the Cause of our confinement, that
we were to be sent to Virginia UNHEARD.

SCARCELY could we believe such a declaration could have been made by a person
who fills the second place in the government, till we were this day confirmed
in the melancholy truth by three of the subscribers, whom you absolutely
refused to hear in person, or by Council. -- We would remind you of the
complaints urged by numbers of yourselves against the Parliament of
Great Britain, for condemning the town of Boston UNHEARD, and we call upon you
to reconcile your present conduct with your then professions, or your repeated
declarations in favor of general Liberty. --

In the name therefore of the whole body of the Freemen of Pennsylvania, whose
Liberties are radically struck at in this arbitrary imprisonment of us, their
unoffending fellow-citizens: We DEMAND an audience; that so our innocence may
appear, and persecution give place to justice. -- But if, regardless of every
sacred obligation by which men are bound to each other in society, and of that
Constitution by which you profess to govern, which you have so loudly magnified
for the free spirit it breathes, you are still determined to proceed; be the
appeal to the righteous judge of all the earth for the integrity of our hearts,
and the unparalelled tyranny of your measures.

James Pemberton, Thomas Wharton, Thomas Coombe, Edward Penington, Henry
Drinker, Phineas Bond, Thomas Gilpin, John Pemberton, Thomas Pike, Owen Jones,
junr. Thomas Affleck, Charles Jervis, William Smith, (brok.) William Drewet
Smith, Thomas Fisher, Miers Fisher, Charles Eddy, Israel Pemberton, John Hunt,
Samuel Pleasants.

Mason's Lodge, Philadelphia, September 4th, 1777. N. B. The three last
subscribers, were first attended by some of those, who executed the General
Warrant; but after their Remonstrance to the President and Council, were
arrested by Lewis Nicola, and conducted to the Lodge, by a Special Order to him.





THE foregoing Remonstrance was delivered to Thomas Wharton, junr. President,
etc. last evening, who promised to lay it before Council, and send an answer to
one of the Gentlemen, who delivered it to him this morning; but no answer has
yet been received.

September 5th, half past two o'clock, P. M.

THUS the matter rested till about seven o'clock yesterday evening, when
instead of returning an answer to our repeated demand of an hearing, which we
still adhere to as our undoubted right, the Secretary of the Council enclosed
to William Bradford, a copy of a new resolve, desiring him to acquaint us with
it; wherein, without the least mention of supporting their insinuations against
us, they shift the ground on which they set out, and propose a test to be taken
by us, in full satisfaction of all their suspicions. --

TO this resolve we are preparing an answer, which we intend soon to lay before
them: And in the mean time, we beg you will avoid the being influenced by any
anonymous publications which our adversaries, to draw our attention from the
immediate object before us, may utter against us, filled with falsehoods and
misrepresentations, which they may be encouraged to publish from an assurance
that the printers would conceal their names.

OUR attention is now engaged in a most important struggle, for civil and
religious Liberty; we therefore hope, you will not expect us to waste that time
in refuting such anonymous performances, which is wholly requisite for bringing
this grand point to a proper conclusion. We cannot however wholly pass by a
publication in the last Evening Post, calculated to throw an odium on the just
cause in which we are suffering: It is represented in that piece, that the
Quakers are the principal objects of resentment, and the cause assigned is the
issuing "seditious publications styled Testimonies" one of which they assert
has been unseasonably published at two critical periods.

A single ray of christian charity, would be sufficient to show the uncandid
construction put by that writer upon the exercise of those religious rights
secured by the constitution to every religious society of warning, and
admonishing their members to avoid every thing inconsistent with the principles
they hold. -- It is well known, that at both the times hinted at, contending
armies were endeavoring within the circle of their yearly meeting, to procure
all persons that should come in their way to join them in military preparations.

THE Testimony of the Quakers is against all wars and fighting, and against
entering into military engagements of any kind; surely then, it was the right
of the Representatives of that Society, to caution their Members from engaging
in any thing contrary to their Religious Principles. But if it be an offense in
those who were active in that Publication, what have those of us done who are
not Members of that Society, who are of the Church of England (which two
denominations comprehend all the subscribers) and who have published NO
Testimonies.

BUT this cannot be considered by the Writer as a dangerous Publication, or why
does he republish it in the present critical situation of public affairs;
surely this charge is a mere pretense to vilify a respectable body of the
inhabitants.

THUS we have furnished you with a calm, and dispassionate account of our
present circumstances, and we wish to have it considered as a vindication of
our own characters, and a peaceable, though firm assertion of the unalienable
rights of Freemen.

DIFFICULTIES may perhaps await us, but relying on the assistance of that
Almighty Being, who is the Guardian of the innocent, We prepare to meet them,
rather than endanger PUBLIC HAPPINESS AND FREEDOM by a voluntary surrender of
those Rights which we have never forfeited.

Mason's Lodge, September 6th, 1777.
Israel Pemberton, John Hunt, James Pemberton, Thomas Wharton, John Pemberton,
Thomas Coombe, Edward Penington, Henry Drinker, Samuel Pleasants, Thomas
Gilpin, Phineas Bond, Miers Fishers, Thomas Fisher, Samuel R. Fisher, Thomas
Affleck, Charles Jervis, Wm. Smith, (Broker,) Thomas Pike, William Drewet
Smith, Elijah Brown, Charles Eddy, Owen Jones, Junr.
September 8th, 1777.

P. S. THE foregoing Address was prepared, and intended for publication in the
Evening Post of the 6th instant; but before we thought proper to deliver it to
the Printer, we chose to have some conversation with him; he was sent for, and
attended us; we told him we had a paper to publish in our vindication, with our
names signed, that as we were confined upon some suspicions unknown to us, it
was hard we should be attacked by anonymous writers in the papers, our
characters aspersed, and prejudices excited against us, when we were demanding
a hearing, which ought to be unbiased and impartial. We therefore required of
him, as what we thought a matter of right, according to the rules of every
impartial Free Press, that he would refrain from publishing hereafter any
anonymous papers reflecting upon us, and that he would acquaint us with the
name of the writer of two paragraphs, in the then last Post, highly injurious
to our characters. To the former he gave us an absolute promise to adhere; to
the latter he said, that he could not give up the name without the writer's
consent; that he would go to him, and return with his answer as soon as he
could, at the same time promising, that if we desired it, he would insert our
Address in the Post of that evening, though it would delay it is appearance till
some time the next day: He went away and we have not since heard from him.
Hence we conclude the writer is ashamed to avow the performance.

WE now lay before you a Remonstrance presented to Congress by eight of us, who
were selected by them, and recommended to the Council as dangerous men, who
ought to be secured, the rest of us being named by the Council themselves and
included together with them in the General Warrant.

TO THE CONGRESS. The Remonstrance of the Subscribers, Citizens of PHILADELPHIA.
SHOWS,
THAT we are now confined by a military guard, having been arrested and
deprived of our Liberty, by order of the President and Council of Pennsylvania,
in consequence of a Resolve made by you, on the 28th day of the last month,
"Recommending to the Executive Powers of the several states, to apprehend and
secure all persons, who have in their general conduct, and conversation,
evidenced a disposition inimical to the cause of America," and particularly
naming us, the subscribers, "together with all such papers, in our possession,
as may be of a political nature;" the copy of which resolve, we could not
obtain 'till yesterday afternoon.

CONSCIOUS of our innocence, and that we have ministered no just occasion, to
have our characters thus traduced, and injuriously treated; we have
remonstrated to the said President and Council, against their arbitrary,
unjust, and illegal proceedings against us, and demanded our undoubted right of
being heard by them: Knowing we can manifest the falsehood and injustice, of
any injurious charge, or suspicions, they or you, may entertain concerning us;
but we are denied the opportunity of such a hearing, and were last evening
informed, by their order, that they have resolved to send us to Stanton, in the
county of Augusta, in Virginia, to be secured there -- and we are now told,
that place is appointed by you, for our confinement.

WE therefore, by our love to our country, whose true interest and prosperity
we have steadily pursued, through the course of our conduct and conversations,
and in justice to our characters, as freemen and christians, with that freedom
and resolution, which influences men, conscious of being void of just cause of
offense, are bound to remonstrate against your arbitrary, unjust, and cruel
treatment of us, our characters, and families, and against the course of
proceeding, you have chose and prescribed; by which the liberty, property, and
character, of every Freeman in America, is, or may be endangered. -- Most of
you are not personally known to us, nor are we to you; and few of you have had
the opportunity of conversing with any of us, or of knowing any thing more of
our conduct and conversation, than what you have received from others, and thus
we are subjected to the unjust suspicions, you have entertained from the
uncertain reports of our adversaries, and are condemned unheard, to be deprived
of our most endearing connections, and temporal enjoyments, when our personal
care of them, is most immediately necessary.

WE are therefore engaged in the most solemn manner, to call upon, and entreat
you, to reconsider the course of your proceedings, respecting us; and either by
yourselves, or the said President and Council, to give us the opportunity of
hearing, and answering to every matter suggested to, and entertained by you or
them, against us -- being assured we shall appear to be true friends to, and
anxiously solicitous for the prosperity of America, on the principles of
justice and liberty -- and though we are clearly convinced, from the precepts of
Christ, the doctrine of his Apostles, and the example of his followers, in the
primitive ages of Christianity, that all outward wars and fightings are
unlawful, and therefore cannot join therein, for any cause whatever. -- We
cannot but remind you, that we are by the same principles restrained from
pursuing any measures, inconsistent with the Apostolic advice, "To live
peaceably with all men," under whatever powers it is our lot to live, which
rule of conduct, we are determined to observe, whatever you, or any others may
determine concerning us.

YOUR characters, in the conspicuous station you stand, and the regard due to
the liberties, properties, and even the lives of those, who are, and may be
affected, by the course of your proceedings, so loudly proclaim the justice of
our DEMAND of a hearing, that if more time remained for it, we judge farther
reasoning unnecessary, beseeching you to remember, that we are all to appear
before the Tribunal of Divine Justice, there to render an account of our
actions, and to receive a reward according as our works have been. -- And we
sincerely desire for you, as we do for ourselves, that we may all so direct our
course, that we may at that Tribunal, receive the answer, "of well done," and
enjoy the reward of Eternal Peace and Happiness.

We are Your real Friends, Israel Pemberton, James Pemberton, John Pemberton,
Thomas Wharton, Henry Drinker, Thomas Fisher, Samuel Pleasants, Samuel R.
Fisher.

Philadelphia, 5th, 9mo. 1777, Lodge-Alley.
WE have seen the Resolves of Congress published in the Evening Post, of which
we shall take due notice: And also the Papers published by order of Congress,
in a Supplement to the Pennsylvania Packet: As they are particularly pointed at
a religious society, who are capable of answering for their own conduct, we
shall leave it to them to confute the insinuations contained in some parts of
that Publication which some of us know they are able to do.

WE also think it our duty to acquaint you, that Alexander Stedman, and Charles
Stedman, junr. who are included in the General War^^^^ Were apprehended and
brought here with us, but in a few hours they were carried under guard to the
New Prison, where we are informed they yet remain as much neglected by their
accusers as we have been.

N. B. Seven o'Clock P. M. We presented another Remonstrance to the President
and Council this Day, to which we have received an answer, both which we shall
endeavor to hand to the Public Tomorrow.

Mason's Lodge, Sept. 9, 1777.

WE now lay before you the papers referred to in our note of last evening,
together with a copy of a letter received by Dr. Hutchinson, informing us of
the result of Council upon the last Remonstrance.

Copy of a letter from Timothy Matlack to William Bradford.
Philadelphia, Sept. 5, 1777. SIR,
A REMONSTRANCE signed by the Gentlemen confined at the Mason's Lodge, having
been presented to Council and read, the Council took the same into
consideration, and asked the ^^vice of Congress thereupon, which being
received, Council thereupon passed the following Resolve, which they beg the
favor of you to communicate to the aforesaid Gentlemen.


In COUNCIL, Philadelphia, Sept. 5, 1777.
RESOLVED, That such of the persons, now confined in the Lodge, as shall take
and subscribe the Oath or Affirmation, required by law, in this Commonwealth;
or that shall take and subscribe the following Oath or Affirmation, to wit,

I do swear, (or affirm) that I will be faithful, and bear true allegiance to
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as a Free and Independent State, shall be
discharged.

I am, respectfully, your very humble Servt. T. MATLACK, Secy. To Col. W.
BRADFORD.


N. B. This letter was delivered to Mr. Bradford, as the answer of Council, to
the second Remonstrance.

Copy of a third Remonstrance, presented to the President and Council
yesterday, by the hands of Samuel Rhoads and Dr. Hutchinson.
To the President and Council of Pennsylvania. The Remonstrance of the
subscribers, Freemen, and Inhabitants of the City of Philadelphia, now confined
in the Mason's Lodge.
SHOWS,
THAT it is with pain, we find ourselves under the disagreeable necessity, of
again remonstrating against your extraordinary mode of treating us; when our
last Remonstrance was delivered to your President, he gave expectation to our
fellow-citizens who waited on him, that he would lay it before you, and return
an answer -- Notwithstanding which, we have as yet received no answer
whatsoever to it, but instead thereof, a paper signed by your Secretary, was
delivered to us by William Bradford, the contents of which we shall have
occasion to remark on.

BUT we must not omit another letter received through the same channel, by which
we are confirmed in the truth of what we had before heard, that on the very day
you were addressed by three of us to be heard, and before we were furnished
with a copy of the GENERAL WARRANT, you had resolved to banish us to Stanton,
in the county of Augusta, in Virginia, a place where you claim no jurisdiction,
and to which we are utter strangers; this resolution formed against a body of
innocent Freemen, while demanding to be heard, is, we believe, the first
instance of the kind to be found in the history of our country: and, besides
the violent infringement of the laws and constitution which you have engaged to
govern by, the hardship is heightened by the particular situation of that
country at this time; as it is publicly asserted, that the Indians have already
commenced hostilities upon the frontiers of Virginia, not very far distant from
the place of our intended banishment, as though you could find no place of
security without endangering our lives.

FROM the professions you have repeatedly made of your love of Liberty and
Justice, and the manner in which we have demanded our undoubted rights, we had
reason to expect to have heard from you on the subject of our last
Remonstrance; but we find we were mistaken, and the complaints of injured
Freemen still remain unanswered.

WHETHER you imagine we are of too little consequence to be regarded, or expect
that confinement will reduce us to a tame acquiescence with your arbitrary
proceedings, we shall not determine; it will not divert our attention from the
important object we have in view in behalf of ourselves, and our country. --
Nor will subtle proposals fit only to captivate the unwary, decoy us from the
sure ground on which we stand in to a measure as illegal, and unconstitutional
as your GENERAL WARRANT, and our oppressive treatment under it.

THE proposition contained in your resolve of the 5th inst. to discharge us
upon taking the Test "required by law," or the new Test framed by yourselves
now demand our notice.

AND first we would observe that if you had a right to make such a proposition,
we think it very improper to be made to men in our situation. You have first
deprived us of our Liberty, on one pretense, which finding you are not able to
justify, you wave, and require as a condition of our enlargement, that we
should confess ourselves men of suspicious characters by doing what ought not
to be expected from innocent men. This kind of procedure is not new in history;
for though the great patriots of the revolution found better expedients for the
security of their government, than what arises from oaths of abjuration, yet
the annals, both of Old and New England are stained with accounts of men, in
circumstances similar to our own, dragged before magistrates, on the bare
suspicion of crimes; of whom Tests, which they conscientiously scrupled to
take, have been afterward demanded, as the condition of their enlargement. --
But such examples we should hope, would not have found patrons among men
professing to be reformers upon all the plans of civil and religious Liberty,
adopted by the free nations of Europe.

IT is strange to us that men entrusted with Supreme Executive Powers should be
so regardless of the laws you have most solemnly engaged to execute, as to
require us to do more than those very laws enjoin. By the Test Act every
inhabitant may take the Test, and enjoy all the rights of Freemen, or decline
it, and submit to a deprivation of some of them, of which are expressed in that
Act; but no power is given to any officer of justice whatsoever, to tender it
to any person except in particular circumstances, and as the charge against us
is not founded on a breach of that law, it is evident you exceeded your
authority in putting it to us. But if after what is past, we could be surprised
at any thing you do, we should have been astonished at the rapid progress of
your usurpation in assuming Legislative Powers to yourselves, while the
Assembly was sitting under the same roof. You have overturned the only security
the Constitution has given the people against absolute despotism, by attempting
to exercise the authority of framing a Resolve operating as a Law at the same
time, the powers of executing it.

YOUR duty as one branch of the Constitution is confined to the executing the
laws as you find them, and does not extend to the making new ones to salve your
own irregular conduct. You have undertaken all this by proposing a new Test of
your own enacting, unknown, to the Laws and Constitution of the Government
which you are to execute, unsupported by any authority under which you act; and
this an ex post facto Law made to criminate by a refusal, those who before were
innocent. And if we were in your opinion, such dangerous persons, as you, under
the sanction of the Congress, have endeavored to represent us, and could not
be secured without sending us to so remote and dangerous part of the country,
beyond the limits of your jurisdiction, how will the public be secured by our
taking either of the Tests you have proposed; -- That men of bad principles
will submit to any Tests to cover their dangerous and wicked purposes is
evident to all who have been conversant in public affairs.

THE great Lord Hallifax, who in the name of the People of England presented
the Crown to King William and Queen Mary at the Revolution, has expressed
himself on this subject, in the following nervous terms, "As there is no real
security to any state by oaths, so no private person, much less statesman would
ever order his affairs as relying on it; for no man would ever sleep with open
doors, or unlock'd-up-treasure, or plate, should all the Town be sworn not to
rob."

ANOTHER most extraordinary proceeding we find in your Secretary's letter,
where he says that you asked and received the advice of Congress, upon our
Remonstrance before you determined upon it. What! shall unaccused Citizens,
demanding their inherent rights be delayed, or refused a Hearing until Congress
can be consulted? A Body, who have engaged not to interfere in the internal
police of the Government. Perhaps you thought the authority of a recommendation
from Congress would render your arbitrary designs effectual, and countenance
you in the eyes of the people. We trust you will be mistaken, and that neither
Congress nor the people will approve your measures.

HAVING thus remarked on your proposal, protesting our innocence, we again
repeat our pressing demand, to be informed of the cause of our commitment, and
to have a hearing in the face of our country, before whom we shall either stand
acquitted, or condemned.

Israel Pemberton, James Pemberton, John Hunt, Thomas Wharton, Thomas Coombe,
Edward Penington, John Pemberton, Henry Drinker, Phineas Bond, Thomas Affleck,
Owen Jones, Junr. William Drewet Smith, Samuel Pleasants, Wm. Smith, (Broker,)
Charles Jervis, Thomas Pike, Thomas Gilpin, Samuel R. Fisher, Thomas Fisher,
Elijah Brown, Miers Fisher, Charles Eddy,


Philadelphia, Sept. 8, 1777. SIR,
THE Remonstrance delivered by you and Samuel Rhoads, Esquire to me, has been read
in Council, and I am directed to acquaint you, that the business to which this
Remonstrance relates, is referred to Congress.

I am, with great respect, Your humble Servant, T. MATLACK, Secy.

To Dr. HUTCHINSON. Present.
Mason's Lodge, Sept. 9, 1777, 10 o'Clock, P. M. To the INHABITANTS of
PENNSYLVANIA.
The following is a Copy of a Paper we received at half past four o'Clock this
Afternoon, and we have since received Orders to prepare for our Banishment
Tomorrow.

IN COUNCIL.
Philadelphia, September 9, 1777.
RESOLVED,

THAT James Pemberton, Henry Drinker, Israel Pemberton, John Pemberton, Samuel
Pleasants, Thomas Wharton, senior, Thomas Fisher, (Son of Joshua,) Samuel
Fisher, (Son of Joshua,) Miers Fisher, Elijah Brown, John Hunt, Phineas Bond,
Rev. Thomas Coombe, Charles Jervis, William Drewet Smith, Charles Eddy, Thomas
Pike, Owen Jones, Junr. Edward Penington, William Smith, Thomas Gilpin, and
Thomas Affleck, apprehended by Council, as persons who have uniformly
manifested by their general conduct and conversation, a disposition highly
inimical to the cause of America, and now imprisoned in the Free-Mason's Lodge
in this city, they refusing to confine themselves to their several dwellings,
and thereby making the restraint of their persons in another manner necessary;
and having refused to promise to refrain from corresponding with the enemy; and
also declined giving any assurance of allegiance to this state, as of right
they ought; do thereby renounce all the privileges of citizenship; and that it
appears they consider themselves as subjects of the King of Great Britain, the
enemy of this and the other United States of America; and that they ought to be
proceeded with accordingly.

Resolved, That persons of like characters, and in emergencies equal to the
present, when the enemy is at our doors, have in the other states, been
arrested and secured upon suspicions, arising from their general behavior, and
refusal to acknowledge their allegiance to the states, of which they were the
proper subjects; and that such proceedings may be abundantly justified by the
conduct of the freest nations, and the authority of the most judicious
civilians. Therefore

Resolved, That the persons whose names are mentioned above, be, without
further delay, removed to Stanton, in Virginia, there to be treated according
to their characters and stations, as far as may be consistent with the securing
of their persons. Also,

Resolved, That William Imlay, said to be a subject of the state of New York,
having behaved in like manner as the persons above mentioned, and in particular
declined to give assurance of allegiance to the state of New York, be removed
and secured with the rest.

Ordered, That Colonel Nicola, the Town-Major, secure the prisoners above
named, now in the Mason's Lodge, and assist in removing them out of the city.

Extract from the Minutes, T. MATLACK, SECY.

As we consider this to be the highest Act of Tyranny that has been exercised
in any age or country, where the shadow of Liberty was left, we have, in the
following manner, entered our Protest against their proceedings.

To the President and Council of Pennsylvania. The Remonstrance and Protest of
the Subscribers, Shows,
THAT your resolve of this day, was this afternoon delivered to us; which is
the more unexpected, as last evening your Secretary informed us you had
referred our business to Congress, to whom we were about further to apply.

In this resolve, contrary to the inherent rights of mankind, you condemn us to
banishment unheard.

You determine matters concerning us, which we could have disapproved had our
right to a hearing been granted.

The charge against us of refusing to promise to refrain from corresponding
with the enemy, insinuates that we have already held such correspondence, which
we utterly and solemnly deny.

The tests you proposed we were by no law bound to subscribe; and
notwithstanding our refusing them, we are still justly and lawfully entitled to
all the rights of citizenship, of which you are attempting to deprive us.

We have never been suffered to come before you to evince our innocence, and
remove suspicions which you have labored to instill into the minds of others,
and at the same time knew to be groundless, although Congress recommended it to
you to give us a hearing, and your President this morning assured two of our
friends we should have it.

In vindication of our characters, we who are of the people called Quakers, are
free to declare, That

Although at the time many of our forefathers were convinced of the truth, which
we their descendants now profess, great fluctuations and various changes and
turnings happened in government, and they were greatly vilified and persecuted
for a firm and steady adherence to their peaceable and inoffensive principles,
yet they were preserved from any thing tending to promote insurrections,
conspiracies, or the shedding of blood; and during the troubles which by
permission of Divine Providence have latterly prevailed, we have steadily
maintained our Religious Principles in these respects, and have not held any
correspondence with the contending parties, as is unjustly insinuated, but are
withheld and restrained from being concerned in such matters, by that Divine
Principle of Grace and Truth which we profess to be our guide and rule through
life. This is of more force and obligation than all the Tests and Declarations
devised by men.

AND we who are of the Church of England, are free to declare to you and to the
world, that we never have at any time, during the present controversy, either
directly or indirectly "communicated any intelligence whatever to the Commander
of the British Forces, or any other person concerned in public affairs." And
with the same cheerfulness we would have engaged not to hold any such
correspondence in future, had not the requisition been coupled with ignominious
and illegal restrictions, subjectings to become prisoners within the walls of
our own dwellings, and to surrender ourselves to the President and Council on
demand. This the clear consciousness of our own innocence absolutely forbade us
to accede to.

UPON the whole, your proceedings have been so arbitrary that words are wanting
to express our sense of them. We do therefore, as the last office we expect you
will now suffer us to perform for the benefit of our country, in behalf of
ourselves and those freemen of Pennsylvania who still have any regard for
liberty, solemnly remonstrate and protest against your whole conduct in this
unreasonable excess of power exercised by you.

THAT the evil and destructive spirit of pride, ambition and arbitrary power,
with which you have been actuated, may cease and be no more; and that peace on
earth, and good will to men may happily take the place thereof in your and all
men's minds, is the sincere desire of your oppres^ed and injured
fellow-citizens.

Israel Pemberton, John ^unt, James Pemberton, John Pemberton, Tho^^s Wharton,
Edw^^^ Penington, Tho^^s Coombe, Hen^^ Drinker, Tho^^s Fisher, Sam^^^
Pleasants, Sam^^^ R. Fisher, Owen Jones, Junior, Thomas Gilpin, Charles Jervis,
Phineas Bond, Thomas Affleck, William Drewet Smith, Thomas Pike, William Smith,
(Broker) Elijah Brown, Charles Eddy, Miers Fisher.



