A VINDICATION OF HIS PUBLIC CHARACTER IN THE STATION OF DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF
THE MILITARY HOSPITALS, AND PHYSICIAN IN CHIEF, TO THE AMERICAN ARMY; ANNO,
1776.

BY JOHN MORGAN, M. D. F. R. S. PROFESSOR of the Theory and Practice of PHYSIC
in the College of PHILADELPHIA; Member of several Royal Colleges and Academies,
and Philosophical and Literary Societies, in EUROPE and AMERICA.

BOSTON: Printed by POWARS AND WILLIS, M, DCC, LXXVII.

THE MAN, in conscious Virtue bold;
Who dare his secret Purpose hold,
Unshaken, hears the Crowds tumultuous Cries,
And the impetuous Tyrants angry Brow defies.
FRANCIS'S HORACE, TO THE HONORABLE The CONGRESS of the United-States OF
AMERICA, And to every FRIEND and WELL-WISHER To the RIGHTS and LIBERTIES of
MANKIND, THE FOLLOWING VINDICATION OF HIS PUBLIC CHARACTER,

In the Station of DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF THE MILITARY HOSPITALS, PHYSICIAN in
CHIEF OF AMERICAN ARMY, (...) to Rank and Authority, AND WITH ALL BECOMING
FREEDOM, CHEERFULLY SUBMITTED BY THEIR MOST RESPECTFUL AND MOST OBEDIENT HUMBLY
SERVANT,

JOHN MORGAN.

PROLEGOMENON.
THAT a mean and invidious set of men have looked upon my elevation to the rank
of DIRECTOR-GENERAL AND PHYSICIAN IN CHIEF, with an evil eye, and long been
concerting my removal, is a matter of which I have too substantial proof to
doubt: That the unwearied pains I have taken to support economy, regularity
and order, so far as they had been introduced into the department, before it
came under my management; to introduce, recommend and enforce them, where
wanting; and to oppose and reform abuses that were creeping, or had already
crept into it, from the infancy of the service, were the root of the enmity
which sprung up against my proceedings, are no less certain. It is equally
evident that it received its growth and vigor from my inflexible resolution of
being faithful to my trust, in not suffering, so far as it was in my power to
prevent, the dissipation of the stores entrusted to me, for the uses of the
sick that should be sent to the General Hospital under my care, by exposing
them to the waste and depredation of men whose schemes tended to the subversion
of the General Hospital, in which they labored to raise themselves into an
importance, which neither the General nor Congress ever intended, and from my
putting a stop to those abuses of which too many of them had been guilty. That
these are the stock from whence have shooted those clamours, against me, which
have been so carefully cultivated, with a design to injure my character with
the public, under a pretense of interesting them in the sufferings of the
sick, to which the imprudences of others had given rise; and to shift the blame
from them on me, I doubt not will appear to the full conviction of every
impartial person, who has patience to attend to the following Letters,
Narrative, Proofs and Illustration of facts, which I propose to lay before them.

But that my enemies should be able, with all the arts of malice, to have
influenced Congress to proceed to my dismission, on their partial reports, is
what I had no thoughts they would have been so bold, or so base, as to attempt;
nor if they had, could I have imagined that they would have succeeded in their
attempt.

The manner in which I have conducted myself in the General Hospital
department; my strict observance of the resolves of Congress; my vigilance,
care and activity in the duties of my station; the several plans I devised for
putting it in the power of Congress, consistently with their own original
schemes of economy, to make a better provision for the rigimental Surgeons and
sick, as well as for the General Hospital itself; the advices I have
communicated from time to time to several of the members, concerning the state
and wants of the sick, and of the regimental Surgeons; the evils I have
foretold were likely to ensue, and the remedies I pointed out in time to
prevent many of them; and lastly, the toils and dangers to which I have
continually exposed myself in discharge of my trust, I concluded would always
be a sufficient shield to protect me from every assault, till I could have
notice of the designs and movements of my enemies, been prepared for my
defense, and have had time to have repelled them. Those instances of zeal,
diligence and uprightness of conduct, I hoped, were such, as neither malice
could scandalize, nor envy misintrepret.

Will it be believed in a future day, that so grave and illustrious a set of
men, as compose the American Congress, should, on any partial representation,
without giving the person accused an opportunity of exculpating himself from
the charges brought against him, o^ knowing what he was accused of; and without
calling on him to offer what he had to say, why he should not be so dealt with;
making themselves judges as well as hearers, pass sentence, as if all that is
said, is proved? Will it be believed, that on no better evidence than the
clamours

and misrepresentations of interested men, they would have dismissed, from an
office of the greatest trust, One, whose established character and their good
opinion had called from private life, and exalted to that station; One, who,
nevertheless, from his first stepping forth on the stage of action, had always
met with public approbation and distinguished honors, both at home and abroad;
who had served his country in posts of eminent trust and usefulness, with
applause; that they would, on the first application, have sacrificed him to the
cries of a faction? Would such a proceeding be thought consistent with equity,
or been compatible with the reputation of a less important Assembly? Would it
be thought an act of common justice, in such a court, to proceed to punishment,
on a charge, which might be groundless, and that, for ought they knew, might
have been refuted, as soon as mentioned? Are the Members of Congress well
assured, that on a mere pretense of something being done that ought not to have
been done, or something being omitted that ought to be done, they have not made
a victim of an innocent, or even meritorious servant, to promote the ambition
of an INDIVIDUAL, or cover the faults of MANY, as if that offering would make
atonement for their oversights or misconduct? Is the dismission from an office
of such consequence, a matter of so little moment, as to stand in no need of
even the formality of an inquiry? Can such a step reflect honor on the most
dignified Body of Men (...) America? Is nothing further necessary to find a
(...) guilty, than to accuse him of being so? (...) Assembly be certain, that
they were not (...) ^^^ceeding, invalidating their own resolves (...) obedience
due to their commands, an (...) foundations of their authority?

To degrade an officer from his rank, how (...) it may be thought of by vulgar
minds, is an (...) highest rigor, as it opens the mouth of obloquy (...)
points the tongue of slander with deadly venom.

What reparation can be made for such a hasty judgment, if it is found to be
so? Can any future inquiry into the merits of the cause wholly extinguish its
fatal influence? Is there a tribunal in the world that has past sentence
without a trial, that one may pronounce a proper tribunal, to which an innocent
man may safely appeal? The higher the tribunal, the more fatal is the influence
of prejudices. Has not the part the Congress has taken, in my dismission, a
direct tendency to weaken and corrupt the proper evidences? Can witnesses that
might be called in be so impartial, as to give a full and faithful testimony in
favor of the accused person? Will they readily produce such proofs in his
favor as they could do, that might tend to applaud his conduct, whom Congress,
by a resolve, has thought fit to censure; especially when those witness have
their reliance on that Court, for present rank and future promotions? Is there
a more effectual bribe to stop the mouths of evidences in favor of an innocent
man, and to raise up enemies against him? How unhappy then must be the
situation of any one, which lays him under so great an inconvenience, that
those who have it in their power to justify his conduct, may be intimidated
from doing it, fully and freely, as they wish to do, for fear of giving offense
to those on whom they are dependants; so that it is easier for those who
incline to it, to do an innocent person a mischief, than to find many men so
just, as to produce all they know in his behalf, and, by vindicating him, incur
the disfavour of those in power?

Under those circumstances a man's defense must be liable to misconstructions;
whereas, had an inquiry been allowed, before dismission, full weight would have
been given to the evidences on both sides; but by this summary and unusual
proceeding, is not the door shut against impartial justice; and should the
person be called to trial, before the Bench that condemned him, are not his
Judges become a party against him? In whose favor they are likely to pass
judgment, on reference, let the feelings of mankind determine!

Notwithstanding I was fully sensible of the force of these reasonings, yet so
conscious was I of my innocence, and such was my opinion of the
incorruptibility of the Congress, that, rather than lay under an imputation
that affected my character, dearer to an honest man than life itself, on the
first notice of my removal from office, I immediately appealed to the Commander
in Chief and to Congress, in hopes they would reconsider what had been so
hastily done against me. Three months are elapsed since that appeal, nor have
they thought sit to give me any answer.

To what other cause can I impute it but their own reflections, that there is
not a set of men on earth, so free from the influence of their own passions,
that a person may trust himself to their decisions, unheard, and to whom it is
proper to appeal from their own decisions, thus made? For who are so free from
biass, as not to have a secret wish to find, that, in passing judgment, they
were just. Can it be their desire to find that man blameless, to whom they have
behaved, as if they thought him otherwise? Would it not be a reflection on their
hasty judgment, when they have treated him, as guilty, to find him wholly
innocent?

But I will not do that Honorable Body the injustice to entertain a suspicion
so derogatory to them, as to consider my dismission, and the manner of it, as a
regular, deliberate act of the Whole Body, or what they approved. I have heard
it alleged, in their defense, against so injurious a supposition, that many of
the ^^^st respectable Members were absent; that some of (...) States were not
represented at the time; and that several of the Members were wholly oposed to
it; that (...) was an act into which they were suddenly forced, by (...)
clamours of a party, whom political necessity, at (...) time, compelled them to
gratify.

But such is my opinion of the integrity, and such my ^^^iance on the honor of
the C^^^^ess, as to (...) when they are furnished with the materials for
judging properly, they will be as ready to do me justice, as a part of them
have been to listen to the malice and misrepresentation of my adversaries; and
to show their magnanimity, by allowing that they have been capable of an error,
by their readiness to redress it. These considerations have induced me to print
such an account of my proceedings, a may enable them, and the public, to see
with clearness, and judge with conviction, on the propriety or impropriety of
my conduct; and to put it in their power to condemn, or acquit me, on
sufficient evidence.

To suppose, as some have been inclined to think, that Congress can object to
this appeal, from their judgment, to that of the public, would be a greater
reflection, in my opinion, on their justice, and do more injury to that
veneration we are bound to pay their virtue and wisdom, than I think any
Advocate of Liberty will date to offer so respectable a Senate Would it not be
incompatible with every idea of that liberty and justice for which America is
now in arms, to dis^allow an honest freedom of defense and expostulation, or to
shut up the channels of communicating intelligence, by which the public may be
truly informed of the propriety of their proceedings, if they mean to maintain
the confidence of those who have surrendered to them their power and rights,
not for their own, but the public good? Without this is allowed, all our
privileges are but an empty boast, " the baseless fabric of a vision,," to
which we are sacrificing the most substantial realities.

Out of respect to Congress. I have thus long deferred my application to the
public. I can no longer, consistently with my reputation, defer it. The wounds
that are given by the envenomed tongue of calumny are deeper, and more fatal
than the sword; they destroy what is dearer than life, reputation and peace of
mind; blemishes on a man's public character soon fester, and if not speedily
removed, will contaminate every thing about him, and infect the very air he
breathes. He whose reputation is injured, is ever suspected; his society is
shunned; he is looked upon as dangerous, as a walking pestilence. I must not
therefore pass over, in silence, a proceeding which strikes so home at my
honor. It would afford room for ingenious architects to raise a pile of
plausible charges, which silence is no ways calculated to refute. Evil reports
are apt to spread like wild fire, and even persons not easily inclined to it,
by repeating and circulating a story, snow ball it from hand to hand, whence it
cannot fail to accumulate; and where slanders have been suffered to take root,
there are never wanting some persons, who will use all kinds of manure to
quicken the growth. And though my Friends are disposed to look upon me as an
innocent and injured person, yet I do not desire that they, or the world,
should set down satisfied with a bare presumption of my innocence, as my
enemies have with that of my guilt. I rather wish them to unite, in calling on
me, to persist in dragging from their dark retreats, and chaining down those
barking CERBERI, those pests of society, who lay in wait to prey on the
reputation of others; and to proceed in laying open my conduct, and their evil
machinations, so long as any doubt remains of either, and the means of
obtaining and communicating evidence on the facts, are within my power.

Before I enter upon the task, may I be permitted, without offense, to guard
against a mistake that some may, perhaps, otherwise fall into. They may
suppose, from the pains I am taking to vindicate myself from groundless
imputations, that I wish, or aim to be restored, the place from which I have
been removed; and that I ought rather, on the first appearance of the injustice
done me, to have resigned my commission, by which I might have freed myself
from much trouble, and have avoided the public discred it of being removed from
it. After I have given such evidence, as I have done, of the readiness with
which I consented to serve my Country, at the first call, as a proof of my
principles, and of my obedience to their commands, I flatter myself I may,
without offense, be allowed to acquaint the world, that, (...) the very first
intimation I ever received of the complaints made to Congress, I called for an
immediate hearing. The honorable Member who informed me of them, gave me a
hint of resignation being the most advisable step to be taken, in the like
circumstances, to quiet those clamours. Could I have first vindicated my
innocence. I should have resigned with pleasure, for I had not the remotest
wish to continue in an office that was so intolerably burdensome, when there
was such want of discipline to enforce those regulations, which both the
Congress and Commander in Chief thought were best; nor did I think a service
that, for want of discipline and suitable provision, was in a state of the
utmost anarchy and confusion, so very honorable, as to have a desire to remain
in it, one moment longer, than by so doing I could be useful to my Country. --
But had I resigned, before I had been favored with an examination into my
conduct, it might rather have prepossessed the world with an opinion, that
there was some ground for those clamours against me, of which I was no ways
conscious. I determined, therefore, to insist on an inquiry into my conduct,
and having fully vindicated it, to have closed with their permission to resign,
had it been allowed me to do so.

I should then have rejoiced to have escaped from that scene of confusion to
which I had been so long a witness, and in which I could not be useful, to my
former station, in private life. On this ground I consider my dismission, not
only as more honorable than a resignation, without a previous justification of
my conduct, but than a continuance in office, under the circumstances I have
been in, almost ever since I accepted that commission. But I particularly
rejoice in it, (...) affords me an opportunity of vindicating my conduct, not
only to the Whole Congress, but to the Whole World, and having done it, I leave
the event to that God who rules the world, and in whose hands are all our ways.

Every thing I deem necessary, at present, for my full justification, is
contained in the following letter to a friend at Philadelphia, my memorial to
General Washington, and the letters and resolves of Congress, with the proofs
and illustrations that are subjoined in the appendix. I shall make no other
apology for laying them before the public in that form and order, than that I
think them the best adapted to give both Congress, and the public, full
information of the nature of my conduct; and if, in the course of my narrative,
the facts I adduce, and the remarks which arise upon them, should seem to
glance obliquely on any particulars, I hope I may be allowed to plead that the
treatment I have met with, and the nature of my vindication, requires freedom,
and that I shall be excused in the eye of reason, and with every candid mind,
if I do not smother the truth and thereby weaken my defense, merely to avoid
giving pain to any.

A LETTER to a friend at Philadelphia.
Pudet hoec opprobria nobis,
Aut dici potuisse, aut non potuisse refelli.

Boston, April 17, 1777. Dear Sir,
I Am obliged to you, for the accounts I have received of those loud clamours,
which have been circulating through Philadelphia, at my expense. I have
enclosed, and already sent to the post office, the newspapers of last week,
and of this day, containing my answer to those injurious charges so
groundlessly, and yet so maliciously propagated, by certain virulent
caluminators, which, I flatter myself, will open a door for a full and ample
vindication of the whole of my conduct; a conduct which I shall never suffer to
be traduced, in so vile a manner, as has been attempted, by a set of weak, or
(...) men, whilst I have a tongue to speak, or a (...) hand to employ, to clear
myself from those (...). The newspapers, here referred to, are the Independent
Chronicle, of April 1^th and 17, and the Boston Weekly Advertiser, on the 17th;
from which it may be proper to acquaint the reader, that in that of April the
10th, being informed of some (...) minded persons who had taken upon them to
raise and circulate a number of false reports and groundless clamours, at
Boston, on account of my having taken possession of the medicines and shop
furniture of Dr. Sylvester Gardner, and Dr. William Perkins, of Boston, for the
use of the army; and to allege that many of the sufferings of the sick, in the
last campaign, arose from my having unjustly with held from them (or from the
REGIMENTAL SURGEONS) those sto^es which they were entitled to draw from the
General Hospital, I came to Boston on purpose to call upon the persons pointed
out, as the principal authors of those reports, requiring them to make good
that charge, and at the same time inviting any persons, who had any thing to
offer against me, that regarded the faithful discharge of my trust, to step
forth, and state their accusations. I then promised to lay before the public,
a faithful and exact account of every proceeding, relative to the discharge of
my duty in the above station, by which the world would be enabled to judge
whether the charges were well sounded, or only proceeded from a spirit of
malignity and detraction.

In the papers of the 17th, I communicated the result of that examination, with
a letter, calling upon the author of the report, concerning the removal of the
medicines, to know what he had to offer; to which he returned a short evasive
answer, disclaiming the charge, which is there published, together with a full
account of the transaction.

In that paper the public were informed, that in respect to the removal of the
drugs, medicines and shop furniture in question, I had the order of General
Washington, in writing, for what I did, backed with a resolve of the Council
and Assembly of the State of Massachusetts Bay, after a sequestration of the
property of those persons; -- that they were removed to New York, for the use
of the army, -- that whatever was done by me, in this affair, was merely
official; -- that an inventory of the whole was left with the Boston Committee,
that in case the former owners should return to town, and be entitled to claim
a restitution of their effects, the value might be duly ascertained; -- that a
particular and faithful account of every thing done in this business, was
transmitted to the Adjutant General, to be laid before the Commander in Chief,
for which I received thanks for the matter and manner of what I had done; --
and that an inventory of every hospital store, remaining on hand, being made
out by the Apothecary of the General Hospital, with care and exactness, was
transmitted to General Washington and the Congress, of which I kept an
authentic copy; concluding this head with an address to those persons, to take
shame and confusion of face to themselves, who, judging only from the
corruption of their own hearts, appear to think it impossible for men, to whom
much is entrusted, to keep free from that pollution of hands, which they find
in themselves such a proneness to contract.

In regard to the second charge, which relates to the withholding the hospital
stores; this being reported against me, by Dr. Story, Surgeon of Col. Little's
Regiment, I wrote a letter to him, April 8th, calling on him to explain himself
for taking such unwarrantable license as he had done, assuring him that no man,
be his rank in life what it may, should be suffered to do it, with impunity;
Dr. Story declining to take any notice of it, that letter was published in the
Independent Chronicle, of the 17th of April, with the following Declaration of
Col. Joseph Trumbull, Esquire Commissary General of the American army.

To all whom it may concern.
BE it known, that -- whereas I have been informed that it has been
industriously propagated by some evil-minded persons, in diverse parts of the
Country -- That Dr. JOHN MORGAN, late Director-General of the Continental
Hospital, has drawn from the Commissary-General's office, the well rations, for
the sick, while in the General Hospital, and that he has pocketed the same for
his own emolument; I have this day made examination of my books, clerks, etc.
-- and find that I have not a charge in my books, of A SINGLE PENNY paid to
said Doctor MORGAN, or any other Hospital Surgeon under him, on account of
rations for the sick; nor did I ever PAY any thing, on that account, to Doctor
MORGAN, so that there cannot be the least foundation for such aspersion of his
character. -- I have paid LARGE SUMS for the rations of the sick, in Regimental
and Brigade Hospitals, to many Brigade and Regimental Physicians and Surgeons,
but never a farthing to said Doctor MORGAN, or any General Hospital Physician
or Surgeon whatever.

Given under my hand at Hartford, 2d of April, 1777. JOSEPH TRUMBELL,
Commissary-General.
N. B. The public are now informed, that Dr. Story having afterward
insinuated -- that, "when he was properly called upon, he did not doubt he
should be able to support what he had at any time advanced." I called upon him
in person, for an explanation, when he thought fit to deny, that, at the very
time he affirmed the sufferings of the sick to have arisen from the cause
assigned, of withholding from the Regimental Surgeons or sick, what be supposed
them entitled to draw from the General Hospital, (to which, however, they had
no claim) "he had any thought of Dr. Morgan's having any intention to defraud
the Continent." Lastly, it is proper it should be known that the aforementioned
invitation, if any man had any thing to allege against the faithful discharge
of his trust, to step forth and declare it, has been also printed in the Rhode
Island, Connecticut and Philadelphia papers, without any the least reply; from
whence all men may judge how groundless, as well as malicious, those clamours
were; and, no doubt, with, a behalf of injured innocence, feel a just
indignation at the authors thereof.







It is in vain for any of my friends to expect, that I will set still under the
base imputations, or rest satisfied in that general persuasion they all have of
my innocence, or acquiesce in any thing short of a full and impartial
discussion of every particular, relative to my proceedings, in my late station.

You would comfort me with this true observation, that "it is not for men in
public stations, in times like these, to expect to be free from censure, nor
should they be discouraged at the obloquies, with which some men wish to stain
their characters; they ought to content themselves with this remark, that men
of worth, who are not only innocent, but whose conduct is meritorious, are most
liable to be traduced by ignorant and designing men; that not to meet with envy
and backbiting, is a frequent effect of compliances, which argue, a weakness
unworthy of confidence; that my friends know I do not wish to be popular at
such a price, but have rather courted the slanders of the envious, by a steady
perseverance in my duty, than lay a train for the compliments of flatterers, by
favoring their dark purposes."

You proceed in remarking, "That it is no unusual matter, in the want of
success in any undertaking, for those who have been the authors of any public
calamity, in order to shift the fault from themselves, to lay it at the door of
others."

You say you are convinced, that what I wrote to you of my suspicions, was
true; "that this cry against me is owing to my steadiness to discharge the
trust reposed in me, according to the best of my judgment, knowledge and
abilities, and in not yielding to the repeated attempts of ignorant or bad men,
to encroach upon my department, who wished that I would issue all expensive
stores to their orders, without their being accountable for them, contrary to
my instructions, by which they would be exposed to rapine and dissipation,
without a possibility of replacing them, and my character justly suffer for
submitting to an unlicensed prodigality and breach of duty and orders. You
observe that mine "is not the only instance of a man's reputation being offered
up a victim to the ignorance or ambition of others."

You tell me you now see clearly, what I had often told you before, and have
now experienced to my cost:" That it is no easy matter for a person, placed at
the head of any department, that requires a strict and wary attention, not to
be borne down by ignorant or designing men, or to preserve the dignity of the
place committed to him, without which however, he must unavoidably expose
himself to a thousand rude attempts to dishonor his judgment, and oblige him
to act inconsistent with it." You wish me to support myself under this
reflection, that, "the best provision those men can make, for all events, who
are above such compliances with the ways of the world, as may impeach their
honor, or offer violence to their conscience; and to whom the judgment and
approbation of the world is matter of but second consideration, is to have a
firm confidence in Providence, that he will not suffer their innocence to be
utterly oppressed, or notoriously defamed, and yet expect the gusts and storms
of rumor, envy and detraction; to look on these as a purgatory he is
unavoidably to pass through, and depend upon time, and the goodness of heaven
for a vindication; and by constantly performing all the duties of his place and
station with justice and integrity, prove to all men, how groundless these
charges were, that men of secret designs have imputed to him."

To these judicious reflections and observations, permit me to reply -- That to
pass over, in silence, a proceeding, which strikes so home at a man's
reputation as that of his dismission from a public station, and being
superceded, without a cause assigned, will be considered, by most of mankind,
as an argument of conscious guilt -- The complaints which have been made, ought
surely to have been heard before a court of war, which was doubtless the proper
method of proceeding for offenses, supposed to be committed against the army,
before which such an inquiry might be made, as would determine the validity of
the acccusation, and how far the person accused was worthy of condemnation,
acquital, on honorable acknowledgments of the services he had done, and
particularly for his care to avoid all those methods and precedents, which men
of less scruple would have laid hold of, for their own advantage, and thought
even justifiable. Is it not hard to meet with such treatment as this, when a
person's conduct has been highly meritorious, in the sacrifices he has made by
entering into the service; the loss he has endured in it; the fatigues, toils
and dangers to which he has been exposed; the throwing himself out of business,
and making himself a marked character to serve his Country, in a post wherein
his countrymen conceived he could be particularly useful, from his former
experience and knowledge in military hospitals, when they could meet with none
other, who had the same pretense to experience, that would accept of it; and
who has suggested, to them, the proper plans for improving and putting it on a
better footing than he sound it? Must he, in silence, behold others run away
with the merits of his performances, and build on his foundations, who could
neither pretend to the same experience, nor done the same duty, nor run the
same risks and hazards, and quietly put up with the misplaced censures of the
public? Must he content himself with the repeated " sic vos non vobis" of the
Mantuan Bard?

Where is the honor of a service, or what the safety of accepting a place of
trust, if the most punctual compliance with the orders of his superiors, and,
in many instances, contrary to his own judgment, is to lay the foundation of a
man's ruin? If any sub^ile, malicious, or vindictive INSINUATIONS, on the one
hand; or the AMBITION of aspiring men, on the other; shall, at any time,
prevail against those, who have made a sacrifice of their private interests, to
follow their Country's call, in their particular station; who value their
integrity more than popularity, and cannot be brought to act in contradiction
to their conscience or judgment, however powerful attempts are made to oblige
them to do it; or if the character and reputation of one, who has served the
public, in places of rank and trust, faithfully, irreproachably, with honor
and applause, is to be immolated to the MISREPRESENTATIONS of others, or to the
designs and wishes of a more SWELLING INTEREST, without any trial, or giving
the party accused the least notice of what nature were the complaints laid to
his charge, or who were his accusers, that he might be able to show to the
world, how groundless the accusations were, and how far their clamours were
founded on private pique, disappointed expectations, or secret resentment?

Does not this conduct tend to overthrow the foundation of civil Liberty, which
can only be secured by impartial trials, before dis-interested Judges, where
the accused person and the accusers, are brought face to face, and where full
weight is given to the evidence in favor of the accused? What line is there
betwixt this and DESPOTISM? At this rate, who is free from the fatal effects of
influence? Have not the States of America claimed this essential right, as one
of the main pillars of their Liberties? Or have Americans, who contend against
what they declare to be an illegal usurpation from abroad, on the natural
rights of mankind, no laws to secure them from oppression at home? Has the
British subject a defense against that of a King, that should attempt to
violate those rights, and an American none against the injustice of his equals,
when joined with power to injure him?

Is it a misfortune, easily to be borne, that any persons should lay under a
charge, which it was the duty of those, who are the authors of it, to have made
good? Is it not consistent with the principles of equity, that every accused
person should be deemed innocent, or judgment be suspended till guilt is
proved? Let all consider, what mischief may happen to themselves, if, upon a
general charge, without the mention of any one crime, a person is to be
degraded from his rank and office; for who is secure from the consequences of
such a precedent? Or, if men of secret designs can thus shelter themselves, by
sacrificing those, who, from a sense of duty, remain immovable against every
effort to draw them aside from their duty, who is certain that he shall escape
the danger?

TO INCAPACITATE, in this manner, is no such small punishment, that a man may
easily endure, though he be innocent. "It is to SCOURGE; it is to WHIP with
SCORPIONS; it is a punishment calculated only for GENEROUS MINDS, thus to rob
men of their HONORS;" it is to lay a stain upon them, which, though
undeserved, a whole life is too short to efface the impression, without it be
fully vindicated; and, to them, is worse than death. It reaches to innocent
friends and relatives, who would rather hear of their death, than their
disgrace. It is to destroy a man's peace of mind; it is to expose him to the
tongue of slander, and the rude attempts of wicked men, who, by their
behavior, seem to think it a merit to load him with reproaches, as one without
the shadow of a virtue, Nulla virtute redemptum
a vi^^is.
But if I am proved guilty of misconduct in my office, let my guilt meet with
its desert, but on me, on me alone, let the public indignation fall: Let not
one friend ever pity me: Let every trace of sympathy and compassion be
obliterated from the tender breast of every relative; of every dear and tender
connection! On the other hand, if I am found innocent, I must insist upon my
right, of publicly asserting and maintaining that innocence, although hosts of
evil minded men should oppose themselves to the attempt, and I trust in Heaven,
that it will come forth, on the test, as gold tried in the furnace, without
mixture of alloy.

Nor shall I rest, at ease, till my vindication is as well known, and
circulated as far as the malice of my accusers has spread, and the
disreputation fully wiped away, which the Congress has cast upon me, by so
shameful a dismission from office, on a mere accusation, without proof, and
without an hearing, although repeatedly called for before that took place; and
I apprehend it will be found upon proper inquiry, that at the risk of my
reputation, so grossly and shamefully insulted, and of popular favor, which I
might easily have acquired however, at the trifling expense of honor, and of
the trust reposed in me by Congress, whilst I was fighting in their cause,
having escaped the secret ambushes of latent enemies. I was placed, Uriah-like,
in the forefront of battle, amidst enemies set in formidable array against me;
then deserted, and left to fall, unsupported, by those who placed me there; and
whose duty it was to have protected me.

If one, who being only accountable, by his commission, to the Congress and
Commander in Chief, and who was more particularly under their wing, could not
be sheltered, even by them, from so furious an onset, such a violation of the
common rights of mankind, till he could be brought to trial, and his guilt or
innocence established on undeniable evidence, I ask, once more, who then is
(...)?

You have gone on, Sir, to tell me, "that on the first rumor of my dismission,
and the manner in which it first took place, you felt all that indignation that
might be expected from friendship, on so interesting an occasion; but that you
suffered but a few moments of reflection to take place, before you were
convinced of the falsity of the charges, which you say, you are sure I can
clear up to the entire satisfaction of an impartial world; as you proceed, you
enter into the sensibilities of my own heart, on the first news of my being
treated so unworthily."

As you discover a desire to know what reception these rumors met with from
myself, I must inform you of certain circumstances that prepared me, in some
sort, to think that ill offices had been done me, by unknown persons; which I
was determined, if possible, to find out. I acknowledge that I felt resentment
rising in my breast, on occasion thereof, the first emotions of which I could
not suppress; I was resolved to restrain them, however, till I had set on foot
an inquiry into the causes of such treatment as I met with, and, if matters
were not explained to my satisfaction, to resign my commission, and bid adieu
to a service, in which an injury was offered to my sense of honor.

By the votes of Congress, October the 9th, it seems I was, in effect, degraded
from the rank of Director General and Physician in Chief, to the rank of
Director only, and restricted to the department on the East side of
Hudson's-River; -- whilst the Director of the flying camp, who had been
appointed, after the campaign began, to the temporary service of that campaign,
without waiting the issue of his services, was put on an equal, or, to say the
truth, a preferable footing, contrary to the rules and discipline of war. That
I might not mistake, I wrote to Mr. Gerry, a Member of Congress, for an
explanation of that resolve: His answer is as follows.

Philadelphia, November 20, 1776.
"I have received your favor of the 7th instant. With respect to the meaning
of the resolve of ordering the "DIRECTORS" to take care of the sick, as they
may be on the East or West side of the river; it appears to me to be this, that
whatever sick of the army shall happen to be on the East side, they shall be
under the care of yourself; and the others under direction of Dr. SHIPPEN."


I am well informed, by a gentleman of unquestionable honor and veracity, and
who had seen his letter to Dr. SHIPPEN, about the same time, that his address
to him was, to Dr. SHIPPEN, "Director-General, etc." "A word to the wise."


Instead of making his reports to me, as Director-General, as had been formerly
ordered, by a Resolve of Congress, July 17, we were both to make our reports to
Congress. I was ordered to establish an Hospital, at a proper distance from
camp, for the army posted on the East side of the North-River, when there was
no convenience for doing it on that side, at any suitable distance, being
hemmed in by the two rivers, and the enemy's forces, on either side. He was to
establish an Hospital in the Jerseys, on the West of Hudson's-River, and to
direct it, where alone any suitable accommodations could be provided for the
sick, with any the least regard to the convenience of the army, or the
preservation of the sick. Here almost the whole of the Hospital stores and
medicines were lodged, and near one half of the Hospital Surgeons and Mates of
my department were; as well as all the wounded brought from Long Island, and
the sick of the General Hospital at New York, who, as the object of my peculiar
care, were conveyed to the Jersies, for their greater safety and better
accommodation.

At this very juncture, it was the General's pleasure that I should proceed to
Hackinsack, on the West side of the river, to establish other hospitals for the
increasing sick. I applied to him, to know in what light I was to consider
those resolves; and whether, consistently with them, I could continue to
establish hospitals, or provide for the sick, that should be carried from the
East to the West side of the river, so that they should remain under my own
care and superintendence, or whether I was not by those resolves to be deprived
of the only hospitals I had, that were fit for the accommodation of the sick
and wounded, and of the principal hospital stores (...) had left, that I could
command; they being, at the retreat from New York, sent to Newark, the only
place where they could be dispensed with safety and convenience for the use of
the troops on New York island, and in its neighborhood.

But General Washington and General Green, who was present, gave it as their
opinion, that the resolves of Congress extended only to distinguish the two
armies, for which separate hospitals were to be established; that I was
directed to establish one for the sick and wounded of General Washington's
army, that was posted on the East side of Hudson's-River; and that the other
gentleman was to take care of the sick of the flying camp, and such other of
the troops, as happened to be then on the East side of the North-River, which
was only a temporary station. This view of matters, in some measure, composed
my apprehensions at that time. I was unwilling to admit the supposition that
Congress, which, I was bound to think, wished order and subordination to be
kept up in every department of the army, intended that he should interfere with
my power, and superior appointment of Director-General, though, for the sake of
present convenience, he might be ordered to make his report directly to
Congress. I therefore concluded, as well from the construction put upon it by
the Generals, as from the reasonableness of the thing itself, that I was not
prohibited from fixing hospitals, either on the east or west side of the river,
as best answered for the army posted on the east side. I could not conceive
that the lives of the men, that composed that army, were to be sacrificed, by a
limitation of the place in which they were to be taken care of, or that a plan
was laid for reducing me to a mere cipher, and to throw the whole power of the
department into the hands of an inferior officer, as Doctor Shippen certainly
was, however he might affect an equality.

Agreeable to this inference, I repaired to Hackinsack, by the General's order,
to direct the necessary provision to be made, for the reception and
accommodation of the sick, from York island, and directed a second division of
the Hospital Surgeons, of my immediate department, to attend, and take the care
of them.

Although I never was allowed to be absent from the army, and scarcely
permitted to be at any distance, for the shortest time, from Headquarters; yet
the great weight of providing for, and taking care of the sick of the whole
army, rested on my shoulders alone; and yet my hands were so tied up by
resolves of Congress, and general orders, as to leave little freedom for proper
exertions. In particular, I had no Deputy or Assistant under me, to share any
part of the burden of my department, however extensive. One Surgeon and five
Mates were all that had been allowed me, from the beginning to this time, for
every five thousand men; when at least one thousand men, in every five, were
sometimes considered as unfit for duty. And though I was called upon, as if I
was a Commissary, to attend to the daily provision returns of all the sick in
the army, spread through many miles, not only of the hospital, but the regimental
sick, and to provide them with accommodations, as a Barrack-Master, and with
hospital furniture, as a Quartermaster, and that, contrary to the resolves of
Congress (so ignorant and unreasonable were the Regimental Surgeons, and even
some of the militia Generals, in requiring it) yet I had no other aid, than
what could be afforded me by those gentlemen, who had only the rank and pay of
Hospital Surgeons, but who were obliged to do the duty of Deputy Directors, for
which I wished them to be clothed with more power, than they were entitled to,
when acting under the simple commission of Surgeons.

Perhaps artful men may here allege, that I ought, therefore, to have
submitted to the difficulty, and discharged my care of the sick, of the army,
on the western Director. I would ask them for what purpose, whether to bury him
with the load, when he could no more take care of the sick of the flying camp
only, than I could of the whole army, unless by depriving me of my own officers
and stores; or was it, to reduce me to a cipher, in order to raise him into
importance? Had the Congress supposed that I had too much, and he too little to
do, I would cheerfully have transferred to him the superintendence, and
management of as many, as his heart desired, only reserving my rank, and the
command of my own officers, hospitals and stores. But I have good grounds to
believe, that his underhand attempts to interfere with me, in my department,
and his interest with a partirular set, which has been employed to effect my
removal, with a view to promote his design of succeeding me, have operated more
powerfully to accomplish it, than all others, that have been held up, as the
ostensible causes of my removal; which, however he may think, from being
transacted behind a curtain, they lie concealed, can be easily traced to their
author, and are of a tissue with the rest of his conduct toward me, on similar
occasions.

But whilst I was left destitute of help, what assistance was allowed, in the
mean while, to the Director of the flying camp? I was well assured, from his
own lips, that he had not long acted in that station, before he was
complimented with the appointment of a deputy, having the rank, title and pay
of Assistant-Director, or, as he told me, however strange and inconsistent it
may appear, of Assistant-Director-General. Thus it fares with the man, I will
not say as Haman did, whom the king delights to honor; but whom governing
connexions choose to make considerable, at the expense of others.

However this was effected, whether by his own forecast, or that of his
friends, will any man pretend to say that this appointment, and the manner of
wording the resolves of Congress, October 9th, did not serve the purposes of
nest eggs, on which to brood and hatch designs, not thought of by Congress, as
a body? What will indifferent men think of these resolves, so contrary to my
commission of Director-General, October 17, 1775, and the report of Congress,
August 20th, to establish my rank beyond dispute? See the appendix, page 30.

Whilst such an auxiliary appointment is made to give weight and importance to
a temporary Director of a flying camp; and resolves procured afterward, to
raise him to greater importance, and to bring me down to a^ level; and when
subsequent measures are taken, to dispossess me of the powers of action, to tie
up my hands, and yet to make me accountable for misfortunes, beyond human reach
to prevent, and for the misconduct of others; to transfer my stores, my
hospitals, my surgeons and officers, to another; and yet blame me for the
consequences: who is so blind as to see no designs in all this or so wilful, as
to ascribe the whole to mere accident? Is it not manifest, that the Director
and his attachments, have, from his first coming into the service, pursued such
measures, as they conceived were best calculated to raise him over the
shoulders of every man who stood in his way, and to constitute him Head of the
department. How truly Machiavelian has been his conduct, and those who have
assisted him, per fas atque ne^as, to accomplish his ends, whether right or
wrong, to make all things subservient to them; "to cousen and deceive, so long
as it answered any purpose, and might contribute to what he desired upon
motives, how foreign so ever; and when that failed further to serve his
purposes, to compel submission, by force, to what persons are not able to
oppose? How consistent is such conduct with such principles? Where men have
entertained designs, that are void of all conscience, they must not think to
prosecute them, by the rules of conscience, which was laid aside, or subdued,
before they entered upon them; and must make no scruple of doing all those
things, which are necessary to compass that, to which they have devoted
themselves." Machiavel's political principles.
I am persuaded, that both he, and his adherents, have not only watched for,
but made occasions, to serve as a plausible pretext, for displacing me, to
accomplish their own wishes. I am not more assuredly convinced of my own
existence, than I am fully persuaded, that had any other person been Director
of the flying camp, and were it not for that object, no clamours of the
sufferings of the sick, which were trumpeted through every State, nor any other
charge of mismanagement, would have been laid at my door; or that I should have
had an opportunity given me of being heard in my defense, and that my conduct
would have been fully vindicated, and my reputation for diligence and fidelity,
in the discharge of my trust, have been established, beyond the reach of
calumny.

That I may not seem to advance this, without a reason, I shall not place the
whole stress of the argument upon the single circumstance of no particular
charge being ever made known to me, by Congress, although I repeatedly applied
to know what was the accusation, and who were my accusers, and no other person
was ever called upon, in the department, none accused, or sought after, as if I
was answerable, not only for every supposed crime that could be alleged
against any part of it but for mere misfortunes; on which I have been proceeded
against, and treated in a manner, that, I believe, has no precedent: I shall
produce such circumstances, as, I trust, will convince impartial men, that the
ostensible causes of my dismission, were not the true ones; and that Congress
had, in fact, no well grounded charge, to justify the measure, which some
persons were so resolutely bent upon, as to be afraid, if I were admitted to an
hearing, their designs, of effecting my removal, would have been frustrated. I
think the one I have already pointed out will be found, on an impartial
inquiry, to be the conditio sine qua non; or rather, the efficient cause of
that event; I mean that I stood in the way of an ambitious man, whom his
adherents determined, be the consequences what they might, to raise to the
first rank in the department, and either oblige me to bend, as a reed, before
him, or, like a stubborn oak, to be torn up by the roots, for resisting the
tempest; and to plant him on my ruin.

I had intimations given me, more than once, that pains would be taken, to
deprive me of my rank and distinction, to make room for a rising competitor. I
did not readily believe, yet did not wholly discredit the intelligence. I wrote
to some members of Congress, whom I looked upon as my friends, to guard against
any step, which, through seeming inattention to military rules, might make it
impracticable, consistent with those rules, as a man of spirit, to remain in
the service. I told them I did not seek for any extent of power, nor was I
averse to any limitation of it, in my own case, compatible with that sense of
honor, which is supposed necessary to actuate and quicken men, in every army.
I did not know, till I received a letter from the Secretary of Congress, to
rectify that mistake, that rank, precedence and honor, are all nonsense, and
not looked for in our army; and truly, if we may judge from effects, they carry
too much conviction, that a sense of honor is no virtue, in his estimation,
whatever it may be in that of some men, of a more liberal way of thinking, both
in Congress and in the army. I took the liberty to write to the President of
the Congress, himself, "that I hoped there would be no unnecessary abridgement
of rank and authority in my person, whilst I continued in office, that was
necessary for the head of the department, in the person of my predecessor, and
was consistent with real usefulness, to which I expressed it to be my desire,
that every other consideration should give way, as it would imply a reflection
upon me, which I was unwilling to suppose I merited."

I also wrote to the Secretary of Congress, on a double account; first, to know
the extent of my power, and that of the several Directors, for the sake of
conducting business in its proper channel; and next, to get that rank, which
was allowed me by Congress, properly recognized by the several Directors, to
avoid mistakes. Dr. Stringer, one of the Directors, had not only disputed it
with me, and refused to make his returns to me, as Director-General, as
Congress required; but appealed to Congress for its decision, which was given
in my favor. See appendix, page 30.

Although my application to him was respectful, and as I informed him, only
made with a view to know my station, and that of others, that I might perform
the duties expected of me, without interference with any; instead of favoring
me with any extract from the resolves of Congress, to which I referred for
information, he saw fit to substitute his own dictates, in place of those of
Congress. See page 149, 150, etc.

My rank and authority being securely fenced in, by repeated acts and resolves
of Congress, there was no possibility for the Director of the flying camp, or
his friends, to accomplish their secret purposes, without first breaking down
the separating wall of distinction. By this means, the person, who would not
submit to be degraded from his rank, would be obliged to resign, and, to insure
success, it was easy for artful persons to excite or encourage complaints, and
to bring them before Congress, to afford a pretext for displacing him. But then
it was of consequence, that he should be kept ignorant of those complaints, and
of his accusers, and to prevent his obtaining an hearing, lest he should
vindicate himself, and thereby disappoint their hopes. Nothing could answer
their purposes better, than to push for obtaining his dismission, without a
trial, which might enable him to clear himself from all aspersions, and justify
his conduct in the face of Day, to the confusion of his enemies.

After this detail of facts, compared with the several resolves of Congress,
and the proceedings thereon, with the relation I am about to give of the
particular behavior of the Director, in consequence of them; let every
impartial man lay his hand upon his heart, and ask himself, ingenuously, what
he thinks of the whole matter, and of the several appearances, which concur, in
an uniform series to point to one object? Will they view the resolves of
October 9th, and the manner of wording them, after all that had passed, as a
mere accidental mode of expression, in men so wise, so much accustomed to
weigh, and so well acquainted with the import of words and the force of
language, and as only intended to re-iterate, and renew former appointments,
without any design, in those who framed the resolve, I will not say to throw
dust in the eyes of the Members of Congress, in general, but to draw them into
a measure, of which they might not consider its tendency, not only of effecting
an alteration in one department, but of making such an entire innovation upon
another, as was not generally thought of, and would lead to the great changes
that have since taken place?

Can it be said that neither the Secretary, who, though no Member of Congress,
has an interest with many of them, without doors; nor any of the members
themselves, were apprized of the difficulties that would, unavoidably, arise
from a resolve of Congress, calculated to throw down the former settled
distinctions, of July 17, 1775, and 1776, and August 20, last; in which my rank
was so clearly recognized and established. One part of my errand to
Philadelphia, last June, was to confer with the Committee of Congress, on the
necessary establishments for keeping up a clear and regular subordination in
the General Hospital, through all its various departments, and this was the
subject of several letters, to different Members. If any of the Members of
Congress had discovered, in me, any want of abilities, for so important a post;
is it not reasonable to imagine they would have openly, and avowedly, assigned
it as a cause of disqualification? But did they ever do it? Nay; what says the
Secretary, himself, in his letter, of August 14, by way of making some
acknowledgment for the mistake he had committed, in his former, of August 2d.
It is the testimony, not of a friend, but an enemy, and one, whom I believe to
be a deep agent in my removal. I will therefore quote his very words; for " fas
est ab ^oste doceri."

"There is no man, Sir, acquainted with you, who can doubt of your abilities.
All the world bears witness of them, and the learned in Europe, who must be
allowed to be the best judges, have given ample testimony, by the honors they
have heaped upon you. While you exercise your great talents, for the benefit of
those entrusted to your care, your Country will honor you, and posterity will
do you justice; even though Dr. S --, when you chance to meet, should refuse to
give you precedence."

I proceed to the relation of what happened, in consequence of those resolves
of Congress, of October 9th, and the strange behavior of Dr. Shippen, the
western Director, thereupon.

Being at Hackinsack, soon after this " new arangement," as he was pleased to
style it, took place, I employed myself, with all possible industry, to put the
hospital affairs in such a train, at Hackinsack, that Dr. Warren might conduct
them, without my presence afterward, that I might, without hinderance, be able
to proceed to the White-Plains, to which place, General Washington, and the
army under him, had marched, a day or two before; and the British troops were
taking the same rout. I called, therefore, on General Green, at his camp, near
Fort-Lee, to represent to him the situation of the sick, at Hackinsack, and to
request his orders for procuring Dr. Warren such assistance, from the
Quarter-Master-General's, and the Commissarial departments, as he required. I
met the western Director there who, with a peculiar freedom, becoming the
elevation to which he seemed to consider himself as already raised, or to be
raised, demanded why I was not at my post, on the other side the river?
Accustomed to receive accounts from others, and to give orders myself, in the
affairs of my department, I could not but feel the indignity of being thus
taken to task by him; and answered him accordingly. I discovered his desires
and aims, but concluded he had more LEE-WAY yet to make, than to entitle him to
avow his sentiments so openly; but in this, it seems, I was mistaken.

The day following, Dr. Foster, to whose charge I had left the direction of the
hospital, and care of the hospital stores, at Newark, came over, in haste, and
desired a private conversation with me, on a subject of some delicacy. As I had
visited Newark, within a very few days, and every thing was reported to me to
be in good order, and I had left all the directions I thought necessary for
future regulations, previous to my return to Headquarters, I could not
conceive the occasion of this unexpected visit. But my foreboding mind took the
alarm, of which I was yet ignorant of the cause, for he informed me it was of
such a nature, as made him think (...) improper to communicate, by letter.

After this preparation, he informed me, that the Director had called on him,
and proposed, but with great art and address, the surrendering up of the
hospitals and stores to his Direction; the care of the sick to remain under the
same persons whom I had sent from my department, but to act under his
authority. He replied that he considered himself as under my direction only, in
hospital matters; and that he did not think himself at liberty to deliver up
the stores to any person, without a written order from General Washington, or
the Director-General. To this the Director made answer, that whatever like, or
dislike, I might show to this proposal, I should find myself obliged to
acquiesce in it.

The construction which the gentleman put upon this proceeding, was, that the
appointment of the Director, being, to form and superintend the hospital of the
flying camp, would terminate in a little time, as the troops, composing the
army, raised for that service, were enlisted but for a few months, unless he
could carve out some place that he could be pleased with, in the mean while,
that would put him on a better establishment. I commended his prudence, in
declining to deliver up the stores, without proper orders, and desired, that,
if any further demands, of the like kind, were made by Dr. Shippen, to refer
him to me, for an answer.

The Director had expressed himself to me, about a month before, in a manner
that corresponded with the above idea. He told me, frankly, that he should
like, well enough, to continue in the service, as he thought it a more
gentlemanny life, than that of a drudging private practitioner. I was truly
desirous of his continuance in that station, if he could remain in it, without
elbowing me out of any thing that appertained to my place; for I did not then
imagine he had yet aspired to the place itself.

Having served in the army, the whole of last war, and had pretensions, on that
account, to some years experience in military hospitals, which he knew nothing
of; and having been appointed to the chief direction of the hospitals, the
pr^ceeding year, and having borne the burden of the day, ever since, it had not
yet entered into my imagination, that I was soon to give place to the very man,
who, but four months before, not four months, nay, scarcely three, had written
to announce his appointment, as Director of the hospital of the flying camp,
and that he had enlisted himself in the service of the American States,
confessed his being a mere novice in the management of his (subordinate)
department, and applied to me for instructions in the etiquette, the word by
which he chose to express his notion, of the government of a General Hospital;
and who promised, from time to time to report to me the state of the hospitals
under him, agreeable to an order of Congress for the purpose; but which,
however, he never did. Perhaps he judged, from better information than I could
ever obtain, that so soon as he had learned the " etiquette" of military
hospitals, his elevation would render it unnecessary.

But what surprised me, in his late conduct, was, that having an opportunity to
acquaint me, the day before, in person, at General Green's, with his
expectations and demands on the hospitals I had established, he did not choose
to say any thing to myself on the subject, but to apply to subordinate
officers, to accomplish his wishes, rather than treat with me as a principal; I
thought this portended no good; but then I knew it was of a piece with very
many other instances of his conduct, on different occasions.

I went over, in a day or two after, to the White-Plains. A letter soon arrived
from the Director to General Washington, complaining that his situation was
uneasy, for he could not obtain the command of the stores at Newark, and of
course of the hospitals I had established there, and of the officers I had
detached from my particular department, unless by the General's orders for the
purpose, or by directions from me; for which, however, as I observed before, he
had never applied.

The General was pleased to communicate this letter to me. I represented to him
the inconveniences of depriving me of those stores, and that I had no others,
in any sufficient quantity, to answer the continual calls upon me; that the
rest of the stores, which, at his command, were ordered to Stamford, (and from
thence were removed by the Stamford Committee, without my knowledge, and with
his approbation, as I afterward learned) could be of no use to me, at that
time; that the only medicines, which could be got at, were those at Newark,
which I had snatched as a brand out of the fire, at the retreat from New York;
and that I had appointed an Apothecary on purpose to assort and dispense them
out to Regimental Surgeons at Newark, as there was no possibility of doing it
in an army, constantly moving from place to place, under all the inconveniences
we suffered. To be borne down, with incessant demands from all quarters, was
hard indeed; and to be deprived of the only resources I had left me, those of
my own providing, and of my own saving, with extreme difficulty and hazard, to
be at the sole command of another, a junior, and inferior officer, appeared to
me to be an unreasonable demand. I had, already, detached near one half of the
Surgeons and Mates, of the General Hospital, to Newark and Hackinsack, and by
the General's command, established hospitals there, at the very time I had
pointed out the probable consequences that would ensue from the extraordinary
resolves of Congress, October 9th. There were, at this time, above fifteen
hundred sick, at those two places, under the care of my own Surgeons. I had
just received letters from them, which showed they were gradually working
through all their fo^mer difficulties, by steadily pursuing the directions I
had left them: With these advantages and their own experience they were more
likely to complete the work, than they would be, if in the midst of it they
were to receive new directions from one, who, with all due deference to his
abilities was less acquainted, than themselves, with the arrangements of a
General Hospital I observed, that to deliver up the hospitals (...) and (...),
would be to strip me of all power of being useful; and it was not in the power
of the director to supply their places, if the stores, hospitals and sick, were
to be committed to his care, and my proper officers were to return under my
command, on the east side of the River; whence the-sick must suffer; and if the
stores were delivered up, we ourselves must become destitute and helpless, and
yet exposed to greater clamours than ever. I had, in no instance, interfered
with the Director of the Flying Camp, but offered to give him every assistance
in my power, that he was pleased to call for. But to be stripped of the rank of
a Director-General, and the power of my station, and to be left but the shadow
of a Director, and yet to be accountable for every accident, or misconduct of
others, as well as of my own department, and, from the highest post, to be
rendered the mere dependent of a junior and subordinate officer, was what I
never would submit to. Sooner than be subject to such control, or give up the
stores and hospitals, which by the General's orders I had established for the
sick of his own army, when I had no convenience for providing others, I would
give up my commission.

The General promised he would, and I doubt not but he did write to the
Director, in answer to his letter, "That the hospitals I had established, and
the surgeons and stores I had sent to Newark and Hackinsack, were to remain
under my direction."

What was my surprise to hear, after some time, from some of the officers of
the hospital that were under me, in the Jerseys, [for it seemed proper that I
should never know, but in a circuitous manner, what most immediately regarded
myself,] that those stores which had been provided for General Washington's
army, and which I had saved at New York, and sent to the Jerseys for safety,
and for the convenience of issuing out to the hospital sick under my own care,
and to the Regimental Surgeons, were now actually ordered, by a late vote of
Congress, to be delivered up to the Director of the Flying-Camp; and that he
received letters, at appeared on the point of being swallowed up for ever, if
some vigorous measures were not immediately pursued to apply an effectual
remedy; and I had ventured, without waiting for orders, to fly to the place of
danger, where I thought my presence most wanted, I had no doubts that I should
no sooner have mentioned my apprehended grievance, than I should have had
immediate redress. Fully persuaded that my services and sacrifices merited
consideration, and entirely ignorant that malice had yet attempted to discolor
the merit of my proceedings, I did not suspect that any crime had been laid to
my charge, till I complained of the injury done me. So short sighted are
mortals, and so true it is that a man is never exposed to greater hazards than
when he least apprehends them. Now, for the first time, I heard of the clamours
about the sufferings of the sick in the Jersies, and at Philadelphia; and
although I had been restricted to the east side of Hudson's-River, to make way
for one of rising interest, the misfortunes of the department committed to his
care, were wholly ascribed to me, notwithstanding the direction was taken out
of my hands, for his sake.

I applied for admission to Congress; Mr. Samuel Adams appeared. On mentioning
the cause of my application, he gave me to understand that complaints were
brought against me, and the sufferings of the sick charged to me, with
circumstances greatly reflecting on my humanity. I denied the justice of the
charge, and being at the door of the chamber where the Congress were setting, I
thus addressed him: Sir, I do solemnly deny the charge, and do entreat I may,
this instant, be introduced to Congress, that I may have an opportunity of
vindicating myself against every injurious aspersion. Of this, Sir, I am
confident, the more my conduct, in the station of Director-General, is examined
into the more luster will it reflect upon me. I ask (...) an inquiry. I desire
to know the particulars of the charge and who are my accusers, to meet them
face to face, and am willing to stand the test of the strictest scrutiny.

I was refused admission, it (...) said the Congress was engaged in some
important matter. I again desired the gentleman to inform me what particulars
were laid to my charge? I could neither learn them, nor who were my accusers.
As I could not obtain an audience, at that time, I begged Mr. Adams to inform
Congress of the design of my coming, and my desire of admission, and I let him
know that I waited at my lodgings, in expectation of an hearing, when Congress
had liesure to grant it. I obtained it not. Congress adjourned to Maryland,
without taking the least notice of my appeal to them. I repeated my
application, through the same gentleman, by letter. My dismission took place
without an hearing, and without any answer, and without suspending me from
office, till they could be satisfied of the facts alleged against me; for
this, it seems would be too great a condescension.

I would fain ask, whether such a denial of my humble request, and keeping me
in ignorance of my reputed crimes, and secret accusers, is agreeable to
humanity, or what is usually allowed to the greatest criminals? Is it a way to
beget a reliance on the safety and honor of the House, that after having
passed judgment, without an hearing, I may still depend on ample justice,
candor and generosity of treatment? Is such a proceeding usual? Might I not
have rather expected to have been first suspended, then tried, and judgment to
follow, and not precede conviction, on any breach of order or misconduct?

Had I been conscious of guilt, may it not be presumed I should have sought to
shelter myself, by a resignation, rather than insist on a trial? Could a better
pretext have been afforded? The Congress, contrary to every known rule, by a
resolve of theirs, had reduced me from the rank of Director-General, removed me
from my right, of attending the army under the Commander in Chief, to give
place to a temporary Director, who, before, was made accountable to me, as head
of the department; clamours were raised against me, (groundless indeed!) I
asked for an hearing, and was refused. Resignation was intimated to me, as what
alone would quiet those clamours. What temptation was there for a person
conscious of guilt, to wish a continuance in office, till his conduct could be
examined into? On the contrary, every thing was to be apprehended under that
circumstance. The most imminent danger that the cause itself was lost filled
the minds of many. I saw the black clouds gathering on the margin of the
political horrison, threatening, on every side, to over-whelm its abettors in a
general destruction, on one hand; and myself in private ruin, on the other;
unless I could make my retreat from the approaching tempest. Did I,
coward-like, basely fly; nay, the very appearance of danger determined me to
face the storm, and prove the falsity of the charges against me. I met two of
the Georgia Delegates. I acquainted them with what had happened; that I would
stand by the cause, during the present dangerous onset; but when that was over,
I would insist on an immediate hearing, and, if not granted, then resign.

I repaired to the scene of danger, but was ordered to the east side of
Hudson's-River. Submission was (...) duty, for the present moment; redress my
hope and expectation, so soon as Congress had liesure, and was in a situation
to attend to it. I pursued my business, as though I had received no cause of
complaint, till I could obtain an hearing. But instead of redress, the first
account I received, but through an indirect channel, was that of my dismission.
I had prepared, in haste, a narrative of my proceedings, in the department
committed to me. I immediately sent it to the General, with a desire of its
being laid before Congress, for their reconsideration of what was done, as I
thought with precipitancy, and did not doubt that, on better information, they
would quickly retract from the measure, or, at least, give me an audience, and
judge on the evidence of facts, compared with their own resolves and the
General's orders.

At any rate, if they were determined to deliver me up to the cries of a
faction, I thought Congress, for its own sake, would have let me down gently.
If the sacrifice must be made to gratify it, I thought Congress would suppose
that something was due to the character I had (...) in life, to the rank I had
held in my profession, to the general reputation which public honors from the
learned societies in Europe are supposed to confer. Upon occasion of such
unworthy treatment as I have met with, flatt^^ myself, a man may be allowed to
speak the truth, in his own favor; without an impeachment of vanity. I thought
some consideration would have been had for that devotion of my best abilities,
which I had shown, such as they are, to the improvement of liberal a (...) and
sciences in this new world; some regard manifested to an early and zealous
attachment to the cause of American liberty; to the sacrifice! had made of my
private interest and safety; to my own station, and that of some of my nearest
relations and friends, both in and out of Congress, and of the army. And could
not all these procure some shadow of lenity, where a victim was to be offered
up; something like compassion; some answer to my humble memorial, in my
vindication, and my petition only " to be heard"? I must say none. Three months
are nearly elapsed, whilst I have not received one line or message in answer.
In the mean while, as if that refusal was the signal; the alarm spread;
newspapers bear witness to my degradation. Base and malicious men, the pests
of every society, have given free vent to their slanders. Boston has been
filled with clamours to my prejudice. Villains there are in every place, to
coin and circulate reports, prejudicial to a man's character. But why should I
pretend to enumerate the evil consequences of such a severity of conduct
toward me? If it would have answered any valuable purpose; if the sacrifice of
my life would have saved my Country, I could have cheerfully offered it up. I
shall not say so of my honor.

To the impartial public I therefore mean to appeal. At this tribunal, no
innocent person need fear to make his defense, nor to allow free scope to be
given to that defense; where a man's conduct, and the motives of it being
known, he has reason to hope for a candid judgment, free from prejudice or
party. If I can but obtain this indulgence, I hope to evince, to every common
understanding, the rectitude of my conduct, and if the most laborious and
steady application to the discharge of my trust, and perseverance in the path
of duty, can give a claim to hope. I flatter myself, that I shall not only
escape their censure, but meet with the warmest approbation of the public,
which it ever has been, and whatever may be the success, ever shall be my study
to obtain.

I am, my dear friend, theirs, and your most devoted, humble servant, JOHN
MORGAN.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY GENERAL WASHINGTON, Commander in Chief of the American Army.
The MEMORIAL and REPRESENTATION of Doctor JOHN MORGAN, respecting his Care of
the Sick, and Manner of conducting the Department of the General Hospital
committed to his Care.
SIR,
WHEN I was called by the choice of my country, to the station of
Director-General of the hospital and Physician in chief, I left a respectable
and lucrative practice against the judgment of some considerable persons in my
native city, who, from regard to me, and what they conceived to be my interest,
endeavored in vain to dissuade me from accepting the post, truly honorable as
they allowed it to be. Their advice had no influence over me. Without
hesitation, I sacrificed it, with every future prospect of better expectations
from continuing with them to the satisfaction of serving my country, AT THE
HEAD OF THE HOSPITAL, IN THE ARMY, UNDER YOUR EXCELLENCY'S IMMEDIATE COMMAND.

Having had some experience, in times past, of the nature of the department, I
have, ever since I took charge of it, made it my constant study, to make myself
master of the subject, and to acquire a thorough insight into it. With what
success, I do not think can be judged off, from the outside appearances of last
campaign, and the causes which prevented the several regulations I proposed,
from taking place agreeable to my wishes. It would be tedious to enumerate them
all; yet it cannot be amiss to point at some of the principal. See the Appendix.


The first of these which I shall mention was, the want of sufficient time and
opportunity before the opening of the campaign, to have all the regimental
Surgeons properly furnished by Congress, and made acquainted with their duty,
of which many of them were very ignorant, and the error of having them look to
the General hospital for those supplies of medicines and instruments, etc.
which it would have been better to have sent to them by Continental Druggists,
who might have the means of collecting and preparing every article in a
suitable manner, which it is vain to attempt in a moving army. Another cause
was the want of a sufficient number of certain hospital officers and
assistants, and the means of procuring them when allowed by Congress, which was
late, as Commissaries, Storekeepers, Stewards, Ward-Masters, etc. ( b) This
difficulty was increased from the nature of the campaign, in which, contrary to
expectation, it became necessary, to shift the places of the General hospital
frequently, and to branch it out in such a number of hospitals widely distant
from each other. ( c) To these may be added, first, the want of sufficient help
from other departments, which it was impossible to remedy in the state our army
then was. ( d)

2dly, The neglect of the regimental Surgeons, to report the sick of their
regiments in season, and in an orderly manner to the General hospital, though
often required in General orders, Resolves of Congress and otherwise, to do it;
( e) and sometimes keeping back their sick from entering into it at all, or
till they became very numerous; then discharging them all at once into the
General hospital, at the time of an engagement with the enemy, and when the
attention of the whole body of hospital Surgeons was necessary to take care of
the wounded. And lastly, the frequent and long absence of the regimental
Surgeons from their regiments, who, instead of sending the sick, as they ought
to have done, to the General hospital, had them conveyed to some remote
regimental hospitals, where they neither had, nor could obtain suitable
necessaries for their provision and care ( f)

On my first arrival at Cambridge, I set about to establish rules for the
General hospital Surgeons. I had heard of many abuses being practiced by
enormous drafts of expensive stores from the General hospital, to which, with
your Excellency's approbation, to whom I made report thereof, I put a stop and
limited the demands of regimental Surgeons to such articles, as Indian meal,
oatmeal, rice, barley, molasses, and the like, and required that such sick as
wanted others, should be sent to the General hospital, that these things might
be dispensed out under my own direction. ( g)

The next reformation I attempted was to call upon all the Mates in the
hospital to undergo an examination of their abilities, in order to select from
the number those who were best qualified for the service. -- This was followed
by your Excellency's orders, to see that all the regimental Surgeons and Mates
should pass a like examination. I began the task, but the movements of the
army, the aversion of Surgeons to undergo these examinations, from which too
they were often screened by their Colonels, and by pretense of sickness, etc.
and the increasing business on hand prevented my proceeding far in it. ( h)

When the army lay before Boston, the smallpox frequently made it is appearance
in it, owing to the number of persons who came out of that city with the
infection upon them, which endangered the spreading of the contagion amongst
our troops. By the establishment of the smallpox hospital in a suitable place,
with proper persons to take care of the sick, and the precaution of sending all
infected persons to it, so soon as known to have the disease, and to cut off
all communication betwixt it and the troops, the army was preserved from ever
receiving any injury from it.

When the troops marched from Cambridge for New York, all the sick were left
behind in the General hospital, amounting to upwards of three hundred men. In
less than six weeks, during which time but few died, I was able to discharge
the hospital of every man, to settle and pay every account, insomuch as never
to have had any further demands from that quarter.

During this time, with little or no expense to the public but for package and
transportation I collected medicines, furniture and hospital stores, worth many
thousand pounds, and sent them on to New York. The like quantity, I apprehend,
could not be procured in any part of America. Nor were these obtained for the
use of the army, without much trouble and assiduity, owing to a strong
opposition that was made to prevent it. ( k) -- Besides these, I was able, by
means of the subaltern officers in the hospital, some of whom I employed
continually at the work, likewise to collect to the amount of near two thousand
rugs and blankets, near as many bedsacks and pillows which were taken up from
docks, and were gathered from hospitals and barracks, etc. These being washed
and aired served the last campaign when none others could be got, and many of
them are yet in good preservation. -- At New York I collected some hundred
sheets, fracture boxes, and other useful articles.

It may be thought perhaps that I place a higher value upon these acquisitions
than they merit; be that as it may, I am persuaded the like could not be
obtained now for much less than thirty thousand dollars, which is equal to the
whole amount of what I have ever drawn or expended for the General hospital, in
the space of a twelvemonth, including the pay of all the officers and all the
hospital expenses of every kind, which have fallen within my department to
settle, and for the faithful expenditure of the same, I am ready to produce my
accounts, receipts and vouchers, whenever called upon for a settlement. Yet the
General hospital has had the constant charge of a number from two or three
hundred to a thousand sick and upwards to provide for and attend. Nor have any
articles of the public stores been embezzled or mis-applied, nor the sick
suffered in the General hospital for want of any thing I thought them entitled
to draw from the hospital, and that I could procure for them.

The medicines and stores provided, as above mentioned, have been appropriated
with equal faithfulness and strict economy to the use of the General hospital;
or issued from thence to regimental Surgeons, or remain on hand, subject to
your Excellency's order. I have never burdened the Quarter-Master-General's
department with any unnecessary demand from thence. And as to the
Commissary-General, he will do me justice, as he has often declared himself on
that head, that my drafts were within the most reasonable bounds. I am
persuaded that of the sick who have been drawn for in the General hospital, if
none of them have been drawn for at the same time with the well men in their
regiments, the stoppage of their rations will go a great way toward paying the
whole of the expenses the hospital has been put to, on their account, for
provision and stores of whatever kind. ( l)

In a conference I once had with your Excellency at Cambridge, on the subject
of hospital expenses, you told me, and I took it as a hint of caution and
advice to observe the strictest economy in my department (from which I have
never deviated) that you were fearful the expenses of the General hospital
would exceed the estimate that had been made of them, by a person of experience
in General hospital matters. If I rightly recollect, your Excellency thought
the sum mentioned to be ten thousand pounds sterling per annum. I was
surprised, and concluded the gentleman was mistaken; I resolved however, if
possible, to employ such strict economy in the department, as to keep within
those bounds, yet was fearful it could not be accomplished, on account of the
advanced price of every article of living and hospital stores. Desirous of
knowing what were the principles on which he founded the calculation, I wrote
to the person that was mentioned, on the subject, in answer to which he
informed me, that the estimate, he had given in to General Gates was ten
thousand pounds sterling, for every ten thousand men, for six months, and so in
proportion, which is equal to 40 000 L. ster. per. annum, for 20,000 men, the
number then kept on foot.

At the same time, as one qualified to give me full information, I wrote to him
with a view to clear up all doubts, or to confirm my sentiments in regard to
the manner in which the regimental Surgeons were supplied in the British
service, with medicines and instruments, and to know what right they had to
draw stores from the General hospital; to which his answer corresponded with
the opinion I had ever entertained of the nature of the service. 'Till
Congress, or your Excellency should give orders for a different mode to be
pursued, I considered myself to be bound in duty to keep the British
establishment constantly in my eye, as a directory, making allowance for the
nature and difference of the service. ( m)

Moreover, I was afterward favored with your Excellency's opinion on the
subject, contained in those observations you was pleased to bestow on the plan
of regulations, which, by your command I sketched out, for getting again into a
proper train, after we had, by one accident or another, been forced from the
original plan of a General hospital, and got into confusion, on account of the
opposition, some of the resolves of Congress, of July 17 last, met with from
many of the regimental Surgeons, and the impracticability of complying with
others of them, in the situation we were then placed. Your words were, "What is
the practice in this case in the British army? Why should we think of improving
upon their system, founded on long experience?"

Upon first entering upon the duties of my station, apprehending that the
General hospital was not amply supplied, as I could wish, with bandages, old
linen and other implements of surgery, that would be required, in case of an
action, I set myself to supply those wants immediately, which I effected with
little expense of money, but with great labor, in which I had all possible
assistance from the hospital Surgeons and Mates. I collected large quantities
of old linen, lint and sheets, made up six thousand bandages, and six hundred
tourniquets, for the use of the General hospital, etc. which, though sufficient
for a present ex^igency, I did not think more than might be wanted for six
hospitals, which I managed at that time.

Being then desirous of knowing how the regimental Surgeons were supplied, I
proposed the calling upon them in general orders, for that purpose, and with a
view to learn whether their assistance could be depended upon in the field, and
whether they were properly furnished with medicines. Except Mr. Magaw, Surgeon
of Col. Thomson's regiment, and a few others, they had scarcely the shadow of a
supply -- I gave in a report thereof, with a weekly return of the sick; I also
stated to your Excellency what I conceived to be my duty, and that it was
limited to the care of the sick in the General hospital.

This inquiry into the wants of regimental Surgeons, made them turn, as it
were, on the General hospital. They wished to furnish themselves from it, with
those articles of dressings, which the hospital Surgeons had collected, and
made up for themselves, which those gentlemen thought an unreasonable demand.
Farther, the regimental Surgeons wanted, contrary to all usage, to draw from
the General hospital, all they should call for, in the way of stores, whether
diaetetic or medicinal, for the use of the sick retained under their care, in
regimental hospitals, and to be provided by me with instruments and bandages,
or to fix the odium of their insufficiency at my door. I therefore recommended
in my report the necessity of providing (not in the army or General hospital)
but from Continental Druggists (for that was what I intended) "a capital set of
medicines, instruments, etc. as soon as possible, and advised that portable
chests should be furnished from every regiment for a whole year, at once, and
each chest be provided with instruments and bandages." -- I did not expect,
weak handed as I was, with respect to officers and assistants in the General
hospital, from its very establishment by Congress, that this task would be
enjoined on me, I thought my duty pointed out by that establishment, as much as
I could well execute, and which only related to the General hospital itself;
although with an earnest desire of promoting the good of the service, I early
pointed out the wants of the regiment Surgeons, and in time for having the^
supplied with necessaries after the manner that has always been practiced in
the British army, I wrote to inform your Excellency, "that my commission only
extended to the care of the General Hospital; the plan of establishment by
Congress, of July 28, 1775. The list, number and arrangement of officers, and
my instructions from Congress, which were wholly silent concerning regiments,
their Surgeons or supplies confirmed this opinion," not to say any thing of the
low estimate, which I had understood was formed for the support of the General
hospital.

I then gave it as my opinion, grounded on the custom of the British army, of
supplying the medicine chests by stoppages, "that if the sick, remaining in
regiments, were to be supplied at a public expense (and not by stoppages) that
expense ought to be made a regimental charge, and might be delivered in with an
abstract of the regiment, (or any other better way,) that the General hospital,
having nothing to do with the affair from its very nature, ought not to be
burdened with their supplies; for then, on the number of sick admitted in the
General hospital being known, the expense necessary for their support could,
after a while, be better estimated from experience."

I then called on your Excellency, in the same letter, "for instructions what
to do?' I informed you "that the nature and design of the General hospital,
being little understood, and the nature of my duty so much mistaken, both by
the regimental Surgeons and officers, and many things expected from me,
impossible to be complied with, I apprehended it to be absolutely necessary
that certain regulations should be fixed upon, to ascertain my duty, and those
of the Surgeons and officers under me, as well as those of the regimental
Surgeons, which all ought to know, and not hospital and regimental Surgeons
only, but in general, every officer of any rank in the army, to prevent
interference and mistakes." --

Besides giving this information, in order to bring about a farther explanation
of the matter, and with a view to accomplish the end proposed by it; when I
came to New York, I laid a plan before the regimental Surgeons, to ascertain
their duty, with a draft for a memorial to be laid by them before Congress
stating their present difficulties, of which they approved; and I wrote
pressingly myself on the subject, to the Doctors Committee of Congress; and at
various other times I have delivered my opinion on the duties of regimental
Surgeons, which may be seen in the general orders, particularly of July 3d, and
July 28th, 1776. But although the sentiments contained in those orders were
enjoined by your Excellency to be made the rule of conduct, and I think they
were well calculated to answer the purpose, yet they were little regarded ^y
many of the regimental Surgeons, and openly opposed by others. ( n)

With respect to the manner in which I came to have the charge of supplying all
the regimental Surgeons with medicine chests, etc. contrary to what I had
always conceived to be the proper method, or usual for a General hospital, as I
had always declared, I beg leave to remark, that the surrender of Boston having
put us in possession of a large, though unassorted stock of medicines, hospital
furniture, etc. your Excellency was pleased to order me, by the
Quarter-Master-General, to put up medicine chests for five regiments, at
Boston, Salem and Marblehead, etc. about the time the rest of the army moved to
New York. This I cannot but look upon as the beginning of all my subsequent
difficulties. When I arrived afterward at New York, your Excellency was at
Philadelphia, and I was repeatedly called upon by letters, and in the way of
personal applications from regimental Surgeons and officers, to furnish several
regiments that were at New York, and others gone to Canada, with medicine
chests. My hope and expectation had been, that out of the whole stock I had
collected, I might be permitted to take such as were wanted for the General
hospital, and then to deliver the remainder to any Commissary or Continental
Druggist, appointed by Congress, or by your Excellency, to receive it, for the
use of the public, and particularly for furnishing regimental Surgeons. I
received several intimations at this time, from different persons, that
Congress expected from me to supply the northern army with medicines and
hospital stores.

Having received no orders, however, for that purpose and the campaign then
opening, I thought it highly expedient to receive clear instructions on that
head, and applied for leave to go to Philadelphia, to have a conference with
some members of Congress to know what I had to depend upon. Your Excellency
gave me leave of absence for ten days, and although it proved too short a time
to settle the business of my department, yet I returned punctually on the day
appointed.

Before my arrival at Philadelphia, I learned that the Congress had purchased a
valuable stock of medicines, which were in the hands of some druggists in town,
out of which (on a supposition I imagine that they had more than would be
wanted for public use) such considerable sales had been made by permission of
Congress, and large quantities sent to the Southward, that it appeared to me
there was danger, from the great reduction that was made in it already, lest
the best collection of medicines I had ever seen in America for an army, might
slip out of the power of Congress from such sale, etc. which might prove a loss
they might not have it in their power to retrieve in the whole year. ( o) I
therefore presumed to caution the committee against it. Upon conferring with
them on the subject, as I had, though contrary to usage, been obliged to put up
medicine chests for some regiments, I undertook, if I might be allowed such a
share of what was on hand as might be wanting from time to time to assort those
in my possession, to use my best endeavors to supply regimental chests to the
regiments at New York under your Excellency's command, for one campaign by way
of trial; for I did not want to shrink from any (...), assigned me, whether my
proper duty or not, by which I might serve my country, as far as it was
practicable for me to do it.

I did not conceive from all I was able to learn that there would be more than
forty or fifty regiments assembled at New York; nor did I suppose that one half
of those would come destitute of medicines and chirurgical apparatus, when I
heard that the Southward regiments were supplied by the Continental Druggists;
and I had taken pains at Cambridge, occasionally, to acquaint General officers,
Commanders of regiments and regimental Surgeons, with my idea that they were
not to look to the General hospital for those supplies, but have their
regiments furnished, where raised, as being the most easy and natural method;
nor did I expect such numerous detachments of militia, all of which came
unprovided, and looked to me for supplies of every thing they wanted, not
choosing to send their sick to be under the care of the Surgeons of the hospital.

I supplied from 40 to 50 regiments with medicine chests by the end of August,
besides all the branches of the General hospital at New York, in the bowry and
neighborhood, and at Long Island, which reduced many of our capital articles
to an insufficiency for the General hospital for the remaining part of the
campaign. And these I was obliged to collect elsewhere as well as I could; for
although there was a great show of medicines and furniture left, yet many of
the principal medicines being exhausted, and other articles not being duly
prepared, nor such as were usually called for or wanted for regimental use,
that show availed but little. To give what were at hand and could be spared
from hospital use, which the regimental Surgeons would neither accept of nor be
answerable for, would be, as scripture expresses it, to give one that asked for
bread, a stone; or for an egg, a serpent.

It was by your Excellency's command that I shipped off part of the stores, as
I did, to Stamford, to prevent the whole being lost, in case the enemy should
possess themselves of New York From thence they were sent into the country, as
some frigates had got into the Sound, and it was easy to land near Stamford,
whereby the stores might be destroyed. ( p) It was by a like command that I
visited ^oppon, Haverstraw and Orange, to look out for a suitable place for a
General hospital; and by your orders, in writing, that I went over to Newark a
day or two before the evacuation of New York, to make provision (...) about a
thousand sick, including those wounded at the last action on Long Island, who
were there committed to the care of Doctors Foster and Burnet, Surgeons in the
General hospital, with seven or eight Mates to take care of them. ( q) Part of
the medicines remaining at New York, were ordered over by the Adjutant-General,
to whose personal activity and the assistance he gave to the Surgeons, it is
owing, that they were saved. The most valuable part, however, was still left in
New York, when the enemy had effected a landing, drawn a line across the
island, and were supposed to be then entering New York. ( r)

At this critical juncture, I went over with some of the hospital officers, and
brought off all that had been left, in a pettiauger, which was filled
therewith. I had ordered two chests, for hospital use, to be put up and sent to
Kingsbridge, it being impossible to get more up there, in a retreat.

The sick and wounded abovementioned were landed in haste and disorder, at
Hobuck, Weho^k, etc. Some of our Mates fell into the hands of the enemy, and
many of the Nurses and Waiters fled, and the militia ran off and impressed
every wagon they could find in the neighborhood. It therefore required some
days to get on all the sick and wounded, through many difficulties, from the
fright of the inhabitants and their reluctance to admit of the hospitals being
stationed at that place. I had provisions to collect, a Commissary and
Ward-Master to seek, and Nurses and Waiters to procure, with every thing
necessary for the comfortable accommodation of the sick and wounded. I had but
little assistance enough to perform this task, your Excellency having enjoined
me to leave the most considerable number of Surgeons and Mates at York island,
in case of need. I made all possible haste, however, to put the hospitals at
New-Ark on a safe footing, which I accomplished in about ten days, and then
returned to headquarters.

After this, judge, Sir, of my distress, to find how much this affair had been
misrepresented to your Excellency, as I perceived it was by a letter just
written to me by your Aid-de-Camp, setting forth the miserable situation to
which the sick were reduced, and the clamor for want of medicines, absolutely
insisting on an immediate and sufficient supply, for "whilst I was reserving
the medicines for cases of emergency, the sick were dying in numbers for want
of a necessary supply." I had just sent to an eminent private Druggest, as well
as to Mr. William Smith, the Continental Druggist, at Philadelphia, praying for
a supply of such articles as either I had not or could not be got at, enclosing
each of them a list for the purpose. ( s) Instead of ten pounds of Tartar
Emetic, I sent for, four ounces were all I could obtain for the whole army,
scarcely equal to the demands of a single regimental Surgeon, or for one day's
consumption for the army I prevailed on the Surgeon of a regiment to go express
to Hartford, Norwich, Providence, Rhode Island and Boston, to procure
medicines, which places were so bare of the articles that we principally
wanted, as to occasion a great disappointment. What is more worthy of remark,
they never came to hand till a short while before the retreat from Hackensack I
had applied to Governor Trumbull by letter, for some assistance, which, though
it was sent as expeditiously as possible, took time ( v) I also applied in
person to the State of New York, at Fish-Kills, hearing they had part of a
stock of medicines purchased for the use of that State on hand, and found it
had been ordered to Albany for the use of the Northern department.

What made it more astonishing that the number and clamors of the sick should
be so great at that time is, that in a consultation which your Excellency,
General Green and General Parsons had, a few days before the evacuation of
New York it was there proposed to send off the sick and all unfit for duty in
brigades, with some careful officers out of each brigade to attend them, and
money to defray the expenses of suitable accommodations and refreshments; and a
Surgeon was ordered a long with the sick of each brigade, that they might not
suffer for want of medical assistance.( w) I am still of opinion, it was the
best step that could have been taken to prevent the sick from falling into the
enemy's hands, unless what I once mentioned to your Excellency as my wish could
have been accomplished, viz. That protections might be granted to the hospitals
on both sides, and the sick not become prisoners of war, but their persons and
attendants might be privileged and safe, as was the case betwixt the French
and English in the wars of Europe.

Yet all the consequences of the sick suffering for want of necessaries -- sad
spectacles of human woe presenting themselves in towns, villages and on the
roads, and straggling through the country, thereby exciting the terror as well
as the compassion of the inhabitants; have been ascribed to my department and
the officers under me, at a time when we ourselves suffered, and called in vain
for assistance from other departments, and so far as we were able, became
fatigue-men and laborers to the sick and wounded, as we could procure none from
the army, and, as I mentioned before, many of our attendants and nurses fled.

At the time of my greatest difficulty to procure an assortment of medicines, I
gave orders to the Apothecary at Newark to assort what he had there, which was
all that could be got to dispense; to issue to all applyers for regimental
sick, what could be spared at (...) from the hospital practice, and referred
(...) upon me for medicines, to him.( x) That did not (...) all, many
expecting, as it seems, wherever they happened to be stationed, or wherever any
part of the hospital (...) open for the reception of the sick and wounded, that
they had a right to draw any medicines they wanted and to be furnished from
thence with whatever they (...) for, though that part was only provided for its
own consumption, and the Surgeons of the hospital were (...) to take care of
the sick sent to them for that purpose.

In the midst of this scene of perplexity and confusion I received a note from
Col. Grayson, Aid-De-Cam^^^ your Excellency, desiring to know from you, whether
I could, or whether I thought it in the line of my duty to supply the
regimental Surgeons with what they wanted; to which I returned for answer, "
that I never had ^^ceived it to be properly in the line of my duty, though I
had done every thing in my power to perform that (...) for want of a better
establishment, the present being in that respect contrary to every known
practice, as I had always declared, and if it was ever so much expected from me
I had not the means" It was then by your order that I drew up the proposed
regulations for a better establishment, which I forwarded to Congress so soon
as it was returned to me, and herewith send your Excellency a copy, ( y) It was
to no purpose that I made the (...) ^^claration to Officers and Surgeons in
general, as I had done to your Excellency. Their importunities (...) as great
as ever.

(...) this, I received a charge to (...) farther (...) be situated more (...)
that time (...) officer to (...) as the most (...) on the Island (...) the
enemy had just made a descent above Kingsbridge. I was ordered over the river
to view Hackensack, and to report what numbers of sick could be provided for at
that place. On my return, I did accordingly report that if a sufficient number
of carpenters and masons were set to work immediately to fit up the church,
courthouse, manufactory and a store house or two, etc. six or seven hundred
men, and perhaps more might be accommodated in the town and neighborhood; but
it would require many workmen, and some time to prepare places for their
convenient reception. I was then ordered back to carry the plan into execution
with all possible diligence. I went accordingly, and next day no less than 300
men were brought into the neighborhood for me to look after, though I was
quite alone in respect to help. They daily increased in numbers, so that within
a few days they amounted to upwards of a thousand. I had left instructions for
Dr. Warren, and a number of Mates and other hospital officers to follow and
attend the sick. ( z)

At first we had neither bread, flour, nor fresh provisions in readiness nor
were Commssaries at hand, from whom I could obtain any help. General Green, to
whom I sent to fort Lee for assistance, was gone over to York-island. So soon
as my hands were strengthened with Dr. Warren's and Mr Zabrisky's help, and the
appointment of a Commissary and Quartermaster, difficulties abated by degrees
very day, and our affairs got into a more promising train. In the mean while
the two armies having marched toward the White Plains, a battle was expected.
I therefore hastened to join your Excelleny. On my arrival I found the Surgeons
of the General hospital, in consequence of orders from headquarters, to look
out for a place for the wounded at a convenient distance, had pitched upon the
church at North-castle, as the most suitable they could meet with. I went to
view it, and to prepare matters if the enemy's troops should come to action.

Whilst we were getting in readiness, a firing of cannon was heard anew, for
there had been a firing heard, the day before, at fort Washington. On learning
it was at the White Plains, every Surgeon of the hospital then present set out
with me, immediately, for the Plains, several Mates following, with a wagon,
to bring the instruments and dressings. We fixed near the lines, and I never
stirred from thence till the enemy retreated, which was about a week after; nor
till your Excellency crossed the river, to hasten to the support of fort
Washington. In the mean time, the situation of affairs would not permit your
Excellency to give me leave to return to North Castle, but for a few hours, to
give directions, and to assist in providing for the sick and wounded; an
hospital Surgeon, and some times two or more, with three or four Mates,
attending the whole time, at the Plains, in expectation of a second action.

Here I cannot but feel for the Hospital Surgeons, who before they could obtain
any quarters, except such as a few hours industry enabled them to do, in a
country which was not well calculated to afford any good, were suddenly
overwhelmed with numbers of sick sent to them, as well as the wounded, in time
of an engagement, and whilst many of the regimental Surgeons were absent in the
country, having left their corpse in the field, without assistance, contrary to
orders of July 3d, at a time when an engagement was considered as inevitable,
there were few at hand to give any aid. Hence, whilst the hospital Surgeons
were preparing matters at their proper stations in the hospital, clamors were
excited against them for not being with the troops, and when they were detained
at the lines, to supply the places of regimental Surgeons, who ought to have
been there; the wounded, who were conveyed ^o to the hospital, naturally
demanded the attention of the whole body of Surgeons, to administer aid to
them. ( and)

When I was at liberty to repair to North-Castle, all my applications for
workmen, to out the hospital in order, to construct chimneys, and secure the
sick and wounded from cold, the effects of which were severely felt at that
time, and of which it is thought some died, proved abortive. Such then as could
not be accomodated here, under care of Doctors Adams and Mc Knight, were sent
to Stamford and Norwalk, to the amount of above a thousand, under the care of
Doctors Turner and Eustis, Surgeons of the General hospital, and every
accommodation possible was provided for them.

Before I go on with this narrative of General Hospital proceedings, I shall
just observe, that in part of a day and night's time, several hundred sick and
wounded, were transported from Long Island to New York, amidst a heavy rain,
which fell during our retreat. They were landed at different wharves, and
carried into different houses, whilst myself and those about me used all our
endeavors to collect them together, into barracks, and hospitals I had
provided for them; and although all possible care was taken to prevent it, yet
may of them unavoidably suffered, though we were up great part of the night in
this service.

So soon as I was able to attend that duty in person, I gave my assistance in
dressing the patients, so that there was not a single one, of those wounded in
the action on Long Island who were brought to the General hospital at New York,
that I did not dress myself; and I assisted in all operations that I knew of,
wherever I was present and could attend; for I always visited as many sick
officers and others, out of the hospital, by myself, and in consultation, as
was any ways possible for me to do, consistent with my other calls of duty. (
aa)

How much pains I took by writing and conversation to assist in getting the
regimental Surgeons on some footing, satisfactory to them, and useful to the
army, I could adduce many proofs, if required; that I never could effect it, is
what I have to lament. The causes I shall not take up your time to investigate.
If the plan, now before your Excellency, should take pleace either in whole, or
part, it may perhaps effect that desirable purpose, where my endeavors must
rest. ( bb)

The orders and instructions I have given to the Surgeons of the General
hospital, at different times, are numerous; some of them your Excellency read,
approved, and subscribed yourself.

Sometimes when houses for hospitals have been assigned me by public authority,
I have met with great opposition in getting possession of them, from
protections in favor of the proprietors and occupiers, or others, as in the
case of Stuyvesants, and in those in the Bowry, where a brigade of militia
dispossessed the sick of the houses, assigned for that purpose, by the New York
committee. ( cc)

To bring this narrative of my conduct to a conclusion. So soon as I heard of
the loss of Fort Washington, Fort Lee, Hackensack and Newark, judging your
Excellency would require my presence, I left the best directions I could, for
the Surgeons of the General Hospital on the east side of Hudson's-River, and
hastened to join you, which I did, the day after you crossed the Delaware. I
was distressed to find your Excellency entirely destitute of Surgeons, at hand,
to take charge of the wounded, in case of battle.

With your Excellency's approbation I proceeded to Philadelphia, to lay this
matter before Congress, and get an explanation of the meaning of their resolves
of October 9th, respecting my being stationed on the east side of
Hudson's-river. I applied to several members, and requested an audience, but,
on account of the situation of affairs at that time, it was impossible to
obtain it. The Congress was fully employed, and adjoured within a day or two
afterward, to Maryland. The sick were brought daily to the city, in great
numbers, objects of pity. For the care of them, I gave the best advice I could,
to Dr. Potts, who was employed by the Council of Safety for that purpose.
Several wagon loads of medicines and hospital articles, which had been
preserved from falling into the enemy's hands, and sent from New York to,
Newark, and from thence to Philadelphia, were brought to the college, in no
good condition. It was my care to collect from them, what was of most value,
and chiefly wanted for hospital use, and send to Bethlehem. The rest, by order
of Congress, were shipped to Wilmington and Christeen, where I sent a Surgeon
to review and see them repacked, in good order, and to make out an invoice of
the same, and send it to Congress.

I returned to headquarters, and that day received a letter from an honorable
member, which I showed to your Excellency, giving it as his judgment, that it
was the design of Congress, I should attend to the care of the sick on the east
side of Hudson's-river, and be restricted to that place; which I could not but
consider as a singular restriction for a Director-General.

In obedience, however, to this resolve of Congress, I determined to repair to
that station, but sound it necessary to take Bethlehem in my way, as my papers
and baggage, and most of the hospital Surgeons and Mates of my department were
at that place, and to deliver over to some proper persons, for the use of your
Excellency's army, the chief articles of the medicines I had sent there. Of
these however, I reserved a few, and comparatively but a few, of such as were
wanted, with some few stores, likewise wanted, for the sick on this side,
together with my instr^ments and bandages. But your Excellency having seen fit
to send for these, by express, they were accordingly dispatched by the same
messenger.

Of ten thousand Bandages I had prepared for use in the beginning of the
campaign, what with the consumption loss, supplies to the General Hospital and
regimental Surgeons, few are left.

The difficulties of attending to the wants and demands of so many sick, spread
through so great a tract of country, and the clamors which have been raised, in
consequence thereof, have induced me to trouble your Excellency with this long
and particular detail of facts, and to request your Excellency's order for a
court of Inquiry, how the sick have been taken care of, in the General
Hospital; composed of officers best acquainted with the rules and discipline of
war, and of hospital matters; by which it may be known in what manner,
agreeable to the establishment of our General Hospital, by authority of
Congress, and the instructions I have received, from time to time, from
Congress and your Excellency, and the information and assistance I have
repeatedly applied for, provision has been made for the sick; that the nature
of military hospitals, in general; and of ours in particular, may be
ascertained; and if the sick have suffered more than was inevitable, from the
nature, peculiar hardships and difficulties of last Campaign, the causes may be
known, and a seasonable remedy applied, and those on whom any imputations have
fallen, either of neglect or mismanagement, may have an opportuniy of
vindicating their proceedings, before a proper tribunal, which is what I
entreat for myself, and for the department under me.

I have requested Dr. M'Knight to take charge of these dispatches, and hope for
your Excellency's answer, when leisure will permit; being, with the greatest
deference,

Your Excellency's most obedient and very humble servant. JOHN MORGAN.
Fish-Kills, February 1st. 1777.
To His Excellency General WASHINGTON.
FISH-KILLS, February 2, 1777.
SENSIBLE of the great difficulties, which have attended the department of
Director General, owing to a great variety of causes that were not in my power
to govern, by which the sick of the army suffered very much last campaign; I
had just finished the memorial, which accompanies this containing a narrative
of my conduct in that department, with the hope and expectation of obtaining,
from your Excellency's known humanity, and love of justice, a court of inquiry
respecting it; that those causes might be examined into, and rightly
understood, and I might have an opportunity of vindicating myself, before a
just and candid tribunal, from any allegations that might be laid at my door,
of neglect, or misconduct in the discharge of the duty of my station, according
to the best of my judgment, knowledge and abilities, when Dr. Foster called to
show (...) your Excellency's order to him, of January 22d. It informed him,
that as I was dismissed from the Director-Generalship by Congress, he was
called upon, as eldest Surgeon, to take charge of the hospitals on the east
side of the river, till a further nomination to that post. This dismission has
taken place, without my being ever notified by Congress with the reasons for
it, or having been called upon, to answer for my conduct, though I had heard
from a member, that heavy charges had been brought against me, for the
sufferings of the sick; on which I desired him to inform Congress, that I was
ready to stand the test of an examination, and requested an audience,
immediately, which I could not be favored with. This I did verbally, and
afterward applied to Congress, through him, by letter, to which I never
received any answer.

On this account I drew up the present memorial, flattering myself I should
obtain the wished for inquiry, from your Excellency.

A dismission by Congress from my station, without their having acquainted me
with the nature of my supposed offenses, and allowed me a previous hearing,
appears to me a very severe, if not unusual proceeding. I am obliged,
therefore, still to trouble your Excellency, to request your perusal of the
memorial, and to express my desire that it may be laid before Congress, for
their considera^ion. -- It is not, Sir, that I dispute the authority of that
august Body, to appoint at pleasure, as well as to revoke their appointment of
persons, to offices of rank and trust; but when a revocation is made in such a
manner, as not to leave the person removed an opportunity of justifying his
proceedings, in case any accusations are brought against him, it cannot fail of
operating to his disadvantage, in the eyes of the world.

It is natural, therefore, to expect, and what every man has a right to hope
for, that he may, though late, be heard with candor and impartiality, and to
wish that a true state of his conduct in any public department may be known,
that according to the evidence of facts it presents, he may be condemned or
acquitted.

I propose to go from hence to Stamford and Norwalk, to deliver up the hospital
stores, with which I have been entrusted, to Dr Foster's charge, and then
proceed, as I have opportunity, to Philadelphia or Baltimore, for the
settlement of my accounts.

As I shall stand in need of assistance for transporting my books, papers and
baggage, I flatter myself your Excellency will be pleased to give such orders
as may enable me to get them removed, without which I may suffer great delays
and inconvenience. For want of the assistance, I asked for all those (...)
which were carried with the hospital stores to Danbury we^^: entirely consumed
by fire, in the late destruction of that place, April the 25th, by the
incursion of the troops under Governor Tryon. The most costly of my household
furniture, italian history paintings done by the best masters, a choice
collection of French engravings, a chosen Library (exclusive of my own
manuscripts, the labor of ten years) a number of rarities and specimens of
natural history, to the amount of more than a thousand pounds sterling, in
value, were also destroyed at Bordentown, or carried off by the enemy, at
Christmas, a few weeks before this my so shameful dismission, yet whilst I was
actually engaged in the service of my country. I had removed them to that
place, for security, when I was first invited by Congress into the army. For
such losses and services as I have sustained, in my country's cause; whilst
others, of inferior rank, who have made no such sacrifices, nor sustained any
losses, for lesser services, meet with promotions, and distinguished rewards;
my only returns from a grateful country, are disgrace and insults. But I set
down quiet, under this consolatory reflection, that if it be the Will of
Heaven, all these things shall, in due time, work together for good.
-- Wishing you success and happiness, equal to your exalted merit, I have the
honor to subscribe myself, with all possible veneration,

Your Excellency's most obedient and very humble servant, JOHN MORGAN.

His Excellency General WASHINGTON.
APPENDIX.
COPY OF THE RESOLVES OF CONGRESS, relating to the General-Hospital, and the
Duties of the Director-General, Directors of Hospitals, Surgeons of Hospitals
and Regiments, and to the Provision for the Sick, etc.
IN CONGRESS, Thursday, July 17, 1775.
RESOLVED, That for the establishment of an Hospital for an ARMY, consisting of
20,000 men, the following officers and other attendants be appointed, with the
following allowance and pay.

A Director-General and Chief Physician, his pay 4 Dollars per day. 4 Surgeons,
per day, each one and a third, do. 1 Apothecary, one and a third, do. 20 Mates,
each per day, two-thirds, do. 1 Clerk, two-thirds, do. 2 Storekeepers, each 4
Dollars per Month.

1 Nurse to every 10 sick, one-fifteenth of a Dollar per day, or 2 Dollars per
Month.

Laborers occasionally.

THE DUTY OF THE ABOVE OFFICERS, viz.
Director and Chief Physician to furnish medicines, bedding and all other
necessaries; to pay for the same; superintend the whole; and to make his report
to, and receive orders from the Commander in Chief.

Surgeons, Apothecaries and Mates, to visit and at tend the sick, and the Mates
to obey the orders of the Physician, Surgeons and Apothecary.

Matron, to superintend the Nurses, bedding, etc.

Nurses to attend the sick, and obey the Matrons orders.

Clerk, to belong to the Director and Storekeeper.

Storekeeper, to receive and deliver the bedding, and other necessaries, by
order of the Director.

Extract from the Minutes. CHARLES THOMSON, Secretary.

RESOLVED, That the appointment of the four Surgeons, and the Apothecary, be
left to the Director General and Chief Physician. -- That the Mates be
appointed by the Surgeons; and that the number do not exceed twenty; and that
the number be not kept in constant pay, unless the sick and wounded should be
so numerous as to require the attendance of twenty, and to be dismissed as
circumstances will admit; for which purpose, the pay is fixed by the day, that
they may only receive pay for actual service.

That the Clerk, Storekeepers and Nurses, be appointed by the Director.

Extract from the Minutes. CHARLES THOMSON, Secretary. By Order of CONGRESS.
JOHN HANCOCK, President.

IN CONGRESS, September 14, 1775.
RESOLVED, That SAMUEL STRINGER, Esquire be appointed Director of the Hospital, and
Chief Physician and Surgeon, for the ARMY in the Northern Department.

That the pay of the said SAMUEL STRINGER, Esquire as Director, Physician and
Surgeon, be four Dollars per day.

That he be authorized, and have power to appoint a number of Surgeons-Mates
under him, not exceeding four.

That the pay of said Mates, be two-thirds of a Dollar per day.

That the number be not kept in constant pay, unless the sick and wounded be so
numerous as to require the constant attendance of four, and be diminished as
circumstances shall admit, for which reason the pay is fixed by the day, that
they may only receive pay for actual service.

That the Deputy Commissary General be directed to pay Doctor STRINGER, for the
medicines he has purchased for the use of the ARMY, and that he purchase and
forward such other medicines as General SCHUYLER, shall, by his warrant direct
for the use of the said ARMY.

A Copy from the Minutes. CHARLES THOMSON, Secretary. By Order of the CONGRESS.
JOHN HANCOCK, President.

IN CONGRESS, July 17, 1776.
RESOLVED, That the number of the Hospital Surgeons and Mates, be increased in
proportion to the (...) of the ARMY, not exceeding one Surgeon and five Mates,
to every five thousand men^; to (...), when the ARMY is reduced or when (...)
no further occasion for so great a number.

(...) as many persons be employed in the several Hospitals in quality of
Storekeepers, Stewards, Managers (...), as are necessary for the good of the
service (...), to be appointed by the Directors of (...) Hospitals.

(...) the several regimental chests of medicines, and (...) instruments which
now are, or hereafter (...) in the possession of the regimental Surgeons, be
(...) to the inspection and inquiry of the respective (...) of Hospitals and
the Director General, and (...) the said regimental Surgeons shall from time to
(...) when there to required, render account of the said (...) and instruments
to the said Directors; or if (...) be no Director in any particular department,
to the Director General; the said account to be transmitted to the Director
General, and by him to the Congress; and the medicines and instruments not used
by any regimental Surgeon, to be returned when the regiment is ^^duced, to the
respective Directors, and an acc^^^ ^^ereof by them rendered to the Director
General (...) by him to this Congress.

That the several Directors of Hospitals in the several departments, and the
regimental Surgeons where there is no Director, shall transmit to the Director
General, regular returns of the number of Surgeons-Mates, and other officers
employed under them, their names and pay; also an account of the expenses and
furniture of the Hospital under their direction; and that the Director General
make report of the same, from time to time, to the Commander in Chief, and to
this Congress.

That the several Regimental and Hospital Surgeons, in she several departments,
make weekly returns of their sick to their respective Directors, in the said
department.

That no regimental Surgeon be allowed to draw upon the Hospital of his
department, for any stores except medicines and instruments, and that when any
sick person shall require other stores, they shall be received into the said
Hospital, and the rations of the said sick persons be stopped, so long as they
are in said Hospital; and that the Directors of the several Hospitals report to
the Commissary, the names of the sick when received into, and when discharged
from the Hospital, and make a like return to the Board of Treasury.

That all extra expenses, for bandages, old linen, and other articles necessary
for the service, incurred by any regimental Surgeon, be paid by the Director of
that department, with the approbation of the Commander thereof.

That no more medicines belonging to the Continent, be disposed of till further
orders of Congress: -- That the pay of the Hospital Surgeons, be increased to
one Dollar and two-thirds of a Dollar by day; the pay of the Hospital Mates be
increased to one Dollar by the day; and the pay of the Hospital Apothecary be
increased to one Dollar and two-thirds of a Dollar per day; and that the
Hospital Surgeons and Mates take rank of regimental Surgeons and Mates.

That the Director General and the several Directors of Hospitals, be empowered
to purchase, with the approbation of the respective departments, medicines and
instruments for the use of their respective Hospitals, and draw upon the
Paymaster for the same, and make report of such purchase to Congress.

JOHN HANCOCK, President. A true Copy from the Resolves of Congress. J. REED,
Adjutant-General.

IN CONGRESS, July 20, 1776.
RESOLVED, That Doctor SENTERS, be recommended to Doctor MORGAN, who is desired
to examine him, and if he find him qualified, to employ him in the Hospital as
Surgeon.

Extract from the Minutes. CHARLES THOMSON, Secretary.

DOCTOR STRINGER, having presented (...) Congress, the substance of which was,
-- (...) explanation of the resolves of Congress, (...) nature and extent of
his own, as well as (...) MORGAN's appointment."

IN CONGRESS, August 20, 1776.
THE Committee appointed to consider of Doctor STRINGER's petition, report as
follows:

That Dr. MORGAN was appointed Director General, and Physician in Chief of the
American Hospital.

That Doctor STRINGER, was appointed Director and Physician of the Hospital, in
the Northern department, only.

IN CONGRESS, October 9, 1776.
RESOLVED, That no regimental Hospitals be (...) future allowed, in the
neighborhood of the General Hospital.

That JOHN MORGAN, Esquire provide and superintend a Hospital, at a proper distance
from the camp, for the ARMY posted on the East side of Hudson's River.

That WILLIAM SHIPPEN, Esquire provide and superintend a Hospital for the ARMY in
the State of New Jersey.

That each of the Hospitals be supplied "by the respective Directors," with
such a number of Surgeons, Apothecaries. Surgeons-Mates and other (...); and
also with such quantities of medicines and (...), and other necessaries, as
they shall (...).

That they make weekly returns (...) the Commander in Chief, of the officer
(...) of each denomination; and also the (...) and deceased, in their
respective Hospitals.

That the regimental Surgeons be direct^^ (...) to the General Hospital such
officers and (...) their respective regiments, as confined by wounds, (...)
other disorders, shall require Nurses or constant attendance, and from time to
time apply to the Quartermaster General, or his Deputy, for convenient wagons
for this purpose: Also, that they apply to the Directors in their respective
departments for medicines and other necessaries.

That the wages of Nurses be augmented to one Dollar a week.

That the Commanding Officer of each regiment, be directed once a week to send
a commission officer, to visit the sick of his respective regiment, in the
General Hospital, and report their state to them.

Extract from the Minutes. CHARLES THOMSON, Secretary.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY GENERAL WASHINGTON, COMMANDER IN CHIEF, etc.
General-Hospital, at Cambridge, February, 1776, SIR,
THE nature of my station having led me to make many reflections, on the
situation of the sick, in the army, and the means required for their relief, I
have been anxious to lay before your Excellency, what appears to me, to be
necessary for this purpose, and wanting to render the business of the General
Hospital more easy and complete. I am desirous to suggest to you, what benefits
may be supposed to arise, from the establishment of regimental Surgeons and
Mates; what are, and ought to be looked upon, as the duties of their place; to
show the insufficiency of any powers hitherto given them, "by Congress or your
Excellency," to supply the defects "of their station, which they at present
labor under," without some fixed regulations, and without some provision being
made for them, that, for ought I see, they are almost wholly destitute of, and
which they are at a loss how to remedy, and without which they can be of little
service to the sick. This I am willing to undertake at large, and to point out
some plan, for putting it in their power to supply the sick, of their
regiments, whilst allowed to remain under their care, "with whatever is
supposed requsite for the purpose" At the same time, I am desirous of pointing
out a method of regulating the expenses of the General hospital, and of
furnishing the sick in it with many necessaries and refreshments, "which they
at present want," in the most suitable and least chargeable ways. To do it
properly would be a work of time, and I find little leisure at present for a
task that would require some vacancy from the daily avocations of my business,
to effect. Yet I keep the design in view, when other necessary calls of duty
will permit.

"But although I cannot perform this work fully now, yet it is necessary to say
something; our circumstances and situation require a general explanation of
what is wanting." The nature and design of a General hospital is so little
understood, and my particular duty so much mistaken, both by regimental
Surgeons and other officers; so many expectations are formed, and so many
things looked for, from me, which are impossible to be complied with, that I
apprehend it to be absolutely necessary that certain regulations be fixed upon,
for the better government of the hospital, myself, and the Surgeons and
officers of the hospital under me, as well as o^ the regimental Surgeons, which
all ought to know; by which they may be respectively kept within their line of
duty, without interference with each other, and which every officer who has any
thing to do with the sick may be apprized of, to prevent mistakes.

To begin with my own department, I beg leave to refer your Excellency to the
particular duty which is assigned by the Congress to the Director-General, and
chief Physician of the hospital, and to the powers with which he is vested.

His DUTY is to furnish medicines, bedding, and all other necessaries; to pay
for the same, to superintend the whole, TO MAKE HIS REPORT TO and RECEIVE HIS
ORDERS FROM THE COMMANDER IN CHIEF, etc.

Your Excellency will be pleased to observe that I have never had "any mention
made to me of," nor received the least instructions concerning either
regimental Surgeons or regimental sick; and yet there is not perhaps a single
regimental Surgeon, and even but few officers who do not suppose they have a
right to insist upon my furnishing every regiment, as well the established
soldiery, as the militia, with whatever articles they are pleased to demand
from the hospital, as though it was a store house, or magazine for the whole
army, "and not confined, in the intention of its establishment, to the purpose
of taking care of those sick and wounded, that might be reported to it as
proper objects, and admitted accordingly." Thus, besides what medicines are
allowed, as well to the militia as to every other regiment in the army,
regimental Surgeons have a custom of making demands on the General hospital for
instruments of surgery, bandages, linen, tourniquets, wine, rum, sugar,
molasses, chocolate, coffee, butter, candles, soap, brandy, raisins, rice,
flour, Indian meal and fresh meat. They suppose I am obliged to comply with any
order signed by a "regimental" Surgeon or Mate, for those articles, in any
quantity they see fit to demand. I have been informed, that some officers have
taken it much amiss, if they wanted veal or mutton, that they could not have it
from the hospital, "on sending for it for their own tables." What is more
unaccountable, no regimental Surgeons ever thought it their duty to make any
report to me of the state of their sick, to leave me room to judge of the
propriety of issuing, or of refusing to issue out whatever stores they were
pleased to call for.

To show in what light the hospital is viewed, and my duty as Director of it,
accounts of soldiers that I know nothing of, and who have never been reported
to me for directions about them, are sent to me for payment, and from all
quarters, near and afar off. Officers who are sick in the country, at a
distance from the army, under country practitioners, send in their accounts by
those Doctors for me to discharge. See W. M. Philips's account, subjoined to
this letter.
So numerous and unreasonable are the demands of officers, regimental Surgeons,
"and others, directed by them to the Director-General of the hospital for
payment," that were all those demands gratified, the expenses of the sick, as
the Commissary-General has often remarked, would exceed all the expenses of
the whole army besides.

"To give a pretext for the propriety of their claims, they plead their
inability of being furnished elsewhere with what they want;" the cry of the
regimental Surgeons is, there is no provision made for us. "My answer is, nor
have I any orders to provide for any but what are under my own direction in the
General hospital. They ask where they are to get instruments and dressings, and
what they want for the sick under their care, or of what use are they, if left
unprovided. I refer them to their commanding officers, and to make
representations of their situation to them, to apply to Congress to establish
means of furnishing what they want; whatever orders are given me, they shall be
obeyed, but I cannot go beyond my instructions." Do they imagine that 4
Surgeons and 20 Mates (which are all the Surgeons allowed me in the General
hospital, for an army of 20000 men) employed in attending all the sick and
wounded that are sent to them from the whole army, and as they can find, or
make liesure from that employ, constantly busied in preparing lint, bandages,
compresses, splints, tourniquets and other dressings for hospitals use in case
of any considerable action, must be subjected to their demands, and obliged to
unfurnish the hospital, and give up the labor of their hands, to three or four
score of regimental Surgeons and Mates, who were to have no trouble themselves,
in making any preparations for their own use.

Has not your Excellency "recommended the strictest economy, and" informed me
that from the estimates given in to Congress, it was computed that L. 10,000
per ann. was sufficient to answer all the demands of the General hospital, "and
that you were apprehensive the expenses already exceeded what was imagined a
sufficiency?" The salaries of all the officers in employ, the nurses and
attendants, nearly equal to half that sum, without taking into the account the
expense of hospital furniture, bedding, blankets, medicines and instruments.
From such limited funds, for the support of the General hospital, can it be
expected that between thirty and forty regiments shall draw supplies intended
only for the General hospital itself?

In this situation, I humbly request your Excellency's instructions. "Be
pleased to consider that" my COMMISSION only extends to the care of the
HOSPITAL itself; and yet every regimental Surgeon, apparently, expects me to
supply him with whatever he wants, and to prepare every thing to his hand, or
to lay the odium of his deficiency at my door.

This application of mine does not proceed from any desire or inclination to
shrink from any service I can render them; but, if this service (contrary to my
present duty) is required of me, the means must be established, and I must
receive positive instructions for it, lest I be deemed guilty of neglecting, or
not sufficiently providing for my own department, for the sake of those who are
not comprehended within it.

On the whole, I think it my duty to represent to your Excellency, that I have
thought it incumbent on me, to give directions to the stores-keepers of the
General hospital to issue no stores from thence, on the bare order of any
regimental Surgeon, except Indian meal, rice or oatmeal, and if they want wine,
rum, sugar, or other the like stores, they must produce an order for these,
countersigned by me, and take a receipt for the same, to make them accountable
for the disposal of what they thus receive, if called upon. I have directed the
apothecary to issue out medicines to them, for the use of each regiment, in
such quantities, as their present occasions may require, but so as not to
unfurnish the hospital, or exhaust the stock, faster than I can get a fresh
supply. To enable, you, Sir, to form some judgment of what is necessary for the
purpose, I must observe that such an army as is now on foot, will require an
additional sum of two thousand pounds sterling per annum at least for the use
of the regimental Surgeons, over and above what is necessary for the supply of
the General hospital itself. And it will be for ever needy, and even destitute
of capital medicines, if not speedily furnished with a fresh supply, to the
amount of two or three thousand pounds: medicines being very scarce and dear.

Another observation I beg leave to make is, that every regiment ought to have
a small portable chest, for the whole year at once, and be provided with
instruments, bandages and dressings.

It is not with any view to reflect upon the regimental Surgeons, but for the
better purpose of procuring them relief from their difficulties, that I am
obliged to inform your Excellency, that there are but very few of them, as far
as I can learn, who have what can be called even a tolerable supply of any,
even the most essential articles for regimental Surgeons, instruments or
bandages, and that they are deluding themselves with a false opinion, that in
case of action, every regimental Surgeon will be immediately furnished with
those articles from the hospital. I fear, from this circumstances, most of them
would be extremely at a loss what to do, or be even useless in a battle.

I would therefore recommend to your Excellency, that "a person be appointed
for the purpose," and instructions given for furnishing a regimental chest of
medicines, with instruments, lint, tow and bandages, etc. for each regiment;
that orders be issued, that every regimental Surgeon make out a report of what
he has of those articles in readiness, and a representation of what he may
further want, to be collected together, in order to judge of their present
deficiencies; and that the regimental chests be inspected from time to time. As
continual complaints are made of the ignorance and unfitness of many called
regimental Surgeons and Mates for that post, and I find them generally
unacquainted with what duties are to be expected of them, in that station; I
would advise, "if it be thought practicable under present circumstances," that
some kind of examination be made of their respective abilities, by a chosen
committee; being a practice observed in all countries, which is essential to
the service, and is now established in the middle colonies.

"I have been amazed to hear it said, and that it should have been thought,
even by some members of Congress, that little use was expected from regimental
Surgeons, where there was a General hospital; and this has been given to me as
a reason for their being so much neglected, or so ill provided with the means
of being useful, and is, perhaps, the best reason that can be given that there
are comparatively so few amongst them, at present, of any tolerable education,
experience or knowledge in the business and duties of the station." Before I
put an end to this letter, I must beg your indulgence whilst I trouble your
Excellency with two observations more. The first is, that regimental hospitals
and regimental Surgeons, under proper regulations and subordination to the
General hospital, are absolutely necessary, and, in my opinion, may be made
extremely serviceable in an army; secondly, were matters so well regulated that
whenever any soldier was taken ill, whether sent to the General hospital, or
whether he continued with his regiment, under the care of his proper Surgeon;
if his rations were stopped for the time, and paid for in money, it would, in
my opinion, be sufficient or nearly so, provided he was dieted as he ought to
be for a sick man, and as he is directed to be, in the General hospital, not
only to pay for his diet, but to supply him with every necessary refreshment
without any, "or with little" additional expense to the public, from the
stores of the General hospital. To prove this, may require an explanation,
which I shall willingly give when called for. General Parsons. I am informed by
the Commissary-General, has, to his great credit, (...) tried the experiment,
and on this plan the sick of his brigade were provided last summer with every
thing necessary and comfortable to men in their situation, and there was a
saving of sixty pounds lawful, after every article was paid for, from the
stoppage of the sick men's rations, and receiving the amount in cash, in lieu
of rations.


Permit me, Sir, to conclude with this remark that if the sick in regiments are
to be supplied at a public expense, that expense ought to be a regimental
charge, and may well enough be included in the abstract of the regiment. The
General hospital having nothing to do with regimental sick, till they are
reported to, and admitted as proper objects, ought not to be burdened with the
expense. In this manner, the expense of "maintaining the sick in regimental
hospitals will be known," and that of supporting a General hospital, unmixed
with the former, may be pretty exactly ascertained from experience; nor would
it be charged with enormous accounts, which the General hospital, properly
speaking, has nothing to do with.

I remain, Your Excellency's most obedient humble servant, JOHN MORGAN.
( b) P. S. I would observe to your Excellency, that the sum allowed by
Congress for the payment of the store-keepers is so insignificant as four
dollars a month; about half the wages of a common soldier; though it is a place
of great trust, and requires talents and application to business, as well as
integrity to perform it well.

The pay of nurses is ^ixt by Congress at half a dollar per week. Whilst it is
so low, we shall never be able to furnish good nurses, or in short any nurses,
in proportion to the number wanted for the sick. They complain of their pay,
and are jealous that more is allowed, but that part of it is stopped: Most of
them say they were promised a dollar per week. I have only paid them what is
allowed by my instructions.

There is a necessity for having occasional officers in the General hospital,
of whom no mention is made in the establishment by Congress. Some such I have
found here on my arrival. They remain without pay, nor is their pay settled. I
have neither confirmed their appointment, nor have I dismissed them,
instructions being wanted.

It is necessary that I report to your Excellency the dismission of five Mates
from the General hospital, as, by order of Congress, they were only employed by
the day; and they have refused to submit to any examination of their
qualifications.





N. B. The above Letter is printed from the original rough draft of it, wrote
in haste, and delivered to General Washington, and which he returned for a fair
copy, in which the lines and words comprehended betwixt inverted comma's, are
interlineations, perhaps a few of them additions, but none others are. I think
proper to mention this as I would not willingly incur the charge of altering
the sense of the original, or making an addition, but of a few words, to render
the sense more obvious, or complete, for the ease of the reader.

It is proper to remark here, that this very letter was read two several days
before the medical committee of Congress in the conference I had with them in
June last when I went to Philadelphia for that purpose and I then laid before
them for their consideration the several regulations, which did not appear in
their resolves till near a mouth after.

Amongst other accounts I had before me, at the time of writing this letter, I
shall select one, as it is undersigned by persons in a public station, who are
well known, and I doubt not, if necessary, will attest the truth of the copy,
of which I still have all the original accounts in my possession.

WILLIAM MESERVE PHILIPS, being a soldier in Col. John Glover's regiment, to
the Selectmen of the town of Marblehead, Dr.

To sundries supplied him by sundry persons while sick with the smallpox, viz.

L. s. d. q. 1775, Aug. Capt. James Mugford's Bill for Amount, 1 12 4 Benjamin
Needham's Bill do. 13 Elizabeth Smith's Bill do. 2 8 Richard Tarr's Bill do. 5
3 4 Thomas Hartshorn's Bill do. 8 11 William Watt's Bill do. 1 1 0 1 N.
Demens's Bill do. 3 16 0 Jeremiah Procter's Bill do. 8 9 2 Cornelius Philips's,
do. 1 13 1 1 Marblehead, 11 th of December, 1775. L. 17 4 6

Errors excepted.

Selectmen. James Mugford, St. Philips, Wm. Doliber, Edward Fettyplace,
Jeremiah Procter, Robert Hooper, tert.

Marblehead, Dec. 14, 1775. Sir,
Please to pay Deacon Wm. Doliber or order, seventeen pounds four shillings and
six pence, it being the amount of the charges of Wm. Meserve Phillips's, having
the smallpox in this town, as per account above, and you will oblige your humble
servants,

Selectmen. James Mugford, St. Phillips, Edward Fettyplace, William Doliber,



To John Morgan, Director-General.


To gratify the curiosity of such who may wish to know some of the principal
articles of those charges, I have selected them from the several accounts, and
classed them as follows.

To N. Demen for 19 Day's Attendance in Nursing, at 2-thirds of a Dollar per
Day, L. 3 16 0 To Elizabeth Smith's Account of ditto, 2 8 0 To Richard Tarr's
for do. at Pesthouse, i. e. S. P. Hosp. 5 3 4 L. 11 7 4 To Beef, Lamb, Mutton
and Salt Pork, at 7d. l. m. p. lb. 1 11 10 2 To the Doctor for 4 visits, a
vomit and six fever powders 8 11 The other Articles, including New England and
other Rum, (to the amount of sixteen Quarts) Wine, BRAD FOR THE MUL^O^^ and
Syrrup of SERFEN, Candles, etc. 3 16 4 2 Total amount (equal to 57 Dollars
2-6.) L. 17 4 6

From the Doctor's visits and accounts (which must be confessed to be very low)
compared with the diet, salt pork, wine and rum, etc. it must appear how
necessary such an expensive attendance was for a private soldier, in the
smallpox, and what idea was entertained of the duty of a Director-General, if
liable to pay such accounts.

I had also before me, at this time, a copy of the drafts of one regimental
Surgeon at Cambridge, upon the store of the General Hospital, for above an
hundred gallons, or an hogshead of rum; wine, loaf and brown sugar, and
molasses in proportion; and to show the extreme necessity, one pint of oatmeal
was added to the list, being for one regiment only; all within the space of
about six weeks; and yet there was no return made of the sick, but all demanded
on the faith of an order, signed by a regimental Surgeon or Mate.

I shall here likewise, remark, that, when after regimental Surgeons were
repeatedly called upon, by general orders, to make reports of the state of the
sick, although many of them never complied at all with those orders, amongst
those who did make their returns, some individuals reported above an hundred,
each. But when Doctor Foster, then Surgeon in the General hospital, attended,
by my directions, to visit, in particular, Col. Parsons's regiment, of which
the Surgeon was suddenly taken ill, in order to receive such as were proper
objects, into the General hospital; on calling over the list by name to examine
their cases, there were but few of them, who were not found, and did not
acknowledge themselves, to be fit for duty.

In some returns, of which I took care to keep the originals, forty waiters and
upwards were included on the sick list, to exempt so many from duty. Some
regimental Surgeons made a practice of selling recommendations to furloughs and
discharges; for which only one, out of the number supposed to merit that
distinction, was drummed out of the army, for such mean and scandalous
practices Had all who deserved it, met the same reward, it would have reduced
the list very considerably. Cordials and refreshments were drawn by others,
from the stores of the General hospital, which by the parts some of the
officers took in supporting the unreasonable demands of those men, gave room
for many to believe they shared in the plunder themselves.

Is it any wonder, on being repeatedly informed of these particulars, that I
put a total stop to the unauthorized practice of the regimental Surgeons
drawing stores from the General hospital, without obliging them to be
accountable for the same? Is it a matter of surprise that regimental Surgeons
and officers of that cast, should manifest a declared enmity against one, who
contravened their shameful measures; or that they should have influence with
some of the privates, in concert with whom they preyed on the vitals of the
public, to declaim against the General hospital, whilst those who were proper
objects for it, and had once experienced the benefit of that institution, were
glad to have recourse to it, as often as they stood in need?

When the estimate of hospital expenses was so very low, and such economy, for
I may not call it parsimony, was manifested in the pay allowed to the hospital
officers by former resolves of Congress, so different from the generous
munificence of the present day, that four dollars per month, was then thought a
sufficiency for the hospital store-keepers. [Great proof of its being the
intention of Congress, that they should issue stores, to the amount of many
hundred thousand dollars per annum, to regimental Surgeons;] is it any wonder
that I would not suffer regimental Surgeons to draw, ad libitum, for whatever
their unbounded appetites and fancies craved from the General hospital; or,
when I discovered so many arts, put in practice, to defraud the public, that I
would pay no accounts of soldiers, out of the hospital, contracted without my
knowledge, and out of the sphere of my department? Had I allowed myself to be
drawn into this snare, who can tell what limits they would have set to their
growing demands? Some large accounts of private practitioners, were brought to
me; from more than an hundred miles distance. Some of them had charged near
five pounds, a day, for attendance on common soldiers, who ailed but little.
Had I passed those accounts would it not have been at the risk of my own
reputation? but why mention reputation? Have I not suffered more obloquy from
the malignity of such men, on account of saving prodigious sums to the
Continent, with great toil, but no possible advantage to myself, than some
others for engulphing the public moneys? Such are the rewards of care and
exactness in business to serve one's country; glorious pledges of liberty! when
officers of rank are to be forced from their stations, to make way for
undermining and ambitious men, on their partial representations, without any
hearing! oh fortunatos ^imium, sua si bona no^int agricol^e!

( b) The want of sufficient assistance from other departments was attended
with many and great inconveniences. For example, When it was thought necessary
to establish a General hospital above Kingsbridge, in the neighborhood of that
wing of the army commanded by Major General HEATH, in October, after the proper
places were pitched upon for that design, I called upon the
Deputy-Quarter-Master-General for workmen and materials, to put the several
houses in order, to build chimnies, to construct births, and to make suitable
apartments for the sick and wounded. The Q. M. General being then at
Philadelphia, the D. Q. M. General informed me that every carpenter and mason
under his direction in the army were engrossed, and could not be taken off from
their present employ. He advised me to make application to General HEATH, for
an order, to obtain as many of the militia, or other soldiers who were proper
workmen, to be drafted from their respective regiments under his command, as
would suffice for the present occasion. I sent to General HEATH for this
purpose. The answer I received was, that the General did not choose to meddle
with any thing to be done in the Quarter-Master-Generals department. When
General MIFFLIN, Quarter-Master-General, returned some time after from
Philadelphia, where he was then gone, I procured an order from him on his
Deputy, for a dozen carpenters and masons; but they could not be spared from
other business; and not one was sent to me all the time I remained on
York-Island, from the biginning of October, to the time of my going over to
Hackinsack, after the middle of the month, when the army began to retreat to
the White Plains.

The same thing happened frequently at other times and places particularly at
North Castle; when, after earnest applications made by myself and the Surgeons
of the General hospital, to that department, and orders were given by the
Quarter-Master-General himself, or his Deputy, on the Commander of the
Artificers, they could not be procured, it being always declared that all hands
were engaged by prior orders, for other purposes of the army. I do not mention
these difficulties with a view to reflect upon, either the
Quarter-Master-General, or his Deputy. Men of greater activity, or greater
abilities for the respective posts, I do not imagine can be produced: Nor were
they wanting in inclination to give me all the assistance they were capable of
affording. But if they had it not in their power, still the inconveniences were
no less on account of that inclination; yet was I to suffer, and be blamed for
wants which neither the whole army, nor perhaps the Congress itself; at least
no other persons were capable of making a timely provision for, and to be
answerable, as it would seem for all the misfortunes of the campaign?

When I was at Hackinsack I was expressly forbidden by the General, to draft
any workmen from the army. My whole dependence was placed on such as I could
meet with in the country, and which I ought to have had from the
Quarter-Master-General's department; few were to be found in the neighborhood
of the army, when affairs went on otherwise than prosperously. Nor had I any
company or guards allotted to me, for any purposes of the General Hospital,
when I first went to Hackinsack, and men were wanting to go after provisions
and for other necessaries, besides waiting on the sick and wounded, that were
hourly brought in great numbers, without any persons whatever to attend them.

Once, indeed, when the sick became very numerous, about ten days before the
retreat from New York, and when I stood in greater need than usual, of an
increase of laborers and waiters in the General Hospital, and there were no
men to be had in the city, who were willing to engage in that service, after
repeated applications for that purpose, it was given out in general orders,
that fifty men should be drafted from the line, who were allotted to that duty.
No day passed without making personal application myself, to the officers
appointed to direct the performance (...) his order, yet a week passed before
it was complied with. When the men were paraded, and marched to the New York
college, to receive their orders from me, at what hospitals they were to be
employed, and how to be disposed of, they declared they would not remain there.
They said they were cheated, having been told they were ordered for quite a
different duty. I reasoned with them, and showed the necessity there was of
their help, promised to make their services as easy and agreeable to them as
possible, and to allow them each a gill of rum per day, if they behaved well,
and threatened them, if they left me, to report them as guilty of disobeying
the General's orders. They feigned acquiescence. Yet, by next day, most of them
had deserted from the hospital, and returned to their companies, although,
besides the sick, there were near one hundred wounded to attend. Such was the
discipline of the army at that time. Before I could take any step to have these
men called to account, I was ordered over to Newark, to provide accommodations
for the sick at that place, in the midst of which, great part of the remaining
Waiters, and some of the Nurses left the hospital.

AS the following letters, selected from a number of others, written by me, to
different members of Congress, on the business of my department, bear testimony
to the pains I took to give full and timely information to that Body, of the
state of the sick in the General hospital and the army, of the deficiencies and
inconveniences both labored under, for want of suitable regulations, and of
what supplies were wanting, in time for affording more effectual relief, at
least in many instances, had that information been duly attended to by
Congress, I need not make any apology for publishing them in this place, at
full length, and in their original dress I am not sure, if I were to give only
extracts, o^ an abridgment of them, that it would be satisfactory. If they
appear rather prolix to the reader, I must beg leave to inform him, (...), it
was for want of leisure they (...) nor did I expect at the time they were
written, that I should ever think it necessary to print them. Besides, in
business of so much importance, I imagine it will be considered as a less
fault, to be minute and particular, and even to repeat the same things, in the
hurry of writing, than to give so cursory a relation, as to fail of answering
the design of affording full information of whatever falls under the writer's
notice, that may inform those in office of the true state of his department,
and be any further inducement to them, than they already have, to exert
themselves, in giving all the timely assistance that is needful, to remedy
every want, or remove every inconvenience under which it labors.

On my arrival from Cambridge, at New York, the latter end of May, 1776, I
found several orders, drawn upon me, from the Northern Army, for supplies of
medicines and instruments, and particularly for a large supply of medicines
from Doctor Stringer, Director in that department. I heard from a number of
officers, of great rank, who were just returned from Philadelphia, that
Congress expected me, as Director General, to order the necessary supplies of
Hospital stores, for the Northern department. I had received no such orders. As
I thought proper regulations were wanting, to ascertain the respective limits
of authority, intended by Congress to be vested in myself, and the several
Directors, I requested leave to go to Philadelphia, to obtain an audience of a
committee of Congress, on that subject, which I obtained. I left proposals of
several regulations with that committee, for introducing order into the
different branches of the General Hospital department. Amongst others, I
proposed that the several Directors and Superintendants of Hospitals, should be
ordered and empowered to provide their respective departments with Hospital
stores, without depending on me for supplies; it being impossible for me,
circumstanced as I was, to answer their demands. Nothing was determined till a
month afterward. In the mean while, upon my return to New York, Doctor Potts,
who had a separate charge of certain Hospitals, which were to be established to
the Northward, applied to me for the appointment of Surgeons and other Hospital
officers to act under him, and for a farther supply of medicines, than he had
yet obtained. He expressed it as his opinion, that he was obliged, in duty, to
look to me for assistance, and said he should depend upon me only, as head of
the department, for every thing of which he should stand in need. At the same
time, Doctor Lind, applied to me for medicines, for General Sullivan's army, on
which, I wrote the following Letter.

TO THE HONORABLE SAMUEL ADAMS, Esquire Member of the Medical Committee of Congress.
New York, June 25, 1775. SIR,
THE state of the army in Canada, according to Dr. Lind's account, (who is just
arrived from thence, by order of General Sullivan, for a supply of medicines,)
is truly deplorable. I have seen no return of the sick, but he assures me, that
in the beginning of this month, there were no less than 1800 men down with the
smallpox; and the total of sick and unfit for duty, amounted to 3,300 men; and
he says, they have no medicines: Such a report is scarcely credible, but you
may learn the particulars, yourself, from him, as he intends going to
Philadelphia.

General Gates sets out tomorrow, to take the command of the army in Canada.
Dr. Potts will accompany him. I have therefore given orders to supply him, from
the General Hospital, with a large chest of such medicines as I can best spare;
and which can be got ready tomorrow before his departure. Upon looking into
Dr. Potts's commission, I find he is appointed Physician and Surgeon in the
department of Canada; but whether it be of a regiment, or in the Hospital, is
not specified; nor does it show whether it is the intention of Congress, to
vest him with the power of a Director, in the General Hospital: Nor can I
learn, what appointment Dr. Stringer has, or what is the nature of his
commission.

From all I am able to learn, every thing in the medical department, in Canada,
displays one scene of confusion and anarchy: Nor have the Congress taken upon
itself, to establish, or vested any person whatever, with a power sufficient to
establish a General Hospital in Canada.

The Congress cannot, in my humble opinion, be too speedy in determining what
steps are to be taken for this purpose, and for settling a due subordination
amongst the Surgeons there. It would be of particular use, that the intentions
of Congress were made known in respect to Dr. Stringer and Dr. Potts, whether
either of them is to be considered as Director, by appointment of Congress, and
which of them; or whether they are both to be looked upon as Surgeons depending
on, and acting by instructions from me. I have never seen Dr. Stringer's
commission. In either case, they will require more help than they have at
present; and in the latter, I suppose I ought to have the appointment of three
or four more Hospital Surgeons, an Apothecary, and a sufficiency of Mates in
that department, without dim^nishing the number I have allowed me for the army
at New York, as I have none here that are superfluous. Other officers, as a
Storekeeper, Stewart and Matron, are also wanted in Canada, with Nurses and
occasional Laborers. Whatever is determined on, in respect to these matters, I
should be glad to know immediately: Till then, my hands are tied up, and the
army suffering for want of help. I am not sure that our disgrace and
misfortunes in Canada are not owing, in a great measure, to the shameful
proceedings of the Surgeons, in spreading the smallpox by innoculation,
amongst the soldiery, in face of the enemy. Instead of innoculating the
soldiery, under like circumstances before Boston, General Washington, upon my
representation, continued to keep in pay a Surgeon and Mate, to attend all that
fell ill of the smallpox. A Hospital was fixed for their reception only, in a
retired place, and a guard set round it, and all communication betwixt it and
the army was cut off; and so soon as any one was seized with the infection, of
whatever rank, he was sent to the smallpox Hospital. By this means, every
inconveniency, arising from the appearance of the smallpox, was prevented, and
the army effectually secured from danger, from that quarter.

Had there been a General Hospital in Canada, there would have been better
orders, and some subordination observed, which is now wholly wanting; and it is
to be feared, that whilst the Congress, occupied in a multiplicity of weighty
concerns, can proceed but slowly on this matter, the opportunity may be lost.
Rather than postpone, however, so important a concern, would it not be right to
place full confidence and power in a proper person, capable to arrange these
matters, as they ought to be, with ample authority for the purpose, rather than
suffer a loss of men, to the discouragement of the whole army, for want of a
due provision being made for the sick and wounded.

If the Congress will six on the means and manner of establishing a General
Hospital at Canada, it will ease me of much trouble; but if they are not at
leisure, or not sufficiently acquainted with what is the proper manner, and
will order me to do it for them, giving me such power as they think adequate, I
will do the best I can, to effect this desirable end immediately. Excuse, Sir,
my dwelling so earnestly on this subject; it is of the utmost consequence to
the service, and delays are dangerous. I cannot expect to receive instructions,
on this matter, from General Washington; he supposes, that I understand the
affairs of this department, and relies wholly on me for every thing which
relates to it. But I neither durst, nor will I presume, to meddle in affairs,
out of my province, or that are beyond the sphere, in which I suppose, I was
designed originally, by Congress, to move. -- Such, I imagine, is the
arrangement of Hospital affairs, in Canada, and the undertaking to supply the
Surgeons there with what is necessary for a General Hospital, without fresh
instructions, or more ample power than I now have, either from the Congress or
Commander in Chief, as my commission directs me to look to them, for orders.

I wait, impatiently, for an order from Congress, to empower me to demand such
a proportion of the Continental medicines, left in the care of Messieurs De
Lancy and Smith, as they may think fit to allot for this department. In
determining that proportion, they will please to consider (if we can trust to
Dr. Lind's account) that there is not an article of medicine in Canada, in the
hands of any Surgeon on that expedition.

June 26, 1776. Since writing the above, Dr. Potts having received a supply of
medicines, from the General Hospital store, Dr. Lind has set off with General
Gates and him, for Canada.

I remain, with great esteem, SIR, Your most obedient, and very humble servant,
JOHN MORGAN.
This may certify, that I remember to have heard Doctor MORGAN read the
foregoing letter in July, 1776, together with several others, upon the subject
of the General Hospital and Regimental Surgeons, all inculcating the immediate
necessity of putting them upon a proper footing.

JOHN WARREN, Hospital Surgeon.




BEFORE I proceed to exhibit a copy of the next letter, which I wrote to
Congress, it will not be improper to inform the reader of the occasion of it.

Having been returned from Philadelphia, about a fortnight after my conference
with the Medical Committee of Congress, in which I had set forth my
insufficiency, without farther powers and instructions to answer all the calls
daily made on me, in an extensive and unsettled department; and, having
received no orders or directions from Congress, all this while, in answer to my
application for that purpose: A powerful fleet and army from Great Britain,
intended for the reduction of New York, being likewise already arrived on the
coast; and having prepared every thing in my department that was in my power. I
then considered the unsettled state of the regimental Surgeons in order to
bring them, by degrees, into greater regularity, and to make them more useful
in case of action, as many of them had but newly entered the service, and most
of them, from want of experience, were yet novices in the duties of a military
Surgeon I thought it advisable to give them some instructions which might
(...) their minds to a sense of what duty was (...) them, as regimental
Surgeons, in time of action (...) it could not be supposed, was very distant,
(...) drew up the following directions and (...) them to the General. -- He
approved of (...) of the day; and commanded the several (...) of Regiments to
wait upon me for copies, and to regulate themselves according to the proposed
plan.

Each Surgeon was allowed a copy, and commonly, at the same time, I gave him an
order on the Apothecary, of the General Hospital, for a medicine chest, for
every Battalion, which he also obtained, if he was not already provided,
together with a number of bandages and tourniquets and a quantity of lint, tow,
and old linen, for chirurgical dressings.

A COPY OF THE ORDER and INSTRUCTIONS, Given to the REGIMENTAL SURGEONS, In
case of ACTION.
New York, July 3, 1776.
IT is proposed by the Director-General, and ordered by his Excellency the
Commander in Chief, That the Regimental Surgeons and Mates may be the better
prepared for the discharge of their duty, in case of action, to hold themselves
in immediate and constant readiness for service; and, in the first place, to
make a return to the Director General of the Hospital, of their names and
stations, and of the instruments and bandages, etc. they have at hand,
agreeable to the following FORM, viz.

A REGIMENTAL Return of Surgeon's Instruments and Bandages, etc. now in
Readiness for immediate Service, belonging to Colonel -- 's Regiment, in
Brigadier General -- 's Brigade, encamped at --, July 3, 1776.
Names of the Surgeon and Mate, and the dates of their commission. Instruments
(...) for use. Number and kind of Bandages etc. Ligatures, etc. Old Linen and
other Implements. Surgeon-Mate. Amputating Instruments. Trepanning, do.
Incision knives. Pocket Instruments. Bullet Forceps. Crooked needles Strait do.
Pins. Simple (...) Double do. F^^iated bandages. Splints. Tourniquets.
Ligatures. Tape. Thread. (...) of old Linen (...) weight of Rags. Weight or
Quantity of Lint, Tow, etc. Sponge. (Place to be signed by the Surgeon.)

AS the General Hospital will not admit of the Hospital Surgeons and Mates
being divided, or detached from the places where the General Hospital is fixed,
and may require occasional assistance from the Regimental Surgeons, in case of
many wounded being sent to it, in order that the Hospital and Regimental
Surgeons may concur, at this time, to render their mutual services more
effectual and extensive, the following regulations are to be observed for the
present, and till any change of circumstances may require an alteration.

Part of the General Hospital is now fixed at Long Island, for the reception of
sick and wounded persons, whose cases may require it; which JOHN WARREN, Esquire
Surgeon in the General Hospital is appointed to superintend and direct, with
the assistance of three Hospital Mates, and such other Regimental Surgeons and
Mates, belonging to that part of the army stationed at Long Island, as may be
required. In case of evident necessity, arising from an attempt being made on
Fort Defiance, (afterward called Fort Washington,) two of the Hospital (...),
with Doctor M'Henry now at Mont e^or Island, and whom he is to superintend and
direct, are to repair to that post, with a proper assortment of instruments and
bandages The remainder of the Surgeons and Mates of the General Hospital, are
to continue at King's-College, and New York Hospital, for the reception and
care of such wounded as are sent to them, from what ever part. It being the
duty of the Regimental Surgeons and Mates, in case of action, in the field, to
attend the Corpse to which they belong, in order to dress the wounded in battle;
they are to take post in the rear of the troops engaged in action, at the
distance of three, four, or five hundred yards behind some convenient hill, if
at hand, there to dress the wounded, who require to be dressed, on or near the
field of battle If the Regiment or Corpse to which they belong, are engaged
within a fort, or lines thrown up for defense, that fort or place of defense,
is then the proper station for the Regimental Surgeons: But as a Regiment may
be divided, and distributed into different posts, so as to render it
impracticable for the Regimental Surgeon and Mate, belonging to that Regiment,
to be near some parts of their Corpse, it is necessary that, an account of the
number of Surgeons and Mates, in any Brigade, or any division of the army, that
occupies one or more detached posts, be taken, and delivered to the Commanding
Officer of said posts or division. It is to be considered as the duty of each
Regimental Surgeon and Mate respectively, wherever stationed, to regard
himself, as having a joint charge of the whole Brigade, with the rest of the
Surgeons of that Brigade, rather than as if his care was to be confined only to
those officers and soldiers who are of the Regiment to which he belongs. It
must unavoidably happen, at times, that both officers and soldiers may be
wounded in action, and their particular Surgeons be elsewhere employed, so as
not to be able to attend them. The amputation of a limb, or performance of any
capital operation, cannot well take place in the heat of a brisk action: It is
seldom possible, or requisite. What the Surgeon has chiefly to attend to in
cases of persons being much wounded in the field of battle, is to stop any flux
of blood, either by tourniquet, ligature, lint and compress, or a suitable
bandage, as the case may require; to remove any extraneous body from the wound;
to reduce fractured bones; to apply proper dressings to wounds; taking care on
the one hand, not to bind up the parts too tightly, so as to injure the blood's
circulation, increase inflammation, and excite a fever; or so loosely, as to
endanger the wounds bleeding afresh, or to allow broken bones, after they are
properly set, to be again displaced. The wounded being thus dressed by the
Regimental Surgeons, are next to be removed to the nearest Hospital belonging
to the Brigade, or to the General Hospital, as may be most convenient.

As the General Hospital may at times, be fully crowded with sick persons, or
in the time of action, so many wounded may be sent there, as to require a
greater number of hands, than that part of the General Hospital, where many of
the wounded are sent, is furnished with, it may be absolutely necessary for the
superintending Surgeon, besides the proportion allowed him, from the General
Hospital, to call for the assistance of a number of Surgeons and Mates, from
the Brigade, division or part of the army where he is, either before an
engagement, or, when the number of wounded persons sent to him becomes very
great, making such assistance needful. For this purpose, he is to apply to the
Commander of that Brigade, or part of the army, who is hereby ordered to send
him as many Regimental Surgeons and Mates, for that purpose, as are required,
and can be spared from their posts.

To prevent confusion, and that the Regimental Surgeons may know the better
what part of duty is expected from them, some one, at least, of the Surgeons,
especially those fixed at out posts, are directed, as soon as possible, to call
upon and arrange matters, in time, with the Hospital Surgeons nearest at hand,
in behalf of the Brigade, or Corpse acting together, that no disorder may arise,
in time of action, for want of so necessary a precaution. The Regimental
Surgeons ought to call on the officers of the Corpse to which they belong, to
settle with them, what persons are to be employed in carrying off the wounded,
and for a supply of wheel-barrows, or other more convenient biers, for
conveying them from the field of battle, to the place appointed for reception
of the wounded, or General Hospital. Each Regimental Surgeon and Mate ought to
have a portable box, with suitable divisions for containing his lint, bandages,
instruments, and other implements of Surgery, which ought to be well provided
with every necessary.

In applying a common tourniquet to stop the flow of blood, from any principal
artery in a limb, till it can be otherwise properly secured, care must be taken
not to twist it too tightly about the limb; and to prevent the tourniquet from
slipping, so as to endanger a fresh loss of blood, it must be fastened with a
ligature of thread or tape.

JOHN MORGAN, Director-General.



IN consequence of the foregoing plan and orders, some reports were made,
although ^^^y came in but slowly. Near a fortnight passed over before I
received them from more than fifteen Regimental Surgeons: It is to be ascribed,
if not to that backwardness which the Regimental Surgeons ever showed to
complying with General Orders, perhaps, to a conscious shame of being entirely
destitute of any necessary articles, but what they had been previously indulged
to draw from the General Hospital: Some of them, whom I afterward met, and
inquired into the cause of their neglect, confessed this to be the truth. As my
intention in desiring those reports to be made to me, was, to lay them before
the General and Congress, with remarks on their insufficiency, that the Medical
Committee might be incited to use more diligence, than heretofore, to fall on
some measures for supplying the Regimental Surgeons, with every necessary to
qualify them for greater usefulness in their station. I drew up, from the
separate reports delivered to me, one general return of the state of the
abovementioned fifteen Regiments. All the instruments were reported to be
private property, and amounted to six sets of amputating instruments, two of
trepanning ditto, fifteen cases of pocket instruments, seventy-five crooked,
and six strait needles. Amongst the whole fifteen Surgeons, there were only
four scalpels or incision knives, for dilating of wounds, or any other purpose;
three pair of forceps, for extracting bullets; half a paper and seventy pins;
and but few bandages, ligatures or tourniquets, and as little old linen, lint
or tow, but what they had procured from the General Hospital; and only two
ounces of sponge in all. Amazing deficiency for fifteen Surgeons, and as many
Mates!

Upon inquiry how they could think of marching with their Regiments, without
providing, at least, old linen for dressings; or of joining the army, without
the necessary instruments, as, if ever they reflected at all, they must be
sensible of the impropriety of so doing, and of its being much easier for each
man, to procure those articles, within the sphere of his acquaintance,
connexions or neighborhood, than to obtain them in an army, in general,
destitute of necessary supplies, of what was not to be procured in America, but
with great difficulty. Their constant answer was, whenever they applied to
their superior officers for those things, they were always told, they would be
furnished with every thing they wanted, so soon as they should have joined the
army. Upon being informed that I had only a sufficiency of those articles for
the use of the General Hospital, and that I would by no means unfurnish it, to
supply them, they appeared quite confounded, and expressed great uneasiness,
(...) having no proper establishment; and said, they knew not how, or where to
obtain the necessary articles, to be any ways useful in the army, if I did not
assist them.

As I was not ignorant of the many inconveniences, under which they had
hitherto labored, from a want of attention in the Congress to relieve, or
place them on a better footing, and as I felt for their distress, I assured
them of my readiness to assist them, all in my power, consistently with my
proper duty, and the orders I had, or should receive from Congress. I advised
them to meet in a body; to converse on the matter with each other; and then
choose one or more Deputies, from each Brigade, to state their helpless
situation, and pray for relief; in which I was willing to second their
application, with all the influence of which I was master.

As they complained much of not being allowed proper Regimental Hospitals, and,
as I had, in opposition to what always appeared to me to be the sentiments,
both of the Congress and General, ever uniformly given it as my opinion, that
Regimental Surgeons and Regimental Hospitals, under proper regulations, and due
subordination to the General Hospital, might be very useful, I took that matter
under my consideration. I likewise drew up a memorial, and proposals, to be
shown to the General, for his approbation and concurrence, to be laid before
Congress. At the same time, I penned for the use of the Regimental Surgeons, a
form, and directions for keeping a proper register of the sick, and for making
every kind of necessary returns of sick, provisions, etc. also tables of the
various kinds of diet, used in the General Hospital, as an example for
themselves, to copy after, under the heads of full diet, half diet, low diet,
milk diet and fever diet, with the method of calculating the differences
betwixt these, and the amount of the well rations; to enable them to draw the
value of the difference, whether in cash or refreshments, but for the use of
the sick only: And I showed them a list of what instruments, bandages,
ligatures, lint, tow, old linen and other articles, I esteemed necessary for a
Regiment; which I shall subjoin to the substance of the memorial and petition
to Congress, and the proposals I had sketched out for their consideration.

At the first meeting I had with them, by appointment, to confer on these
several particulars, before I produced the papers referred to, I addressed them
in these words, which I had written, and of which I kept the original.

ADDRESS TO THE SURGEONS.
GENTLEMEN,
I HAVE, with all the care and attention in my power, taken into consideration,
the state of the Regimental Surgeons, with a view to getting them provided with
Regimental Hospitals, and pointing out the means for their being, in future,
supplied with the usual requisites, for the more easy, more regular, and more
extensive discharge of the duties annexed to their station. To answer this end,
I have considered what is within our power, as matters now stand, and what we
are to aim at, for further improvement; and have, by a train of reflections on
the subject, been led, in the first place, to propose certain regulations which
appear to me to be both salutary and practicable, if they meet with your
concurrence; for which I shall submit them to your hearing and strictures, for
correction and amendment. If we can agree in them, it will be one step gained,
and may serve as a foundation, on which to proceed, in smoothing every
difficulty that may still remain, toward forming a more perfect plan, or model
of economy, in the conducting of Military Hospitals, and providing for the
sick and wounded.

The next step which I apprehend we have to take, is to apply to Congress for
an immediate supply of chirurgical instruments and bandages, for the Regimental
Surgeons, and for its approbation of the proposed regulations, as well as that
of the Commander in Chief; that those regulations may have a proper authority
to rest upon, for their sanction and support; and, 3dly, to suggest such
others, as may be still more useful, in future, should the continuance of the
war make any further regulations necessary.

July, 1776. J. M.

The MEMORIAL of the REGIMENTAL SURGEONS, TO CONGRESS.
Sets forth, THAT when troops were assembled in haste, at the first breaking
out of the war, Regimental Surgeons were appointed to accompany them, provided
with medicine chests, from the different parts of the country, where they were
raised, at a Colonial expense. -- That when it became a common cause of the
whole continent, and provision was made, by Congress, for the care of the sick
and wounded of the army, by the establishment of a General Hospital, with a
Director General, four Surgeons and twenty Mates, there was no mention of the
Regimental Surgeons and Mates, nor any provision made for them, either of
medicines, instruments, or other necessaries; yet they were kept in pay. --
That, in this situation, although it might be presumed the Hospital Surgeons
and Mates, appointed to take care of the sick and wounded, were scarcely
sufficient to attend so great a number of patients as an unhealthy season, or
an active campaign might produce; yet the Regimental Surgeons and Mates, for
want of a suitable provision, must, in their present situation, be very
useless; although they were so much more numerous than the Hospital Surgeons
and Mates, and always professed an ardent desire of being properly employed,
and of answering the design of their appointment. -- That not knowing where
else to look for relief, they had applied to the Director-General, who assured
them of his inclination to serve them; but having no orders to issue out
supplies to them, and it being unusual for Regimental Surgeons to depend upon
the General Hospital for all they wanted, he had advised them to make
application to the Commander in Chief, or Congress, for establishing a proper
method to obtain supplies, promising to second their applications, with the
warmest representations from himself -- That it was with his advice, the
present memorial was drawn up, to lay before Congress. -- That he had given
them several meetings, and a set of proposals were agreed upon, as regulations,
provided they met with the approbation of Congress, which were enclosed for
consideration; praying for such relief on ^he premises, as to the wisdom of
Congress should seem meet.

REGULATIONS proposed by the Director-General of the Hospital; and agreed upon
with the Regimental Surgeons, to be laid before CONGRESS FOR THEIR
DETERMINATION upon them.
1st. THAT the Regimental Surgeons apply to the Quarter-Master-General, and
obtain from him, or the Barrack-Master, by an order from him, some proper
quarters convenient for the situation of each Brigade, by the name of
Regimental or Brigade Hospitals.

2d. That the said Hospitals be furnished from the Quartermaster General's
department, with necessary utensils and Hospital furniture, according to a list
of enumerated particulars.

3d. That the Regimental Surgeons be supplied, in future, by Continental
Druggists, with medicines, instruments and old linen for bandages, and
necessary dressings.

4th. That they shall report to the Director-General, or Surgeons of the
General Hospital, all such sick patients of their Regiments, who are proper
objects; making use of every possible precaution, to guard against crowding the
Hospital with putrid cases, that require fresh air for recovery of the sick,
least hospital, malignant, or pestilential diseases be excited, to the great
devastation and ruin of the army.

5th. That they shall keep an exact register of the sick, in which they shall
enter the names of the patients, the companies to which they belong, the
disorders they labor under, the times of their admission, or being considered
as unfit for duty; with the times and event of their diseases, of recovery,
death, or dismission.

6th. That they make proper reports, extracted from said register, to accompany
every person they recommend to the General hospital, with an account of the
patients case, and previous treatment, and what clothing is sent with each
patient, certified by the Surgeon or Mate, and signed also by a commissioned
officer.

7. That they make daily returns to the Quartermaster or Adjutant of the
regiment; of the sick belonging to that regiment, who are unfit for duty,
whether remaining under their own care, or sent to the General hospital, that
no soldiers may be exempted from duty, as sick men, that are not borne on the
Doctor's list; and that no rations be drawn for them, amongst the effective
men, whilst they are drawn for with the sick, whether in the General or
regimental hospitals.

8. That they make weekly returns of the sick from their registers, both in the
General hospital, and regimental, or brigade hospitals, as well to the
Director-General, as to the Commandant of the regiment or brigade, that a true
state of the sick of the whole army may be made out, to lay before the
Commander in chief, and to be transmitted to Congress, weekly.

9. That agreeable to the sick list returned to the Director General, the
regimental Surgeons be entitled to draw from the General hospital, for the sick
remaining under their care, any articles they may choose, agreeable to the
various diet tables made use of for the patients of the General hospital; and
whatever other stores or refreshments they choose, with which the General
hospital is supplied, to the full amount of their rations. If they require more
from the General hospital, the sick are to be sent to the General hospital.

10. That the Colonels of regiments be allowed to draw moneys for defraying any
extraordinary or incidental charges of regimental hospitals, and for such
articles as are not to be got in the store of the General hospital, nor in the
commissarial, or Quarter-Master's department, and an account of the
disbursements to be settled, with the weekly or monthly abstract of the
regiment.

11. That the state of the several regimental or brigade hospitals, of the
sick, and of the medicine chests, be subject to examination, from time to time,
of the Director-General, or such hospital Surgeons as he shall appoint to that
duty.

12. That in all things, not particularly ascertained in these regulations, the
usage of the British and other armies be followed, till otherwise directed, as
far as is consistent with the good of the service.

THE foregoing, as nearly as I can recollect, is the substance of the memorial
and proposals agreed upon. I remember the import well. If it differs
materially, it is in the power of the regimental Surgeons to show the
difference, by printing the orginial papers. I gave my drafts thereof to them,
which they considered, and proposed some alterations, that I convinced them
could not be adopted. They acquiesced in the reasons I gave. I then made some
small emendations in the copies, which, with the alterations and
interlineations in my own hand writing, are still in possession of Doctor
Story, late Surgeon of Colonel Little's regiment; one of those who were present
at the conference. It is not long since I called on him for a copy of both the
memorial and proposals. He promised to let me have them; but afterward, being
void of honor, broke his word, for which he would assign no other reason, than
that he did not know what use I should make of them to his disadvantage, though
I told him, before my design of publishing them, and that I wished to have the
original papers before me, or exact copies of them, that I might not be charged
with any misrepresentation to the public; which, by communicating them to me,
it was in his power to prevent. But this is not the only instance of meanness,
joined with insolence of behavior, which I have had occasion to publish to the
world, and which I have yet to produce, to delineate the cha^^^^^r of this
shameless man.

LETTER SECOND. TO MESSIEURS SAMUEL ADAMS, Esquire, And the rest of the Medical
Committee of Congress.
New York, July, 1776. GENTLEMEN,
HAVING put the General hospital on a good footing at New York, and provided it
with a pretty considerable stock of what it may stand in need of (as a general
hospital) I have thought it my duty to turn my attention to the regimental
Surgeons. Their situation, ever since I have been in the army, has been such as
to require a great deal of regulation.

If I were to confine myself to the true and proper business of Director
General of the hospital, I should have very little concerns with them as
regimental Surgeons, according to the plan of the British establishment. It
would be principally confined to the receiving such sick from them, into the
General hospital, as they could not take care of themselves; to assist in the
examination of such as offered themselves candidates for the places of Surgeons
and Mates; and to give orders to them to supply themselves with proper
medicinal chests, for each regiment, and all the instrnments and implements
necessary for them to be provided with, and see it done. The making provision
of those articles should depend on themselves; but they ought to be supplied
with the means, whether by an allowance of money adequate to the provision, or
by a stoppage from the men's pay.

I found them, upon enquiry, destitute of every article, whether of medicines,
instruments, bandages or other implements of surgery; and not knowing where to
provide what was necessary, or who to look to for assistance.

With a view to promote the service all that lay in my power, I have attempted
to bring them together, to examine into the state of their wants; to point out
what they ought to be furnished with; to direct them where to look for
supplies; and to bring them under some proper regulations.

To answer these several purposes, I began, by requesting the General to issue
out orders for each Surgeon, to make a return of what medicines he had on hand.
To my sorrow, I must say it, excepting two or three Regiments, the stock of all
the Regiments at Cambridge put together, would scarcely have made one good
chest. I procured all I could get at Boston, and have, from thence, and from
some purchases of shops at Salem and some articles I got at Newport, Norwich
and New York, furnished Regimental chests to all the Regimental Surgeons, who
have hitherto applied, to the amount of near twenty; and am still furnishing
all the new regiments that daily come in.

In the next place, I sketched out a plan of conduct, for the Surgeons of
Regiments in case of action, of which the General approved, and gave out in
orders, that they should attend, and take directions from me, on that head See
that plan and orders of (...) Page 50.
. At the same time, I desired a report to be delivered in, of their Surgeons
instruments, and bandages fit for use, agreeable to a form give them for the
purpose. Fifteen Regimental Surgeons made their returns accordingly; from which
I have drawn up one general return, to show the amount: I suppose them to be,
at least, as well provided as any others, that have neglected to pay due
attention to the order; and do find, that the Regiments now coming in have
Surgeons and Mates, but not one article of medicine, or any thing in the way of
Surgery, but all depend on me for supplies.

I have sketched out, what in my opinion, every Regiment ought to be supplied
with, in the way of instruments. By comparing this sketch, with the returns
made for fifteen Regiments, the great want of every thing essential to them, as
Surgeons, will be evident.

To make amends for their defect, I am well off in the Genesis Hospital, except in
a few particulars. I have provided 10,000 bandages, have some hundred old
sheets, and a stock of medicines (though unassorted;) I have of capital
instruments nearly enough for Hospital use. But, in the mean time, what is to
become of the Regimental Surgeons? Should I divide my stores amongst them, they
would be dissipated, and ourselves left destitute. To observe a medium. I have
ordered to be issued from the General Hospital stores, 60 bandages, 2 sheets, 4
tourniquets, a quantity of lint and tow, and a chest of medicines, out of what
I have collected with the assistance of the Hospital Surgeons and Mates, who
bare no proportion, in number, to the Regimental Surgeons and Mates, (there
being, perhaps, 40 Regiments here,) reserving the rest to supply that
particular part of the army which may stand in most need: But of instruments, I
have none to spare, and I begin to want some capital medicines. -- Moreover,
symptoms of a putrid fever begin to appear.

In this situation, I have called many of the Regimental Surgeons together;
have had a conference with them; desired a deputation from each Brigade; have
given them a plan of regulations for Regimental Hospitals, and a form of a
memorial, or representation to Congress They all look to me, for supplies of
every thing they want: I have no authority for that purpose. It is contrary to
my judgment to supply them with all they want. To prove this, I refer you to
all who know any thing of the matter. I refer you to Dr. Bass, in Philadelphia,
who knows these matters as well as any man: I refer you to a copy of a letter,
on this subject, from a man of experience, which I enclose See the next letter.
. I must not, I durst not transgress orders, or exceed my line of duty more
than disobey, or go contrary to them. It is the same thing. I call for orders.
I shall shrink from no fatigue: Say what is my duty, and to the best of my
power, I will obey: But leave me not without orders Every General, every
Colonel of a Regiment, every surgeon in the army think I have full power, and
ample instructions, and know not where to apply for the relief of their men, if
sick or wounded, and needing uncommon supplies, if I cannot afford them. It is
a cruel situation. My errand to Philadelphia was to represent these things; to
settle the channels of supply; to obtain sufficient means, or authority
sufficient to procure them. I am bound to a spot: Scarcely could I obtain
permission to leave this place, for a few days, to come to Philadelphia, and
lay these matters before you.

Again, I am pressed on the side of Canada. I have wrote pressingly on this
subject. I have sent you a letter from Dr. Potts. He says, there are 3000 sick,
coming to Albany. I have not received the least answer, or instruction from
Congress; nor can I give any assistance to that part of the army, without
orders or power. Let them give me orders, whether limited or ample, they shall
be obeyed. I will answer for my conduct. But do not make me nominal Genesis
Director, and leave me, at the same time, a destitute, a helpless one. I have
requested my proportion of the medicines in the hands of Messieurs Delaney and
Smith, to be kept sar^ed, untouched, subject to my order: Perhaps it is too
late to repeat the request.

I will enclose this, with a plan observed by the British, in the conduct of
their General and Regimental Hospitals; and papers to illustrate and support
what I have written; sufficient to compile some rules, or form some orders. I
beg instruments may be sent us, particularly amputating; crooked needles and
sponge. The enemy are at hand: The campaign is opening: I have done all my
limited power will allow. I hope, though late, almost too late, yet that it is
not altogether so, either to receive power, instructions, or means to regulate
the affairs of my department. I have done my duty, in giving the necessary
information for what is connected with it, and in preparing for the faithful
discharge of my trust. I now rest the matter on your determinations, being,
with all possible regard,

Gentlemen, Your most dutiful and obedient Servant, JOHN MORGAN.

Norwalk, February 12, 1777.
I remember to have heard Doctor MORGAN read this letter, about the month of
July last, with several others on the subject to show what he was then doing,
to put the Regimental Surgeons on some better footing.

W. EUSTIS, Surgeon in the Genesis Hosp.



THE only letter I received from Mr. Adams, is dated August 5, in which he
says: "I have received several letters from you, which I should have sooner
acknowledged, if I could have found leisure. I took, however, the necessary
steps, to have what you requested, effected in Congress."

THE letter from a gentleman originally consulted by Congress, on the
establishment of the General Hospital, mentioned in the note, page 69; being
the same with that to which I referred General WASHINGTON, in my memorial page
6, is as follows:

TO DOCTOR JOHN MORGAN, DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF THE Continental Hospitals, AT
CAMBRIDGE, etc.
Philadelphia, February 24, 1776. SIR,
LAST week, I received yours, of the 1st inst. The Regimental Surgeons were
never allowed medicines from the Hospital, unless their own happened to be
expended, from being long encamped in a part of the country, where none could
possibly be got: And to prevent their being out of medicines, as much as
possible, previous to their taking the field, their medicine chests were always
examined, by order of the Commander in Chief, by the officers of the Hospital;
to see they were provided with their proper stores for the service they were
going upon, and a report was made to the Commander in Chief, accordingly.

When it was found proper to deliver them medicines, they were no more than
might serve them till they went into quarters, or could be supplied from any
neighboring place. AS TO ANY OTHER STORES, I never knew them once thought of,
or demanded.

Every Regiment had an Hospital to itself, for slight cases, which the Surgeon
and his Mates took care of; the charges of which were always defrayed by the
Regiment.

The medicinal and chirurgical stores for the Hospital were, for every
campaign, fixed and ordered, the preceding winter, by the Physicians,
Apothecaries and Surgeons, in a joint consultation.

To give you our long lists of medicines, etc. (" on any expedition last war,
as you request,") would avail you little at present, as many of the articles
are not to be had; nay, I am certain, one half of them might, at any time, be
left out: When you come to town, you shall see them; They are too long for a
letter.

We always made our own bandages, splints, tourniquets, etc. from old linen,
leather, etc. we sent out on purpose. We had never less than five hundred old
sheets, and two or three hundred skins came out at once, which the Hospital
Mates made into the different kinds of bandages, etc. in common use.

General Gates can inform you, that the estimates I gave in for the Hospital,
including the pay of the officers, were ten thousand pounds for the first six
months, for ten thousand men, and in the same proportion for a larger number.

I am, Sir, Your most humble Servant, etc.


The following is a report of what instruments, bandages, ligatures, tow, etc.
a Regimental Surgeon and Mate ought to have in readiness, for service, in case
of action, for a Regiment, consisting of a thousand men; and so in proportion.

Instruments for Surgeon and Mate. Bandages, etc. Linen, etc. A set of
amputating Instruments, consisting of at least Of Bandages, Rollers, etc. of
various kinds, at least 300. Six pair of old sheets, or rags equivalent, for
compresses, etc. A large knife, a saw with two blades, 2 (...) crooked needles,
and a screw tourniquet. One or two dozen set^ of splints, (...) dozen common
tourniquets, 3 ounces of thread, foligatures, a piece or two of inch wide tape,
16 or 18 inches square of sadler's-leather, and a piece of sadler's inch wide
girting. Lint, 2 or 3 pounds at least, 6 pounds of fine tow, 6 ounces of
sponge. A case of 6 incision knives, 2 sets of pocket instruments, 4 bullet
forcipes, an artery forceps, 2 dozen strait needles, a paper of pins, a cases
of lancets. Bandages, tourniquets, splints, etc. should be made by the Surgeon
and Mate. J. M. D. G.

IN the same packet, with the foregoing letter to the Medical Committee of
Congress, page 67; I enclosed a variety of papers for their consideration,
namely, copies of the instructions given to the Regimental Surgeons July the
third, page 54; of their intended memorial to Congress, page 62; of the
regulations proposed and agreed upon with them, for the allowance of Regimental
Hospitals, page 64; of the preceding letter, from a gentleman at Philadelphia,
very conversant in the subject, to show what were the usages and customs of the
General Hospital, in the British service; and particularly to declare what kind
of stores, and under what circumstances, the Regimental Surgeons were allowed
to draw from the General Hospital in that service, page 72; and of the
foregoing report of instruments and bandages necessary for every Regiment, page
73; together with copies of the different diet tables, and other regulations of
the General Hospital. These were severally indorsed and numbered, being
calculated for the purpose, and intended to answer the promise I had made his
EXCELLENCY GENERAL WASHINGTON, in the beginning of my letter to him, of March,
page 32; by explaining the nature, both of the General and Regimental
Hospitals; pointing out the uses and proper government of each; their separate
and distinct designs; the means of supplying the Regimental, and rendering them
more useful, by placing them in a due subordination to the General, Hospitals.
I did not doubt the works being acceptable, both to the General and the
Congress, as it might be supposed, they were not much versed themselves, in
these matters; with which, however, it was necessary for the good of the
service, they should be acquainted.

To understand the better what were the uses of the copies of the different
diet tables, and of other regulations of the General Hospital, which
accompanied my letter to the Medical Committee of Congress; and to demonstrate,
at the same time, what pains I was at, to introduce method and exactness into
every branch of the department entrusted to my care, as I have omitted to
mention the particulars before, it will be very proper to take notice, in this
place, of the steps I had taken for that purpose, when at Cambridge.

So soon after my arrival in the army as to have been able to take a review of
the state, in which the General Hospital then was, I appointed a meeting of the
Hospital Surgeons to take under consideration the proper steps to be pursued
for the better government of the Hospital. I, therefore, in the first place,
showed them my commission, with the instructions from Congress for the
establishment of the General Hospital; I explained to them my idea, of the
duties of the several officers, and gave them a form of the various returns
which I expected (...) be made, on the various occasions of the Hospital, (...)
laid before them the different diet tables that were in use, in the General
Hospital of the British army, last war, as well as those in the different
Hospitals of London and Westminster, with all the regulations observed, in each
distinct part and office, for the government of St. Thomas's Hospital, which I
had procured at the time I was pupil there, under the celebrated Physicians,
Milner, Akenside and Russell, and brought with me to the army.

With these regulations before us, compared with the nature and diseases of the
climate, and those incident to an army, with the provisions of the country, and
manner of living, as well as the nature of our establishment, several sets of
rules were drawn up for the better regulating of our own Hospitals, and
particularly for ascertaining, and enforcing the duties of the Surgeons, the
Mates, the Apothecaries, the Stewa^^s, the Matron and Nurses, the Waiters and
Attendants; and also rules for the observance of the Patients. It would
protract this piece, to too great a length, were I to insert them here: I
therefore content myself, with taking notice, that the perfecting them was a
work of time and of mature reflection, which would do no discredit to any of the
gentlemen that were concerned in the performance, were I to publish them at
large. And I must, to do justice to this task enjoined them, which was
submitted to my own corrections, observe, that it was the means of introducing
that exactitude in duty, and that better economy and discipline into the
General Hospital, that were wanted, as might be naturally expected; by means of
which, all the proper business of the Hospital was afterward conducted with
more regularity, ease and satisfaction to the officers, and greater benefit and
advantages to the patients; all which were much wanted, in all the transactions
I have ever had with the Regimental Surgeons.

This I thought a proper employment for a Director General, and deserving the
attention of the Congress and Commander in Chief. I therefore dispatched them
to the General, by return of one of his servants, sent to engage me to come to
Headquarters, for his perusal at first, and then to be forwarded to Congress;
hoping he would be pleased to second my letter to Congress, with some
representation from himself, of the necessity of adopting these, or some other
regulations to answer the intention, for which these papers might serve as a
proper foundation on which to proceed. They were accompanied with a note to
Colonel Reed the Adjutant-General, in which I wrote as follows:

SIR,
I imagine the annexed regulations, etc. for the establishment, management and
supplies of the Regimental Hospitals, will be of great use in the army, and
tend to remove the frequent complaints of Regimental Surgeons, respecting the
want of some better provision for the sick under their care, and enable them to
discharge their duty with more CHEERFULNESS, and ADVANTAGE to the service.

They are submitted with the Memorial etc. to Congress, to General Washington's
perusal, if he has time to consider them, for his approbation. It will appear
on reading them, that those, or some such regulations, are much wanted, and
cannot take place, unless they have his sanction in General Orders.

Perhaps you may have so much leisure as to examine the several enclosed
papers, and communicate the substance of them to the General, if he is not
sufficiently disengaged to look over them, himself. I intend, agreeeable to
your desire, to be at Headquarters early, to come at two o'clock, that there
may be some time for conversing on this subject, before dinner."


I requested, that after the General had satisfied himself in respect to the
contents of these papers, they might be forwarded with his dispatches to
Congress.

WHEN next I had an opportunity of speaking with the General and supposed he
might have acquainted himself with the purport and design of those papers, I
took the liberty of asking his opinion of them. He had been greatly hurried, as
I could perceive by the number of applicants to himself, on a variety of
business of different departments. His answer, therefore, was such as might be
expected, couched in the following interrogatory: How can you think, I have
time to read over such a bundle of papers? I told him I was sensible of his
situation, and how precious his time was; that the reason of my troubling him
with so much writing, was that he might not be interrupted by long
consultations, though on the most necessary matters; but be able to make
himself master of the subject, when most at leisure to consider it, with the
means before him: I informed him as briefly as possible, of the general
contents, and what I had written to the Adjutant General, in whose abilities he
placed great confidence; and concluded with a request, that if he should not
have leisure shortly, to read them over himself, that he would refer them to
Colonel Reed, or any other person he chose, to give him an account of them,
that some orders might issue in consequence: They related to important matters,
and nothing could be done in them, without his orders, on which he let me know,
that I should hear from him soon, on the business they were intended to
recommend to his notice.

I think it was that very day, the resolves of Congress, July 17th, came to
hand, and were communicated to me, of which I obtained a certified copy from
the Adjutant-General, and another, about four days afterward from Colonel
Robert H. Harrison, Secretary to the General, which bears date July 26, 1776.

In the mean time, the Regimental Surgeons, who were impatient to know the
General's mind, that they might take their measures accordingly, for making a
personal application to himself, which they judged would answer as well as
applying to Congress; or for forwarding the memorial and petition to Congress,
as might appear most suitable, on knowing his mind; were made acquainted with
the beforementioned resolves. These resolves produced a general disgust in the
Regimental Surgeons, as they anticipated, and might prevent the success of any
application to Congress at that time; and cut them off from all present hopes
of carrying into execution, their favorite scheme of having Regimental
Hospitals under their own management, furnished and supplied to their wishes;
and from the expectation of handling public moneys

The chagrin and bitterness of spirit which they manifested on this occasion,
is inexpressible; and every mean artifice that could be devised, was carried
into execution by some of them, to counteract, and, if possible, to evade those
resolves. They gave proof indeed, that, for the infamy of it, deserves to be
recorded, to what degrees of weakness, blindness and folly, men destitute of
the principles of honor and honesty will be transported, by a false pride, and
the disappointment of secret and ambitions views, when they prefer the
gratification of their own desires, however unjust, to the interest of the
cause they are engaged to promote, if opposed to each other. But I shall defer
giving the particulars, till I have first communicated a letter, which with a
view to serve those ungratefal men all in my power, I wrote to General
Washington, and is as follows:

TO HIS EXCELLENCY GENERAL WASHINGTON,
New York, July 25, 1776. SIR,
THE Congress having come into a number of resolves respecting the General
Hospital, etc I find that one of them, as it now stands, gives great uneasiness
to the Regimental Surgeons. It is that which prohibits them from drawing upon
the Hospital of their department for any stores, except medicines and
instruments; and orders, that when any sick person shall require other stores,
they shall be received into the General Hospital, and the rations of the said
sick persons be stopped, so long as they are in the said Hospital.

The Regimental Surgeons seem to think, if this resolve should remain as it now
stands, without any palliative construction in favor of supplying the sick
under their care, with necessary articles of diet, etc. (for no provision is
made by any of these resolves for changing the diet of the sick, and their
rations would be very improper diet.) they have nothing left, but immediately
to order the whole of their sick into the General Hospital. What would be the
consequence? Instead of about three hundred, which is the present number of the
sick in the General Hospital, it would immediately amount to two thousand or
upwards, and the numbers increase every day. But where we shall get room for
them, is the difficulty; and in case of an action, and many persons being
wounded, that difficulty would increase: The General Hospital would be crowded,
and the Regimental Surgeons, who profess their ardent desire of being usefully
employed, would complain of having nothing to do. But what is the worst part of
it, as the dysentery, and fevers of a putrid kind now prevail; the crowding so
many together into the General Hospital, would certainly engender a malignant,
pestilential fever, that would threaten the ruin of the army.

These difficulties, in my opinion, might for the present, be got over in one
of these two ways, the choice of which is left to your Excellency.

The first, is by adopting a set of regulations, drawn up and agreed upon,
betwixt the Regimental Surgeons and myself, (if it met with your Excellency's
approbation,) and which I laid before your Excellency, a fortnight ago, for
your consideration.

Otherwise, let the Regimental Surgeons be suffered to keep such men in their
own Regimental Hospitals, under their own care, whose cases would endanger the
spreading of putrid and infectious distempers Let them be reported to, and born
on the list of patients admitted into, the General Hospital, but remain with
the Regimental Surgeons, under their care: Then their rations will be stopped,
discounted with the Commissary-General, and in lieu thereof, they will receive
supplies of such articles, as the General Hospital can furnish them with; of
wine, vinegar, molasses, meal, etc. which I believe would not far exceed the
amount of those rations: This would answer to a plan I proposed to your
Excellency last winter, and which was approved: Your Excellency only wished
then, that some method might be taken to prevent the rations of the sick being
twice drawn. I apprehend that matter is fully guarded against, by the method
pointed out by the 6th resolve of Congress, of July 17, on the subject of the
G. Hospital. The first method would give the greatest satisfaction, not only to
the Regimental Surgeons, but to the officers, and to the men; and an experiment
would be made of the real expense attending Regimental Hospitals, and every
cause, or even shadow of complaint, vanish: It would encourage the soldier in
his duty, and if it is found, on trial, subject to any abuse, I imagine that
abuse could be easily remedied, by future regulations, or a stoppage in the
men's pay, at the time of a new enlistment.

The present increase of the sick is a serious matter, and requires a speedy
remedy. I regret the calling for your Excellency's attention (for ever so short
a time) to my department; but, I flatter myself, the importance of the subject,
and the advantages which may accrue to the service from it, will evince the
necessity, and be a sufficient apology for it.

I remain, Your Excellency's most obedient, and very humble Servant, JOHN
MORGAN.


ANY man of the least knowledge of the world, that reflects ever so little,
will readily own, how disagreeable a piece of business it must be, for any
gentleman, to break in upon a Commander in Chief, circumstanced as General
WASHINGTON was, with so great a burden of managing an army of undisciplined
men, in which the nature and extent of the various departments were so
unsettled, and so few officers knew their duty, and therefore teized with
numberless applications, which must make him, at times, unavoidably, more
difficult of access; and to importune him repeatedly on business, which is
supposed to be already settled, either by his own orders, or those of Congress,
must be very irksome.

After reading the foregoing letter, can there be a person found, who will not
allow that I exerted myself to the very utmost in favor of the Regimental
Surgeons, to serve them to the extent of my ability; and after those repeated
exertions, and steady perseverance at all times, to promote their reasonable
wishes, as far as was consistent with my duty, even in opposition to the
sentiments of the General and Congress, when theirs did not agree with my own
sentiments; was not the ingratitude and wickedness of those Regimental Surgeons
of the deepest dye; because I would not sacrifice to their importunate craving,
the duty of my station, and the trust reposed in me, as well as the commands of
my superiors; to be guilty, as they were, of private cabals and secret
conspiracies, (of which I have lately received full proof,) to injure my
character and misrepresent my conduct, with a view, if possible, to ruin me,
for ever, in the public esteem?

THAT none may imagine I wished to reduce the Regimental Surgeons to any
improper dependence on myself, which might be assigned as a reason for their
opposition to me, I think fit to declare, that I never sought for any authority
over them, inconsistent with their true interest, or upon any occasion, that I
was not compelled to assume. On the contrary, I declined those occasions that
frequently offered, of making them more dependent upon me, than I knew would be
agreeable to themselves, ever since they had taken exceptions to the General's
public order at Cambridge, that no Regimental Surgeons should receive
commissions in the army to be raised, for the time to come, till they had
submitted to such examination of their abilities, as I thought necessary; and
had found means to evade it, by prevailing with their Colonels, who (I have
been informed) had blank commissions by them, to fill them up with the names of
the former Surgeons, without any regard to that order. Yet if I had ever made
any representation of this matter to the General, I am convinced, he would not
have suffered his own orders to have been dispensed with, in so extraordinary a
manner. So far was he from desiring to enlarge their powers, or to lessen my
authority, that he was pleased to propose it to me, himself, in one of the last
conferences, I had with him, on the subject of regulating the Regimental
Surgeons, in order to make them more absolutely dependent upon me, that they
should receive warrants at my hands only, for acting in that station. This
proposal I declined, on purpose to avoid the envy that would attend so much
power, and the consequent misconstructions that, I was confident, would be
passed on the most perfect and upright use, that any man, in my post, could
make of it. I was desirous to avoid giving room for jealousies to a set of men,
of such turbulent and refractory tempers, as I discovered some of them to be,
and of which I experienced the ill effects in the instances I have already, and
am further to relate, of Mr. Story.

He once called upon me, on business of Colonel Little's Regiment, soon after
my arrival from Cambridge to New York, when I had not yet laid aside all
thoughts of finishing the task began at Cambridge, on the general's order, to
examine the Regimental Surgeons, with a view to confirm those who were
qualified for the office, and to report such as were deficient in education, or
abilities. He had been previously represented to me, as a mere firebrand; and
as one that was not thought to be properly qualified for a Surgeon's place;
whether justly, or not, I shall not presume to say, as I never proceeded to any
examination of his abilities. I asked him whether he acted as Surgeon to that
Regiment: He told me that he did. On reminding him of the General's order, for
examining the Regimental Surgeons, he behaved in a very insolent, and
impertinent manner, giving me to know, "that he had his commission already, no
thanks to me, which was as valid, and of as good authority as my own, and that,
truly, he never would submit to any examination of mine."

Had I been disposed to treat him, as he merited on that occasion, I imagine he
would have found that I could easily have obliged him to it, or to quit the
service: But peace was my object. This made me pass over his present rudeness
of behavior; and encouraged him in those subsequent acts of insolence, and
dishonorable conduct which, I believe, took their rise from the above cause;
and if he was not always at the bottom, yet he always showed himself to be one
of the most violent agitators, and ^omentors of disturbances, that I have ever
met with.

If I may be allowed to mention, in this place, what I take to be the true
causes of the malevolence of the Regimental Surgeons against me; they were 1st,
my disallowing them to draw stores, at pleasure, from the G. Hospital; 2dly, my
having recommended it to the General to require some proof of the
qualifications of those men, who were to be entrusted with the lives of the
sick and wounded soldiery, for which many of them were conscious of their being
found unequal to the task, if they were obliged to submit to the inquiry; and
3dly, it was a received opinion of theirs, that the resolve of Congress, "that
the Hospital Surgeons and Mates should take rank of the Regimental Surgeons and
Mates," was owing to me.

These were unpardonable sins, which they were determined never to forgive nor
forget. From the day these last resolutions of Congress were known, they left
no scheme untryed to injure my character, and misrepresent my conduct Of this I
have had the strongest assurances from some gentlemen, who, since my
dismission, and not before, have informed me of their having received
application from those men to join them in their cabals and conspiracy against
me; who were struck with astonishment at the proposal, and from the respect
which, they were pleased to say, they entertained for my character and conduct,
endeavored to dis^wade them from their wicked purposes, and to convince them
that I had shown, in a very striking manner, my inclination to serve them, in
the memorial and proposals I had drawn up for that purpose, and the letters I
had written to Congress and the General, in their favor; but being bound to
act agreeable to my orders, it was not in my power to swerve from them. It was
the hope of having prevailed with them, by these remonstrances, to lay aside
their intentions, and their ceasing to importune them further on the subject,
that inclined them to make no mention of this affair to me, till they
afterward learned they had, though secretly, put their designs into execution,
with a success that amazed them.

The acts they pursued to frustrate the intentions of Congress, and to force me
to a compliance with their measures; were first, a neglect of reporting the
sick for admission into the General-Hospital; the next was their leaving their
proper posts with their respective Regiments, and carrying the sick to a
distance from the army, where they suffered much, and ascribed all the ill
effects of their misconduct, to my not receding from the resolutions of
Congress: And again, their infusing jealousies and groundless suspicions into
such officers as they could influence by their representations, and attempting,
by that means, to mislead the General Officers and Members of Congress, to my
prejudice. Whatever mischances happened to the sick from their own
perverseness, or ignorance, were laid by them at my door, as one so wedded to
his own plan, as not to yield to the united voice of all the Regimental
Surgeons, to come into their measures. And, true it is, my perseverance in what
I conceived to be my duty, and for the good of the service, was unshaken; nor
could any consideration induce me to deviate from the commands of my superiors;
although, had the Congress seen fit to alter their resolves, in some
particulars, I should have thought it would have been for the better, as my
letters fully prove.

I am now led, in the order of events, to lay before the public, some specimens
of the wickedness of that set of men, in counterfeiting, caballing, and
endeavoring to make impressions upon General Officers and others, in their
favor, and to my prejudice.

And first, as to their actor counterfeiting, and passing what they had
counterfeited as a resolve of Congress.

Having already mentioned the chagrin and bitterness of spirit, which many of
them discovered, on knowing the resolves of Congress, July 17; which cut off
all their immediate hopes to effect their favorite scheme of having Regimental
Hospitals allowed them, on such a footing, as to enable them to accumulate
stores at pleasure, and to give them some disposal or public moneys; it is to
be remarked, that what completed their chagrin was, the determination of
Congress, which had before raised the pay of themselves and Mates, to increase
that of the Hospital Surgeons and Mates, which was always more than theirs, in
such proportion as they thought proper; but what above all things kindled their
malice and resentment was, that the Congress, in the same vote, had also
resolved, that the Hospital Surgeons and Mates should take rank of Regimental
Surgeons and Mates, as beforementioned, see page 29.

Let it be remembered, then, to the perpetual infamy of the mean scandalous set
who were guilty of it, that upon my furnishing them with a copy of those
resolves, for the information of all the Surgeons in the army, they made an
alteration in the copy of the eighth resolve, by leaving out the particle of,
and substituting the word with in its place, which made an entire change of the
meaning of that resolve, into another of an opposite signification, thus
foisting in a brat of their own begetting, to usurp the authority of a vote of
Congress, they discovered what their secret machinations tended to continually,
as if this silly device could serve the purpose of their wishes, to lower the
estimation of the General-Hospital, and raise themselves into imaginary
consequence.

After passing this counterfeit resolve, and circulating it briskly, two of
their champions, the famous Doctor Story, and an associate of his, with a view
to insult the gentlemen of the Hospital, went about, exulting in imaginary
triumph, to vent their reproachful language against them, and thereby had
nearly accomplished what they were intent upon; which was, to make their
situation so disagreeable, notwithstanding they never interfered with them, as
to induce them rather to quit a station that was rendered so irksome by them,
rather than be subject to such insolence of conduct. One of those gentlemen was
Doctor Warren, (brother to the deceased General Warren,) a gentleman, who was
so happy, (...) gain the esteem of all who knew him, by his understanding his
humanity, his affable and polite behavior, and his great assiduity and
attention to discharge the duties of his station: He was at that time acting in
the place of a Director of the Military Hospitals at Long Island, (where, among
others, Colonel Little's Regiment was posted,) with the title and pay only of
Surgeon in the General Hospital, in which he had given great satisfaction to
General Green, and every officer of rank at Long Island, who always spoke of
him, to me, in high terms of approbation. On which, it may not be amiss,
transiently, to consider this, as a full proof how salutary those orders were,
which I had given, for providing for the relief and comfortable accommodations
of the sick at Long Island, as well as the efficacy with which they were
carried into execution, by the wisdom and prudence of the officer who managed
the Hospital department there, by my instructions.

Disappointed in their malicious designs, in the first, they desisted not from
other, attempts, to perplex the officers of the General Hospital; and till
their aims were accomplished, a party of them determined to leave nothing
undone, which they could have hopes of effecting, to produce a prevailing
uneasiness and discontent in the General Hospital.

In consequence of my letter to General Washington, of July 25th, in favor of
the Regimental Surgeons, the Adjutant-General called upon me, by his
Excellency's command, to consider how far theirs and my request could be
granted, consistently with the intention of Congress, without setting aside
their resolves. On which, such General Orders were issued out July 28, as I
thought would afford them some satisfaction, if the good of the service was
what they had in view, and not their own private advantage and emolument. But I
was greatly mistaken in this supposition: They were allowed Regimental
Hospitals under certain restrictions; amongst which one was, a power given me
to send Hospital Surgeons to visit their Hospitals, to prevent crowding them,
and keeping more sick on hand, than they could take good care of, who were to
be judges what patients were proper objects for, and directed to receive them
into the General Hospital.

They clamoured exceedingly, drew up an application to the General on that
head, which was laid before a Council of General Officers; and some farther
points given up to them, by a General order of August the third. The insolence
of a party of the Regimental Surgeons rose, in proportion, as they were
gratified in any concessions made to them, by the officers of the Hospital, for
the sake of peace; who never visited their sick, on that account, but submitted
to receive them, as they saw fit to report, and send them to the General
Hospital, rather than give room for supposing they had any contention with the
Regimental Surgeons: In truth they had not; unless the fire which was kept up,
on one side only, by a factious part of the Regimental Surgeons, could be
called a contention, and to the keeping up of which, the Hospital Surgeons only
contributed by their patience, and suffering for a while, for the good of the
service, those men to sport themselves, without interruption, in their
unreasonable pursuits, or by opposing them only, with gentle remonstrances. If
this is contention, it is of that sort of which Juvenal, in his satyr, gives a
lively description. " ubi tu ^al^as, ego vapulo tantum," or in which one side
receives, and the other gives all the blows.

At length, the sense of what was due to themselves wrought so far upon the two
eldest of the Hospital Surgeons, Dr. Foster and Dr. Warren, who principally
experienced the insolence of those men; that, being unwilling to endure it
further, and equally unwilling to be concerned in any disputes with them, they
chose rather to quit their present stations: The former let me know his
intention to leave the service; and the latter, in a genteel, manly and
sensible letter, made known to me his situation, and the resolutions into which
this conduct of theirs, had forced him: He represented to me, what he had
experienced from the rude and ungovernable temper of this set of men; that, not
content with the determination of Congress and the General orders respecting
them, they were ever restless, and ever making new and unauthorized demands,
inconsistent with the peace and good government of the General Hospital; that
they were seeking continual occasions for dispute and differences; and as they
found the gentlemen of the Hospital did not choose, on every occasion, which
they knew how to call forth for matter of disputation, to trouble either me or
themselves with frequent references of their disputes, they would gradually
gain one point after another, till all their ends were, at last answered, in
the subversion and ruin of the General Hospital. In this situation, as there
were daily expectations of the enemies landing at Long Island he flattered
himself, he could be more useful in the military, than in the hospital
department, thus circumstanced; and requested my permission, that he might
resign his place in the General Hospital, and be allowed to act as a volunteer,
upon the approaching action.

To have been deprived of the assistance of those gentlemen, at so critical a
time, whose places I could not have supplied, with others of equal experience
in the conducting of Military Hospitals, on the plan of the Congress, would
have thrown the department into that confusion, which a designing party were
busy to excite, in hopes, by fishing in troubled waters, to derive those
advantages to themselves, in the accomplishment whereof, their wishes seemed to
center. By explaining to the gentlemen of the Hospital, the mistake into which
this perverse conduct of the party had led them, and by supporting their
authority, in a proper manner, on every occasion, they were contented to
continue in their stations.

The next measures those men chose to take, as I have since learned, from
information that I can depend upon, was to interest such officers, over whom
they had, or could acquire any influence, to make representations in their
behalf, to Members of Congress, and to the General. I have cause to believe
this was often done to the former, without my having the least intelligence of
their proceedings: Of course, I had it not in my power to explain matters, that
ought to be known, or to obviate objections, however ill sounded. I must, in
justice to the General, acknowledge, I have no suspicion that his Excellency
ever suffered me to remain long ignorant of any representations, that were made
to impeach my conduct by which I was, in all the instances I knew, enabled to
answer in my justification to him, and I hope satisfactorily. But I cannot say
so of the Congress; for, so far from giving me any information of any such
transaction, the Members of whom I have made enquiry, carefully evaded it: Of
which I shall have occasion to make more particular mention, in its proper
place.

The representations, in favor of Regimental Surgeons, which were calculated
to injure me; besides dwelling on the dissatisfaction which the Regimental
Surgeons had infused into many of their men, on groundless pretenses, and which
made some, who knew nothing of the General Hospital themselves, express their
dislike against being sent to it; commonly set forth, that it would be highly
prejudicial to the service, when a new army was to be raised; -- that the sick
could not be comfortably accommodated in Regimental Hospitals. The fact is,
many of the officers had been chosen, as it were, by the men, who had not a
regard to, or any consideration of merit, in that choice, or any love of
discipline, but were attached to the persons of the officers they chose, in
proportion to the knowledge they had of their being ^en of the same mean,
sordid, grovelling disposition, with many of themselves; void of the sentiments
of brave soldiers, love of honor and of liberty on principle, but ready to
associate with them on a footing of equality; who would drink drams with them,
allow them to plunder, or exempt them from duty, when they did not feel
themselves, " bold to fight," and who had no objection to fill the army with
malignerers, public extortioners and cowards.

Here a shocking group of disagreeable facts present to my remembrance in
reflecting upon the expedients that have been made use of to raise troops, and
the shameful consequences. It is a fact, I believe too generally known to be
disputed, that in order to engage men to enter more readily into the service,
officers commissions were allowed to men, whose ranks were to be determined by
the number of levies they could raise. Prudence, courage, conduct, education
experience, talents, or fitness to command, were not the requisites for
officers. No wonder, then, that such kind of men were chosen officers, as many
of them were; men of the meanest figure and capacity, such as they termed civil
fellows, but in strictness of meaning. Major Sturgeons, or errant Jerry Sneaks
with noses of wax, so very pliant as to be governed by the privates, and many
of those, if we may judge of causes by effects, had little in view by entering
the service but to make money, by fastening themselves, as leeches, on every
thing, from which they could draw pelf. And therefore it was no unusual thing,
as I have been often told, when a company was forming for the men to choose
those, from amongst themselves, for officers, who consented to throw their pay
into joint stock with the privates, from which, commissioned and
non-commissioned officers; Captains, Lieutenants, Ensigns, S^^jean^s and
Corporals, with (...) and privates, drew equal shares. Some of those, who
consented to be privates for one six weeks, three months, or six months, as it
happened, expecting to have their turn to command, on a new enlistment, and
perhaps to command those very men who were now their officers.

What was to be expected from such men and officers, under no discipline but to
run away, by whole companies, at the appearance of a handful of the enemy. Will
any man deny this to be a fact? I will appeal to one instance, out of many. At
the approach of an advanced party of the British troops, after the landing at
York Island, about three hundred of the men, who were advantageously stationed
for opposing them, retreated, without giving fire, with great precipitation;
or, in common language, ran-away: They were met by Glover's Regiment, which
stopped their flight: As was no unusual thing, on being charged with cowardice,
the common men cast the reproach from themselves on their officers, declaring
it to be their faults, who, instead of putting themselves at the head of the
men, and leading them on to the attack, or there sustaining the charge like
soldiers, were the first to scamper off, leaving their company, to fly to such
places of safety as they could. The officers of Colonel Glover's regiment, one
of the best corps's in the service, and who were indeed gentlemen, immediately
obliged the fugitive officers and soldiers, equally, to turn into the ranks
with the soldiers of Glover's regiment, and obliged the trembling wretches, to
march back to the ground they had quitted. I have been an eyewitness, myself,
to whole battalions running off from Powle's-Hook, and the heights of Bergen,
upon the firing of a broad side from a man of war, in her sailing down the
North River to join the fleet below, when obliged to remove from her station,
to avoid a fire-ship, although not a man was hurt by that fire. These doughty
champions never stopped till they came to Second River, but forced away the
very wagons that were impressed to transport the sick, and those wounded at
Long Island, to Newark; to carry off themselves and baggage, for many of them
chose to ride, to save their legs, in case of being more nearly pursued. A
cannon being planted in the causeway, that commanded the ferry at Second River,
was pointed toward them, by an officer of artillery, who commanded there; and
who threatened to mow them down, if they did not return to their posts. What
was their next shift? They betook themselves to a ferry a mile above: The boats
happened to be on the other side, but within reach of their shot; on which,
being fearful of any delay, they called out to the ferrymen to hasten over with
their boats, or they would discharge a volley upon them; and thus, they made
good their retreat!

When such were the officers, is it to be wondered at, or rather is it to be
believed? But how incredible soever it may appear to those at a distance, it is
an indisputable truth, that a Captain was tried and broke, by a Court Martial,
for stealing his soldiers blankets, the minutes of which Court Martial are not
only published amongst ourselves, but reprinted in the New York or Newport
papers; and one officer, in the face of the General's family, and many officers
of distinction, was found shaving his men, acting in so menial a capacity, long
after the retreats from Long Island and New York, whether for the pence he
could collect, or that he might stand a chance of interest and preferment, and
" that he might not be prejudicial to the service, when a new army was to be
raised," let casuists determine. Whether giving ear to the unreasonable
clamours of such men as these, and the gratifying them, by indulgences in their
senseless demands, dismissing an officer of distinguished rank and trust, for
noncompliance with them, against the express commands of Congress, was the
most likely means of promoting the service, or procuring respect and veneration
for the Congress itself, time will manifest, credat Judaeus, non ego.

What instances of thieving, plundering and oppression, both in officers and
men, have come to my knowledge, that would disgrace the lawless Arab, the
barbarous Scythian, the rude Goth, or wild and savage Tartar; who spare their
own, when they war on their enemies!

" Birds prey on birds, fish on each other prey,
" But man alone, does kindred man betray."
I was present when a lady from West-Chester, lodged a complaint with a General
Officer, against a Captain of the regiment of artificers, who had got into her
house, and under pretense of protecting her, as a friend, from the incursions
of the enemy, robbed her of a trunk, containing many costly articles; silks and
other wearing apparel, to the amount of fourteen hundred pounds; and disposed
of her clothes at a public sale, which being proved upon him, he was justly
cashiered.

From my own knowledge, and indeed my particular loss, having been a great
sufferer, I can declare that what the enemy have spared to our own people, less
compassionate men, from amongst ourselves, have carried off and destroyed; and
Hessian cruelty to an enemy, has been exceeded by the more savage cruelty of
the very men, paid by us, to defend our property. An injured man has a right to
complain; and truth will force conviction on the minds of fellow-men, however
harsh and ungrateful it may be, to some, to hear the truth.

But that I may not pass beyond the limits of my own department, and what has a
connection with it, I will confine myself in the instances I shall now exhibit
of disorderly conduct, to those facts, of which I came to the knowledge, in the
discharge of my duty, and the opposition I met with in the discharge thereof. I
pass over other examples of oppressing helpless women, and families of the best
fortune and distinction, on whom sick and well, indiscriminately, have been
forced, or men that ought to have been reported to the General Hospital, for my
directions; in which no regard has been had, whether the persons were well
disposed, or otherwise affected, to the cause of American Freedom; but " tros
rutilusve suit, nullum discrimen habetur," The object was to get possession of
their houses and property, under the pretext of accommodating the soldiery, and
particularly for Regimental Hospitals. I shall select one case, in which were
complicated, disregard to Congress, disrespect and breach of the General's
orders, opposition to the General Hospital, which sustained great injury from
such proceedings, and great inhumanity to the fair and weak part of the
creation. The circumstances of which are well known to some, who are officers
of rank in the army, and of irreproachable honor, to whom, if necessary, I can
appeal, in support of what I advance.

About the month of August, 1776, having made frequent representations at
Headquarters, that I could not obtain regular reports from the Regimental
Surgeons, of the state of their sick; but that they were seizing on those very
houses for regimental sick, that were assigned to me, by the State of New York,
for the use of the General Hospital; an order was issued, requiring the
Regimental Surgeons to deliver in the reports I had demanded, etc. and to
enforce it, all Colonels, and Commanders of Regiments were called upon, to make
it known to their Surgeons, that they might not plead ignorance, and were
directed to see that the order was duly observed.

Just at that time, a Brigade newly arrived from the Massachusetts Bay
Government, under command of General Fellows, was ordered to be stationed along
the river, from Greenwich to Chelsea and upwards, to throw up lines, and defend
the same against any attempts of the enemy to land there. Most of the houses
fit for the accommodation of the officers of that Brigade, and for quartering
of the men, being previously seized upon by the Regimental Surgeons, for
themselves and their sick; Colonel Moylan, then Quartermaster General, desired
we might ride out together, to take a view of the sick, and of the houses in
that quarter. He ordered a large dwelling house, on the estate of the deceased
Admiral Warren, then in possession of certain Regimental sick, to be evacuated,
and cleansed for the accommodation of the officers of the Brigade, posted in
the neighborhood, to whom therefore it was very convenient, as it adjoined the
works thrown up for defense of the landing, but a very improper place to
contain sick persons, as it was close to the bank of the river, and
particularly exposed to the firing of the ships, that might pass up or down the
same.

The very mention of dispossessing the Regimental Surgeons of their Hospital,
gave great dissatisfaction, though I undertook to receive their sick into the
General Hospital. That proposal met with opposition. That the Surgeon might
have a place for the accommodation of his patients, I informed him of a large
commodious barn of Mr. Campbell's at Greenwich, with two spare rooms on the
back part, and lower floor of the house, at a small distance, adjoining the
kitchen, being rooms the best sheltered from the shot of passing men of war,
and most retired from the river. Such spacious, airey barns as the above, well
floored, and secure from rain, yet cool, and pervious to the wind, answer to
the places, recommended by Sir John Pringle physician to the British army, in a
former war, as proper for hospitals. Such, assuredly, are better calculated for
the recovery of dysenteric and putrid diseases, that prevailed at this time, to
any of the dwelling houses, with plaistered walls, and small or confined
chambers, which, though convenient for a private family, are not proper for the
crowding of sick into them. But fine houses were commonly preferred by the
Regimental Surgeons; and this gentleman let me know, that he should expect to
be broke, if he consented to accept of a barn, however commodious, for the
reception of his sick.

The house itself, he could not have, it being preoccupied by another Surgeon,
for the use of a Regimental Hospital. On looking into the rooms, they were
found to be filled with the sick, and the Surgeon who had the care, panting for
breath, in the midst of them, It was amidst the sultry heats of summer: In vain
I represented to him the danger of engendring a putrid (...) fever, from
crowding so many sick, in confined rooms, in that hot season. He had near a
hundred sick in the house: I forbad him then, as I had uniformly prohibited
every Regimental Surgeon I conversed with on the subject, from taking charge of
more than thirty or forty sick, on the outside, at any one time, being a larger
number than they could well attend; as I desired to know how they intended to
manage, i^ called to the field of battle, or on any sudden removal of their
regiments, an event daily expected, and they encumbered with so many sick. As
the other Surgeon had refused to occupy the barn, and shady rooms on the ground
floor, back of the house, I recommended it to him, to send at least one half of
his sick to the General Hospital, and remove the greater part of the men into
the barn: He disregarded my advice, a putrid fever prevailed, he caught the
infection, and paid the forfeiture of his rashness, with his life.

I then went to General Heath, who commanded that division of the army, and
represented the matter to him; and as it was but a small distance from his
quarters, requested him to give himself the trouble, of seeing with his own
eyes, and judging himself of the truth of the facts I related. The General, in
polite terms, declined my most importunate solicitation, upon this unanswerable
objection, that it might look, as if he made himself a party against the
Regimental Surgeons.

As the Surgeon had never made his report, and the order had been issued a
week, I had waited on the Lieutenant Colonel of the regiment, in person, before
I saw the Surgeon and complained of his neglect, in not reporting his sick, and
in not sending such as exceeded the number he could take care of, to the
General Hospital. I reminded him that, by the General Order, he was required to
see that the Surgeon complied with said order. The answer he gave me, was in
these very words: "That the Regimental Surgeons could read the orders for
themselves; and it not, he should give himself no trouble about it; adding,
that, if it was in his power to prevent it, none of his men should ever be
carried to a General Hospital."

Perhaps it may be imagined from such a reply, he had reason to assert, that
the General Hospital was not kept in a clean and proper state, and that the
Regimental Hospitals were: The reverse of which was true: The former were
always kept clean and airey and, in the words of General Green's letter, which
I shall have occasion to publish at large, " well provided with every thing,
and the sick very comfortable;" whereas most of the Regimental Hospitals, I had
ever seen, on account of the filth and nastiness of them, deserved the
appellation they have acquired in the Eastern Governments, of pest-houses; for
such they commonly turned out to be. I asked him his reasons: He made no reply
to my question; but required of me to give him an order, which it seems he
thought proper to demand of me, in favor of his Surgeon, for a number of bed
frames.

This leads me to show in what manner the Regimental Surgeons and such officers
were ever at work, by their plans, and method of proceeding, to exhaust,
unfurnish, or prevent the supplies of the General Hospital, all in their power
I had engaged the Quartermaster General, to give orders in his department, for
making a large number of bed frames, for the sick of the General Hospital. So
fast as forty or fifty were made, the Regimental Surgeons, with, or without
orders from their officers, applied for, and carried them away. Colonel Moylan,
told the Officer in my hearing, "that they had carried off above two thousand,
that were intended for the General Hospital; which of course, could not be
provided with them as fast as was wanted." Upon every movement of a regiment,
that required a shifting of the houses for Regimental Hospitals, many of the
bed frames were left behind, or burned, or carried off; and the Surgeons,
probably, made fresh applications for others, whilst the General Hospital could
not be provided with spare bedsteads, for additional sick, or wounded that
might be sent in.

On that occasion, I remonstrated in favor of the General Hospital, and had a
stop put to the further supplies of bed frames to the Regimental Surgeons,
(...) was better furnished Upon this, and in like instances, I have been
visited by some of the militia Colonels and Brigadiers who, by their
representations, seemed to think it a hard case, that I would not concur with
their Surgeons and them, to subvert the General Hospital, which I was appointed
to establish and govern; to enable them, contrary to the designs of Congress
the General's Orders, and the very nature of things, to transfer all the
property and power of the General Hospital, to Regimental Surgeons. Colonel
Moylan then and often, told me, that by the repeated concessions I was making
to those men, he should not wonder if they succeeded, in what he saw they were
aiming at, to subvert the General Hospital, and plant themselves on the ruins,
to the confusion of all order and discipline.

But to return from this relation, which being connected with, and part of the
subject I am upon, is not an improper digression, I now resume the narrative of
that particular instance of brutal conduct, which I have had in view, to
illustrate my declaration of encroaching on my department, by an outrage upon
all military order and discipline, and on humanity itself.

Mr. Campbell, who had purchased a lease of the house aforementioned, at
Greenwich, from Mr. Delancey, was a stranger, and with his lady and family of
children, of whom he had several, all young, and some mere infants, came into
America to settle, about the time our unhappy disputes, with Great Britain,
began, or soon after they began to be attended with such consequences, as civil
war and bloodshed. Congress being satisfied that he had not come over to
America, with any inimical intention of taking part in the dispute, against
this country, saw fit, as I am informed, to grant him their protection; on the
faith of which he determined to become an American, by settling here with his
family: He chose the neighborhood of New York, for his residence, and ^eased
the house, with the estate, already mentioned, at Greenwich, where he conducted
himself inoffensively and irreproachably The lustful eye of some of the
Regimental Officers, or Surgeons, marked it out for a Regimental Hospital. I
had the account from Mr. Campbell's own mouth, with circumstances that gained
my credit to his relation: He informed me, that with out any previous notice,
to depart, and resting on the assurances of the Quartermaster General, that he
should not displace him, (for he saw no occasion for it;) a gallant officer
came up one day to the house, followed with a long train of sickly soldiers,
who were ill, with dys^nt^^ys, putrid, and other fevers, and put them in
p^ss^ssion of his house, without any regard to the owner, or to the
circumstances of his family, as if on purpose to drive them out from their
habitation.

This he effected; but not immediately, as Mr. Campbell had no other house in
which he had a right, or that he could hope for liberty, to shelter himself,
his wife and helpless children; nor before these, who were of a delicate frame
were seized with the infection, and nearly destroyed by the filth of the sick,
which had drove them from room to room, till they had no farther retreat. On
attempting mildly to expostulate with the officer, and to know, (...) he acted
by any authority, or command of the Quartermaster General or other superior
officers, this heroic man, just deigned, with a magisterial air, to spend as
much precious breath, as to acquaint him, he wanted not to exchange
conversation, or to throw words away, unnecessarily, upon him; and triumphantly
turning on his heel, faced to the right about; and left him astonished at so
unfeeling and barbarous an insult. Beset in this manner, with objects of
terror, and disgust, which were hourly increasing, he hastened with his family,
from their own house, to seek cover elsewhere: The most of the family, to my
own knowledge, as I had occasion to meet with them in one of the houses in the
neighborhood, assigned to me for an hospital, for they applied to me for
relief, very narrowly escaped, if they did all escape, perishing, in
consequence of the putrid dysentery, contracted as above.

It is, with great aversion, at the recollection of this distressing scene,
that I but faintly delineate it, not without throwing a veil over such parts,
as shock me, accustomed, as I have ever been, to hospitals and sick, when I
connect the ideas of delicacy in breeding and manners, and what protection is
due to female dignity and helpless infancy, with such more than savage
treatment, not of enemies, but of friends and strangers! Quis talia fando
temperat a lachrymis!

As I cannot prevail on myself to dwell longer on scenes, whereof this is but
one of many that have offered to my notice, and not less distressing, I hasten,
from them, to try if I can recover some less offensive grounds, on which to
proceed. A man that can enter into minute descriptions of particulars, so
disgustful and distressing, may seem to have lost his finer feelings; but if
any man can have any gratification in wading through the dirty puddles of such
business, he must have a strange perverseness of taste indeed: Are there men
that would take delight in painting a Demon, in all the shocking picture of
black deformity? Let them do it, I cannot; but being compelled in my
vindication. I have touched the subject slightly. The many things that have
intruded upon my memory, on this occasion, I have endeavored to refuse
admittance, wishing to bury the whole in oblivion, to rise no more in judgment
against us.

Of the Regimental Surgeons and Mates, I will only observe this once, that as I
have done justice to those of them, who merited it, by declaring there were
some amongst them of liberal manners, education and abilities; I must be
permitted to declare, there were many, very many of them, unlettered, ignorant,
and rude to a degree scarcely to be imagined. Some of them, I have been
informed, and from what I observed, could readily believe, were never educated
to the profession of physic, nor had ever seen an operation of Surgery: Many
of them had but small appearances of either literature or breeding, in which
respect they fell short of some of the privates. It would display a farce of
the most ridiculous kind, to give the public an account of the learning and
seize, which some of them, whom I have had an opportunity of examining,
have discovered; or to give a transcript of their reports. And that this
ignorance was pretty general, may be safely inferred from their repugnance to
stand the test of inquiry, so contrary to the practice of those, who are men of
talents, improved by education, who shun no occasion, of giving proof thereof,
by their compliance with those laws and regulations, which the wisdom of
States, or the good policy of seminaries, and corporations of the learned in
the profession, devise, to encourage genius and merit, and to put a stop to the
rapid growth of empyricism: And I observed, that it was generally the most
ignorant, the most opiniated and the most disorderly, and irregular in their
conduct, who were the most troublesome, and loudest in their clamours. These
were the men, from whom I found the greatest opposition, to every regulation
for introducing method, discipline and improvement, into the department of
physic and (...).

It is with much regret I have yielded to the necessity I have been under, in
clearing up my own conduct from the imputations of a set of wicked men, to
display the true character and behavior of those, (...) were my accusers, and
from the many samples of rapine, disorder and oppression of which they have
been guilty, to select some of their nefarious practices, and of such amazing
prodigality, as, if it were allowed to pass without notice, would have been
sufficient to insure destruction to any army, or people. I am fully persuaded
that we owe many of the misfortunes and miscarriages of last campaign, to those
men, who were guilty of them. I have but barely skimmed over the surface of
them. A reluctance to enter deeper into such a sink has restrained me: Were I
to attempt an enumeration of them all time would fail.

It is sufficient to show their destructive tendency, in general; to make a
remark on the mean and sordid practice, which was pursued by some of the
Regimental Surgeons, of selling certificates for furloughs and discharges, at a
less sum than a shilling a man. At this rate, a number equal to a regiment
might be discharged for a much less sum, than has been since given, to raise a
single recruit. At a moderate computation, so many men have been born on some
sick lists of Regimental Surgeons, including waiters, fit for duty, that if the
practice was common, the strongest Brigade in the army was not equal to the
number thus maintained in idleness. I am willing to hope that those instances
of mal-practice I have adduced are sufficient to shut the door against the like
abuses in future, and to introduce better discipline, and better men into
stations of public trust: And that men of better principle, as well as of more
knowledge and humanity, are engaged in the present service. To promote the
interests of these, were the motives of my conduct, and the object I invariably
pursued in all my proposed regulations.

Amongst those in employ the last year, some, in the time of need, deserted the
army altogether, and others shunned to attend their regiments to the field of
battle.

It was a general complaint, that at the battle of the White-Plains, few of the
Regimental Surgeons were with their respective Battalions, in consequence of
which many of the wounded bled to death, who, it was supposed, might have been
saved, had they been present, and done their duty: Their absence obliged me to
fix myself at the lines, with some of the Hospital Surgeons. This produced the
following circular letter to be sent round the country, with orders to the
Surgeons of the General Hospital who were at a distance from camp, to call upon
the Regimental Surgeons, in pursuance of the resolves of Congress, and the
General's commands, to deliver up all their sick to the Hospital, and to return
to their proper posts, signed, with the following declaration.

"I have read, and much approve of those instructions and orders."

G. WASHINGTON.

CIRCULAR LETTER. To the Regimental Surgeons and Mates, belonging to the Army
of his Excellency General WASHINGTON, now absent, with, or without the sick of
their respective Regiments and Brigades, on either side of Hudson's River.
GENTLEMEN,
FEW of the Surgeons or sick, allowed to remove from camp, some time ago, being
yet returned, and no report made of them to me, His Excellency the Commander in
Chief, conceives, that his former indulgence to the sick, in permitting them to
retire from camp, for the recovery of their health, has been much abused, both
by the sick, and the generality of the Surgeons and Mates, under whose care
they were allowed that indulgence: It is his Excellency's orders, therefore,
that each of you do forthwith wait upon Isaac Foster, Esquire at Newark, John
Warren, Esquire at Hackinsack, or Philip Turner, Esquire at Norwalk; Surgeons in the
General Hospital, whoever of them is nearest at hand, and make a faithful and
accurate report of the state of the sick and wounded under your care, and
remove those who are fit subjects, immediately, to the General Hospital, under
their care; for which you are to apply to the Quartermaster General's
department, for wagons, and accompany them yourselves. Such of you as those
gentlemen require to assist them for the present, in the General Hospital, and
who are willing to attend their sick there, under their direction, are allowed
to do so, till further orders; all others are to repair immediately to
Headquarters, and join their respective regiments; first furnishing me with an
accurate register, duly certified, of the state of the sick that went out with
them, or have been since under their care, specifying the time of their being
taken ill, their diseases, and events as to death, recovery or continuance; and
whether any of the sick have been allowed to withdraw from under their care,
and when. As all, who are absent without leave, must naturally be looked upon
as deserters. And the Surgeons or Mates, who cannot give a regular and
satisfactory account of the faithful discharge of their duty, necessarily
subject themselves to an inquiry into their conduct.

JOHN MORGAN, Director-General and Physician in Chief.
Camp at the White-Plains, November 5, 1776.

AMONGST other methods used by the Regimental Surgeons, to accomplish their
purposes, I have mentioned their infusing jealousies and groundless suspicions
into such officers as they could influence by their representations, in hopes,
by their means, to mislead the General Officers, and Members of Congress, to my
prejudice.

I do not pretend to have knowledge of all the applications that have been
made, to different Members of Congress, to give weight to the clamours of the
Regimental Surgeons; but one of them, that I do not know of, requires my
serious attention.

Having called one day, upon General Green, to consult him about some
regulations of the hospitals, I found him busy in writing a letter to the
President of Congress, complaining much of the sufferings of the sick, for want
of such establishment, as provided properly for taking good care of them. Not
the least notice was taken of the unwearied pains I had bestowed to accomplish
that purpose; which might lead Congress to imagine me very negligent of my
duty, or inattentive to matters that so nearly concerned me: I told him so: He
then added a postscript, in which he seemed barely to guard against reflections
upon me; yet forebore to do me that justice, which I thought myself well
entitled to expect from him, if to be had from any man in the army.

I had attended General Green in two dangerous fits of illness, in which he had
proofs of my attention to him, and assiduity to the business of my station,
that merited a far different return. The last was at a time, when General Green
had the command at Long Island, and about the time when the enemy were landed
not many miles below. Although I was then incessantly engaged on New York
Island, I made all other business give way to my daily attendance on him; and
finding his life endangered, by a putrid and billious fever, under which he
labored, prevailed with him to leave the island, and provided him with one of
the most healthy, airey, safest and best accommodated habitations, in the
center, betwixt the two rivers, two miles distant from the city of New York. My
place of duty changed, likewise, and my presence was demanded every day at
Long Island, to attend to the care and removal of the wounded. Yet I visited
him, daily, once, twice or oftener, under a variety of difficulties, and watched
over him with the strictest attention, and an affection little less than
fraternal, till his recovery was so far completed, that he was out of all
danger. I should not have given this account of matters, but for the following
reasons: The first is, because it was at General Green's desire, I established
a General Hospital at Long Island, for the benefit of that part of the army
under his command, which was so well conducted by Doctor Warren, as to compel
him to pass high encomiums on its management, in a Council of General Officers,
held on the complaints made by the Regimental Surgeons, that were found to be
groundless and unreasonable.

If there was any deficiency in either that part of the General Hospital
itself, or any want in the accommodation of the sick of the regiments stationed
there, that could be obtained, the fault must be laid at his door, and his
only, because he had expressly engaged, at my first consenting, in compliance
with his request, to provide a General Hospital there; to build or furnish
sufficient quarters for all the sick belonging to that division of the army
under his command; and because by my orders to Doctor Warren, my instructions
to the Regimental Surgeons, July 3d, and General Washington's order, matters
were so regulated that the sick might remain under the care of their own
Surgeons, in such quarters or hospitals as General Green himself might order
for them; and be considered as parts of one General Hospital, of which Doctor
Warren was to be esteemed the Director and Head: They were to be allowed all
necessary refreshments, and the Regimental Surgeons and their sick might
partake of every advantage, which the sick in the General Hospital enjoyed,
under the immediate care of the Hospital Surgeons, if the Regimental Surgeons
would consider themselves as acting under the direction of the General
Hospital, with this only restriction, that every demand was to be made, and
granted under the acknowledged authority of Doctor Warren, to whom I had (...)
all my own power for their good, for which he was to be accountable: And I
forbad him to deliver out any stores, of any kind, to the Regimental Surgeons,
for the sick, not reported to, and considered as in the General Hospital.

A second reason, is the following letter from General Green to General
Washington, of August 11th.

A third reason, is my having been censured, for delaying to communicate to the
Congress the plan of regulations I had promised to draw up for their
consideration, so long after I had undertaken it, during all which time it was
left with Genesis Green, for the benefit of his observations and remarks, viz.
from about the middle or end of October to the 20th of December, although I
repeatedly applied to him by message and letter, to expedite it for that
purpose; and it was then returned to me in the state I delivered it, without
any remark to accompany it.

And lastly, the liberty which Doctor Story took, of making use of General
Green's name, to sanctify his assertions, that the sufferings of the sick lay
at my door.

On these several accounts, I now call on General Green (in a more especial
manner) and on any, and every other officer, of whatever rank, whether General
or Field Officers, or those of inferior rank, who have thought fit to make any
representations, either to Congress as a body, or to particular Members of it,
or to the Commander in Chief, concerning the causes of the sufferings of the
sick, if they can lay any thing to my charge, whether relating to the disposal
of Hospital Stores, the disposition of public moneys, or any other article
entrusted to me: I desire to know if they can accuse me of any neglect of duty,
of indolence, inactivity, inattention to the calls of my station, or of any
breach, either of General Orders, or of the Resolves of Congress: If they can
do any of these, I shall be glad they will publish it to the world, in a manner
that will afford me an opportunity to reply, in print. Did ever any General,
Field Officer, or other, on any suggestion of the sick suffering for want of
care, visit the General Hospital, and judging with his own eyes, report to me a
single instance of the sort? I declare they never did: So that the complaints
of the sufferings of the sick, are not of those under my care, but of those
that were hindered from coming, or who were never reported to the General
Hospital, for admission. On the contrary, the complaints ever were, that "
whilst in the General Hospital, the sick were well taken care of, they could
not enjoy the like advantages in Regimental Hospitals," But if so, the fault of
not sending them to the General Hospital, is the more conspicuous, and the
wickedness of ascribing the sufferings of the sick to the General Hospital, or
myself, from whose care they were kept back, and which is justly chargeable on
the Regimental Surgeons, who kept them back, and the officers who supported
them in such a contumacious disobedience of every order, of the Congress and
General, is the more flagrant. But, let us attend to General Green's letter.

GENERAL GREEN'S LETTER TO HIS EXCELLENCY GENERAL WASHINGTON,
Camp at Long Island, Aug. 11, 1776. DEAR GENERAL,
THERE is no proper establishment for supplying the Regimental Hospitals with
proper utensils for the sick; they suffer therefore for want of proper
accommodation. There is repeated complaints on that head. The Regimental
Hospitals are, and ever will be rendered useless, nay grievous, unless there is
some proper fund, to provide the necessary conveniences. The General Hospital
cannot receive all the sick; and those that are in the Regimental Hospitals,
are in a suffering condition. If this evil continues, it must greatly injure
the service, as it will dispirit the well, to see the sick suffer, and prevent
their engaging again, upon any conditions whatever. Great humanity should be
exercised, toward those indisposed. Kindness upon one hand, leaves a favorable
and lasting impression, neglect and suffering on the other, is never forgotten.

I am sensible, there has formerly been great abuses in the Regimental
Hospitals, but I am in hopes, men of better principles are elected to those
places, and that the same evils will not happen again. But the Continent had
better suffer a little extraordinary expense, than the sick should be left to
suffer, for want of those conveniences that may be easily provided.

I would beg leave to propose, that the Colonels of regiments be allowed to
draw moneys, to provide the Regimental Hospitals, with proper utensils; an
account of the disbursements weekly, or monthly, to be rendered: This will
prevent abuse, and remedy the evil.

Something is necessary to be done, speedily, as many sick are in a suffering
condition.

The General Hospital is well provided with every thing, and the sick very
comfortable. I wish it was extensive enough to receive the whole, but it is not.

I am, your Excellency's most obedient Servant, NATH. GREEN.


I SHALL now take the liberty of propounding a few questions, on the contents
of the above letter.

WAS General Green acquainted with the resolves of Congress, of July 17, page
29? If so, has not his letter a direct tendency to oppose and overset them?

What reason can be assigned for Regimental Hospitals being established on
Long Island, with all the furniture and apparatus of a General Hospital, when
the sick might have the benefit of the General Hospital there, in compliance
with General Green's own request, although a very improper place for
establishing an Hospital, where the enemy were expected to land, especially
when there was a General Hospital on the Island of New York, for the reception
of those who could not be accommodated at Long Island?

Of what use could Regimental Hospitals be at Long Island; or rather, with what
disservice must they be attended, when the enemy were expected to land there?
Was it to retain more sick there, to embarrass the army, when the works were
besieged, or to keep Regimental Soldiers from accompanying their corpse into the
field, in case it was judged expedient to march forth, to meet the enemy at a
distance, from the lines; or was it convenient, at such times, to be
discharging many hundreds of sick, in the time of action, upon the Hospital
Surgeons on the Island, at the same time with the wounded?

It is said the General Hospital cannot receive all the sick, and those in the
Regimental Hospitals were in a suffering condition. Had any been reported to
the General Hospital at Long Island, that were ever refused admission? I never
heard of an instance. But if there was no room at Long Island, was there no
room in the General Hospital at New York? Would neither the College, with all
its spacious apartments; the City Hospital, with all its great and magnificent
conveniences; the City Barracks, capable of accommodating above a thousand men;
the many vacant houses in the Bowry, or neighborhood of New York, and whole
streets, appropriated for the purpose, and assigned to the Director-General, by
the Convention of the State of New York, and the City Committee, and to be at
his disposal only: I say, were not all these sufficient for their reception and
accommodation? If not, he had the choice of most of the country seats, for the
space of seven miles from the city, to answer that purpose. And were not these
enough?

But suppose it to have been necessary for the sick to be accommodated on
Long Island: What reason can be assigned, if they were to be permitted to draw
stores and furniture from the General Hospital, why they should not range
themselves under the direction of Doctor Warren, which was the only possible
method, that, with much reflection, could be devised to entitle them to the
necessaries and comforts, which it was allowed the General Hospital was well
provided with? Could the Regimental Surgeons, who were so earnest for having
separate and distinct Hospitals, have any thing in view, by remaining
unaccountable for their supplies? What other reason could they have for
refusing to have the state of their sick inspected by Hospital Surgeons, with a
power to order such sick, as appeared to be proper objects, into the General
Hospital, but to retain as many sick, or nominal sick, as they pleased, on
their lists, till the time of an action, and then to pour them all into the
General Hospital, and to receive the wounded under their care, for the sake of
trying experiments, and of performing operations, which some of them had never
seen performed? From all their actions, it is plain this was an object they had
much at heart. And what would that be, but to reduce Gentlemen, of the first
class in their profession, to be subordinate to all their purposes, and mere
ministers of their pleasure?

For what purpose are superior rank and greater pay allowed to Hospital, than
to Regimental Surgeons, if not to engage men of the first ability, education,
and experience, to take that charge upon them?

And after all, is there any thing proposed in General Green's letter, that I
had not urged before, both to General Green himself, as well as to General
Washington and the Congress, for the relief of the Regimental Surgeons, who
might be situated at some distance from the General Hospital? Wherefore, if
there could be any exception made to the plan, it must be to except those on
Long Island, where it was unfit there should be Regimental Hospitals, when the
enemy were expected to land there, and when there was a General Hospital at
hand, of which they might have the same benefits, with those under the
immediate care of the Hospital Surgeons and Mates; if they would submit to the
same regulations.

Upon the whole of this inquiry; when the Congress who, for ought General Green
knew to the contrary, might be supposed to have weighed matters deliberately,
had fixed upon a plan, which, by every subsequent set of resolves, restricted
the Regimental Surgeons, within narrower limits than before; or, at least,
enforced the former, with new and additional weight: Where was the necessity,
expedience, or propriety, of supporting the Regimental Surgeons in their
clamours? They were ever backward to send their sick to the General Hospital,
to have a plea for Regimental Hospitals, and to draw stores at discretion,
which never was allowed in any army, and which Congress had not seen fit to
allow them? Would it not have been more consistent with the idea of submission
to the commands of our superiors, if General Green, instead of giving that
weight to the prejudices, and ignorance in point of duty, and in the proper
management of the sick of an army, which the Surgeons labored under, had seen
fit to have enjoined their making weekly returns of their sick to the General
Hospital, for admission, agreeable to the orders of Congress; and thereby
helped to cure or remove those prejudices? This might have checked them in
their career, of aspersing reputations to accomplish their aims, and must have
contributed to their own ease, and the great benefit of the suffering sick.

But whilst Regimental Surgeons were so intent upon the establishment of
Hospitals for their regiments, and General Green was so earnest in seconding
their desires, by his application to the President of the Congress, and
Commander in Chief: What was the opinion of General Washington, if we are to
judge by his orders? They agreed with the resolves of Congress: And as to the
Members of Congress, all that I ever heard speak of them, exactly corresponded
with Mr. Gerry, who wrote me his opinion of the matter, in the following words:
"With respect to small Regimental Hospitals, I cannot but think them an
unnecessary and dangerous institution; for, upon every removal of such
regiments, those Hospitals are a dead weight, and must be removed, or be
exposed to the enemy. The latter, you will agree, is by no means admissible;
and the removing such Hospitals, is attended with hardships to the diseased,
and prevents them from an early recovery."

Let us attend to what he next writes, of REGIMENTAL SURGEONS: "As to the
REGIMENTAL SURGEONS, says he, being otherwise wholly USELESS, I have always
supposed, that they were never intended to answer any other purpose, in time of
war, than to cure, in camp, slight wounds and diseases, by which the patients
were not confined, and to attend the regiments, in time of action; to dress the
wounded soldiers, until they can be removed to the General Hospital."

Where persons of rank and influence, as General Officers and Members of
Congress, draw such different ways, is it possible for any man, to conduct in
such a manner, betwixt them, as to give satisfaction to every one?

But that it may be seen, how I endeavored to discharge my duty, by adhering
exactly to my orders, where they restricted me to a point; and yet in
prudentials accommodated myself, as well as I could, to the reasonable desires
of others: I shall here publish a copy of my directions, to Doctor Warren, for
establishing, and for the manner of conducting the Hospitals, under his care,
at LONG ISLAND.

INSTRUCTIONS TO JOHN WARREN, Esquire, SURGEON of the GENERAL HOSPITAL.
New York, June 12, 1776. SIR,
YOU are desired to go over to Long Island, and to consult with General Green,
about the proper houses for the forming of an Hospital (to be part of the
General Hospital) for the reception of the sick in his Brigade. For your
assistants you will be pleased to take over three of the Hospital Mates, of
which Mr. Glover is to be one, the other two as you agree with the other
Surgeons.

Make out a proper assortment of medicines, such a list as you think needful,
after consulting with Doctors Foster Adams and M'Knight, and order it to be put
up from the Hospital stores: If you have occasion for further assistants, make
a requisition from General Green's Brigade, of as many Surgeons and Mates as
you shall stand in need of.

Keep a register of the sick, in which you are to make an entry of the times of
their admission and discharge, as well as of the diseases they labor under,
and require of the respective Surgeons of the different regiments, weekly
returns of the sick in the Hospital belonging to their regiments, in order to
compare with yours: From which, once a month, a roll is to be made out for
receiving the ration money, from the Commissary General; which you will get
signed by the Brigadier-General, after you have compared it with the return of
sick born on the rolls of the Regimental Surgeons: From the time they are
admitted into the General Hospital, their rations are to be stopped in the
regiments. The list of the Regimental Surgeons, compared with yours, ought to
be delivered by them to the Adjutant, or Quartermaster of every regiment, in
order to prevent rations being drawn for the sick, in the regiments, so long as
they remain in the hospital.

You will be pleased to fix up, in the hospital, the regulations already agreed
upon by the Surgeons of the Hospital, for the government of the officers,
nurses, attendants and patients; and appoint some person to have them read in
every ward: The rules of diet, ought to be fixed up in the same place, and a
strict attention paid to the same.

You are to take over Mr. Weld, to act as a Store-keeper, who is to obey your
commands in all things relating to his department: Whatever stores you have
occasion for, in the department of the Commissary-General, or
Quartermaster-General, you will apply for by an order under your hand, signed
by order of the Director-General, with your name, of which direct the
Storekeeper to keep an exact account, and of the distribution of the same.

What nurses you require for the sick, you will engage at the price of half a
dollar per week; the number not to exceed one for every ten persons, sick or
wounded; the necessary laborers to be employed by the day, as usual, in which
avoid engaging a greater number than is absolutely necessary.

Deliver out no stores of any kind to the Regimental Surgeons: When the sick
require further aids than they can give, let them be reported to you, and if
their cases require, receive them into the General Hospital.

Take with you at least 1500 bandages, and a quantity of tow, with a set of
capital instruments, and all suitable dressings, in case of an action.

Use your best endeavors to make the Surgeons and Mates of the regiments
attentive to their duty.

For any debts contracted for the use of the General-Hospital, agreeable to the
above rules, draw on me. You will employ the same person to supply fresh meat,
and at the same prices, as in the hospital at New York.

Weekly returns of the sick to be sent over early every Monday morning as usual.

Be pleased to call on Mr. Delamater, for 100 additional blankets, for the use
of the hospital in Long Island, and as many beds, applying to the Quartermaster
for straw, from time to time, and order the nurses, washer women, etc. to clean
them from time to time.

An orderly Mate is to take charge of the blankets, and bedding, etc. and of
the Hospital furniture every week; to enter into a book for the purpose, what
stores of this kind are given out, to examine what each sick brings with them,
and to see that nothing is carried out, on their dismission, not belonging to
them.

An orderly sergeant, or corporal, or careful soldier, (if the General will
allow) ought to be stationed at the hospital, to take charge of the arms, etc.
of the sick, whilst in the hospital, and to give them up on his death or
dismission.

A Carpenter, ought to attend constantly, to make coffins, or perform other
work, for which you will apply to the Quartermaster-General.

No blankets, or other effects of the Hospital, to be expended at the funeral
of those soldiers, who die in the hospital.

I remain, Sir, your most humble servant, JOHN MORGAN.

To JOHN WARREN, Esquire, Surgeon in the General-Hospital.
The above is a true Copy, from the original. J. WARREN.


WHEN General Green; as already related, removed from Long Island, on account
of the dangerous state of his health, General Sullivan was appointed to succeed
him in the command; on which I thought it my duty to communicate to him, the
plan observed in the government of the General Hospital, and for the regulation
of the Regimental Surgeons, and to acquaint him with the above instructions to
Dr. Warren, and the mode in which he managed his department; and wrote him a
letter on the subject, that he might the better retain the principal heads of
the proceedings, in his memory, should he have any occasion to refer to them,
in issuing out orders, respecting the sick and wounded, as the enemy were
already on Long Island; and some important engagement with them, expected
daily. To which I received the following answer:

New York, August 21, 1776. SIR,
I Received your favor of yesterday; am much pleased with your plan,
respecting the Surgeons; shall take care that it is in every respect carried
into execution; and am, with respect,

Your most obedient Servant, JOHN SULLIVAN.

To Doctor MORGAN, Director-General of the Hospitals, etc.

And now, whilst I am on the subject of ortlers issued by me, to the different
Gentlemen, for the better management of the General Hospital, on whose care I
was to depend principally, for their being carried into execution, I must take
the liberty to observe, that were I to transcribe all I have delivered to them,
in writing only, for that purpose, it would require a separate volume.

To Doctor Foster, as being the eldest Surgeon, I wrote much and often; and
have now before me, copies of various orders to him, in a series of letters,
etc. of which I will only mention dates, and occasions, without detaining the
reader with particulars. The first (without date) was on his setting out from
Cambridge, about the latter end of March, or beginning of April, 1776, to
establish a General Hospital, at New York. The next, likewise from Cambridge,
April 22d: The next was at New York, on my setting out from thence, for the
management of the Hospital in my absence, whilst I proceeded to Philadelphia,
to apply to Congress for further instructions, though I came away without
obtaining them, but not without application, and as long time of attendance, as
the General would allow me. The next, were dated at New York, August 5th, the
19th, the 23d, and 27th; and September the 9th. The next, was also at New York,
September the 13th, for the intended removal of the sick and wounded, to
Newark, respecting the manner of their removal, and the provision to be made
for them, on that occasion, and for taking care of them, by the way. The next
are dated September 24, October 18, and 20; November 3d, and 6th; whilst he had
the care and superintendance of the sick at Newark; and of December the 10th
and 31st; and January the 10th, at Bethlehem, for removal to the east side of
Hudson's River.

Numerous and particular are the directions, which, in like manner, I have
delivered in writing, on various occasions, as well as verbally, to Doctors
Warren, Adams, M'Knight, Turner, and Eustis, Surgeons in the General Hospital;
on their being detached to different places, for the establishment of
Hospitals, for the convenience of the sick, in parts distant from each other,
in which my directions were drawn up with consideration, and not in a careless,
negligent, or perfunctory manner; for that was neither the way, in which I
chose to do business myself, or to require others to perform it, who were
subject to my authority.

I shall now explain another difficulty, to which I was often subjected.

IT was no unusual thing for Officers and Regimental Surgeons, on detached
posts, wherever they happened to be stationed, though ever so distant from the
main body of the army, whether on a march, or a retreat, to expect a General
Hospital to accompany, or follow them in the rear; as if it were possible, like
the Polypus, though cut up into ever so many pieces, that each part should
instantly repullulate, and become an entire Hospital, properly furnished with
every necessary accommodation, attendants, and conveniences, although amidst
Highlands, alps, or a forsaken and wasted country, without any help or
assistance from those who had the command; or, as if it were possible to save,
or remove the weighty and cumbersome apparatus, every where, with as much
expedition as they could retreat, and without any regard to the unfitness of
the place for a General Hospital.

I hope no intention of disrespect will be imputed to me, when I am sometimes
necessarily obliged to make use of the names of Gentlemen of rank, for whom I
have a personal and due respect, in the course of relating facts, which the
vindication of my conduct requires I should discuss, with all becoming freedom,
I think it proper to guard against such a wrong supposition, on the present
occasion.

At a time when I had formed General Hospitals at Newark, Hackinsack,
North-Castle, Stamford, and Norwalk, all crowded with sick, to the number of
near 4000 men; and of course, the Hospital Surgeons, who were not numerous,
stationed at various distances, through a space of near an hundred miles, were
fully employed, I received a letter from General Heath, at Peek's-Kill; of all
places I have seen one of the worst, that could be thought of for a General
Hospital, as well for want of accommodations, as of a proper country, to
support it: It bore date, November the 19th, on which he observed, that there
was neither General Hospital, nor any one General Hospital Surgeon, at that
post; that he received daily complaints from the Colonels of the several
regiments, of the sufferings and distresses of the Regimental sick; and that
"the neglect of them, was likely to prove very prejudicial to the inlistment of
a new army."

From the similarity of language in this letter, the complaints of officers
concerning the sufferings of the sick, and the evil consequences that were
predicted of their proving prejudicial to the inlistment of a new army, I was
apprehensive of the latent influence, and was determined, if I could any ways
prevent it, they should not have it in their power to lay the fault at my door.
I might, indeed, have remonstrated to the General, that it was the duty of the
Regimental Surgeons to send their sick, whom they could not take care of, to
the nearest branch of the General Hospital, wherever I thought it most
convenient for fixing it, and which I never did, without first advising with
the officers who were in chief command, that they might be properly taken care
of: But instead of that, the General Hospital was expected to attend every
movement of theirs, not so much for sending their sick into it, as to claim
supplies from it, or Hospital Surgeons to attend their regiments as was
sometimes required, whilst they were absent, and scattered through the
neighboring States, in pursuing the uniform scheme they constantly kept in
view, of establishing Regimental Hospitals, for which they explored distant
towns, and retired to them with part of their sick: These places became an
asylum for idleness, riot and dissipation, for when once they got into such
places, they were in no haste to return, and the numbers that resorted to them,
increased amazingly.

On receipt of General Heath's letter, I determined to ride from North-Castle
to Peek's-Kill, to wait upon him, and concert the necessary steps to be taken,
for accomplishing his desire, which I did; but first, I represented to him, how
impracticable the design of having a General Hospital there was, unless
convenient quarters were first in readiness; that the providing quarters for
the reception of the men being in the Quartermaster General's department, was
under General Heath's command, and not in my power; but if he would undertake
to give such orders, as would be executed, for the appropriating and fitting up
rooms and births, for 300 sick, and would enforce obedience to the orders of
Congress, October 9th, to allow no Regimental Hospitals in the neighborhood of
the General Hospital; and would call on the Regimental Surgeons, to remain with
their respective corpse, agreeable to General Washington's pleasure, of November
5; and to make such regular returns of the sick, that I could know the state of
them; ordering some attendants on the Hospital, that would be much wanted, I
would forthwith send a detachment of the General Hospital to attend his
commands. I acquainted him, that it would answer no purpose, but to bring
unmerited reproach on the hospital, if Gentlemen were sent up to take charge of
it, and, when they came, no quarters could be had for their accommodation, or
that of the sick See my complaince on this head, page 45.
.

That the nature of the establishment and management of a Military Hospital
might be the better understood, I drew up, November 20, an account of whatever
was necessary, for providing quarters and accommodations, furnishing of
supplies, and for the regular admission, care and attendants on the sick, with
the necessary reports to be made, from time to time, to conduct matters with
regularity, and to discover who do their duty, and who neglect it; so that if
complaints are made of the sufferings of the sick, it may be known where the
fault lies, and how to correct it. These I enclosed in my letter to him.

In return, the General "thanked me by letter, approved of my care and
attention, and commended my plans and directions; and, as General Sullivan had
done before, promised to take care that they were, in every respect, carried
into execution."

Doctor Adams, and Doctor M'Knight, successively waited upon General Heath, by
my desire, to request that he would order such quarters, for the sick at
Peek's-Kill, as were necessary for a General Hospital, which they were to
direct; but never could be provided with any proper accommodations, when they
were there; but, were obliged to cross the Highlands, to Fish-Kills, twenty
miles off, before they could meet with any suitable place, for the reception
and accommodation of the sick.

Of the clamours of Regimental Surgeons, from want of Medicines.

OF all the complaints that have been made in respect to the sufferings of the
sick, none have been so loud and clamorous, as those proceeding from a want, or
pretended want of medicines. I proceed, therefore, to examine into the nature
and causes of those complaints, and I doubt not, to be able to convince the
impartial world, and Congress itself, that whether or not the Gentlemen, that
compose that illustrious body, can justly exculpate themselves from the charge
of neglect, in not providing the necessary supplies of medicines, for the
Regimental Surgeons, and furnishing them therewith in season to be of use to
them, I am free from any merited blame, on that account. And I wish the reader
to remark, that the complaints, on account of the ^ufferings of the sick, from
want of medicines, were but mere whispers before the battle and retreat from
Long Island, compared to the clamours from that time forwards.

From the day of that retreat, August 28, 1776, a dreadful scene of confusion
and disorder took place, which had a particular effect in disjointing all the
measures of the Regimental Surgeons, and involving the affairs of the General
Hospital department, so far as it was complicated therewith, in the greatest
difficulties, for the remainder of the year

These misfortunes were increased by the obstinacy of the Regimental Surgeons,
in withstanding the orders of Congress; in which they were still supported by
officers, who, to put the most favorable construction on their motives, were
either not acquainted with the determinations of Congress respecting them, or
not skilful in the duties of Regimental Surgeons, and the nature of Military
Hospitals; or they were owing to the want of a proper arrangement in settling
the duties of the Regimental Surgeons, and providing them with the proper means
of discharging those duties. This may be imputed to the vast variety of
business, that constantly occupied the Congress, which did not leave them
sufficient leisure to attend to them, or their not sufficiently understanding
the subject, from the defect of experience, on the first raising of an army;
whereas they ought to have been early provided with medicines, instruments and
bandages, by a Continental Druggist, or chosen Committee, before the campaign
began: And the militia which came late to the field, should have been provided
by the different States, before they joined the army: Some of them did not come
till just before, and many not till after the retreat from Long Island; and
then came wholly unprovided with those articles, at a time when it was
impossible, if there had been ever so great a plenty of medicines in the
hospital or army, subject, as both were, to continual movements, and when the
officers of the hospital were divided, and as busily employed as men could be
in taking care of the sick and wounded, to dispense them out to all applyers.

I early foresaw that this evil might happen, and as early pointed it out to
the General, in the month of February, for the sake of applying a remedy, and
of not being burdened with the charge of it, as may be seen in my letter to
him, page 32. The contents of this letter, I also communicated to Congress, the
first opportunity (...) I had for doing it, in person, which was in June
following.

And after the retreat from Long Island, I described my own situation to them,
and that of the Regimental Surgeons, in the live left terms I could, praying
for farther assistance, and pointing out the means of it, without success, as
my letters to different members of the Medical Committee, will abundantly
prove; but all my applications, on this subject, were in vain. I never received
the least assistance from them.

In my narrative to General Washington, from page 7, to page 12, I have
described what pains I had been at, to make provision of medicines, for the
Regimental Surgeons, and to have the mode of furnishing the supplies clearly
and properly established.

To what I then wrote, I have now to add some further observations, to free me
from any misrepresentation, on this head.

When I made an offer of my best services to the Medical Committee of Congress,
to supply the Regimental Surgeons at New York, with regimental chests, though
not in my line of duty to do so; it was not because I wished for the employ,
being already burdened with much more business than belonged to my place, but
because I did not find that Congress had taken any step for the purpose; and
was apprehensive, lest when the evil arising from the neglect thereof, should
be more sensibly felt and complained of, the ill consequences of that neglect
would be charged upon me; and I expected thereby to get rid of a still greater
evil, with which I heard I was threatened, as I told the Committee, that of
being called on to furnish the hospitals and regiments, in the northern
department, with instruments, medicines, etc. a thing impracticable in my
situation, and in the exhausted state of America in respect to them. And I
still expected, if Congress accepted of my proposal, they would have appointed
an apothecary for the army, distinct from the hospital; or to have had the
medicines put up at Philadelphia, in proper chests for regiments, to be sent to
camp, duly prepared, of which I left with the Committee a proper list for the
purpose. But what is surprising, they never gave me any answer to these
proposals, so that notwithstanding I engaged in the business, I never was
properly authorized, or assisted for the discharge of that slavish employment;
although, it seems, I was answerable for the consequences of my offer, as
though I had been enabled, in every respect, to perform it.

Far be it from me, to charge the Committee with neglect in this business. All
I mean is to defend myself against any imputation. What answer did they ever
give me on that subject? None, except what is contained in a resolve of
Congress, July 17th, of which I knew nothing, till that month was nearly
expired; for when I was obliged by the General's order to return to camp, they
had come to no determination. Nor, do those resolves enjoin it as a duty: They
only forbid the Regimental Surgeons to draw any thing from the hospital, except
instruments and medicines

That it was not the intention, however, of Congress, to give them a right to
demand these, except, as mentioned in the printed letter, page 72, (a copy of
which I had laid before the Committee in June.) in small quantities, only to
serve them till they could be supplied from any neighboring place, is evident
from the following consideration.

The Congress had committed their stock of medicines at Philadelphia, into the
hands of Mr. William Smith, and by a vote of theirs appointed him Continental
Druggist, or Commissary of Medicinal Stores, for which they allowed him pay,
equal to go dollars per month. What was I to conclude from hence, but that the
Congress had seen sit, and proper it was it should have done it long before to
relieve me from a task foreign to my station, and to provide a person on
purpose to supply the wants of the Regimental Surgeons: And that this was their
idea, will appear farther probable, if it may be supposed the mind of Congress
was known to one of their Members, who, some time after this, in a letter he
wrote to me, expresses himself as follows: "With respect to supplying the
Regimental Surgeons with medicines, I am fully of opinion that the Directors
cannot well attend to it, but the application ought to be to them; in the first
instance, and they to sign orders on the Continental Druggist, for so many
chests as they shall judge necessary, and have the medicines assorted, as they
shall think proper."

IN REGARD TO INSTRUMENTS; anxious to have it in my power to furnish the
hospitals more plentifully, as I had found it necessary to increase the number
of Hospital Surgeons and Mates, and to recruit my stock of medicines, which was
almost wholly exhausted of capital articles, I sent Doctor Bi^n^y to
Philadelphia, a gentleman of the hospital, in whose zeal and activity I placed
great reliance, to forward to camp, with all dispatch, what medicines I had
there of my own, and as much as he could procure from Congress, for I could not
be sufficiently supplied at New York. I enjoined him to use the utmost
diligence to purchase instruments, if to be had, ready made, or to engage a
workman to make a great number of sets, on my account. He soon informed me, by
letter, that there were no instruments to be purchased at any rate; and that
the only workman in the city that could make surgeon's instruments was engaged
by Mr. Marshall, for the Congress; and that he could not undertake any work for
me, for a long time to come. Is not this an additional proof that Congress, in
their resolves of July 17th, did not intend to make me answerable for the
supplying of Regimental Surgeons, either with medicines or instruments; or, if
it was their intention that I should furnish them; why did they not enable me
to do it? Or why did they deprive me of the means?

By much assiduity, Doctor Binney, who was detained near a month in
Philadelphia, at length sent forward such a supply of medicines as he could
procure, which was very different, however from the list I had sent for, which
arrived at Newark (...) short time before the retreat from Long Island. It was
then unsafe to attempt, if not impracticable to get them over to New York; on
which account, till the army abandoned the city, and the hospital stores were
all removed to Newark, they remained there, where they had been left, except
some articles which were wanted to supply the General Hospital, formed at this
time near Kingsbridge, toward which place the army had retreated. I fixed Mr.
Cutting, Assistant Apothecary, at Newark, which I considered as the most
convenient and proper place at the time, for storing the medicines I had
collected there, and referred such Regimental Surgeons, as applied to me for
medicines, to him. This being my magazine of all that were most valuable, or
most in demand, I felt the loss more sensibly, when they were taken out of my
hands, in so irregular a manner, as I have already described in the first part
of this work.

IN no part of the vast variety of duty and fatigue that I went through, have I
been so sensible of ILL TREATMENT, as in what related to the supplies of
medicines and hospital stores, except the more shameful and injurious manner in
which I was deprived of them. It is next to impossible, to describe the toils
that myself, and most of the Gentlemen of the hospital, have endured in that
business; and the injurious reflections that have been cast upon me, for
conducting this affair, in a way the most meritorious, is truly matter of
astonishment, and only to be equalled by the treatment I met with from
Congress, in return for all those services.

To judge of this matter clearly, it is necessary to call to mind the
difficulties under which I labored for want of sufficient help, to consider
the scarcity and value of medicines, and how troublesome or impracticable to
procure them, in quantity, in America. I found no large stock on hand, when I
first took charge of the hospital, to supply the vast demands of an army, in
which generally more is wasted than used: The strictest economy was also
enjoined me, in supplying the wants of the hospital, however much the plan of
Congress is now changed. It is worth observing here, that the first piece of
business the Congress employed me in, after my appointment to the
Director-Generalship, was to look over a list of medicines made out by my
predecessor, and not a large one, to supply the immediate wants of the
hospital: A Committee of Congress put it into my hands, not so much, as I could
understand, to add to it, if I thought necessary, as to curtail it: What was
said on the occasion, at least, looked that way. With such views, such wants,
and such economy demands were made on me, from all quarters of the army, and
out of the army, to distant parts of the country. All the assistance Congress
allowed by their original establishment to procure assort, prepare and dispense
medicines, was one apothecary It being impossible to perform this service,
without further help, a mate had been employed before my arrival, and an
assistant with little more than soldiers pay, whom I also found here on my
arrival, and continued him in his place, without being allowed any other help,
till the year was almost over; when the Congress by their third resolve of
October 9, 1776, at once, enjoined me to furnish such further quantities of
medicines and bedding, as I might judge expedient, and empowered another, at
the same time, to deprive me of what I had, with toil and fatigue immense,
collected, and saved from destruction.

To be ordered by the General to collect medicinal stores, in the manner
already mentioned, and to be abused and calumniated for performing that duty;
and after supplying chests to five battalions at Boston, near fifty at
New York, and sent twenty more to the northern department, and furnished the
hospitals at Long Island, New York, Newark, Hackinsack, and Kings-bridge; and
when I made demands on the Continental Druggist for a small supply, to assort
what remained on hand, not to be furnished with that necessary supply, was hard
to be born: And yet to be baited like a bear at the stake, with incessant
demands, and made responsible for the clamours of the Regimental Surgeons, for
all the wants of new troops daily arriving, without supplies, and for the
sufferings of the sick, arising from their opposition to General Orders; and so
artfully excited that if I was at the General Hospital, cries were raised
because I was not at camp, and if at camp, that they could not meet me at the
General Hospital, was not less intolerable. The same noise pervaded from the
remotest towns in the neighboring States, to which the Regimental Surgeons had
conveyed the sick, beyond the reach of relief, to terrify and alarm the
country. Nor were these circumstances sufficient to fill up the measure of my
distress. The most affecting representations were made to the General, from the
distance of several hundred miles, ascribing the misfortunes of the army, ready
to mutiny at the northward, to me, when I had early acquainted Congress with
their situation, and prayed for relief for them in vain, although no part of my
care. And notwithstanding I had sent them what I could spare from my own stock,
and officers to assist them, at the earnest request of the director; I never
met with the least acknowledgment for these services from the Congress but, on
the contrary, the strangest and most uncival returns from the Secretary, only
for presuming to inquire of him, concerning the nature of the appointments
Congress had made in some other departments, for the care of the sick, that I
might the better understand, and understanding, better perform my own duty. Can
there be a more striking instance of ingratitude than I have met in the whole
of my treatment, where the obligations to show me a very different one, for my
attention to, and for the manner of discharging my trust, were neither small
nor few.

I shall here relate an instance of insolent and injurious treatment I met
with, for what I had not done, in place of thanks for what I had done to serve
the northern department. It is contained in a letter from a certain Parson
David Avery to Doctor Lind, and forwarded by him to the General, in September
last; in which, after giving a high wrought description of the sufferings of
the sick, at the lakes, for want of medicines, he introduces this virulent
aspersion: "Men of chief consideration, (says he) are more than uneasy on this
head, and do not hesitate to speak freely of first rate characters, as the
authors of those calamities, some blaming the Congress, and some the
Surgeon-General, (meaning the Director-General) of the American Army, and some
the Director of the Northern Department. For my part, continues this reverend
calumniator, I will not say which of them is the most guilty, but this I will
affirm, that great guilt lies at some one's door." Strange that a preacher of
the gospel, which breathes charity to all, and especially to strangers, should
carry the poison of asps under his tongue, and spout forth his venom at this
indiscriminate rate, against persons whom he knows little of, as is the case at
least of one that had nothing to do in this matter, but as an act of
extra-official benevolence, and who, though oppressed, as he was, with the
greatness of his own burden, strove to mitigate and lighten that of others! And
such are the grateful returns made to him for it.

BUT a circumstance that happened at that time, which I think of the most
consequence to explain fully to the public is the REMOVAL of part of the
HOSPITAL STORES from New York to Stamford, previous to the evacuation of
Long Island, and from thence to the interior parts of Connecticut; as this
transaction was laid hold of as a handle of censure against me, and induced the
General, by one of his aids, to write to, and acquaint me with the miserable
situation to which the sick were reduced, and the clamours excited, as it was
alleged, (but without reason,) for want of medicines as set forth in my
narrative, page 12, and 13. I shall now prove the truth of what I there
alleged; that it was by his Excellency's own order, that I shipped the stores
which were sent to Stamford; and the sending them from thence farther inland,
was by his commands, of which I had no knowledge at the time, whence the
General himself, and every other reasonable person, must be so far from
condemning, that they cannot, in justice, but approve my conduct. This account
will likewise evince the impracticability of what he afterward insisted upon I
should comply with immediately; but will show, at the same time, that it was
undertaken with all diligence, and executed with all possible dispatch.

Sanguine as the generality of men unexperienced in military operations were,
that the strength of our works, and so large an army as we had, were sufficient
to defend New York, against all the force that could be brought against it;
others, of better understanding and cooler judgment, had great abatements in
their belief of it. At any rate, they concluded it was very possible the town
might be destroyed by the shipping, whether a landing was effected or not. Had
a shell fallen amongst the combustible articles of medicines, the whole might
be destroyed, to the irreparable loss of the army. I therefore asked the
General what he thought of removing those articles that could be best spared
for the present, and mentioned Stamford, as a place to which they might be
easily transported by water, and from whence they might, at any proper time,
when wanted, be brought back either by water or land. He not only approved of
the proposition for their removal, but ordered it to be carried into execution,
as expeditiously as I could. At this time, being the month of August, I had as
I imagined, supplied almost every regiment in the army, with medicine chests:
But fresh demands occurring every day, and the want of a transport vessel,
impeded the performance of the General's commands, for some weeks.

It being in the most violent heat of summer, and so the less wanted, I ordered
the greater part of the rugs and blankets, the newest and best bedding, of
which I had collected a very large stock, and a thousand sheets of which I had
lately got to the amount of near two thousand, many of them new, and a number
of new shirts, at New York, to be set apart for the purpose; and a large
quantity of heavy hospital furniture, some of the largest best metal and iron
mortars, a number of crates of vials and gaily pots, the largest bottles, with
the most bulky articles, and those in the least demand, as some hogsheads and
casks of cascarilla, and other such particulars as we could best spare, to
accompany them. To these, I ordered a share of whatever we had in so great a
plenty, as not to fear being soon destitute of them, to be added, with a small
assort me (...) of chosen medicines, to be made up, and kept together in one or
two suitable boxes, as a reserve, most likely to be wanted, and the most easily
to be got at, on any pressing occasion. In the mean while the British troops
landed at Long Island, and many officers and some Surgeons, perhaps the very
men, who were afterward foremost in the clamor, for want of medicines, came
to the hospital, and expressing their apprehensions for the safety, took upon
them to be very importunate for the removal of the hospital stores. I met the
Adjutant-General, and told him in what state they were, and as reports of some
frigates being shortly expected to appear in the sound prevailed, I proposed,
once more, to know the General's mind, with regard to the removal of the
stores: He told me he had heard the General express himself on the subject very
lately, with wishes of their being gone; whereupon he, believing it to be so,
informed him of such his assurance, that they were already sent away; and urged
me to lose no time to have it done. A small transport being forth with engaged,
the abovementioned stores, amounting to eighteen tons, were immediately put on
board, and sent off, under the care of Doctor Ledyard, of the hospital; they
were safely landed at Stamford, and committed to the care of John Lloyd, Esquire of
that place, who stored them in his own house.

An apprehension and alarm prevailing soon after, that the enemy were about to
make a sudden descent upon that place, and might destroy the stores if not
removed farther from the sound; Mr. Lloyd wrote to the General on the subject,
and received his commands in return; in pursuance of which the Committee had
them removed further into the interior country, and particularly the most
valuable were conveyed to no less a distance than fifty miles, for safety; of
which I had no notice at the time, but have since obtained a copy of the
General's order for their removal, and a certificate from the Committee at
Stamford, of their removal, in virtue of the General's said order, contained in
the following letter.

TO JOHN LLOYD, Esquire, at Stamford.
New York, August 31, 1776. SIR,
I HAVE it in command from his Excellency General Washington, to acknowledge
your favor of, this date, and to request, in his name, that you will apply to
the Committee of Stamford ^or assistance, to remove the stores in your
possession, to such place or places as you and they may judge necessary for
their security. Whatever expenses shall attend their removal, will be
punctually paid, as soon as the bill them of is rendered. As these stores are
of great use, and may be of the utmost consequence, and things are so
circumstanced here, that persons and carriages, proper to convey them, cannot
be sent; his Excellency is hopeful you will excuse this trouble, and that yours
and the Committee's kind exertions, will most readily be employed upon this
occasion.

I am, Sir, your most obedient Servant, ROB. H. HARRISON, Secretary. A true
Copy, JOHN LLOYD.


Long Island was abandoned to the British troops, 3 days before the date of the
above letter; and in less than 3 weeks more, New York also fell into their
hands. With difficulty could the remaining hospital stores be saved, by
transporting them, over the North River to the Jerseys, and thence to Newark.
And yet it was within ten days, from that time, and whilst I was taking
measures to overlook and put in order the medicines, and to get a fresh list of
capital articles, wanted to assort them, that, owing to the clamours
beforementioned, I received that severe and unmerited reprehension, quoted in
my narrative, page 13.

I wrote to Philadelphia for medicines, but could get none, or next to none.
The Gentlemen, to whom I wrote, acquainted me their shops were exhausted. From
the Continental Druggist I obtained a very small supply indeed, with a proper
apology for it.

Under all these difficulties, I did not slacken my endeavors to obtain a
supply. I sent through the different States of New England, and applied, in
person, to the State of New York, at Fish-Kills, and, not long after, had
hospitals established at Stamford and Norwalk, well supplied with medicines and
other stores, the former of which, received into it above 12,00 patients, who
were comfortably provided for, under the care of Doctor Philip Turner, most of
whom recovered; and the latter above 700, under the care of Doctor Eustis; both
of whom furnished, from the hospital, all Regimental Surgeons who applied, with
whatever medicines they called for, to the full of their demands. By the
exactest accounts and returns of the patients received into the hospital at
Stamford, from November 5th, to the time of my dismission being known there, in
February following, the amount was near thirteen hundred, of whom the number,
remaining in the hospital, was then reduced to twenty-five, in all. Doctor
Eustis informed me, that upwards of seven hundred sick and wounded were well
provided for, by means with which I had sufficiently furnished him, whom he was
enabled to attend, much to their satisfaction; and that when he left Norwalk,
in March, the number remaining was reduced to eight or ten.

The GOVERNOR of CONNECTICUT has also favored me with the following
testimonial of my application to him for assistance, and of the good effect of
it.

BE IT KNOWN,
That in the beginning of October, 1776, Doctor John Morgan, then Director
General of the Hospitals, of the American Army, made application to me, by
(...), for my assistance, in supplying the troops of the State of Connecticut,
with medicines and other necessaries for their sick; mentioning the general
want thereof, and his inability (without some aid of this kind) to answer the
numerous demands daily made on him, and the consequent distress of the sick and
wounded of the army. In compliance with which request. I immediately sent
Doctor Philip Turner, with a quantity of necessary articles to his assistance,
and by this means the complaints of the soldiery were greatly lessened.

JONATHAN TRUMBULL, Governor of the State of Connecticut,
Lebanon, April 7, 1777.

WERE it necessary to produce other evidences of the pains I took to acquaint
Congress of the suffering condition of the sick, I could refer to a number of
letters I have written to several of the members, containing a particular
history of the movements of the hospitals and sick, during the whole campaign,
particularly to Mr. Gerry, Member for Massachusetts Bay, and Doctor Rush, of
Philadelphia, and especially in a letter I wrote to the former, October 6th.

In that letter I informed him "of the great clamours that prevailed, at the
time, amongst the Regimental Surgeons, because they could not be supplied with
every thing they wanted, from the General Hospital, of which I gave him a full
and just representation. It contained, likewise, a long and particular relation
of all my proceedings in the care of my department, from the time I entered
into the service, to that period, conformable to what I have delivered in my
narrative to General Washington. I pointed out to him the state of the
Regimental Surgeons, ever since I entered into the service, and the destitute
condition they were in, at my first arrival in the army, in respect to all
sorts of stores, instruments and medicines. I acquainted him with the pains I
had been at, to furnish them with necessaries, and the extent to which I had
done it, with my applications to the General and Congress to settle the
channels of supply, and with the applications to me from Canada, for that
purpose. I let him know, that I had sent off to the amount of twenty regimental
chests, for the troops at Lake George and Albany, besides what I had sent to
General Gates at Ticonderoga, (exclusive of betwixt forty and fifty regimental
medicine chests, supplied to the forces under the immediate command of General
Washington,) and acquainted him with what had been sent by the General's order
to Stamford."

"I further gave him as exact a description, as it was in my power, of the
state of the sick and wounded, and of the unusual complaints amongst the (...);
of the continual vicissitude in the state of the sick, from the various
movements of the army, and consequent shiftings of the hospital; and of the
difficulties to which this reduced the officers employed in attending it; of
the necessity we were under to remove the stores and sick to Newark; and the
obstacles we had to overcome, under many inconveniences, to convey them to a
place of safety, and to provide them with quarters; and withal, I told him of
the unruly behavior of the surgeons of the militia regiments and their
tumultuous applications for medicines; and informed him how widely they were
scattered through the country; of the desertion of some of the Regimental
Surgeons, and the calls on the Mates of the Hospital to supply their places."

"I concluded my letter to him with the following observations: "Upon the whole
matter, it appeared to me, that a general mistake prevailed concerning the duty
of the Regimental Surgeons, and the manner in which they ought to be furnished
with instruments, medicines and necessary stores. I gave it as my opinion, in
the most express terms, that they ought not to depend on the General Hospital
for them, because, in its present exhausted condition, and the loose state in
which every thing was, from the scattered condition of the sick, and the vast
variety of duty, and infinite fatigue of the department, it was impossible for
me to furnish the Regimental Surgeons, and not essentially injure, or totally
overthrow the General Hospital. And observed to him, that whilst there was such
a limitation in the number of surgeons and other officers in the hospital, and
the Regimental Surgeons could claim any right to depend upon it for supply of
what they required, it must soon be entirely exhausted of the means of
answering its design, and be rendered wholly useless. I therefore recommended
to Congress, the appointment of proper persons, to look out, and purchase
medicines sufficient for a store to be formed at Philadelphia, from whence what
might be wanting for regimental use, could be sent up in proper chests to every
Regimental Surgeon, as his occasions required."

"Thus, I observed, being somewhat more disengaged from the present innumerable
calls on me, that were foreign to my duty, I should enjoy more leisure for what
were proper to my station, and then would sketch out some further plan for the
better government of the General Hospital and Regimental Surgeons, and the best
means of furnishing the needful supplies." And, soon after, I sent such a list
of medicinal stores and surgeons instruments, etc. as I concluded would be
necessary for an army of 20,000 men, for a twelvemonth, including both
hospitals and regiments.

I accordingly drew up the above mentioned plan in a few days after, by the
General's Orders; which being first submitted to his remarks, and those of Lord
Sterling, and of General M'Dougall, as it was agreed upon, was then forwarded
shortly after, by General M'Dougall, to General Green, that his remarks being
added, it might be returned to me, with all dispatch, to compare the whole, and
revise it for laying before the Congress.

As General Green had shown so much zeal in the affair, and had made such warm
representations, successively, to General Washington, and to the President of
the Congress, on the subject, setting forth, that if the present evil was not
quickly remedied, it would fatally injure the service: I did not doubt, that he
would give it all possible dispatch, and send it to me, so soon as he could
examine it. But although I wrote, and sent message after message, I could never
get it again, till a few days before Christmas, when I called on him for it, in
person, and received it, without the benefit of a single observation of his, to
accompany its return, However, I sat down, so soon after as I could, and
reduced the whole into eight articles, which I enclosed to Mr. Samuel Adams, to
lay before Congress, with two sheets of paper, containing remarks, and reasons
in support of them. Of these, together with what I had communicated to the
Committee, at my conference with them in June, and to several of the Members,
in my letters to the President and others, I find they have not disdained to
make great use, in the arrangements which have since taken place, on a very
large scale, and especially in what related to the arrangement of the superior
officers, and the subordination they have traced out in the department.

I have not mentioned Genesis Green's omission to perform what he undertook, from
believing it to be voluntary; but as some persons, who having no better reason
at hand to assign for my removal, have, it seems, charged me, with having
promised to lay some plan before Congress, for better regulating the
department, and having then neglected it for near three months, during which
time, many of the evils complained of, continued without redress, I thought it
became me to give a true relation of the cause of that delay, so far as it
respected myself. I doubt not General Green's being able to give such
substantial reasons for his delaying to perform his promise, as will be fully
satisfactory: But as that regards him more than myself, I leave it to him to
state this matter as he pleases, if he should chance to think the taking notice
of it at all, to be worthy of his attention.

BESIDES the afore-described letter to Mr. (...), written with a view to give
Congress all necessary information of the state of my department, and every
thing that had a relation to it, to awaken their attention to the state of the
sick and Regimental Surgeons, as well as the hospital department, to make what
reformations and amendments in it they thought proper, I wrote a letter to Dr.
Rush, a Member of the Medical Committee; and from the same motive, my anxiety
on account of the sufferings of the sick, to ^ouse the attention of Congress to
make this matter a serious subject, before they should be compelled to do it,
from being overtaken with those calamities which too soon after came on, and,
with the rapidity of a torrent, swept away many hundreds, if not thousands,
into the ocean of eternity.

Although it is a long letter, and contains repetitions of matters, some of
which I have already mentioned, more than once; yet on that very account, of
their being repetitions, they have their use; and the length of my letter, at a
time when I had so much to claim my attention, is a proof that my mind was
deeply engaged in the subject: They carry with them the most convincing
evidence, that if the sick suffered, as they indisputably did, more than might
be expected, had the Congress done their part, either in making the necessary
provision, before the campaign began, or understood how to regulate matters
rightly at first; or had been as attentive, in applying seasonable remedies, as
I was, to point out the disorders and means of redress, it was not owing to any
neglect of mine, or any fault that I have yet been reproached with, from want
of experience or abilities for the task, or of zeal and activity in discharging
my duty: But of this, let the impartial judge. The letter is as follows.

To Doctor BENJAMIN RUSH. Member of the Medical Committee of CONGRESS.
Hackinsack, Oct. 20, 1776. SIR,
BY command of General Washington, all the sick and wounded, both in the
General Hospital, and those remaining under the care of Regimental Surgeons,
are removed within these two days, to this side the river, and chiefly in this
neighborhood: They amount to several hundreds, in addition to about 300 who
were before removed to Newark, and 4 or 500 in Orange County. I have neither
Commissary near at hand, nor Quartermaster, and brought with me only three
Mates: One Surgeon who was to follow, is hourly expected. The General's
commands were to leave a respectable body of Surgeons and Mates above
Kingsbridge, a general action being daily expected, as the whole force of the
enemy is drawn to that quarter. So soon as I get this part of the General
Hospital into order and regularity, I am to return, and provide accommodations
at the White Plains, for which indeed I gave the necessary orders before I came
over, that in case the communication by the North-River should be cut off, for
a while, which no doubt the enemy mean to attempt, suitable provision may be
made for the wounded, should there be a general action, which is daily
expected. I wrote to Mr. Gerry, giving an account of the state of the hospital,
since the affair of Long Island which I wish you to see. My anxiety to preserve
hospital stores occasioned my removal of the heavy articles to Stamford, which
I effected, just in time to prevent their falling into the enemy's hands. Great
part of what remained at New York, were again divided, part to be removed to
Kingsbridge, with the Hospital Surgeons and Mates, who remained with the army;
the rest to be sent with the sick to Newark. In packing and unpacking
medicines, and dealing them out, with other hospital stores, to Regimental
Surgeons and Mates, near one half of our mates of the hospital have been
employed the whole summer and autumn, to this time, to the mere subversion, and
almost total destruction, of the General Hospital. We are now scarcely any
thing more than collectors and retailers to Regimental Surgeons and Mates; and
the stores are so divided, wasted, and dissipated, that without a new
arrangement, and abundant more assistance than we have, or can have, or the
hospital continuing fixed in one place, we shall shortly be incapable of
yielding any assistance at all. The greatest difficulty is the supplying
medicines to the whole army. Think how I came to have that charge, (...)
addition to my duty as Director-General, etc. and that it was only designed as
a temporary expedient, and consider the difficulties and inconveniences of
continuing to execute it, and you must soon be convinced how impracticable it
is for me to answer (...). When I first arrived in the army. I (...) Regimental
Surgeons destitute of medicines, (...) and bandages; therefore a useless set,
(...) I represented this to General Washington, (...) pointed out to him (...)
necessity of every regiment (...) supplied, the ensuing campaign, with a
medicine chest for the whole year: But where to get the medicines was the
question, or who was to fit out the Surgeons I recommended an application to
Congress, to employ some one in Philadelphia, to provide chests for each
regiment. Whilst matters were under consideration, Boston was evacuated by the
British troops: By dint of unwearied assiduity, I collected a great number of
blankets, beds and rugs, which had been left, by the British army, in
hospitals, barracks, and in the river: I had them washed, and made fit for use
By the General's Orders I took possession of a large Druggist's shop, and a
small one of a private practitioner, after they were gleaned of capital
articles, as camphor, rhubarb, bark, opium. etc. The General concluding it
would be a means of supplying the regiments, as well as General Hospital,
ordered me to purchase such articles as were wanted, and as I could get, and
make out chests for every regiment, in the army which he commanded: This made
it late before I could get to New York, and above half the mates were employed,
in packing and accompanying the medicines to New York. Hearing, on my arrival,
that the Congress had a large assortment of medicines at Philadelphia, and
being called upon by the surgeons, in the northern department, to supply them,
I hastened to Philadelphia to confer with a Committee of Congress, and have my
duty better ascertained: I found that of a valuable assortment of capital
articles, which the Congress had purchased, there had been considerable
deductions for the use of the southern army, and part sold, as if the quantity
was greater than was required for public use: On which I represented to the
Committee the necessity of husbanding the stock well. I begged that a share
might be appropriated for the use of the army under General Washington, and
undertook to furnish for the present campaign, the regiments of that army, with
chests for the campaign, not imagining they would exceed the number of 40
regiments, especially as the Flying Camp was to form a separate department; and
was fearful lest, if regiments were unequally served, great part of the
Surgeons would be destitute and useless. To make out the better, I bought up
all the valuable articles I could meet with at New York, and elsewhere: Besides
5 regiments which I supplied with chests at Boston, and 20 to the northward, I
supplied, from the beginning of July to the middle of August, above 40 chests.
Then fresh demands came from hosts of militia, the numbers countless, who
joined the army, destitute of every thing necessary for sick and wounded, as
instruments, bandages, or medicines: They demanded even their provisions, as
well as medicines, from me, and our whole force of Surgeons and Mates were
chiefly employed to furnish the Regimental Surgeons: The labor was too great,
the task beyond our abilities, for medicines became more scarce every day, and
our stores dissipated. The making provision, to save part of our stores, before
the affair of Long Island, and the confusion in which we have been ever since,
moving about by detachment; the sick scattered, under the care of Regimental
Surgeons, for a tract of 30 miles and upwards; only one apothecary being
allowed; no leisure for either him or me to leave the army, and look out for
supplies; and none to be got for writing, or next to none; the wounded
requiring our care; destitute of help from Quarter Masters and Commissaries,
when removed to a distance. All concur to show that the resolve of Congress,
that the Directors shall supply medicines to the Regimental Surgeons, is a
thing impossible, at least in my department, for any length of time, unless I
am allowed to leave the camp, and range through the different States, or rather
to employ a variety of persons for that purpose. I have represented the matter
to the General, and now hope the Congress will take it into consideration. I
have been reduced to the necessity of sending a surgeon to proceed through
New England, to collect medicines, as Doctor Stringer is gone in person, for
his department. I have wrote to Governor Trumbull and the Assembly of
Connecticut, for their assistance; to the State of New York for help; sent for
and issued out all my own stock of medicines; purchased from public bodies, and
private practitioners; wrote to Mr. Bass, Mr. Smith and others: All is
insufficient. I shall make out another list, and send to Mr. Smith; but I fear
much that I shall not get what I want, in Philadelphia: It is distressing to
the last degree, to be harrassed with such unceasing clamorous demands, for
what I neither have, nor can get; and if I had them, I have not help sufficient
to issue them out, it being as much as two or three persons can do to prepare,
and issue out medicines for the sick in the General Hospital, diffused as ours
is, and necessarily so.

General Washington has ordered me to draw up a plan for the government of the
General Hospital, and of the Regimental Surgeons, such as I think practicable
in the execution, and best calculated to answer the design of both: I presented
him with a rough sketch, which he has examined, and made his remarks: Lord
Sterling has done the same; and it is now in the hands of General M'Dougall;
and it is to pass through General Green's, then to undergo corrections and
amendments, to lay before the Congress, for which this may prepare you.

This minute I learn, that the British troops have withdrawn from Frog's-Point;
are landed at New Rochell; a general action is hourly expected; an important
event, on which much depends.

The design of this letter is, principally, to prepare the attention of
Congress to the affairs of my department. We want rags, old linen, bandages,
lint, tow, thread, needles and pins, etc. They are not to be got here. Would it
not be worth the attention of a Committee of Congress, or some active Members,
to set some inhabitants of the city to collect these, and other necessary
articles, and send off with dispatch. They cannot come too soon, or in larger
quantity than sufficient. The hospital has been drained by supplying Regimental
Surgeons. We must depend on the public to furnish fresh supplies: They are not
to be got here: I am overwhelmed with business; I cannot leave the hospital to
go in search of them. I now give notice of my difficulties, while I can, in
time, that in case of falling short of the quantity of those necessaries, I may
not be blamed for the impossibility of collecting them.

I shall enclose you a list of medicines wanted for such an army as General
Washington's, which I conceive to be rather moderate than extravagant. Without
so capital a stock is provided in time, we shall be unfurnished for another
campaign: Nor do I think it sufficient for more than six such months as the
last. Judge then whether it will not be necessary to employ Commissaries to
purchase medicines; to prepare them before they come to the army; to provide a
place of safety, at a proper distance from danger, and not subject to continual
movements; to have an Apothecary for the army or regiments, distinct from the
Hospital Apothecary, and mates and laborers to assist in issuing them out,
when wanted, to the respective Surgeons. I remain,

Sir, your most humble Servant, JOHN MORGAN.


The Public may desire to know what was the effect of the above representation
and earnest application for some relief. There are few, perhaps, but readily
conclude, that this notice of my difficulties produced immediate and powerful
assistance; or, that the Congress did me ample justice, in exculpating me from
all censure and blame for want of it. Quite the contrary of all this is the
fact. No more notice was taken of this information, that ever came to my
knowledge, than if it were a tale of what happened in ages past, that did no
ways concern ourselves.

When the remnant of the army that retreated from Brunswick had crossed the
Delaware, I proceeded to Philadelphia, to wait on Congress, and to lay matters
before them in person, for such regulations for the better care of the sick and
wounded, as were suitable to the occasion, and to obtain an explanation and
amendment of the resolves of Congress, October 9th. I met Doctor Rush in the
street, and attempted, for a moment, to detain him, till I could acquaint him
with the present circumstances, and situation of affairs: He gave me no time:
All he said was, that "he was glad I was come; it would take a great burden
from his shoulders," and passed on. When I afterward called upon him, at his
house, to represent matters to him there, as a Member of the Medical Committee,
for relief; the sum of his answer was, that "he would not, for ten times the
consideration, go through the amazing toils and difficulties of my station."
But instead of relief from the difficulties and hardship of my situation, all
the returns I received from Congress, are complaints disregarded, grievances
unredressed, and, without an hearing, and without assigning a reason, a
dismission from my station, as if Congress intended to fix a stigma on my
character. But however hidden the motives for such conduct are, a day may come,
when these will be fully understood.

The same Gentleman who then felt, or seemed to feel for my situation, having
since accepted a place, near of kin to that which he then so earnestly
deprecated, may perhaps remember it. I can truly say, should he aspire to, or
hereafter enjoy, that very place, I do not wish him the ill-treatment and
ingratitude for his services in it, which I have experienced.

TO SHOW how difficult it was for me to receive any exact information from
Congress, on such particulars as I conceived it necessary to know, I need only
acquaint the reader with the following particulars.

Being applied to by Doctor Potts, who acted in the character of Director in a
separate branch of the northern department, to send him proper persons, to
assist him, otherwise it would not be in his power to discharge the trust
reposed in him, I nominated two gentlemen for that purpose, in the quality of a
Surgeon, and Apothecary to that part of the hospital.

As other demands of that fort might be made upon me, I wrote to Mr. Charles
Thomson, Secretary, requesting him to acquaint me, from the Journals of the
Congress, whether the nomination of Surgeons to fill up vacancies, in any part
of the General Hospital of the northern department, rested with me as
Director-General and Physician in Chief of the American Hospital. It appeared,
that Doctor Stringer had been empowered to take charge of the northern
department, the nature of which I did not fully understand: But I thought the
resolves of July 17, last, warranted me to call upon him, as one of the
Directors, for returns of surgeons, mates, and other officers, etc. but then he
had wrote word to me, that he conceived himself to be a senior officer, and
upon a supposition of our ever coming together, expected precedence, from that
priority, or to take rank of me; and had given me to understand in express
terms, that he never would be accountable to me, or to any person, but the
Commander of the particular department where he was, or to the Commander in
Chief: And referred me to the votes of Congress, September 14, for the
particulars of his appointment. Having no access to those votes otherwise, I
informed the Secretary, in the letter which I wrote him, of my desire to avoid
interfering with Doctor Stringer, in his department, from any misconception of
the intentions of Congress; and asked as a favor, that he would be pleased to
let me have a copy of the votes, relative to Doctor Stringer's appointment and
instructions, and to Doctor Shippen's appointment and instructions, that I
might know whether it was the duty of those Gentlemen to make me the specified
returns of July 17th, or not.

Did he comply with my request? O^ what answer did this polite, obliging
Secretary, return me, and two other Gentlemen, Members of Congress, to whom I
also wrote to request they would second my application to him for copies of the
votes and instructions, etc.? He sent them not, but in place thereof, in a
positive magisterial way, gave me to understand, (in which however, he was
greatly mistaken) that " undoubtedly, at the appointment of those Gentlemen,
they had the same powers given to them, in all respects, of nominating their
own surgeons, nurses, etc. in their departments, as I had myself in mine; and
as to rank and precedence, and all that nonsense (as he called it) there was
nothing in the Journals to establish it."

By this time, I had obtained from Doctor Stringer himself a copy of his
appointment, and of the powers vested in him by Congress, Sept. 14, 1775 (see
page 27) which enabled me to point out his mistake, by showing him that Doctor
Stringer had no power given him, by those resolves, of nominating a single
surgeon, or any officers whatever, except a number of mates, not to exceed
four; a power not equal to that given to any of the surgeons, appointed by me,
as each of them had a power of nominating five mates; and having taken the
liberty to tell this GREATMAN! that in what it concerned me to be well
acquainted with, for the direction of my conduct, I preferred a state of facts
to his glosses, on which I could form a judgment of my own, on the evidence
they afforded; and that had he been pleased to have examined these resolves of
Congress, his disobliging observations on rank and precedence, might have been
spared; I further told him, that men bred up in the army, had different notions
from what he seemed to entertain, and that supposing their rank and their pay
were to come into competition with each other, every officer of spirit and
honor, would rather sacrifice his pay, as of less consequence, than his rank;
and then asked him, if it was a matter of no importance, how it came to pass
that the Congress, in their late resolves, had determined that the surgeons and
mates of the hospital should take rank of regimental surgeons and mates.

His letter, in reply to this, contained in it several expressions so rude, and
impertinent to the matter in hand, that I choose to (...) but he very cynically
observed, that "having never been conversant in courts or camps, he doubted not
that his way of thinking, (as if that were to be the standard, and supercede
the votes of Congress, of which he ought to have considered himself the
servant, and not the master) might appear as old fashioned to them, as their
proceedings, at times, appear ridiculous to him, where rank stands for merit,
and that fantastical thing called honor, (with which, by his invectives on it,
he gives room enough to suppose he is little acquainted) supplys the place of
virtue;" and concluded with a rhapsody on Commonwealths, that I conceived to be
very foreign to the subject, as I never asked for a display of his principles,
having barely requested such information of the resolves of Congress as might
enable me to know, and to discharge my duty, the better. I only wished to guard
against breaking down those barriers, which were most like^y to secure my rank
and authority from innovations upon them; and which, perhaps, this very
Gentleman might be instrumental in introducing, afterward, into the votes of
October 9th, which I conceived I had so much reason to complain of, as the
first approach that was made to undermine my commission, which however could
not be thoroughly effected, without attempting likewise to blow up my
reputation, though unsuccessfully.

THAT I may at length bring this detail and examination of facts to a
conclusion, I shall make some abstracts from several certificates and
testimonials, presented to me by the Gentlemen of the General Hospital who have
accidentally fallen in my way, since the affair of my dismission happened,
which has enabled me to obtain their sentiments on the subject.

These abstracts set forth, that on being called upon for the purpose, and
considering themselves in honor obliged to certify facts of which they are
acquainted, respecting the conduct and management of JOHN MORGAN, Esquire late
Director-General of the American Hospital, and Physician in Chief, from being
officers in said hospital, and therefore falling under their cognizance.

TO ALL WHOM IT MAY CONCERN
They testify, -- That the said JOHN MORGAN, gave orders to the different
Surgeons of the General-Hospital, to receive under their care all patients
belonging to the army, whether sick or wounded, that were duly reported and
found to be proper objects, without distinction, with full power to draw on the
said department for whatever medicinal and other stores could be procured --
That the said Director-General was ever attentive to any calls which they made
upon him, for the supply of the hospital, and for procuring comfortable
accommodation, provision, necessaries and refreshments for the sick -- That in
particular instances, on the breaking up of Regimental Hospitals, and routing
of the sick, by the approach of the enemy, the sick being poured upon his care
in vast numbers, without either Surgeon, Mate, Quartermaster, or any one
officer to accompany: Doctor MORGAN having but little assistance for such
amazing and sudden increase of numbers, went from house to house, to procure
quarters for the sick, and provision for their support; instructing the Country
People in what manner to take charge of them, even to seeing them provide their
meals for present refreshment, and take care for their future sustenance --
That he visited the hospitals, going through each ward in person, to see that
the sick were duly attended, and provided for -- That he consulted very readily
with the Surgeons, and gave his assistance whenever there was occasion, and
showed a readiness to remove any difficulty that offered to the utmost of his
power -- That he performed capital operations himself, when present, or
assisted the Surgeons of the hospital therein, and has stooped to do the
duties of a mere mate, in dressing the most simple, as well as the most
dangerous wounds of the soldiers in the General Hospital, as an example and
encouragement to the officers under him, to attend carefully to that duty --
That if the sick have at any time suffered more than usual, it has been from
unavoidable accidents, not in his power to remedy -- That there were no
complaints of the sick suffering in the General Hospital under their care; but
that the uneasiness which arose was, concerning the care and provision of those
who were retained in their regiments, and not reported to the General Hospital
-- That they have been witnesses to his constant application and attention to
the duties of his station, in which his diligence, assiduity, care of, and
humanity toward the sick and wounded, were abundantly evident -- That the
principal causes of the sufferings of the sick, the last campaign, proceeded
from the regimental sick not being properly reported to the General Hospital,
and, in some instances, to the unavoidable scarcity of particular medicines and
other stores, which could not be procured, at all times, in sufficient
quantities, and not, so far as ever came under their notice, to any want of
care and attention in the Director-General; but principally from the repeated
movements of the army, which exposed the sick and wounded to sufferings that
could in no ways be remedied, under those circumstances -- And are firmly of
opinion, that no person whatever, acting in the station of Director-General,
under the same circumstances, could possibly have given universal satisfaction."


THE above abstracts are taken from certificates signed by John Warren, Philip
Turner, and William Eustis, Esquires, Surgeons of the General Hospital, and
Isaac Ledyard, Esquire Apothecary to the General Hospital, in the Eastern
Department. Doctor Foster was generally detached, and at a distance. I have
never seen Doctors Adams, M'Knight, or Burnet, since my dismission, to converse
with them on the subject; but have no doubt of meeting with equal readiness in
them, to testify to the same faithful discharge of my duty, with the other
Gentlemen, whenever they are called upon for that purpose. But what occasion is
there for further evidence. To accumulate it, would, in my opinion, be as
unnecessary as to hold up torches to the sun.

" When Ph^ebus does his beams display,
" To tell men gravely, that it is day,
" Is to suppose them blind."
It may not be improper to say a few words, respecting the Gentlemen who have
acted immediately under me; one of whom is raised to the rank of Deputy
Director General: None of them, that I know of, have done discredit to their
places.

However Congress may reconcile it to themselves, and to the justice that is
supposed to be due to Gentlemen of unexceptionable characters, that have served
them faithfully, and with approved ability, from the beginning of the war; and
have deserved well at their hands, for what they have done and suffered, from
being constantly engaged as Surgeons in the General Hospital, since its first
establishment; to pass them by, and to place over their heads some who were
never before in the service, and others who were their juniors; they have,
however unintentionally, done great honor to my appointments. Of three
Gentlemen whom I nominated, and who have served under me, as Surgeons, who are
all I ever appointed, and were the youngest in the hospitals of my department,
two of them are promoted, by Congress, to the stations of Physician General,
and Surgeon General, in the Army. Can a stronger proof be given of the care and
fidelity with which I exercised that trust, than in employing, as officers
under me, Gentlemen whom the Congress itself has seen fit, since, to
distinguish in so extraordinary a manner? And when one of the beforementioned
Gentlemen, who had just reason to expect to be noticed amongst the first
appointments in the department, was for some time, at least, wholly overlooked,
by them, as he was to my knowledge, probably, because he could not consent to
be troubling Congress, either by himself or friends, with solicitations in his
behalf, though they were not ignorant of his services; and though brother to
HIM, who laid down his life in their CAUSE, and whose memory is held sacred by
them; but who, without deriving merit from any extrinsic or adventitious
circumstances, has conducted himself in a manner that reflects honor upon his
talents and humanity!

If Congress could be capable then, of so long neglecting the known, but modest
worth of Doctor JOHN WARREN, the world may less wonder they should so easily
get over the obligations they owed to myself, and to their own reputation.

As to the Mates, many of them are raised to the rank of Surgeons of Regiments,
and I doubt not, that by their superior knowledge in the duties of their
station, above what many of their predecessors enjoyed, they will reflect
credit on the General Hospital, under my direction, as a School to qualify them
for superior services.

As to myself, and the unworthy treatment I have met with; I call it unworthy,
for so it is, in respect to me, however worthy it may be of the authors of it;
whatever credit and growing fame some may imagine they have acquired by it, I
consider it not as any dishonor to me, but to those only who have procured it.
Time, the great revealer of Men's motives as well as actions, will perhaps, one
day, un mask the private and disguised designs of men, who cover them at
present, with a pretext of public good, but which are visible by their actions
to the quicker sight of discerning men, who judge of a tree, not by its
appearances, but its fruits. I do not envy them, but rather wonder, and wish
them to enjoy the just reward of their devices.

" Nec Drances potius, sive haecest ira deorum,
" Mor^e ^uat; sive est virtus aut gloria, tollat."
I doubt not, but they will fail, however, in one part of their design, and by
endeavoring to throw an odium on my character, fix an indeliable mark on their
own; and, perhaps, find that injustice so sweet to their taste, may, before it
is digested, bring forth gaul and bitterness, and what they have sowed in
deceit and folly, they may reap in remorse and disappointment.

Leaving them, therefore, to the opinion which the juster and wiser part of
mankind may have of them in this proceeding, and to the operation of that
inward monitor in their own breasts, I am satisfied in having hung out lights
to those embarked in the same bottom with designing men, who steering amidst
rocks and quicksands, "hold themselves in readiness to plunder the vessel they
mean to wreck."

I have endeavored to discharge my duty in what I undertook from principle,
according to my degree of knowledge and capacity, with faithfulness and
diligence; and what I value more than knowledge or capacity alone, with
humanity; from whence results the approbation of a good conscience, which as my
enemies, with all their power, cannot give, so neither can they take away. Why
then should I repine at the portion of difficulties, that, in times like these,
have fallen to my lot, and which I have neither coveted, nor been able to shun?
Having been born in freedom, I claim it, in common with every other freeman, as
an indisputable, unalienable right, which I have never surrendered to any one,
to defend my good name from the attacks of insidious men, of whatever class or
denomination. Be it ever, therefore, my part to declare, without fear and
without reserve, that true Freedom is my "unconquerble delight," and that I am
equally a foe to false pretenses of liberty, and "to every species of bondage,"
but most to "that of the mind."

As to those who have made themselves busy to reflect on my character, I
consider their envy to be rather a proof of merit, than dread the power of
their malice to affect me, since, in every age, Envy does merit, as its shade,
pursue,
And by the shadow, proves the substance true.


But neither pretending, nor wishing, to derive any merit from that source, I
willingly subject the validity of the preceding narrative, and exact
representation of facts, to the strictest scrutiny of the impartial and
disinterested part of the community: To their equitable and candid decision
therefore, this Defense of my public conduct, against all the secret arts and
impotent malice of a set of invidious and plotting men, who have sought to
establish their power and influence, on my injured Innocence and Reputation, is
cheerfully submitted.

POSTSCRIPT.
* The Italick Letters (in parenthesis) in the Memorial to General WASHINGTON,
were, at first, intended to point out to those parts of the Appendix, which
more particularly regard the facts, there mentioned; but it being afterward
found necessary to change the order of the proofs and illustrations, the
references were afterward dropped, for the sake of connecting them with those
facts, and others which were omitted in the Memorial, in the style of a
continued Narrative, for the greater ease of the Reader.


