THE American CRISIS. NUMBER III. BY THE AUTHOR OF COMMON SENSE.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by STYNER and CIST, in Second-street, six doors
above Arch-street. WHERE ALSO MAY BE HAD No. I. and II.

By His EXCELLENCY GEORGE WASHINGTON, Esquire General, and Commander in Chief of
the forces of the United States of America. PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS many soldiers, lately inlisted in the Continental Army, not content
with the generous bounties and encouragements granted to them by Congress, but
influenced by a base regard to their interest, have reinlisted with, received
bounties from, other Officers, and then deserted. And whereas, it is presumed
that many, fully sensible of the enormity of their crimes, would return to
their duty, were they not deterred by an apprehension of suffering the severe
punishment lately inflicted on those found guilty of desertion -- I HAVE
thought proper to issue this my Proclamation, offering free pardon to all those
above described, as well as to those who have deserted from other motives, who
shall voluntarily surrender themselves to any Officer in the Continental Army,
or join their respective corpse, before the fifteenth day of May next. And I do
strictly enjoin all Officers in the army under my command, and entreat the good
people of these States, to use their utmost endeavors to apprehend and secure
such deserters as shall not avail themselves of the indulgence offered by this
Proclamation.

GIVEN under my hand, at Headquarters, Morris-Town, this sixth day of April,
One Thousand Seven Hundred and Seventy-seven. GEORGE WASHINGTON.
By His EXCELLENCY'S Command, ROBERT H. HARRISON, Sec.

GENERAL ORDERS.
Headquarters, Morris-Town, April 8, 1777.
HIS Excellency the Commander in Chief orders in the most positive terms, That
all the Continental Officers, who are absent without leave in writing from
himself, or some Continental General-Officer, or are not upon any special
command, or not on the recruiting service, (the two last by proper authority)
do immediately join their respective corpse, without the least hesitation or
delay. The time for which they have written furloughs must not be exceeded a
single hour. Such as have been sent upon particular commands, or are engaged in
the recruiting service, must pay the utmost attention to their orders. No
excuse can be admitted for idleness or dissipation, at a time when their own
honor and their country's interest call them to the field.

His Excellency does not wish to convey these orders through the channel of a
news-paper; but the difficulty, indeed impracticability, of transmitting them
in time in any other way, render it indispensably necessary.

By His Excellency's command, G. JOHNSTON, A. D. C

The American CRISIS, etc.
IN the progress of politics, as in the common occurrences of life, we are not
only apt to forget the ground we have traveled over, but frequently neglect to
gather up experience as we go. We expend, if I may so say, the knowledge of
every day on the circumstances that produce it, and journey on in search of new
matter and new refinements: But as it is pleasant, and sometimes useful, to
look back, even to the first periods of infancy, and trace the turns and
windings through which we have passed, so we may likewise derive many
advantages by halting a while in our political career, and taking a review of
the wondrous complicated labyrinth of little more than yesterday.

TRULY, may we say, that never did man grow old in so short a time! We have
crowded the business of an age into the compass of a few months, and have been
driven through such a rapid succession of things, that, for the want of leisure
to think, we unavoidably wasted knowledge as we came, and have left nearly as
much behind us as we brought with us: But the road is yet rich with the
fragments, and, before we fully lose sight of them, will repay us for the
trouble of stopping to pick them up.

WERE a man to be totally deprived of memory, he would be incapable of forming
any just opinion; every thing about him would seem a chaos; he would have even
his own history to ask from every one; and by not knowing how the world went on
in his absence, he would be at a loss to know how it ought to go on when he
recovered, or rather, returned to it again. In like manner, though in a less
degree, a too great inattention to past occurrences retards and bewilders our
judgment in every thing; while, on the contrary, by comparing what is past with
what is present, we frequently hit on the true character of both, and become
wise with very little trouble. It is a kind of countermarch, by which we get
into the rear of Time, and mark the movements and meaning of things as we make
our return. There are certain circumstances, which, at the time of their
happening, are kind of riddles, and as every riddle is to be followed by its
answer, so those kind of circumstances will be followed by their events, and
those events are always the true solution. A considerable space of time may
lapse between, and unless we continue our observations from the one to the
other, the harmony of them will pass away unnoticed: But the misfortune is,
that partly from the pressing necessity of some instant things, and partly from
the impatience of our own tempers, we are frequently in such a hurry to make
out the meaning of every thing as fast as it happens, that we thereby never
truly understand it; and not only start new difficulties to ourselves by so
doing, but, as it were, embarrass Providence in her good designs.

I have been civil in stating this fault on a large scale, for, as it now
stands, it does not appear to be levelled against any particular set of men;
but were it to be refined a little farther, it might afterward be applied to
the Tories with a degree of striking propriety: Those men have been remarkable
for drawing sudden conclusions from single facts. The least apparent mishap on
our side, or the least seeming advantage on the part of the enemy, have
determined with them the fate of a whole campaign. By this hasty judgment they
have converted a retreat into a defeat; mistook generalship for error; while
every little advantage purposely given the enemy, either to weaken their
strength by dividing it, embarrass their councils by multiplying their objects,
or to secure a greater post by the surrender of a less, has been instantly
magnified into a conquest. Thus, by quartering ill policy upon ill principles,
they have frequently promoted the cause they designed to injure, and injured
that which they intended to promote.

IT is probable the campaign may open before this Number comes from the press.
The enemy have long lain idle and amused themselves with carrying on the war by
proclamations only. While they continue their delay our strength increases, and
were they to move to action now, it is a circumstantial proof they have no
reinforcement coming; wherefore, in either case, the comparative advantage will
be ours. Like a wounded disabled whale they want only time and room to die in;
and though in the agony of their exit, it may be unsafe to live within the
flapping of their tail, yet every hour shortens their date and lessens their
power of mischief. If any thing happens while this Number is in the press, it
will afford me a subject for the last pages of it. At present I am tired of
waiting; and as neither the enemy, nor the state of politics, have yet produced
any thing new, I am thereby left in the field of general matter undirected by
any striking or particular object. This Crisis, therefore, will be made up
rather of variety than novelty, and consist more of things useful than things
wonderful.

THE success of the cause, the union of the people, and the means of supporting
and securing both, are points which cannot be too much attended to. He who
doubts of the former is a desponding coward, and he who wilfully disturbs the
latter is a traitor. Their characters are easily fixed, and under these short
descriptions I leave them for the present.

ONE of the greatest degrees of sentimental union which America ever knew, was
in denying the right of the British parliament "to bind the Colonies in all
cases whatever." The declaration is in its form an almighty one, and is the
loftiest stretch of arbitrary power that ever one set of men, or one country
claimed over another. Taxation was nothing more than the putting the declared
right into practice; and this failing, recourse was had to arms, as a means to
establish both the right and the practice, or to answer a worse purpose, which
will be mentioned in the course of this Number. And in order to repay
themselves the expense of an army, and to profit by their own injustice, the
Colonies were, by another law, declared to be in a state of actual rebellion,
and of consequence all property therein would fall to the conquerors.

THE Colonies, on their part, FIRST, denied the right; SECONDLY, they suspended
the use of taxable articles, and petitioned against the practice of taxation:
and these failing, they, THIRDLY, defended their property by force, as soon as
it was forcibly invaded, and in answer to the declaration of rebellion and
non-protection ^^^^blished their declaration of Independence and right to
self-protection.

THESE, in a few words, are the different stages of the quarrel; and the parts
are so intimately and necessarily connected with each other as to admit of no
separation. A person, to use a trite phrase, must be a Whig or a Tory in the
lump. His feelings, as a man, may be wounded; his charity, as a Christian, may
be moved; but his political principles must go through all the cases on one
side or the other. He cannot be a Whig in this stage, and a Tory in that. If he
says he is against the United Independence of the Continent, he is to all
intents and purposes against her in all the rest; because THIS LAST comprehends
the whole. And he may just as well say, that Britain was right in declaring us
rebels; right in taxing us; and right in declareing her "right to bind the
Colonies in all cases whatsoever." It signifies nothing what neutral ground, of
his own createing, he may skulk upon for shelter, for the quarrel in no stage
of it has afforded any such ground; and either we or Britain are absolutely
right or absolutely wrong through the whole.

BRITAIN, like a gamester nearly ruined, has now put all her losses into one
bet, and is playing a desperate game for the total. If she win it, she wins
from me my life; she wins the Continent as the forfeited property of rebels;
the right of taxing those that are left as reduced subjects; and the power of
binding them as slaves: And the single die which determines this unparalleled
event is, Whether we support our Independence or she overturn it. This is
coming to the point at once. Here is the touchstone to try men by. He that is
not a supporter of the Independent States of America, in the same degree that
his religious and political principles would suffer him to support the
government of any other country, of which he called himself a subject, is, in
the American sense of the word, A TORY; and the instant that he endeavors to
bring his Toryism into practice, he becomes A TRAITOR. The first can only be
detected by a general test, and the law has already provided for the latter.

IT is unnatural and impolitic to admit men who would root up our Independence
to have any share in our legislation, either as electors or representatives;
because the support of our Independence rests in a great measure on the vigor
and purity of our public bodies. Would Britain, even in time of peace, much
less in war, suffer an election to be carried by men who professed themselves
not to be her subjects, or allow such to sit in parliament? Certainly not.

BUT there are a certain species of Tories with whom conscience or principle
has nothing to do, and who are so from avarice only. Some of the first
fortunes in the Continent, on the part of the Whigs, are staked on the issue of
our present measures. And shall disaffection only be rewarded with security?
Can any thing be a greater inducement to a miserly man, than the hope of making
his mammon safe? And though the scheme be fraught with every character of
folly, yet, so long as he supposes, that by doing nothing materially criminal
against America on one part, and by expressing his private disapprobation
against Independence, as a palliative with the enemy on the other part, he
stands thereby in a safe line between both, while, I say, this ground be
suffered to remain, craft and the spirit of avarice will point it out, and men
will not be wanting to fill up this most contemptible of all characters.

THESE men, ashamed to own the fordid cause from whence their disaffection
springs, add thereby meanness to meanness, by endeavoring to shelter
themselves under the mask of hypocrisy; that is, they had rather be thought to
be Tories from some kind of principle, than Tories by having no principle at
all. But till such time as they can show some real reason, natural, political
or conscientious, on which their odjections to Independence are founded, we are
not obliged to give them credit for being Tories of the first stamp, but must
set them down as Tories of the last.

IN the Second Number of the Crisis I endeavored to show the impossibility of
the enemy making any conquest of America; that nothing was wanting on our part
but patience and perseverance, and that, with these virtues, our success, as
far as human speculation could discern, seemed as certain as fate. But as there
are many among us, who, influenced by others, have regularly gone back from the
principles they once held, in proportion as we have gone forward; and as it is
the unfortunate lot of many a good man to live within the neighborhood of
disaffected ones; I shall therefore, for the sake of confirming the one and
recovering the other, endeavor, in the space of a page or two, to go over some
of the leading principles in support of Independence. It is a much pleasanter
task to prevent vice than to punish it; and however our tempers may be
gratified by resentment, or our national expenses eased by forfeited estates,
harmony and friendship is nevertheless the happiest condition a country can be
blessed with.

THE principal arguments in support of Independence may be comprehended under
the four following heads, FIRST, -- The natural right of the Continent to
Independence. SECONDLY, -- Her interest in being independent. THIRDLY, -- The
necessity. -- And FOURTHLY, -- The moral advantages arising therefrom.


I. THE NATURAL RIGHT of the Continent to Independence, is a point which never
yet was called in question. It will not even admit of a debate. To deny such a
right, would be a kind of atheism against nature: And the best answer to such
an objection would be, "The fool has said in his heart, There is no God."

II. THE INTEREST of the Continent in being independent is a point as clearly
right as the former. America, by her own internal industry, and unknown to all
the powers of Europe, was at the beginning of the dispute, arrived at a pitch
of greatness, trade and population, beyond which it was the interest of Britain
not to suffer her to pass, lest she should grow too powerful to be kept
subordinate. She began to view this country with the same uneasy malicious eye,
with which a covetous guardian would view his ward whose estate he had been
enriching himself by for twenty years, and saw him just arriving at manhood.
And America owes no more to Britain for her present maturity, than the ward
would to his guardian for being twenty-one years of age. That America has
flourished at the time she was under the government of Britain, is true; but
there is every natural reason to believe, that had she been an independent
country from the first settlement thereof, uncontrouled by any foreign power,
free to make her own laws, regulate and encourage her own commerce, she had by
this time been of much greater worth than now. The case is simply this, The
first settlers in the different Colonies were left to shift for themselves,
unnoticed and unsupported by any European government; but as the tyranny and
persecution of the old world daily drove numbers to the new, and, as by the
favor of Heaven on their industry and perseverance, they grew into importance,
so, in a like degree, they became an object of profit to the greedy eyes of
Europe. It was impossible in this state of infancy, however thriving and
promising, that they could resist the power of any armed invader that should
seek to bring them under his authority. In this situation Britain thought it
worth her while to claim them, and the Continent received and acknowledged the
claimer. It was, in reality, of no very great importance who was her master,
seeing, that from the force and ambition of the different powers of Europe she
must, till she acquired strength enough to assert her own right, acknowledge
some one. As well, perhaps, Britain as another; and it might have been as well
to have been under the States of Holland as any. The same hopes of engrossing
and profiting by her trade, by not oppressing it too much, would have operated
alike with any master, and produced to the Colonies the same effects. The
clamor of protection, likewise, was all a farce; because, in order to make that
protection necessary, she must first, by her own quarrels create us enemies.
Hard terms, indeed!

TO know whether it be the interest of the Continent to be independent, we need
only ask this easy, simple question: Is it the interest of a man to be a boy
all his life? The answer to one will be the answer to both. America has been
one continued scene of legislative contention from the first king's
representative to the last; and this was unavoidably founded in the natural
opposition of interest between the old country and the new. A governor sent
from England, or receiving his authority therefrom, ought never to have been
considered in any other light than that of a genteel commissioned spy, whose
private business was information, and his public business a kind of civilized
oppression. In the first of these characters he was to watch the tempers,
sentiments and disposition of the people, the growth of trade, and the increase
of private fortunes; and in the latter, to suppress all such acts of the
Assemblies, however beneficial to the people, which did not directly or
indirectly throw some increase of power or profit into the hands of those who
sent him.

AMERICA, till now, could never be called a free country, because her
legislation depended on the will of a man three thousand miles distant, whose
interest was in opposition to ours, and who, by a single "NO," could forbid
what law he pleased.

THE freedom of trade, likewise, is, to a trading country, an article of such
vast importance, that the principal source of wealth depends upon it; and it is
impossible that any country can flourish, as it otherwise might do, whose
commerce is engrossed, cramped and fettered by the laws and mandates of another
-- yet these evils, and more than I can here enumerate, the Continent has
suffered by being under the government of Great Britain. By an Independence we
clear the whole at once -- put an end to the business of unanswered petitions
and fruitless remonstrances -- exchange Britain for Europe -- shake hands with
the world -- live at peace with mankind -- and trade to any market where we
best can buy and sell.

III. THE NECESSITY, likewise, of being independent, even before it was
declared, became so evident and important, that the Continent ran the risk of
being ruined every day she delayed it. There were reasons to believe that
Britain would endeavor to make a European matter of it, and rather than lose
the whole, would dismember it like Poland, and dispose of her several claims to
the highest bidder. Genoa, failing in her attempts to reduce Corsica, made a
sale of it to the French, and such traffics have been common in the old world.
We had at that time no Ambassador in any part of Europe, to counteract her
negociations, and by that means she had the range of every foreign Court
uncontradicted on our part. We even knew nothing of the treaty for the Hessians
till it was concluded, and the troops ready to embark. Had we been independent
before, we had probably prevented her obtaining them. We had no credit abroad,
because of our rebellious dependency. Our ships could claim no protection in
foreign ports, because we afforded them no justifiable reason for granting it
to us. The calling ourselves subjects, and at the same time fighting against
the power we acknowledged, was a dangerous precedent to all Europe. If the
grievances justified our taking up arms, they justified our separation; if they
did not justify our separation, neither could they justify our taking up arms.
All Europe was interested in reducing us as rebels, and all Europe (or the
greatest part at least) is interested in supporting us as Independent States.
At home our condition was still worse: Our currency had no foundation, and the
fall of it would have ruined Whig and Tory alike. We had no other law than a
kind of moderated passion; no other civil power than an honest mob; and no
other protection than the temporary attachment of one man to another. Had
Independence been delayed a few months longer, this Continent would have been
plunged into irrecoverable confusion: Some violent for it, some against it,
till in the general cabal the rich would have been ruined, and the poor
destroyed. It is to Independence that every Tory owes the present safety he
lives in; for by that, and that only, we emerged from a state of dangerous
suspense, and became a regular people.

THE necessity likewise of being independent, had there been no rupture between
Britain and America, would in a little time have brought one on. The increasing
importance of commerce, the weight and perplexity of legislation, and the
entangled state of European politics, would daily have shown to the Continent
the impossibility of continuing subordinate; for, after the coolest reflections
on the matter, this must be allowed, that Britain was too jealous of America,
to govern it justly; too ignorant of it, to govern it well; and too distant
from it, to govern it at all.

IV. BUT, what weigh most with all men of serious reflection are the MORAL
ADVANTAGES arising from Independence: War and desolation are become the trades
of the old world; and America neither could, nor can be under the government of
Britain without becoming a sharer of her guilt, and a partner in all the dismal
commerce of death. The spirit of duelling, extended on a national scale, is a
proper character for European wars. They have seldom any other motive than
pride, or any other object than fame. The conquerors and the conquered are
generally ruined alike, and the chief difference at last is, that the one
marches home with his honors, and the other without them. It Is the natural
temper of the English to fight for a feather, if they suppose that feather to
be an affront; and America, without the right of asking why, must have abetted
in every quarrel and abided by its fate. It is a shocking situation to live in,
that one country must be brought into all the wars of another, whether the
measure be right or wrong, or whether she will or not; yet this, in the fullest
extent, was, and ever would be, the unavoidable consequence of the connection.
Surely! the Quakers forgot their own principles, when in their late testimony
they called this connection with these military and miserable appendages
hanging to it, "The happy constitution."

BRITAIN, for centuries past, have been nearly fifty years out of every hundred
at war with some power or other. It certainly ought to be a conscientious as
well as political consideration with America, not to dip her hands in the
bloody work of Europe. Our situation affords us a retreat from their cabals,
and the present happy union of the States bid fair for extirpating the future
use of arms from one quarter of the world; yet such have been the irreligious
politics of the present leaders of the Quakers, that, for the sake of they
scarce know what, they would cut off every hope of such a blessing by tying
this Continent to Britain, like Hector to the chariot-wheel of Achilles, to be
dragged through all the miseries of endless European wars.

THE connection, viewed from this ground, is distressing to every man who has
the feelings of humanity. By having Britain for our master, we became enemies
to the greatest part of Europe, and they to us; and the consequence was war
inevitable. By being our own masters, independent of any foreign one, we have
Europe for our friends, and the prospect of an endless peace among ourselves.
Those who were advocates for the British government over these Colonies, were
obliged to limit both their arguments and their ideas to the period of a
European peace only: The moment Britain became plunged in war, every supposed
convenience to us vanished away, and all we could hope for was not to be
ruined. Could this be a desirable condition for a young country to be in?

HAD the French pursued their fortune immediately after the defeat of Braddock
last war, this city and province had then experienced the woeful calamities of
being a British subject. A scene of the same kind might happen again; for
America, considered as a subject to the crown of Britain, would ever have been
the seat of war and the bone of contention between the two powers.

ON the whole, If the future expulsion of arms from one quarter of the world be
a desirable object to a peaceable man; -- if the freedom of trade to every part
of it can engage the attention of a man of business, -- if the support or fall
of millions of currency can affect our interest; -- if the entire possession of
estates, by cutting off the lordly claims of Britain over the soil, deserves
the regard of landed property; -- and if the right of making our own laws,
uncontrouled by royal or ministerial spies or mandates, be worthy our care as
freemen; -- then are all men interested in the support of Independence, and may
he that supports it not, be driven from the blessing, and live unpitied beneath
the servile sufferings of scandalous subjection!

WE have been amused with the tales of ancient wonders; we have read, and wept
over, the histories of other nations; applauded, censured, or pitied, as their
cases affected us. -- The fortitude and patience of the sufferers -- the
justness of their cause -- the weight of their oppressions and oppressors --
the object to be saved or lost -- with all the consequences of a defeat or a
conquest -- have, in the hour of sympathy, bewitched our hearts and chained it
to their fate: But where is the power that ever made war upon petitioners? Or
where is the war on which a world was staked till now?

WE may not, perhaps, be wise enough to make all the advantages we ought of our
Independence; but they are, nevertheless, marked and presented to us with every
character of GREAT and GOOD, and worthy the hand of Him who sent them. I look
through the present trouble to a time of tranquillity, when we shall have it in
our power to set an example of peace to all the world. Were the Quakers really
impressed and influenced by the quiet principles they profess to hold, they
would, however they might disapprove the means, be the first of all men to
approve of INDEPENDENCE, because, by separating from the cities of Sodom and
Gomorrah, it affords an opportunity, never given to man before, of carrying
their favorite principle of peace into general practice, by establishing
governments that shall hereafter exist without wars. Oh ye fallen, cringing
priest- and Pemberton-ridden people! what more can we say of ye than that a
religious Quaker is a valuable character, and a political Quaker a real Jesuit.

HAVING thus gone over some of the principal points in support of Independence,
I must now request the reader to return back with me to the period when it
first began to be a public doctrine, and examine the progress it has made among
the various classes of men. The era I mean to begin at, is the breaking out of
hostilities, April 19th, 1775. Until this event happened, the Continent seemed
to view the dispute as a kind of lawsuit for a matter of right, litigating
between the old country and the new; and she felt the same kind and degree of
horror, as if she had seen an oppressive plaintiff, at the head of a band of
ruffians, enter the court, while the cause was before it, and put the judge,
the jury, the defendant and his council to the sword. Perhaps a more heartfelt
convulsion never reached a country with the same degree of power and rapidity
before, and never may again. Pity for the sufferers, mixed with indignation at
the violence and heightened with apprehensions of undergoing the same fate,
made the affair of Lexington the affair of the Continent. Every part of it felt
the shock, and all vibrated together. A general promotion of sentiment took
place: Those who had drank deeply into Whiggish principles, that is, the right
and necessity not only of opposing, but wholly setting aside the power of the
Crown as soon as it became practically dangerous (for in theory it was always
so) stepped into the first stage of Independence; while another class of Whigs,
equally sound in principle, but not so sanguine in enterprise, attached
themselves the stronger to the cause and fell close in with the rear of the
former; their partition was a mere point. Numbers of the moderate men, whose
chief fault, at that time, arose from their entertaining a better opinion of
Britain than she deserved, convinced now of their mistake, gave her up and
publicly declared themselves good Whigs. While the Tories, seeing it was no
longer a laughing matter, either slunk into silent obscurity, or contented
themselves with coming forth and abusing General Gage: Not a single advocate
appeared to justify the action of that day; it seemed to appear to every one
with the same magnitude, struck every one with the same force, and created in
every one the same abhorrence. From this period we may date the growth of
Independence.

IF the many circumstances, which happened at this memorable time, be taken in
one view, and compared with each other, they will justify a conclusion which
seems not to be attended to, I mean a fixed design in the king and ministry of
driving America into arms, in order that they might be furnished with a
pretense for seizing the whole Continent as the immediate property of the
Crown. A noble plunder for hungry courtiers!

IT ought to be remembered, that the first petition from the Congress was at
this time unanswered on the part of the British king. That the motion, called
Lord North's motion, of the 20th of February, 1775, arrived in America the
latter end of March. This motion was to be laid by the several governors, then
in being, before the Assembly of each province; and the first Assembly before
which it was laid, was the Assembly of Pennsylvania in May following. This
being a just state of the case, I then ask, why were hostilities commenced
between the time of passing the resolve in the House of Commons, of the 20th of
February, and the time of the Assemblies meeting to deliberate upon it?
Degrading and infamous as that motion was, there is, nevertheless, reason to
believe, that the king and his adherents were afraid the Colonies would agree
to it, and lest they should, took effectual care they should not, by provoking
them with hostilities in the interim. They had not the least doubt at that time
of conquering America at one blow; and what they expected to get by a conquest
being infinitely greater than any thing they could hope to get either by
taxation or accommodation, they seemed determined to prevent even the
possibility of hearing each other, lest America should disappoint their greedy
hopes of the whole, by listening even to their own terms. On the one hand they
refused to hear the petition of the Continent, and on the other hand took
effectual care the Continent should not hear them.

THAT the motion of the 20th of February and the orders for commencing
hostilities were both concerted by the same PERSON or persons, and not the
latter by General Gage, as was falsely imagined at first, is evident from an
extract of a letter of his to administration, read among other papers in the
House of Commons; in which he informs his masters, That though their idea of
his disarming certain counties was a right one, yet it required him to be
master of the country, in order to enable him to execute it. This was prior to
the commencement of hostilities, and consequently before the motion of the 20th
of February could be deliberated on by the several Assemblies.

PERHAPS it may be asked, why was the motion past, if there was at the same
time a plan to aggravate the Americans not to listen to it? Lord North assigned
one reason himself, which was, a hope of dividing them. This was publicly
tempting them to reject it; that if, in case, the injury of arms should fail of
provoking them sufficiently, the insult of such a declaration might fill it up.
But by passing the motion and getting it afterward rejected in America, it
enabled them, in their wretched idea of politics, among other things, to hold
up the Colonies to foreign powers with every possible mark of disobedience and
rebellion. They had applied to those powers not to supply the Continent with
arms, ammunition, etc. and it was necessary they should incense them against
us, by assigning on their own part some seeming reputable reason why. By
dividing, it had a tendency to weaken the States, and likewise to perplex the
adherents of America in England. But the principal scheme, and that which has
marked their character in every part of their conduct, was a design of
precipitating the Colonies into a state which they might afterward deem
rebellion, and under that pretense put an end to all future complaints,
petitions or remonstrances, by seizing the whole at once. They had ravaged one
part of the globe, till it could glut them no longer; their prodigality
required new plunder, and through the East India article TEA they hoped to
transfer their rapine from that quarter of the world to this. -- Every designed
quarrel has its pretense; and the same barbarian avarice accompanied the Plant
to America, which ruined the country that produced it.

THAT men never turn rogues without turning fools, is a maxim, sooner or later,
universally true. The commencement of hostilities, being in the beginning of
April, was, of all times, the worst chosen: The Congress were to meet the tenth
of May following, and the distress the Continent felt at this unparalleled
outrage gave a stability to That Body, which no other circumstance could have
done. It suppressed too all inferior debates, and bound them together by a
necessitous affection, without giving them time to differ upon trifles. The
suffering likewise, softened the whole body of the people into a degree of
pliability, which laid the principal foundation stone of union, order and
government; and which, at any other time, might only have fretted and then
faded away unnoticed and unimproved: But Providence, who best knows how to time
her misfortunes as well as her immediate favors, chose this to be the time:
And who dares dispute it?

IT did not seem the disposition of the people at this crisis to heap petition
upon petition, while the former remained unanswered: The measure, however, was
carried in Congress, and a second petition was sent; of which I shall only
remark, that it was submissive even to a dangerous fault, because the prayer of
it appealed solely to, what is called, the prerogative of the Crown, while the
matter in dispute was confessed to be constitutional. But even this Petition,
flattering as it was, was still not so harmonious as the chink of cash, and
consequently not sufficiently grateful to the tyrant and his ministry. From
every circumstance it is evident, that it was the determination of the British
court to have nothing to do with America but to conquer it fully and
absolutely. They were certain of success, and the field of battle was to be the
only place of treaty. I am confident there are thousands and tens of thousands
in America who wonder now they should ever think otherwise; but the sin of that
day was the sin of Civility, yet it operated against our present good in the
same manner that a civil opinion of the devil would against our future peace.

INDEPENDENCE was a doctrine scarce and rare even toward the conclusion of the
year Seventy-five: All our politics had been founded on the hope or expectation
of making the matter up -- a hope, which, though general on the side of
America, had never entered the head or heart of the British court. Their hope
was conquest and confiscation. Good Heavens! what volumes of thanks does
America owe to Britain! What infinite obligations to the fool, that fills, with
paradoxical vacancy, the throne! Nothing but the sharpest essence of villainy,
compounded with the strongest distillation of folly, could have produced a
menstruum that would have effected a separation. The Congress in Seventy-four
administered an abortive medicine to Independence, by prohibiting the
importation of goods, and the succeeding Congress rendered the dose still more
dangerous by continuing it. Had Independence been a settled system with America
(as Britain has advanced) she ought to have doubled her importation, and
prohibited in some degree her exportation. And this single circumstance is
sufficient to acquit America before any jury of nations of having a Continental
plan of Independence in view: A charge, which had it been true, would have been
honorable, but is so grossly false, that either the amazing ignorance, or the
wilful dishonesty, of the British court is effectually proved by it.

THE second petition like the first produced no answer; it was scarcely
acknowledged to be received; the British court were too determined in their
villainy even to act it artfully, and in their rage for conquest neglected the
necessary subtleties for obtaining it. They might have divided, distracted and
played a thousand tricks with us had they been as cunning as they were cruel.

THIS last indignity gave a new spring to Independence. Those who knew the
savage obstinacy of the king and the jobbing gambling spirit of the court
predicted the fate of the petition as soon as it was sent from America; for the
men being known, their measures were easily foreseen. As politicians we ought
not so much to ground our hope on the reasonableness of the thing we ask, as on
the reasonableness of the person of whom we ask it: Who would expect discretion
from a fool, candor from a tyrant, or justice from a villain?

AS every prospect of an accommodation seemed now to fail fast, men began to
think seriously on the matter; and their reason being thus stripped of the false
hope which had long encompassed it, became approachable by fair debate; yet
still the bulk of the people hesitated; they startled at the novelty of
Independence, without once considering that our getting into arms at first was
a more extraordinary novelty, and that all other nations had gone through the
work of Independence before us. They doubted, likewise, the ability of the
Continent to support it, without reflecting, that it required the same force to
obtain an accommodation by arms as an Independence. If the one was acquireable,
the other was the same; because, to accomplish either, it was necessary that
our strength should be too great for Britain to subdue; and it was too
unreasonable to suppose, that with the power of being masters, we should submit
to be servants. In this state of political suspense the pamphlet Common Sense
made its appearance, and the success it met with does not become me to mention.
Dr. Franklin, Mr. Samuel and John Adams were severally spoken of as the
supposed Author. I had not, at that time, the pleasure either of personally
knowing or being known to the two last Gentlemen. The favor of Dr. Franklin's
friendship I possessed in England, and my introduction to this part of the
world was through his patronage. I happened, when a school boy, to pick up a
pleasing natural history of Virginia, and my inclination from that day of
seeing the western side of the atlantic never left me. In October,
Seventy-five. Dr. Franklin proposed giving me such materials as were in his
hands, toward completing a history of the present transactions, and seemed
desirous of having the first volume out by the next spring. I had then formed
the outlines of Common Sense, and finished nearly the first part; and as I
supposed the Doctor's design in getting out a history, was to open the new year
with a new system, I expected to surprise him with a production on that subject
much earlier than he thought of; and without informing him of what I was doing,
got it ready for the press as fast as I conveniently could, and sent him the
first pamphlet that was printed off.
Their caution, at this time, was exceedingly misplaced; for if they were able
to defend their property and maintain their rights by arms, they consequently
were able to defend and support their Independence; and in proportion as these
men saw the necessity and rightness of the measure, they honestly and openly
declared and adopted it, and the part they have acted since, have done them
honor, and fully established their characters. Error in opinion has this
peculiar advantage with it, that the foremost point of the contrary ground may
at any time be reached by the sudden exertion of a thought; and it frequently
happens in sentimental differences that some striking circumstance, or some
forcible reason, quickly conceived, will effect in an instant what neither
argument nor example could produce in an age.

I find it impossible in the small compass I am limited to, to trace out the
progress which Independence has made on the minds of the different classes of
men, and the several reasons by which they were moved. With some, it was a
passionate abhorrence against the king of England and his ministry as a set of
savages and brutes; and these men, governed by the agony of a wounded mind,
were for trusting every thing to hope and Heaven and bidding defiance at once.
With others, it was a growing conviction that the scheme of the British court
was to create, ferment and drive on a quarrel for the sake of confiscated
plunder: Men of this cast ripened into Independence in proportion as the
evidence increased. While a third class, conceiving it was the true interest of
America, internally and externally, to be her own master, gave their support to
Independence, step by step, as they saw her abilities to maintain it enlarge.
With many it was a compound of all these reasons; while those, who were too
callous to be reached by neither, remained, and still remain Tories.

THE legal necessity of being independent, with several collateral reasons, is
pointed out in an elegant, masterly manner, in a charge to the grand jury for
the district of Charlestown, by the Hon. WILLIAM HENRY DRAYTON, Esquire Chief
Justice of South Carolina. This performance, and the ADDRESS of the CONVENTION
of New York, are pieces, in my humble opinion, of the first rank in America.

THE principal causes why Independence has not been so universally supported as
it ought, are, fear and indolence, and the causes why it has been opposed, are,
avarice, downright villainy, and lust of personal power. There is not such a
Being in America as a Tory from conscience: Some secret defect or other is
interwoven in the character of all those, be they men or women, who can look
with patience on the brutality, luxury and debauchery of the British court, and
the violations of their army here. A woman's virtue must sit very lightly on
her who can even hint a favorable sentiment in their behalf. It is remarkable
that the whole race of prostitutes in New York were Tories; and the schemes for
supporting the Tory cause, in this city, for which several are now in jail, and
one hanged, were concerted and carried on in common baudy-houses, assisted by
those who kept them.

THE connection between vice and meanness is a fit object for satire, but when
the satire is a fact, it cuts with the irresistible power of a diamond. If a
Quaker, in defense of his just rights, his property and the chastity of his
house, takes up a musket, he is expelled the meeting; but the present king of
England, who seduced and took into keeping a sister of their society, is
reverenced and supported with repeated testimonies, while the friendly noodle
from whom she was taken, (and who is now in this city) continues a drudge in
the service of his rival, as if proud of being cuckolded by a creature called a
king.

OUR support and success depend on such a variety of men and circumstances,
that every one, who does but wish well, is of some use: There are men who have
a strange awkwardness to arms, yet have hearts to risk every shilling in the
cause, or in support of those who have better talents for defending it. Nature,
in the arrangement of mankind, has fitted some for every service in life: Were
all soldiers, all would starve and go naked, and were none soldiers, all would
be slaves. As disaffection to Independence is the badge of a Tory, so affection
to it is the mark of a Whig; and the different services of the Whigs down from
those who nobly contribute every thing, to those who have nothing to render but
their wishes, tend all to the same center, though with different degrees of
merit and ability. The larger we make the circle, the more we shall harmonize,
and the stronger we shall be. All we want to shut out, is disaffection, and
that excluded, we must accept from each other such duties as we are best fitted
to bestow. A narrow system of politics, like a narrow system of religion, is
calculated only to four the temper, and live at variance with mankind.

ALL we want to know in America is simply this, Who is for Independence, and
who is not? Those who are for it, will support it, and the remainder will
undoubtedly see the reasonableness of their paying the charges; while those who
oppose, or seek to betray it, must expect the more rigid fate of the jail and
the gibbet. There is a kind of bastard generosity, which, by being extended to
all men, is as fatal to society, on one hand, as the want of true generosity is
on the other. A lax manner of administering justice, falsely termed moderation,
has a tendency both to dispirit public virtue and promote the growth of public
evils. Had the late Committee of Safety taken cognizance of the last testimony
of the Quakers, and proceeded against such delinquents as were concerned
therein, they had, probably, prevented the treasonable plans which have been
concerted since. When one villain is suffered to escape, it encourages another
to proceed, either from a hope of escaping likewise, or an apprehension that we
dare not punish. It has been a matter of general surprise, that no notice was
taken of the incendiary publication of the Quakers, of the 20th of November
last: A publication evidently intended to promote sedition and treason, and
encourage the enemy, who were then within a day's march of this city, to
proceed on and possess it. I here present the reader with a memorial, which was
laid before the Board of Safety a few days after the testimony appeared. Not a
member of that Board, that I conversed with but expressed the highest
detestation of the perverted principles and conduct of the Quaker junto, and
that the Board would take the matter up; notwithstanding which, it was suffered
to pass away unnoticed, to the encouragement of new acts of treason, the
general danger of the cause, and the disgrace of the State.

To the HONORABLE the COUNCIL OF SAFETY of the State of Pennsylvania.
At a meeting of a reputable number of the inhabitants of the city of
Philadelphia, impressed with a proper sense of the justice of the cause which
this Continent is engaged in, and animated with a generous fervor for
supporting the same, it was resolved, that the following be laid before the
Board of Safety:
WE profess liberality of sentiment to all men; with this distinction only,
that those who do not deserve it, would become wise and seek to deserve it. We
hold the pure doctrine of universal liberty of conscience, and conceive it our
duty to endeavor to secure that sacred right to others, as well as to defend
it for ourselves; for we undertake not to judge of the religious rectitude of
tenets, but leave the whole matter to Him who made us.

"WE persecute no man, neither will we abet in the persecution of any man for
religion sake; our common relation to others being that of fellow-citizens and
fellow subjects of one civil community; and in this line of connection we hold
out the right hand of fellowship to all men. But we should conceive ourselves
to be unworthy members of the FREE AND INDEPENDENT STATES OF AMERICA, were we
unconcernedly to see or suffer any treasonable wound, public or private,
directly or indirectly, to be given against the peace and safety of the same.
We enquire not into the rank of the offenders, nor their religious persuasion;
we have no business with either, our part being only to find them out, and
exhibit them to justice.

A printed paper, dated the 20th of November, and signed John Pemberton, whom
we suppose to be an inhabitant of this city, has lately been dispersed abroad,
a copy of which accompanies this. Had the framers and publishers of that paper
conceived it their duty to exhort the youth, and others, of their society, to a
patient submission under present trying visitations, and humbly to wait the
event of Heaven toward them, they had therein shown a Christian temper, and we
had been silent; but the anger and political virulence with which their
instructions are given, and the abuse with which they stigmatize all ranks of
men, not thinking like themselves, leave no doubt on our minds from what spirit
their publication proceeded: And it is disgraceful to the pure cause of truth,
that men can dally with words of the most sacred import, and play them as
mechanically off as if religion consisted only in contrivance. We know of no
instance, in which the Quakers have been compelled to bear arms, or do any
thing which might strain their conscience; wherefore their advice to withstand
and refuse to submit to the arbitrary instructions and ordinances of men,
appear to us a false alarm, and could only be treasonably calculated to gain
favor with our enemies, when they were seemingly on the brink of invading this
State, or, what is still worse, to weaken the hands of our defense, that their
entrance into this city might be made practicable and easy.

"WE disclaim all tumult and disorder in the punishment of offenders; and wish
to be governed, not by temper but by reason, in the manner of treating them. We
are sensible that our cause has suffered by the two following errors; by an
ill-judged lenity to traitorous persons in some cases; and secondly, by only a
passionate treatment of them in others. For the future we disown both, and wish
to be steady in our proceedings, and serious in our punishments.

"EVERY State in America has by the repeated voice of its inhabitants, directed
and authorized the Continental Congress to publish a formal Declaration of
Independence of, and Separation from, the oppressive king and parliament of
Great Britain; and we look on every man an enemy who does not in some line or
other give his assistance toward supporting the same; at the same time we
consider the offense to be heightened to a degree of unpardonable guilt, when
such persons, under the show of religion, endeavor, either by writing,
speaking, or otherwise, to subvert, overturn, or bring reproach upon the
Independence of this Continent as declared by Congress.

"THE publishers of the paper, signed "John Pemberton," have called in a loud
and passionate manner on their friends and connections, to "withstand and
refuse" obedience to whatever "instructions or ordinances" may be published,
not warranted by (what they call) THAT HAPPY CONSTITUTION UNDER WHICH THEY AND
OTHERS LONG ENJOYED TRANQUILLITY AND PEACE. If this be not treason, we know not
what may properly be called by that name.

"TO us it is a matter of surprise and astonishment, that men with the word
"peace, peace" continually on their lips, should be so fond of living under,
and supporting a government and at the same time calling it "happy," which is
never better pleased than when at war -- that has filled India with carnage
and famine -- Africa with slavery -- and tampered with Indians and Negroes to
cut the throats of the freemen of America. We conceive it a disgrace to this
State to harbor or wink at such palpable hypocrisy. But as we seek not to hurt
the hair of any man's head, when we can make ourselves safe without, we wish
such persons to restore peace to themselves and us, by removing themselves to
some part of the king of Britain's dominions, as by that means they may live
unmolested by us or we by them; for our fixed opinion is, that those who do not
deserve a place among us, ought not to have one.

"WE conclude, with requesting the Council of Safety to take into their
consideration the paper signed "John Pemberton;" and if it shall appear to them
to be of a dangerous tendency, or of a treasonable nature, that they would
commit the signer, together with such other persons as they can discover were
concerned therein, into custody, until such time as some mode of trial shall
ascertain the full degree of their guilt and punishment; in the doing of which,
we wish their judges, whoever they may be, to disregard the man, his
connections, interest, riches, poverty or principles of religion, and to attend
to the nature of his offense only."

THE most cavilling sectarian cannot accuse the foregoing with containing the
least ingredient of persecution. The free spirit on which the American cause is
founded, disdains to mix with such an impurity, and leave it a rubbish fit only
for narrow and suspicious minds to grovel in: Suspicion and persecution are
weeds of the same dunghill, and flourish best together. Had the Quakers minded
their religion and their business, they might have lived through this dispute
in enviable ease, and none would have molested them. The common phrase with
these people is, "Our principles are peace." To which may be replied, and your
practices are the reverse; for never did the conduct of men oppose their own
doctrine more notoriously than the present race of the Quakers. They have
artfully changed themselves into a different sort of people to what they used
to be, and yet have the address to persuade each other they are not altered;
like antiquated virgins they see not the havoc deformity has made upon them,
but pleasantly mistaking wrinkles for dimples, conceit themselves yet lovely,
and wonder at the stupid world for not admiring them.

DID no injury arise to the public by this apostasy of the Quakers from
themselves, the public would have nothing to do with it; but as both the design
and consequences are pointed against a cause in which the whole community are
interested, it is therefore no longer a subject confined to the cognizance of
the meeting only, but comes as a matter of criminality before either the
authority of the particular State in which it is acted, or of the Continent
against which it operates. Every attempt now to support the authority of the
king or parliament of Great Britain over America, is treason against every
State; therefore it is impossible that any one can pardon or screen from
punishment an offender against all.

BUT to proceed: While the infatuated Tories of this and other States were last
spring talking of Commissioners, accommodation, making the matter up and the
Lord knows what stuff and nonsense, their good king and ministry were glutting
themselves with the revenge of reducing America to an unconditional submission,
and solacing each other with the certainty of conquering it in one campaign.
The following quotations are from the Parliamentary Register of the debates of
the House of Lords, March 5th, 1776.

"The Americans," says Lord Talbot Steward of the king's household.
, have been obstinate, undutiful and ungovernable from the very beginning, from
their first early and infant settlements; and I am every day more and more
convinced that this people will never be brought back to their duty, and the
subordinate relation they stand in to this country, till reduced to an
unconditional effectual submission; no concession on our part, no lenity, no
endurance, will have any other effect but that of increasing their insolence.

"THE struggle," says Lord Townsend Formerly General Townsend at Quebec, and
late Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.
, is now a struggle for power; the die is cast, and the ONLY POINT which now
remains to be determined, is, in what manner the war can be most effectually
prosecuted and speedily finished, in order to procure that unconditional
submission, which has been so ably stated by the noble Earl with the white
staff (meaning Lord Talbot); and I have no reason to doubt that the measures
now pursuing will put an end to the war in the course of a SINGLE CAMPAIGN.
Should it linger longer, we shall then have reason to expect that some foreign
power will interfere, and take advantage of our domestic troubles and civil
distractions.

LORD Littleton, My sentiments are pretty well known. I shall only observe now,
that lenient measures have had no other effect than to produce insult after
insult; that the more we conceded, the higher America rose in her demands, and
the more insolent she has grown. It is for this reason that I am now for the
most effective and decisive measures; and am of opinion, that no alternative is
left us, but to relinquish America for ever, or finally determine to compel her
to acknowledge the legislative authority of this country; and it is the
principle of an unconditional submission I would be for maintaining.

CAN words be more expressive than these? Surely the Tories will believe the
Tory Lords! The truth is, they do believe them, and know as fully as any Whig
on the Continent knows, that the king and ministry never had the least design
of an accommodation with America, but an absolute unconditional conquest. And
the part which the Tories were to act, was, by downright lying, to endeavor to
put the Continent off its guard, and to divide and sow discontent in the minds
of such Whigs as they might gain an influence over. In short, to keep up a
distraction here, that the force sent from England might be able to conquer in
"one campaign." They and the ministry were, by a different game, playing into
each other's hands. The cry of the Tories in England was, "No reconciliation,
no accommodation," in order to obtain the greater military force; while those
in America were crying nothing but "reconciliation and accommodation," that the
force sent might conquer with the less resistance.

BUT this "single campaign" is over, and America not conquered. The whole work
is yet to do, and the force much less to do it with. Their condition is both
despicable and deplorable: Out of cash -- out of heart -- and out of hope. A
country furnished with arms and ammunition, as America now is, with three
millions of inhabitants, and three thousand miles distant from the nearest
enemy that can approach her, is able to look and laugh them in the face.

HOW appears to have two objects in view, either to go up the North river, or
come to Philadelphia.

BY going up the North river, he secures a retreat for his army through Canada,
but the ships must return, if they return at all, the same way they went; and
as our army would be in the rear, the safety of their passage down is a
doubtful matter. By such a motion he shuts himself from all supplies from
Europe but through Canada, and exposes his army and navy to the danger of
perishing. The idea of his cutting off the communication between the eastern
and southern States, by means of the North river, is merely visionary. He
cannot do it by his shipping; because no ship can lay long at anchor in any
river within reach of the shore; a single gun would drive a first rate from
such a station: This was fully proved last October at fort Washington and Lee,
where one gun only, on each side the river, obliged two frigates to cut and be
towed off in an hour's time. Neither can he cut it off by his army; because the
several posts they must occupy, would divide them almost to nothing, and expose
them to be picked up by ours like pebbles on a river's bank; but admitting he
could, where is the injury? Because while his whole force is cantoned out, as
centries over the water, they will be very innocently employed, and the moment
they march into the country, the communication opens.

THE most probable object is Philadelphia, and the reasons are many. Howe's
business in America is to conquer it, and in proportion as he finds himself
unable to the task, he will employ his strength to distress women and weak
minds, in order to accomplish through their fears what he cannot effect by his
own force. His coming or attempting to come to Philadelphia is a circumstance
that proves his weakness: For no general, that felt himself able to take the
field and attack his antagonist, would think of bringing his army into a city
in the summer time; and this mere shifting the scene from place to place,
without effecting any thing, has feebleness and cowardice on the face of it,
and holds him up in a contemptible light to any one who can reason justly and
firmly. By several informations from New York, it appears that their army in
general, both officers and men, have given up the expectation of conquering
America; their eye, now, is fixed upon the spoil. They suppose Philadelphia to
be rich with stores, and as they think to get more by robbing a town than by
attacking an army, their movement toward this city is probable. We are not now
contending against an army of soldiers, but against a band of thieves, who had
rather plunder than sight, and have no other hope of conquest than by cluelty.

THEY expect to get a mighty booty and strike another general panic by making a
sudden movement and getting possession this city, but unless they can march out
as well as in, or get the entire command of the river, to remove off their
plunder, they may probably be stopped with the stolen goods upon them. They have
never yet succeeded wherever they have been opposed but at fort Washington. At
Charlestown their defeat was effectual. At Ticonderoga they ran away. In every
skirmish at Kingsbridge and the White Plains they were obliged to retreat, and
the instant our arms were turned upon them in the Jersies, they turned
likewise, and those that turned not were taken.

THE necessity of always fitting our internal police to the circumstances of
the times we live in, is something so strikingly obvious that no sufficient
objection can be made against it. The safety of all societies depend upon it;
and where this point is not attended to, the consequence will either be a
general languor or a tumult. The encouragement and protection of the good
subjects of any State, and the suppression and punishment of bad ones, are the
principal objects for which all authority is instituted, and the line in which
it ought to operate. We have in this city a strange variety of men and
characters, and the circumstances of the times require they should be publicly
known; it is not the number of Tories that hurt us, so much, as the not finding
out who they are; men must now take one side or the other, and abide by the
consequences: The Quakers, trusting to their short sighted sagacity, have, most
unluckily for them, made their declaration in their last testimony, and we
ought now to take them at their word. They have voluntarily read themselves out
of the Continental meeting, and cannot hope to be restored to it again, but by
payment and penitence. Men whose political principles are founded on avarice,
are beyond the reach of reason, and the only cure for Toryism of this cast, is
to tax it. A substantial good drawn from a real evil, is of the same benefit to
society, as if drawn from a virtue; and where men have not public spirit to
render themselves serviceable, it ought to be the study of government to draw
the best use possible from their vices. When the governing passion of any man
or set of men is once known, the method of managing them is easy; for even
misers, whom no public virtue can impress, would become generous, could a heavy
tax be laid upon covetousness.

THE Tories have endeavored to insure their property with the enemy, by
forfeiting their reputation with us; from which may be justly inferred, that
their governing passion is avarice. Make them as much afraid of losing on one
side as the other, and you stagger their Toryism; make them more so, and you
reclaim them; for their principle is to worship any power they are most afraid
of.

THIS method of considering men and things together, opens into a large field
for speculation, and affords me opportunity of offering some observations on
the state of our currency, so as to make the support of it go hand in hand,
with the suppression of disaffection and the encouragement of public spirit.

THE thing which first presents itself in inspecting the state of the currency,
is, that we have too much of it, and that there is a necessity of reducing the
quantity, in order to increase the value. Men are daily growing poor by the
very means they take to get rich, for in the same proportion that the prices of
all goods on hand are raised, the value of all money laid by is reduced. A
simple case will make this clear: Let a man have one hundred pounds cash, and
as many goods on hand as will today sell for L 20, but not content with the
present market-price, he raises them to 40, and by so doing, obliges others in
their own defense to raise cent per cent likewise; in this case, it is evident
that his hundred pound laid by is reduced fifty pounds in value; whereas, had
the markets dropped cent per cent, his goods would have sold but for ten, but his
hundred pounds would have risen in value to two hundred; because it would then
purchase as many goods again, or support his family as long again as before.
And strange as it may seem, he is one hundred and fifty pounds the poorer for
raising his goods, to what he would have been had he lowered them; because the
forty pounds his goods sold for, is by the general rise of the markets, cent
per cent, rendered of no more value than the ten pounds would be had the market
fallen in the same proportion; and consequently the whole difference of gain or
loss is on the different values of the hundred pounds laid by, viz. from fifty
to two hundred. This rage for raising goods is for several reasons much more
the fault of the Tories than the Whigs; and yet the Tories (to their shame and
confusion ought they to be told of it) are by far the most noisy and
discontented. The greatest part of the Whigs, by being now either in the army
or employed in some public service, are buyers only and not sellers, and as
this evil has its origin in trade, it cannot be charged on those who are out of
it.

BUT the grievance is now become too general to be remedied by partial methods,
and the only effectual cure is to reduce the quantity of money; with half the
quantity we should be richer than we are now, because the value of it would be
doubled, and consequently our attachment to it increased; for it is not the
number of dollars a man has, but how far they will go, that makes him either
rich or poor.

THESE two points being admitted, viz, that the quantity of money is too great,
and that the prices of goods can be only effectually reduced by reducing the
quantity of the money, the next point to be considered is, The method how to
reduce it?

THE circumstances of the times, as before observed, require that the public
characters of all men should now be fully understood, and the only general
method of ascertaining it is by an oath or affirmation, renouncing all
allegiance to the king of Great Britain, and to support the Independency of the
United States as declared by Congress. Let, at the same time, a tax of ten,
fifteen or twenty per cent per annum, to be collected quarterly, be levied on
all property. These alternatives, by being perfectly voluntary, will take in
all sorts of people. Here is the test; here is the tax. He who takes the
former, conscientiously proves his affection to the cause, and binds himself to
pay his quota by the best services in his power, and is thereby justly exempt
from the latter; and those who choose the latter, pay their quota in money, to
be excused from taking the former, or rather it is the price paid to us for
their supposed, though mistaken, insurance with the enemy.

BUT this is only a part of the advantage which would arise by knowing the
different characters of men. The Whigs stake every thing on the issue of their
arms, while the Tories, by their disaffection, are sapping and undermining
their strength, and, of consequence, the property of the Whigs is the more
exposed thereby; and whatever injury their estates may sustain by the movements
of the enemy, must either be borne by themselves, who have done every thing
which have yet been done, or by the Tories, who have not only done nothing, but
have by their disaffection, invited the enemy on.

IN the present crisis we ought to know square by square, and house by house,
who are in real allegiance with the United Independent States, and who are not.
Let but the line be made clear and distinct, and all men will then know what
they are to trust to. It would not only be good policy, but strict justice, to
raise fifty or an hundred thousand pounds, or more, if it is necessary, out of
the estates and property of the king of England's votaries, resident in
Philadelphia, to be distributed, as a reward to those inhabitants of the city
and State, who should turn out and repulse the enemy, should they attempt their
march this way; and likewise, to bind the property of all such persons to make
good the damages which that of the Whigs might sustain. In the
undistinguishable mode of conducting a war, we frequently make reprisals at
sea, on the vessels of persons in England who are friends to our cause compared
with the residentiary Tories among us.

IN every former publication of mine, from Common Sense down to the last
Crisis, I have generally gone on the charitable supposition, that the Tories
were rather a mistaken than a criminal people, and have applied argument after
argument with all the candor and temper I was capable of, in order to set
every part of the case clearly and fairly before them, and if possible to
reclaim them from ruin to reason. I have done my duty by them and have now done
with that doctrine, taking it for granted, that those who yet hold their
disaffection, are, either a set of avaricious miscreants, who would sacrifice
the Continent to save themselves, or a banditti of hungry traitors, who are
hoping for a division of the spoil. To which may be added, a list of Crown or
Proprietary dependents, who, rather than go without a portion of power, would
be content to share it with the devil. Of such men there is no hope; and their
obedience will only be according to the danger that is set before them, and the
power that is exercised over them.

A time will shortly arrive, in which, by ascertaining the characters of
persons now, we shall be guarded against their mischiefs then; for in
proportion as the enemy despair of conquest, they will be trying the arts of
seduction and the force of fear by all the mischiefs they can inflict. But in
war we may be certain of these two things, viz. that cruelty in an enemy, and
motions made with more than usual parade, are always signs of weakness. He that
can conquer, finds his mind too free and pleasant to be brutish; and he that
intends to conquer, never makes too much show of his strength.

WE now know the enemy we have to do with. While drunk with the certainty of
victory they disdained to be civil; and in proportion as disappointment makes
them sober, and their apprehensions of the European war alarm them, they will
become cringing and artful; honest they cannot be. But our answer to them, in
either condition they may be in, is short and full, As Free and Independent
States we are willing to make peace with you tomorrow, but we can neither hear
nor reply in any other character.

IF Britain cannot conquer us, it proves, that she is neither able to govern or
protect us, and our particular situation now is such, that any connection with
her would be unwisely exchanging a half defeated enemy for two powerful ones.
Europe, by every appearance and information, is now on the eve, nay, on the
morning twilight of a war, and any alliance with George the Third brings France
and Spain upon our backs; a separation from him attach them to our side;
therefore, the only road to Peace, Honor and Commerce is INDEPENDENCE.

COMMON SENSE.
Philadelphia, April 19, 1777.
And in the fourth year of the UNION, which GOD preserve!

