THE American CRISIS. NUMBER IV. BY THE AUTHOR OF COMMON SENSE.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by STYNER and CIST, in Second-street, near Arch-street.
Where it may be had GRATIS. Also at the Coffee-House.

THOSE who expect to reap the blessings of Freedom, must, like men, undergo the
fatigue of supporting it. The event of yesterday is one of those kind of
alarms, which is just sufficient to rouse us to duty, without being of
consequence enough to depress our fortitude. It is not a field of a few acres
of ground, but a cause that we are defending, and whether we defeat the enemy
in one battle, or by degrees, the consequence will be the same.

Look back at the events of last winter and the present year, there you will
find that the enemy's successes have always contributed to reduce them. What
they have gained in ground, they paid so dearly for in numbers, that their
victories have in the end amounted to defeats. We have always been masters at
the last push, and always shall while we do our duty. How has been once on the
banks of the Delaware, and from thence driven back with loss and disgrace; and
why not be again driven from the Schuylkill? His condition and ours are very
different. He has every body to fight, we have only his one army to cope with
and which wastes away at every engagement; we can not only reinforce, but can
redouble our numbers; he is cut off from all supplies, and must sooner or later
inevitably fall into our hands.

Shall a band of ten or twelve thousand robbers, who are this day fifteen
hundred or two thousand men less in strength than they were yesterday, conquer
America, or subdue even a single state? The thing cannot be, unless we sit down
and suffer them to do it. Another such a brush, notwithstanding we lost the
ground, would, by still reducing the enemy, put them in a condition to be
afterward totally defeated.

Could our whole army have come up to the attack at one time, the consequences
had probably been otherwise; but our having different parts of the Brandywine
creek to guard, and the uncertainty which road to Philadelphia the enemy would
attempt to take, naturally afforded them an opportunity of passing with their
main body at a place where only a part of ours could be posted; for, it must
strike every thinking man with conviction, that it requires a much greater
force to oppose an enemy in several places, than is sufficient to defeat them
in any one place.

Men who are sincere in defending their freedom, will always feel concern at
every circumstance, which seems to make against them; it is the natural and
honest consequence of all affectionate attachments, and the want of it is a
vice. But the dejection lasts only for a moment; they soon rise out of it with
additional vigor; the glow of hope, courage and fortitude, will, in a little
time, supply the place of every inferior passion, and kindle the whole heart
into heroism.

There is a mystery in the countenance of some causes, which we have not always
present judgment enough to explain. It is distressing to see an enemy advancing
into a country, but it is the only place in which we can beat them, and in
which we have always beaten them, whenever they made the attempt. The nearer
any disease approaches to a crisis, the nearer it is to a cure: Danger and
deliverance make their advances together, and it is only at the last push, that
one or the other takes the lead.

There are many men who will do their duty when it is not wanted; but a genuine
Public spirit always appears most when there is most occasion for it. Thank
GOD! our army, though fatigued, is yet entire. The attack made by us yesterday
was under many disadvantages, naturally arising from the uncertainty of knowing
which route the enemy would take; and from that circumstance, the whole of our
force could not be brought up together time enough to engage all at once. Our
strength is yet reserved; and it is evident that How does not think himself a
gainer by the affair, otherwise, he would this morning have moved down and
attacked General Washington.

Gentlemen of the city and country, It is in your power, by a spirited
improvement of the present circumstance, to turn it to a real advantage: How
is now weaker than before, and every shot will contribute to reduce him. You
are more immediately interested than any other part of the Continent; your All
is at stake; it is not so with the general cause; you are devoted by the enemy
to plunder and destruction: It is the encouragement which How, the chief of
plunderers, has promised his army. Thus circumstanced, you may save yourselves
by a manly resistance, but you can have no hope in any other conduct. I never
yet knew our brave General, or any part of the army, officers or men, out of
heart, and I have seen them in circumstances a thousand times more trying than
the present. It is only those that are not in action, that feel languor and
heaviness, and the best way to rub it off is to turn out, and make sure work of
it.

Our army must undoubtedly feel fatigue, and want a reinforcement of rest,
though not of valor. Our own interest and happiness call upon us to give them
every support in our power, and make the burden of the day, on which the safety
of this city depends, as light as possible. Remember, Gentlemen, that we have
forces both to the Northward and Southward of Philadelphia, and if the enemy be
but stopped till those can arrive, this city will be saved, and the enemy finally
routed. You have too much at stake to hesitate. You ought not to think an hour
upon the matter, but to spring to action at once. Other States have been
invaded, and have likewise driven off the invaders. Now OUR time and turn is
come, and perhaps the finishing stroke is reserved for us. When we look back on
the dangers we have been saved from, and reflect on the successes we have been
blessed with, it would be sinful either to be idle or despair.

I close this paper with a short address to General How. You, sir, are only
lingering out the period that shall bring with it your defeat. You have yet
scarce began upon the war; and the farther you enter, the faster will your
troubles thicken. What you now enjoy is only a respite from ruin; an invitation
to destruction; a something, that will lead on to our deliverance at your
expense. We know the cause we are engaged in, and though a passionate fondness
for it may make us grieve at every injury which threatens it, yet, when the
moment of concern is over, the determination to duty returns. We are not the
hireling slaves of a beggarly tyrant, nor the cringing flatterers of an
infamous court. We are not moved by the gloomy smile of a worthless king, but
by the ardent glow of generous patriotism. We fight, not to enslave, but to set
a country free, and to make room upon the earth for honest men to live in. In
such a cause we are sure we are right; and we leave to you the despairing
reflection of being the tool of a miserable tyrant.

COMMON SENSE.
Philadelphia Sept. 12, at Noon.

