THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK.

FISH-KILL: PRINTED by SAMUEL LOUDON. M.DCC.LXXVII.

The CONSTITUTION, etc.
WHEREAS the many tyrannical and oppressive usurpations of the King and
Parliament of Great Britain, on the rights and liberties of the people of the
American colonies, had reduced them to the necessity of introducing a
government by Congresses and Committees, as temporary expedients, and to exist
no longer than the grievances of the people should remain without redress.

AND WHEREAS the Congress of the colony of New York, did on the thirty-first
day of May now last past, resolve as follows, viz.

"WHEREAS the present government of this colony by Congress and Committees, was
instituted while the former government under the crown of Great Britain existed
in full force; and was established for the sole purpose of opposing the
usurpation of the British Parliament, and was intended to expire on a
reconciliation with Great Britain, which it was then apprehended would soon
take place, but is now considered as remote and uncertain.

"AND WHEREAS many and great inconveniences attend the said mode of government
by Congress and Committees, as of necessity, in many instances, legislative,
judicial, and executive powers have been vested therein, especially since the
dissolution of the former government by the abdication of the late Governor,
and the exclusion of this colony from the protection of the King of
Great Britain.

"AND WHEREAS the Continental Congress did resolve as follows, to wit,

WHEREAS his Britannie Majesty, in conjuction with the Lords and Commons of
Great Britain, has, by a late act of Parliament, excluded the inhabitants of
these United Colonies from the protection of his crown. -- And whereas no
answers whatever, to the humble petition of the colonies for redress of
grievances and reconciliation with Great Britain, has been, or is likely to be
given, but the whole force of that kingdom, aided by foreign mercenaries, is to
be exerted for the destruction of the good people of these colonies. -- And
whereas it appears absolutely irreconcilable to reason and good conscience,
for the people of these colonies, now to take the oaths and affirmations
necessary for the support of any government under the crown of Great Britain;
and it is necessary that the exercise of every kind of authority under the said
crown should be totally suppressed, and all the powers of government exerted
under the authority of the people of the colonies, for the preservation of
internal peace, virtue and good order, as well as for the defense of our lives,
liberties, and properties, against the hostile invasions, and cruel
depredations of our enemies.

Therefore, RESOLVED, That it be recommended to the respective assemblies and
conventions of the United Colonies, where no government sufficient to the
exigencies of their affairs has been hitherto established, to adopt such
government as shall, in the opinion of the representatives of the people, best
conduce to the happiness and safety of their constituents in particular, and
America in general.

"AND WHEREAS doubts have arisen whether this Congress are invested with
sufficient power and authority to deliberate and determine on so important a
subject as the necessity of erecting and constituting a new form of government
and internal police, to the exclusion of all foreign jurisdiction, dominion and
control whatever. -- And whereas it appertains of right solely to the people
of this colony to determine the said doubts, Therefore

"RESOLVED, That it be recommended to the electors in the several counties in
this colony, by election in the manner and form prescribed for the election of
the present Congress, either to authorize (in addition to the powers vested in
this Congress) their present deputies, or others in the stead of their present
deputies, or either of them, to take into consideration the necessity and
propriety of instituting such new government as in and by the said resolution
of the Continental Congress is described and recommended: And if the majority
of the counties, by their deputies in Provincial Congress, shall be of opinion
that such new government ought to be instituted and established; then to
institute and establish such a government as they shall deem best calculated to
secure the rights, liberties and happiness of the good people of this colony;
and to continue in force until a future peace with Great Britain shall render
the same unnecessary. And

"RESOLVED, That the said elections in the several counties, ought to be had on
such day and at such place or places, as by the Committee of each county
respectively shall be determined. -- And it is recommended to the said
Committees, to fix such early days for the said elections, as that all the
deputies to be elected have sufficient time to repair to the city of New York
by the second Monday in July next; on which day all the said deputies ought
punctually to give their attendance.

"AND WHEREAS the object of the aforegoing resolutions is of the utmost
importance to the good people of this colony, --

"RESOLVED, That it be, and it is hereby earnestly recommended to the
Committees, freeholders, and other electors in the different counties in this
colony, diligently to carry the same into execution."

AND WHEREAS the good people of the said colony, in pursuance of the said
resolution, and reposing special trust and confidence in the members of this
Convention, have appointed, authorized and empowered them for the purposes, and
in the manner, and with the powers in and by the said resolve specified,
declared and mentioned.

AND WHEREAS the delegates of the United American States, in general Congress
convened, did on the fourth day of July now last past, solemnly publish and
declare, in the words following, viz.

"WHEN in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to
dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another, and to
assume among the powers of the earth, the separate and equal station to which
the laws of nature and of nature's God entitle them, a decent respect to the
opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel
them to the separation.

"We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that
they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, that among
these are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. -- That to secure these
rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their just powers from
the consent of the governed, that whenever any form of government becomes
destructive of these ends, it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish
it, and to institute new government, laying its foundation on such principles,
and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to
effect their safety and happiness. Prudence indeed will dictate, that
governments long established should not be changed for light and transient
causes, and accordingly all experience has shown, that mankind are more
disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by
abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when a long train of
abuses and usurpations pursuing invariably the same object, evinces a design to
reduce them under absolute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty, to
throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their future security.
Such has been the patient sufferance of the colonies; and such is now the
necessity which constrains them to alter their former system of government. The
history of the present King of Great Britain, is a history of repeated injuries
and usurpations, all having in direct object, the establishment of an absolute
tyranny over these States. To prove this, let facts be submitted to a candid
world.

"He has refused his assent to laws, the most wholesome and necessary for the
public good.

"He has forbidden his Governors to pass laws of immediate and pressing
importance, unless suspended in their operation till his assent should be
obtained; and when so suspended, he has utterly neglected to attend to them.

"He has refused to pass other laws for the accommodation of large districts of
people, unless those people would relinquish the right of representation in the
legislature; a right inestimable to them, and formidable to tyrants only.

"He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual, uncomfortable,
and distant from the depository of their public records, for the sole purpose
of fatiguing them into compliance with his measures.

"He has dissolved representative Houses repeatedly, for opposing with manly
firmness his invasions on the rights of the people.

"He has refused for a long time, after such dissolutions, to cause others to
be elected; whereby the legislative powers, incapable of annihilation, have
returned to the people at large, for their exercise; the State remaining in the
mean time exposed to all the dangers of invasion from without, and convulsions
within.

"He has endeavored to prevent the population of these States; for that
purpose obstructing the laws for naturalization of foreigners; refusing to pass
others to encourage their migrations hither, and raising the conditions of new
appropriations of lands.

"He has obstructed the administration of justice, by refusing his assent to
laws for establishing judiciary powers.

"He has made judges dependant on his will alone, for the tenure of their
offices, and the amount and payment of their salaries.

"He has erected a multitude of new offices, and sent hither swarms of officers
to harrass our people, and eat out their substance.

"He has kept among us, in times of peace, standing armies, without the consent
of our legislatures.

"He has affected to render the military independent of, and superior to, the
civil power.

"He has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our
constitution, and unacknowledged by our laws; giving his assent to their acts
of pretended legislation,

"For quartering large bodies of troops among us:

"For protecting them, by a mock trial, from punishment for any murders which
they should commit on the inhabitants of these States:

"For cutting off our trade with all parts of the world:

"For imposing taxes on us without our consent:

"For depriving us in many cases, of the benefits of trial by jury:

"For transporting us beyond seas to be tried for pretended offenses:

"For abolishing the free system of English laws in a neighboring province,
establishing therein an arbitrary government, and enlarging its boundaries, so
as to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same
absolute rule into these Colonies:

"For taking away our Charters, abolishing our most valuable laws, and altering
fundamentally the forms of our governments:

"For suspending our own legislatures, and declaring themselves invested with
power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.

"He has abdicated government here, by declaring us out of his protection, and
waging war against us.

"He has plundered our seas, ravaged our coasts, burnt our towns, and destroyed
the lives of our people.

"He is, at this time, transporting large armies of foreign mercenaries to
complete the works of death, desolation and tyranny, already begun with
circumstances of cruelty and perfidy, scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous
ages, and totally unworthy the head of a civilized nation.

"He has constrained our fellow citizens, taken captive on the high seas, to
bear arms against their country, to become the executioners of their friends
and brethren, or to fall themselves by their hands.

"He has excited domestic insurrections among us, and has endeavored to bring
on the inhabitants of our frontiers, the merciless Indian savages, whose known
rule of warfare is an undistinguished destruction, of all ages, sexes and
conditions.

"In every stage of these oppressions we have petitioned for redress, in the
most humble terms: Our repeated petitions have been answered only by repeated
injury. A Prince, whose character is thus marked by every act which may define
a Tyrant, is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.

"Nor have we been wanting in attentions to our British brethren. We have
warned them from time to time of attempts by their legislature to extend an
unwarrantable jurisdiction over us. We have reminded them of the circumstances
of our emigration and settlement here. We have appealed to their native justice
and magnanimity, and we have conjured them by the ties of our common kindred to
disavow these usurpations, which would inevitably interrupt our connection and
correspondence. They too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of
consanguinity. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity which denounces
our separation, and hold them as we hold the rest of mankind, enemies in war;
in peace, friends.

"We, therefore, the Representatives of the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, in
GENERAL CONGRESS assembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of the world, for
the rectitude of our intentions, do, in the name and by the authority of the
good people of these colonies, solemnly publish and declare, That these United
Colonies are, and of right ought to be, FREE AND INDEPENDENT STATES; that they
are absolved from all allegiance to the British crown, and that all political
connection between them and the State of Great Britain, is and ought to be
totally dissolved; and that as FREE AND INDEPENDENT STATES, they have full
power to levy war, conclude peace, contract alliances, establish commerce, and
to do all other acts and things which INDEPENDENT STATES may of right do. And
for the support of this declaration, with a firm reliance on the protection of
Divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our lives, our fortunes,
and our sacred honor."

AND WHEREAS this Convention having taken this declaration into their most
serious consideration, did on the ninth day of July last past, unanimously
resolve, that the reasons assigned by the Continental Congress, for declaring
the United Colonies, free and independent States, are cogent and conclusive:
And that while we lament the cruel necessity which has rendered that measure
unavoidable we approve the same, and will at the risque of our lives and
fortunes join the other Colonies in supporting it.

By virtue of which several acts, declarations and proceedings, mentioned and
contained in the before recited resolves or resolutions of the General Congress
of the United American States, and of the Congresses or Conventions of this
State, all power whatever therein has reverted to the people thereof, and this
Convention has by their suffrages and free choice been appointed, and among
other things authorized to institute and establish such a government, as they
shall deem best calculated to secure the rights and liberties of the good
people of this State, most conducive of the happiness and safety of their
constituents in particular, and of America in general.

I. This Convention therefore, in the name and by the authority of the good
people of this State, does ORDAIN, DETERMINE and DECLARE, that no authority
shall on any pretense whatever be exercised over the people or members of this
State, but such as shall be derived from and granted by them.

II. This Convention does further in the name and by the authority of the good
people of this State, ORDAIN, DETERMINE and DECLARE, that the supreme
legislative power, within this State, shall be vested in two separate and
distinct bodies of men; the one to be called the Assembly of the State of
New York; the other to be called the Senate of the State of New York; who
together shall form the legislature, and meet once at least in every year for
the dispatch of business.

III. AND WHEREAS, Laws inconsistent with the spirit of this constitution, or
with the public good, may be hastily and unadvisedly passed; BE IT ORDAINED,
that the Governor for the time being, the Chancellor and the Judges of the
Supreme Court, or any two of them, together with the Governor, shall be, and
hereby are, constituted a Council to revise all bills about to be passed into
laws by the legislature. And for that purpose shall assemble themselves, from
time to time, when the legislature shall be convened; for which nevertheless,
they shall not receive any salary or consideration under any pretense whatever.
And that all bills which have passed the Senate and Assembly, shall, before
they become laws, be presented to the said Council for their revisal and
consideration; and if upon such revision and consideration, it should appear
improper to the said Council, or a majority of them, that the said bill should
become a law of this State, that they return the same, together with their
objections thereto, in writing, to the Senate, or House of Assembly, in
whichsoever the same shall have originated, who shall enter the objections sent
down by the Council, at large, in their minutes, and proceed to reconsider the
said bill. But if after such reconsideration, two thirds of the said Senate or
House of Assembly, shall, notwithstanding the said objections, agree to pass
the same, it shall, together with the objections, be sent to the other branch
of the legislature, where it shall also be reconsidered, and if approved by two
thirds of the members present, shall be a law.

And in order to prevent any unnecessary delays, BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED, that
if any bill shall not be returned by the Council, within ten days after it
shall have been presented, the same shall be a law, unless the legislature
shall, by their adjournment render a return of the said bill within ten days
impracticable; in which case the bill shall be returned on the first day of the
meeting of the legislature, after the expiration of the said ten days.

IV. That the Assembly shall consist of at least seventy members, to be
annually chosen in the several counties, in the proportions following, viz. For
the city and county of New York, nine; The city and county of Albany, ten; The
county of Duchess seven; The county of West-Chester, six; The county of
Ulster, six; The county of Suffolk, five; The county of Queens, four; The
county of Orange, four; The county of Kings, two; The county of Richmond, two;
The county of Tryon, six; The county of Charlotte, four; The county of
Cumberland, three; The county of Gloucester, two.


V. That as soon after the expiration of seven years, subsequent to the
termination of the present war as may be, a Census of the electors and
inhabitants in this State be taken, under the direction of the legislature. And
if on such Census it shall appear, that the number of representatives in
Assembly from the said counties, is not justly proportioned to the number of
electors in the said counties respectively, that the legislature do adjust and
apportion the same by that rule. And further, that once in every seven years,
after the taking of the said first Census, a just account of the electors
resident in each county shall be taken; and if it shall thereupon appear, that
the number of electors in any county, shall have increased or diminished one or
more seventieth parts of the whole number of electors, which on the said first
Census shall be found in this State, the number of representatives for such
county shall be increased or diminished accordingly, that is to say, one
representative for every seventieth part as aforesaid.

VI. AND WHEREAS, an opinion has long prevailed among diverse of the good
people of this State, that voting at elections by Ballot, would tend more to
preserve the liberty and equal freedom of the people, than voting viva voce. To
the end therefore that a fair experiment be made, which of those two methods of
voting is to be preferred:

BE IT ORDAINED, that as soon as may be, after the termination of the present
war, between the United States of America and Great Britain, an act, or acts be
passed by the legislature of this State, for causing all elections thereafter
to be held in this State for Senators and Representatives in assembly, to be by
Ballot, and directing the manner in which the same shall be conducted. AND
WHEREAS, it is possible, that after all the care of the legislature, in framing
the said act or acts, certain inconveniences and mischiefs, unforeseen at this
day, may be found to attend the said mode of electing by Ballot:

IT IS FURTHER ORDAINED, that if after a full and fair experiment shall be made
of voting by Ballot aforesaid, the same shall be found less conducive to the
safety or interest of the State, than the method of voting viva voce, it shall
be lawful and constitutional for the legislature to abolish the same; provided
two thirds of the members present in each House, respectively shall concur
therein: And further, that during the continuance of the present war, and until
the legislature of this State shall provide for the election of Senators and
Representatives in assembly by Ballot, the said elections shall be made viva
voce.

VII. That every male inhabitant of full age, who shall have personally resided
within one of the counties of this State, for six months immediately preceding
the day of election, shall at such election, be entitled to vote for
representatives of the said county in assembly; if during the time aforesaid,
he shall have been a Freeholder, possessing a Freehold of the value of twenty
pounds, within the said county, or have rented a tenement therein of the yearly
value of forty shillings, and been rated and actually paid taxes to this State:
Provided always, that every person who now is a freeman of the city of Albany,
or who was made a freeman of the city of New York, on or before the fourteenth
day of October, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-five, and shall be actually and usually resident in the said cities
respectively, shall be entitled to vote for Representatives in assembly within
his said place of residence.

VIII. That every elector before he is admitted to vote, shall, if required by
the returning officer or either of the inspectors, take an oath, or if of the
people called Quakers, an affirmation, of allegiance to the State.

IX. That the assembly thus constituted, shall choose their own Speaker, be
judges of their own members, and enjoy the same privileges and proceed in doing
business, in like manner as the assemblies of the colony of New York, of right,
formerly did; and that a majority of the said members, shall, from time to time
constitute a House to proceed upon business.

X. And this Convention does further, in the name and by the authority of the
good people of this State, ORDAIN, DETERMINE and DECLARE, that the Senate of
the State of New York, shall consist of twenty-four freeholders, to be chosen
out of the body of the freeholders, and that they be chosen by the freeholders
of this State, possessed of freeholds of the value of one hundred pounds, over
and above all debts charged thereon.

XI. That the members of the Senate be elected for four years, and immediately
after the first election, they be divided by lot into four classes, six in each
class, and numbered one, two, three and four; that the seats of the members of
the first class shall be vacated at the expiration of the first year, the
second class the second year, and so on continually, to the end that the fourth
part of the Senate, as nearly as possible, may be annually chosen.

XII. That the election of Senators shall be after this manner; that so much of
this State as is now parcelled into counties, be divided into four great
districts; the southern district to comprehend the city and county of New York,
Suffolk, Westchester, Kings, Queens and Richmond counties; the middle district
to comprehend the counties of Duchess, Ulster and Orange; the western district
the city and county of Albany, and Tryon county; and the eastern district, the
counties of Charlotte, Cumberland and Gloucester. That the Senators shall be
elected by the freeholders of the said districts, qualified as aforesaid, in
the proportions following, to wit, in the southern district nine, in the middle
district six, in the western district six, and in the eastern district three.
And BE IT ORDAINED, that a Census shall be taken as soon as may be, after the
expiration of seven years from the termination of the present war, under the
direction of the legislature: And if on such Census it shall appear, that the
number of Senators is not justly proportioned to the several districts, that
the legislature adjust the proportion as near as may be, to the number of
freeholders qualified as aforesaid, in each district. That when the number of
electors within any of the said districts, shall have increased one
twenty-fourth part of the whole number of electors, which by the said Census,
shall be found to be in this State, an additional Senator shall be chosen by
the electors of such district. That a majority of the number of Senators to be
chosen as aforesaid, shall be necessary to constitute a Senate, sufficient to
proceed upon business, and that the Senate shall in like manner with the
assembly, be the judges of its own members. And BE IT ORDAINED, that it shall
be in the power of the future legislatures of this State for the convenience
and advantage of the good people thereof, to divide the same into such further
and other counties and districts, as shall to them appear necessary.

XIII. And this Convention does further, in the name and by the authority of
the good people of this State, ORDAIN, DETERMINE and DECLARE, that no member of
this State, shall be disfranchised, or deprived of any of the rights or
privileges secured to the subjects of this State, by this constitution, unless
by the law of the land, or the judgment of his peers.

XIV. That neither the assembly or the senate shall have power to adjourn
themselves for any longer time than two days, without the mutual consent of
both.

XV. That whenever the Assembly and Senate disagree, a conference shall be held
in the presence of both, and be managed by Committees to be by them
respectively chosen by ballot. That the doors both of the Senate and Assembly
shall at all times be kept open to all persons, except when the welfare of the
State shall require their debates to be kept secret. And the Journals of all
their proceedings shall be kept in the manner heretofore accustomed by the
General Assembly of the colony of New York, and except such parts as they shall
as aforesaid, respectively determine not to make public, be from day to day (if
the business of the legislature will permit) published.

XVI. It is nevertheless provided, that the number of Senators shall never
exceed one hundred, nor the number of Assembly three hundred; but that whenever
the number of Senators shall amount to one hundred, or of the Assembly to three
hundred, then and in such case, the legislature shall from time to time
thereafter, by laws for that purpose, apportion and distribute the said one
hundred Senators and three hundred Representatives, among the great districts
and counties of this State in proportion to the number of their respective
electors; so that the representation of the good people of this State, both in
the Senate and Assembly, shall for ever remain proportionate and adequate.

XVII. And this Convention does further, in the name and by the authority of
the good people of this State, ORDAIN, DETERMINE and DECLARE, that the supreme
executive power, and authority of this State, shall be vested in a Governor;
and that statedly once in every three years, and as often as the seat of
government shall become vacant, a wise and discreet freeholder of this State,
shall be by ballot elected Governor, by the freeholders of this State qualified
as before described to elect Senators; which elections shall be always held at
the times and places of choosing representatives in assembly for each
respective county; and that the person who has the greatest number of votes
within the said State, shall be Governor thereof.

XVIII. That the Governor shall continue in office three years, and shall, by
virtue of his office, be General and Commander in Chief of all the militia, and
Admiral of the Navy of this State; that he shall have power to convene the
Assembly and Senate on extraordinary occasions, to prorogue them from time to
time, provided such prorogations shall not exceed sixty days in the space of
any one year; and at his discretion to grant reprieves and pardons to persons
convicted of crimes, other than treason or murder, in which he may suspend the
execution of the sentence, until it shall be reported to the legislature at
their subsequent meeting; and they shall either pardon or direct the execution
of the criminal, or grant a further reprieve.

XIX. That it shall be the duty of the Governor to inform the legislature, at
every sessions, of the condition of the State, so far as may respect his
department; to recommend such matters to their consideration as shall appear to
him to concern its good government, welfare and prosperity; to correspond with
the Continental Congress, and other States; to transact all necessary business
with the officers of government, civil and military; to take care that the laws
are faithfully executed to the best of his ability; and to expedite all such
measures as may be resolved upon by the legislature.

XX. That a Lieutenant Governor shall, at every election of a Governor, and as
often as the Lieutenant Governor shall die, resign, or be removed from office,
be elected in the same manner with the Governor, to continue in office, until
the next election of a Governor; and such Lieutenant Governor shall, by virtue
of his office, be President of the Senate, and, upon an equal division, have a
casting voice in their decisions, but not vote on any other occasion.

And in case of the impeachment of the Governor, or his removal from office,
death, resignation, or absence from the State, the Lieutenant Governor shall
exercise all the power and authority appertaining to the office of Governor,
until another be chosen, or the Governor absent or impeached shall return, or
be acquitted. Provided that where the Governor shall, with the consent of the
legislature, be out of the State, in time of war, at the head of a military
force thereof, he shall still continue in his command of all the military force
of this State, both by sea and land.

XXI. That whenever the Government shall be administered by the
Lieutenant Governor, or he shall be unable to attend as President of the
Senate, the senators shall have power to elect one of their own members to the
office of President of the Senate, which he shall exercise pro hac vice. And
if, during such vacancy of the office of Governor, the Lieutenant Governor
shall be impeached, displaced, resign, die, or be absent from the State, the
President of the Senate, shall in like manner as the Lieutenant Governor
administer the government, until others shall be elected by the suffrage of the
people at the suceeding election.

XXII. And this Convention does further, in the name and by the authority of
the good people of this State, ORDAIN, DETERMINE and DECLARE, that the
Treasurer of this State shall be appointed by act of the legislature, to
originate with the assembly: Provided that he shall not be elected out of
either branch of the legislature.

XXIII. That all officers, other than those, who by this constitution are
directed to be otherwise appointed, shall be appointed in the manner following,
to wit, The assembly shall, once in every year, openly nominate and appoint one
of the Senators from each g^^at district, which Senators shall form a council
for the appointment of the said officers, of which the Governor for the time
being, or the Lieutenant Governor, or the President of the Senate, when they
shall respectively administer the government, shall be President, and have a
casting voice, but no other vote; and with the advice and consent of the said
council, shall appoint all the said officers; and that a majority of the said
council be a quorum. And further, the said Senators shall not be eligible to
the said council for two years successively.

XXIV. That all military officers be appointed during pleasure; that all
commissioned officers civil and military, be commissioned by the Governor, and
that the Chancellor, the Judges of the supreme court, and first Judge of the
county court in every county, hold their offices during good behavior, or
until they shall have respectively attained the age of sixty years.

XXV. That the Chancellor and Judges of the supreme court, shall not at the
same time hold any other office, excepting that of Delegate to the General
Congress, upon special occasions; and that the first Judges of the county
courts in the several counties, shall not at the same time hold any other
office, excepting that of Senator, or Delegate to the General Congress: But if
the Chancellor or either of the said Judges be elected or appointed to any
other office, excepting as is before excepted, it shall be at his option in
which to serve.

XXVI. That Sheriffs and Coroners be annually appointed; and that no person
shall be capable of holding either of the said offices more than four years
successively, nor the Sheriff of holding any other office at the same time.

XXVII. AND BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED, that the register and clerks in chancery be
appointed by the Chancellor; the clerks of the supreme court by the Judges of
the said court; the clerk of the court of probates, by the Judge of the said
court; and the register and marshal of the court of admiralty, by the Judge of
the admiralty. -- The said marshal, registers and clerks, to continue in office
during the pleasure of those, by whom they are to be appointed, as aforesaid.

And that all Attorneys, Solicitors and Counselors at Law, hereafter to be
appointed, be appointed by the court, and licensed by the first judge of the
court in which they shall respectively plead or practice; and be regulated by
the rules and orders of the said courts.

XXVIII. AND BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED, that where by this Convention the duration
of any office shall not be ascertained, such office shall be construed to be
held during the pleasure of the Council of Appointment: Provided that new
commissions shall be issued to judges of the county courts (other than to the
first judge) and to justices of the peace, once at the least in every three
years.

XXIX. That town clerks, supervisors, assessors, constables and collectors, and
all other officers heretofore eligible by the people, shall always continue to
be so eligible, in the manner directed by the present or future acts of
legislature.

That loan officers, county treasurers, and clerks of the supervisors, continue
to be appointed in the manner directed by the present or future acts of the
legislature.

XXX. That Delegates to represent this State, in the General Congress of the
United States of America, be annually appointed as follows, to wit, The Senate
and Assembly shall each openly nominate as many persons as shall be equal to
the whole number of Delegates to be appointed; after which nomination, they
shall meet together, and those persons named in both lists shall be Delegates;
and out of those persons whose names are not in both lists, one half shall be
chosen by the joint ballot of the Senators and Members of Assembly, so met
together as aforesaid.

XXXI. That the style of all laws shall be as follows, to wit, BE IT ENACTED by
the people of the State of New York, represented in Senate and Assembly. And
that all writs and other proceedings shall run in the name of the people of the
State of New York, and be tested in the name of the Chancellor or Chief Judge
of the court from whence they shall issue.

XXXII. And this Convention does further, in the name and by the authority of
the good people of this State, ORDAIN, DETERMINE and DECLARE, that a court
shall be instituted for the trial of Impeachments, and the Correction of
Errors, under the regulations which shall be established by the legislature;
and to consist of the President of the Senate, for the time being, and the
Senators, Chancellor, and Judges of the Supreme Court, or the major part of
them; except that when an impeachment shall be prosecuted against the
Chancellor, or either of the Judges of the Supreme Court, the person so
impeached shall be suspended from exercising his office, until his acquittal:
And in like manner, when an appeal from a decree in equity shall be heard, the
Chancellor shall inform the court of the reasons of his decree, but shall not
have a voice in the final sentence. And if the cause to be determined shall be
brought up by writ of error on a question of law, on a judgment in the Supreme
Court, the Judges of that Court shall assign the reasons of such their
judgment, but shall not have a voice for its affirmance or reversal.

XXXIII. That the power of impeaching all officers of the State, for mal and
corrupt conduct in their respective offices, be vested in the representatives
of the people in assembly; but that it shall always be necessary that two third
parts of the members present shall consent to and agree in such impeachment.
That previous to the trial of every impeachment, the members of the said court
shall respectively be sworn, truly and impartially to try and determine the
charge in question, according to evidence; and that no judgment of the said
court shall be valid, unless it shall be assented to by two third parts of the
members then present; nor shall it extend farther than to removal from office,
and disqualification to hold or enjoy any place of honor, trust or profit,
under this State. But the party so convicted, shall be, nevertheless, liable
and subject to indictment, trial, judgment and punishment, according to the
laws of the land.

XXXIV. AND IT IS FURTHER ORDAINED, that in every trial on impeachment or
indictment for crimes or misdemeanors, the party impeached or indicted, shall
be allowed counsel, as in civil actions.

XXXV. And this Convention does further, in the name and by the authority of
the good people of this State, ORDAIN, DETERMINE and DECLARE, that such parts
of the common law of England, and of the statute law of England and
Great Britain, and of the acts of the legislature of the colony of New York, as
together did form the law of the said colony on the nineteenth day of April, in
the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five, shall be and
continue the law of this State; subject to such alterations and provisions, as
the legislature of this State shall, from time to time, make concerning the
same. That such of the said acts as are temporary, shall expire at the times
limited for their duration respectively. That all such parts of the said common
law, and all such of the said statutes, and acts aforesaid, or parts thereof,
as may be construed to establish or maintain any particular denomination of
Christians, or their Ministers, or concern the allegiance heretofore yielded
to, and the supremacy sovereignty, government or prerogatives, claimed or
exercised by the King of Great Britain and his predecessors, over the colony of
New York and its inhabitants, or are repugnant to this constitution, be, and
they hereby are, abrogated and rejected. And this Convention does farther
ordain, that the resolves or resolutions of the Congresses of the colony of
New York, and of the Convention of the State of New York, now in force, and not
repugnant to the government established by this Constitution, shall be
considered as making part of the laws of this State; subject, nevertheless to
such alterations and provisions, as the legislature of this State may from time
to time make concerning the same.

XXXVI. AND BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED, that all grants of land within this State,
made by the King of Great Britain, or persons acting under his authority, after
the fourteenth day of October, one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five,
shall be null and void: But that nothing in this constitution contained, shall
be construed to affect any grants of land, within this State, made by the
authority of the said King or his predecessors, or to annul any charters to
bodies politic, by him or them or any of them, made prior to that day. And that
none of the said charters, shall be adjudged to be void by reason of any
non-user or mis-user of any of their respective rights or privileges, between
the nineteeeth day of April, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred
and seventy-five, and the publication of this constitution. And further, that
all such of the officers described in the said charters respectively, as by the
terms of the said charters, were to be appointed by the Governor of the colony
of New York, with or without the advice and consent of the Council of the said
King, in the said colony, shall henceforth be appointed by the Council
established by this constitution, for the appointment of officers in this
State, until otherwise directed by the legislature.

XXXVII. AND WHEREAS it is of great importance to the safety of this State,
that peace and amity with the Indians within the same, be at all times
supported and maintained. AND WHEREAS, the frauds too often practiced toward
the said Indians, in contracts made for their lands, have in diverse instances
been productive of dangerous discontents and animosities; BE IT ORDAINED, that
no purchases or contracts for the sale of lands made since the fourteenth day
of October, in the year of our Lord, one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-five, or which may hereafter be made with or of the said Indians,
within the limits of this State, shall be binding on the said Indians, or
deemed valid, unless made under the authority, and with the consent of the
legislature of this State.

XXXVIII. AND WHEREAS we are required by the benevolent principles of rational
liberty, not only to expel civil tyranny, but also to guard against that
spiritual oppression and intolerance, wherewith the bigotry and ambition of
weak and wicked priests and princes, have scourged mankind: This Convention
does further, in the name and by the authority of the good people of this
State, ORDAIN, DETERMINE and DECLARE, that the free exercise and enjoyment of
religious profession and worship, without discrimination or preference, shall
for ever hereafter be allowed within this State to all mankind. Provided that
the liberty of conscience hereby granted, shall not be so construed, as to
excuse acts of licentiousness, or justify practices inconsistent with the peace
or safety of this State.

XXXIX. AND WHEREAS the ministers of the gospel, are by their profession
dedicated to the service of God and the cure of souls, and ought not to be
diverted from the great duties of their function; therefore no minister of the
gospel, or priest of any denomination whatsoever, shall at any time hereafter,
under any pretense or description whatever, be eligible to, or capable of
holding any civil or military office or place, within this State.

XL. AND WHEREAS it is of the utmost importance to the safety of every State,
that it should always be in a condition of defense; and it is the duty of every
man, who enjoys the protection of society, to be prepared and willing to defend
it; this Convention therefore, in the name and by the (...) of the good people
of this State, does DETERMINE and DECLARE, that the militia of this State, at
all times hereafter, as well in peace as in war, shall be armed and
disciplined, and in readiness for service. That all such of the inhabitants of
this State, being of the people called Quakers, as from scruples of conscience,
may be averse to the bearing of arms, be therefrom excused by the legislature;
and do pay to the State such sums of money in lieu of their personal service,
as the same may, in the judgment of the legislature, be worth: And that a
proper magazine of warlike stores, proportionate to the number of inhabitants,
be, for ever hereafter, at the expense of this State, and by acts of the
legislature, established, maintained, and continued in every county in this
State.

XLI. And this Convention does further ORDAIN, DETERMINE and DECLARE, in the
name and by the authority of the good people of this State, that trial by jury,
in all cases in which it has heretofore been used in the colony of New York,
shall be established, and remain inviolate forever. And that no acts of
attainder shall be passed by the legislature of this State for crimes, other
than those committed before the termination of the present war; and that such
acts shall not work a corruption of blood. And further, that the legislature of
this State shall, at no time hereafter, institute any new court or courts, but
such as shall proceed according to the course of the common law.

XLII. And this Convention does further, in the name and by the authority of
the good people of this State, ORDAIN, DETERMINE and DECLARE, that it shall be
in the discretion of the legislature to naturalize all such persons, and in
such manner as they shall think proper; provided all such of the persons, so to
be by them naturalized, as being born in parts beyond sea, and out of the
United States of America, shall come to settle in, and become subjects of this
State, shall take an oath of allegiance to this State, and abjure and renounce
all allegiance and subjection to all and every foreign King, Prince, Potentate
and State, in all matters ecclesiastical as well as civil.

By order. LEONARD GANSEVOORT, Pres. pro tem.


