A SECOND WARNING TO AMERICA.

By ELAMPOTTER, M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

Behold, he comes with Clouds; and every Eye shall see him, and they also
which pierced him; and all kindreds of the Earth shall wail because of him.
Even so Amen. St. JOHN. HARTFORD: Printed by HANNAH WATSON.

A second WARNING to America.
REVELATIONS iii, 22. He that has an ear, let him bear what the Spirit says
unto the Churches.
THIS book is the revelation, which God gave unto his Son, and which he sent
and signified by his angel unto his servant John, in the island of Patmos, to
which, for the word of God and the testimony of Jesus, he was banished by
Domitian, which is supposed to have been about the year 96.

This book contains a wounderful vision that St. John had, which opened to him
while he was in the spirit on the Lord's ^ay: It opened with a great voice, as
of a trumpet, and with a most magnificient appearance of our blessed Lord,
holding seven stars in his right hand, and walking in the midst of seven golden
candlesticks, which being too much for mortal eye to endure, John fell at his
feet as dead; but our Lord recovered him, and bid him write the things that he
revealed.

And (...) we have seven messengers to the seven Churches in Asia.

These epistles agree much in their general form, but in the matter of address
vary according as the state of the churches varied, to whom they were
inscribed; and yet often what was said to one church agreed to others.

In each epistle he, who walks amidst the golden candlesticks, assures the
churches that he knows their works. Our Lord commends every church except that
of the Laodiceans, for something he found good among them; and reproved every
church, except that in Philadelphia, for what he found had among them.

By the most awful threatenings he warns the remiss; and by the most glorious
promises he encourages the faithful. The wonderful titles of our Lord, in these
epistles seem to agree to the particular state of the churches to which they
were sent. Each epistle was directed to the angel of the church, that is, to
the minister, who seems to be considered as a represetative of the whole
church; and yet some things in these epistles might be peculiarly applicable to
the minister himself. In the close of each epistle we have the solemn
injunction in our text: He that has an ear, let him hear what the spirit faith
unto the churches.

That is, let him hear with all attention; God planted the ear for this purpose
and he that does not improve it in this manner will soon wish that he never had
an ear. Let him hear what the glorious Immanual, the prince of life says; this
is he which lives and was dead and is alive forever more, and has the keys of
hell and death; this is also he which has the sharp sword with two edges; let
him hear what he says; his voice is as the sound of many waters; let him hear
what he faith in his providence -- what he faith by his spirit in his word,
and let him hear what he faith in these epistles to the seven churches in Asia;
let him hear with the ear, understand with the heart, and make religion the
life of his soul. But as the contents of these epistles are of general
concernment to all churches to the end of the world; let him, let her, let
every one that has an ear hear what the spirit faith to the churches in the
present day; what he faith by way of commendation, by way of reproof, by way of
counsel, by way of threatening, and by way of encouragement to the faithful.

I. By way of commendation.

Are there any ministers, churches or private christians that have borne, that
have patience, and for Christ's name sake, have labored and have not fainted;
who cannot bear them which are evil, who have tried them which say they are
apostles and are not, and who hate the corrupt deeds of the Nicholaitans, and
the doctrines Balaam; to you he faith, I know thy works, and thy labor, and
thy patience,

Are there any endowed with true poverty of spirit, and it may be poor in this
world's goods, to you he faith, but thou art rich. Are there those who have
followed Christ, where Christ and the world have parted, and so have not denied
his name; to you he faith, because thou have kept the word of my truth, I also
will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the
world, to try them which dwell upon the earth.

II. Let us hear what the spirit faith to the churches in this land, by way of
reproof and counsel.

If we consider our awful declensions in religion; if we consider the righteous
frowns of heaven upon us, we shall apprehend that we hear our Lord speaking to
us as he did to the church of Ephesus; I have somewhat against thee, because
thou have left thy first love; remember therefore from whence thou art fallen
and repent, and do the first works. Let all declining christians look back and
see the abatement of their former love and zeal for the glorious Immanuel; let
them compare their present state with the former, and say how much more
comfortable it was with them then than now; let them inwardly grieve and mourn
before God, and go back step by step, till they have gained the ground they
have lost, and do the first works again. Let them watch and pray and strive to
keep their heart with all diligence, as much as they did before.

Let many protestant churches remember from whence they have fallen within a
century past; for the proof of this compare the spirit of their latter and
former writings. Let particular churches in this land remember their
declensions since they were first planted, and even within thirty years past,
when the unclean spirit seemed, for a season, to be going out of the land; but
now he has taken to himself seven spirits more wicked than the first, who
enter in and dwell among us. Yea, let us look back to the churches in the
apostles days, consider their love, zeal and purity, and comparing our present
state with theirs, let us remember how grievously we have fallen, and repent
and do the first works. Then were fewer Hypocrites in the churches; professors
had religion at heart; Christ dwelt among them, and additions were made to them
daily of such as should be saved. Then how holy! How humble! How meek! How
patient! How prayerful! How heavenly minded were christians! But alas, even in
John's time, many began to decline, as appears by our Lord's rebukes in these
seven epistles. And though there have been several revivals in the church
since, yet alas, how have we fallen from the premitive purity! How cold is our
love to Christ and to souls! How dull our devotions! How languid our zeal! What
pride, malice and hypocrisy prevail among us! While many have been careful to
tithe mint, anise and cummin, we have omitted weightier matters. How is the
gold become dim, and the most fine gold is changed!

For these things, for our woeful and amazing security, the son of God the
glorions Immanual is grieved, and has of late in an awful degree withdrawn his
holy spirit from us, as appears -- from the general decay of holy zeal in
ministers and churches -- from the awful abatement of spiritual life and power
in the holy ordinances -- and from the growing prevalency of all kinds of sin
and iniquity, even under the tremendous frowns of Jehovah.

O let us remember Jerusalem; what distress and desolation came upon them for
grieving away the infinitely glorious Immanual! What sword! What sickness! What
famine raged among them, till they were almost extirpated from the earth!

And verily we have had some of the same signs that preceeded their
destruction. They had calls, but despised them; so have we. They were
corrected, but hardened under the rod; so are we. They bit and devoured one
another, making the sheckel great and the ephah small; and instead of selling
that which was good, they sold the refuse of their wheat; their commodities
were corrupt and adulterated; -- added to these, they imprisoned God's Heralds.

They had also, as Josephus relates, signs in the heavens, strange appearances,
and particularly a "comet that hung over Jerusalem, for a year together, in the
form of a sword." And we, for more than fifty years past, have been often
warned by prodigies in the heavens, particularly that called the aurora
borealis, or a light in the north, which has sometimes appeared exceeding
awful, like streaks of blood and fire, streaming from the horizon almost or
quite to the zenith: And after what philosophers say concerning the natural
cause, it still remains a prodigy to all; and is commonly said to be the
forerunner of a storm. We are still hardened, nor can it be expected that any
prodigies will reform us, while we hear not Moses and the prophets. And if our
sins bring on us distress similar to that on the Jews, then no marvel that we
see the same signs preceding it.

But before the decree be gone forth; before the glory of the Lord, to make his
final departure, go up from the midst of us, let us repent and earnestly
beseech Immanual to return and dwell among us. Then should we see happy days
again, as we have seen before.

III. Let us hear what the spirit faith to the churches in this land, by way of
threatening.

He, who is the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the
creation of God, whose eyes are as a flame of fire, and his feet like unto fine
brass as if they did burn in a furnace, whose voice is as the sound of many
waters, and out of whose mouth proceeds a sharp two edged sword; he speaks to
the church in this land, in accents louder than thunder; he says, repent, or I
will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy candlestick out of his place.
That is, I will unchurch you, ye shall have no ministers nor ordinances, and
the places of worship ye resorted to, shall enjoy their silent sabbaths; and
this he threatens to do quickly.

Again he says, repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight
against them with the sword of my mouth; that is I will pronounce terrible woes
against thee, and will execute all the threatenings in my word upon thee,
except thou repent.

Again he says, because thou art luke warm, and art neither cold nor hot, I
will spew thee out of my mouth. Now remember these Asian churches: They, and
many others, have long since felt the frowns of the Lamb. But perhaps some will
be ready to say, ah! Immanuel is bent on our ruin; he would destroy us of
choice. But no, judgment is his strange work; he does not afflict willingly,
nor grieve the children of men; he has sworn by an oath, as I live faith the
Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the wicked
turn from his way and live. And as he said to the church in Laodicea, he says
to his corrupt church in this land. As many as I love I rebuke and chasten* be
zealous therefore and repeat.

Notwithstanding we have most shamefully left our first (...); notwithstanding
the blasphemy of some, the corruption of many, the luke warmness of most, yet
he, the glorious Immanuel, is now drawing near and waiting for our return.

He says, behold I stand at the door and knock; If any man hear my voice and
open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. O
how gentle! How w^^ing! How condescending! How amazing this! Verily he must be
deafer than a stone, and his heart harder than adement, who is not moved with
it. Again and for encouragement, he faith, to him that overcomes will I give
to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God. That
is, they shall partake of the full joy of heaven above; and as the tree of life
is in Eden would have been to Adam a sacrament of confirmation, in case he had
stood till the end of his trial, so they, in the more glorious paradise above,
shall forever enjoy the surest pledges of their confirmation in eternal bliss.

Nor let any say, because we are out of the church, the spirit faith nothing to
us. Whether you are in the church or out of it, if you are ungodly there is a
portion for you in the sacred word.

ADDRESSES
1. To profane Swearers and Cursers.
MY FRIENDS.
If any thing can make black -- it is not so much the color of the skin as the
foulness of the tongue and the blackness of the heart. I must tell you in the
name of him who ha^h the sharp sword with two edges, and at his pleasure makes
it vibrate like lightning through his enemies, unless you repeat, you are dead
men; nay, damned men, damned forever. If you ask the import of these words,
which I fear some have as little idea of as a blind man of colors, I answer,
eternity can give their awful import! But this I say, all the tremendous
judgments upon the old world -- upon Sodom -- upon Egypt -- upon Dathan and
Abi^an -- upon the camp of the Asyrians, and upon the Jews in their final
destruction, all these and ten thousand more are but the hidings of that power
which you, feeble worms of the dust, impiously rear your heads to defy.

But, sirs, remember, after all your defiances which you say are in jest, you
will soon find that the glorious Judge is not in jest, when he shall say,
Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his angels! -- -- As he loved cursing so let it come unto him, -- into his
bowels like water, and like oil into his bones. Psa. cix. 17. 18. Let the wise
secure the favor of the eternal Judge, while it is tendered in the free offers
of the gospel.

2. To the GOSPEL PROFESSOR.
SIR,
Thou professest more than others; suffer me to propose the question, What
do thou more than others? Mat. v. 47.

I answer, if you have such a sense of your own vileness, of the laws purity,
of the evil of sin, of Christ's excellence, of God's glory, of the beauty of
holiness, of this world's emptiness, of eternity's fullness, of heaven's joys,
as excite you to admire and adore the incomprehensibleness of the great
Jehovah, and as it were to annihilate yourself at his feet, and if these views
amidst your trials beget in you a life of faith, of holy humble walk with God,
looking to Jesus Christ for grace to enable you to repent, to believe, to love
God, to forgive your enemies, and even to think a right thought, and at the
same time not trusting to your good aims, but to the merits of Christ only for
the acceptance of your person and services with God, then you do more than
others. And if you go on striving to apprehend that for which Christ
apprehended you in your effectual calling, your reward will be greater; for he
faith, in Revelations ii. 17. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the
hidden manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name
written, which no man knows, saving he that receives it.

3. To the generality of the Churches in NEW ENGLAND.
Brethren and Fathers,
Church power is a subject on which a world of books have been wrote, and fear
o^ blood have been already spilt. -- I would humbly offer a few remarks.

In the time of the Apostles a christian church consisted of the people, their
leaders and deacons; and every church had authority to govern itself according
to the word of God, and was subject, as a church, to the control of no power
under Christ. Hence St. Paul bids the church of Corinth to put away from among
themselves that wicked person. See 1 Cor. v. 13.

They had the power of excommunication in themselves; and it seems that even
the apostles did not proceed in matters of importance without the consent of
the brotherhood, as in Acts. xv. 22 -- 3. Then pleased it the Apostles and
Elders, with the whole church, to send chosen men of their own company to
Antioch. See also Acts i. 15 to the end -- and Acts vi. 3. And while love like
the spirit in the living creatures animated the Apostles, Elders and Brethren,
they each went straight forward. Then they were strong; nor did they apprehend
any need of leaning upon others.

But some time after their love and zeal were abated, all authority was
resigned to the ecclesiastics, and the Pope tyran^sed with d^eadful sway; and
now the Church groaned under bondage in Babylon for several ages. Thus, what
the Lord Christ gave to his churches, to use for their peace and edification,
they tamely resigned, and the Pope proudly assumed. But the reformation led the
Church partly out of this bondage: The Protestants have recovered this power
out of the hands of the Pope. The Episcopalians lodged it in the hands of
Bishops: But the Presbyterians went further; they retrieved the power out of
the hands of the Pope and lodged it in the hands of the Clergy and a number of
Elders chosen out of the Brotherhood to assist in governing. In this stage of
the Reformation they did much better than in the former.

But after this, the Dissenters in England retrieved the authority from the
Bishops solely, and acknowledged it to be in the hands of the church officers,
and of every private brother, and that none under Christ should control them.

Thus, after long antichristian tyranny, the power came home again to the
church, and was lodged nearer where Christ left it than it had been for many
ages before. This Authority went out in the decrease of love, and in the
increase of love it returned.

But, O New England churches! you have gone backward and not forward; you have
abated of your love, zeal and fervency in religion, and instead of leaning upon
the Lord Christ, as once, calling no man father upon earth, you trust in an arm
of flesh. Instead of going to God for light and strength to judge and determine
your own matters, we go to councils, and commit Christ, his cause, or his
people into their hands. This privilege, the Church's power, is not to be sold
as Esau sold his birthright.

Our pious forefathers contended warmly for it in Old England; -- the Lord
Christ gave it them, and sent them over to this land that they might enjoy it
without molestation; and now will you bury the talent which you once prayed so
earnestly you might possess, will you bury it in the hands of councils, and
then say to the Lord, Lo, there thou have that i^ thine? Hear what the Lord
faith, Thou wicked and slothful servant -- Take the talent from him and cast ye
the unprofitable servant into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.

O New England Churches, your crime in going backward, after such mavelous
deliverances, is much greater than if you had never come thus far. Israel were
about (...) return to Egypt; and you have really made progress in going back to
what you once disavowed and exclaimed against. Now, repent and turn again
speedily to the Lord; return in the way of love, faith, and a holy zeal -- and
then light, courage and strength will return to you. Then you will have less
inclination to commit this sacred right to councils, and they will less desire
it; and I believe that such a reformation is as laudable as it was for the Jews
to return from Babylon to rebuild Jerusalem. This would embolden you to look to
God for that protection in an approaching storm which he afforded to our
forefathers. Would you enjoy their blessing, then prove yourselves their
children by following them as they followed Christ and his primitive churches.

Fear not lo^sing temporalities in this day. When a ship is overloaded in a
storm, it is better to throw out the cargo than to sink with it. Nay, let us
fear not them that mock, and rail, and call hard names, and that may kill the
body; but let us rather fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in
hell forever. Now blessed are they, who maintaining the furthest progress in
the reformation, go forward and not backwards, making due allowances for the
change of place and circumstances.

And you who are so wise as to keep the word of Christ's patience, he will keep
from the hour of temptation, which will come upon all the world, to try them
that dwell upon the earth. Revel. iii. 10. Now I believe that they who conduct
nearest to the above line best deserve the name of christians of any in New
England. And neither would I profess to be Presbyterian, or a Congregationalist
or any other name, but by the grace of God to be a Christian. This is the line
which recommends itself, which the state of New England pleads for, and which
the churches in the days of the apostles followed.

4. To the whole LAND.
Mr. Countrymen and Brethren,
I beseech you, for the Lord's sake, put away the Negro sl^ve^^; ab^or all
jesting with God's holy word, (...) to the glorious Immanuel, and let us honor
him that we may be happy in his favor.

Enfield, September, 12, 1777.
THE END.

