Mr. TENNENT's SPEECH, ON THE Dissenting Petition, DELIVERED In the HOUSE of
ASSEMBLY, Charlestown, South Carolina, Jan. 11, 1777.

CHARLESTOWN: Printed by PETER TIMOTHY. M,DCC,LXXVII.

PREFACE.
THIS Speech would never have been sent to the Press, if it had not been
earnestly and importunately desired, by a large Number of the Members of the
House, who thought that it might be of real Service, in allaying some
Animosity, that, in their Opinion, had arisen from a Misunderstanding of the
Nature of the Case. If another Reason is needful, -- the Author confesses, that
he was in some Sense compelled to give up the Copy, by the Misrepresentations
that had been given of his Words out of Doors.

SPEECH IN The General Assembly OF SOUTH CAROLINA.
Mr. SPEAKER,
I Am much concerned, lest an unfavourable construction should be put upon any
word that may fall from me in the course of this debate, as reflecting upon the
respectable members of the Church of England. I wish, Sir, to be understood as
bearing the gentlemen of that Church, a very high respect. None that now exist
have been the authors of that which we complain of: With the generosity of
sentiment, that now prevails; with the same enlightened minds, I am persuaded
they never would have been the authors.

I dissent from the Church of England, it is true, but, I trust, it is upon the
most liberal grounds: When I oppose its establishment, I do not mean to oppose
the Church itself. I would equally oppose the establishment of any other,
though I admired its constitution ever so much. I firmly believe that this
Petition arises from an unextinguishable love to the free and equal rights of
mankind, and not from a dislike to one denomination of Christians, more than
another. And Sir! while a love to Freedom and Equality is the grand sentiment
that inspires all ranks of men, in this great contest; while you seel an
unconquerable Spirit of Freedom, animating you to all these measures; how can
you find in your heart to blame those who risque their all, and stand with you
in the foremost rank of zeal and danger, if they should only desire to secure
to themselves and children, the same privileges that you enjoy? You must pardon
them, it, sensible of the injuries that have been done them in times past,
while we mutually groaned under a foreign yoke, and anxious for the complete
Freedom and Happiness of their posterity, they should improve the important
moment of forming a constitution for this most righteous purpose.

And, now Sir! I beg leave to offer a few of those reasons which induce me to
oppose the religious establishment of any one denomination of Christians in
this State, under our new constitution.

1. My first, and most capital reason, against all religious establishments is,
that they are an infringement of Religious Liberty.

Religious establishments, as far as they operate, do interfere with the rights
of private judgment and conscience: In effect, they amount to nothing less,
than the legislature's taking the consciences of men into their own hands, and
taxing them at discretion.

We contend, that no legislature under Heaven, has a right to interfere with
the judgment and conscience of men, in religious matters, if their opinions and
practices do not injure the State. The rights of conscience, are now too
generally understood, to make it needful to take much pains to convince
mankind, that they appertain to an higher tribunal, and that the objects of
human legislation, are quite of a different nature. The State may give
countenance to religion, by defending and protecting all denominations of
Christians, who are inoffensive and useful. The State may enact good laws for
the punishment of vice. and the encouragent of virtue. The State may do any
thing for the support of religion, without partiality to particular societies,
or imposition upon the rights of private judgment. But when the legislative
authority of the state, sets itself up as a judge in church controversies, and
proceeds by law, to declare this system of opinions right, and that wrong; when
it proceeds to lay hardships upon the professors of the one, while it lavishes
its bounties on the other, and that while both are equally useful and
inoffensive -- I say, in this, it not only mistakes the proper objects of
legislation, but is chargeable with manifest injustice. No legislature upon
earth, has a right to do such a thing: Nay, we contend, that such a right
cannot possibly be communicated to them. I can communicate to my
representative, a power to dispose of part of my property, for the security of
the remaining part: I may give him a right to resign a part of my personal
liberty to the obligation of good laws, as a means of preserving the rest, --
but, cannot, -- I say it is out of my power, to communicate to any man on
earth, a right to dispose of my conscience, and to lay down for me what I shall
believe and practice in religious matters. Our judgment and practice in
religious matters, is not like our purse; we cannot resign them to any man of
set of men on earth; and therefore, no man or set of men on earth, either has
or can have, a right to bind us in religious matters. The rights of conscience
are unnalienable, and therefore, all laws to bind it, are, ipso facto, null and
void. Every attempt of this kind is tyrany, let it be made by whatever body of
men, and in whatever age: -- Of all tyrany, religious tyrany is the worst, and
men of true sentiment, will scorn civil, where they cannot enjoy Religious
Liberty.

And, now Sir! permit me to take a short view of religious establishments, and
see, whether they do not more or less, bear hard upon the rights of private
judgment, and partake, in greater or smaller degrees, of this worst of tyrany.

On all hands it will be acknowledged, that those establishments are of this
nature, which lay heavy penalties upon those who refuse to conform to them. Can
you form an idea of more horrid cruelty exercired upon the rights of
conscience, than that which imposes fines, imprisonment and death, upon those
who presume to differ from the established religion? You, Sir! look back with
horror upon the history of such savage cruelty, -- the more crued, as it has
ever been exercised under the color of law.

Of the same nature, though differing somewhat in the degree of their cruelty,
are those establishments, which incapacitate good subjects; who differ from the
speculative opinions of the State. Judgment and conscience, in these matters,
is, or ought to be, as independent of our will, as our height or color: They
are formed by the circumstances of the time in which we live, by the manner of
our education, by the capacity of our mind, and the degree of evidence. Would
not that prince be esteemed a cruel tyrant, who should ordain, that every man
of six feet high, and of a sandy complexion, should be excluded from the rights
of citizens? An assembly of two hundred senators, who could ordain, that good
citizens should be deprived, on account of their inoffensive opinions, would be
two hundred times as cruel.

2. The next kind of establishment that we meet with, is, that which now
obtains in this State. I shall speak cautiously of it, but I shall take the
liberty to speak freely, and shall only mention facts.

Its chief characteristicks are, that it makes a legal distinction between
people of different denominations, equally inoffensive; it taxes all
denominations for the support of the religion of one; it only tolerates those
that diffent from it, while it deprives them of sundry privileges which the
people of the establishment enjoy.

I say it makes a legal and odious distinction between subjects equally good.
The law knows and acknowledges the society of the one, as a Christian Church;
the law knows not the other Churches. The law knows the Clergy of the one, as
ministers of the gospel; The law knows not the Clergy of the other Churches,
nor will it give them a license to marry their own people. Under this reputedly
free government, licenses for marriage are even now refused by the Ordinary, to
any but the established clergy. The law makes provision for the support of one
Church, -- it makes no provision for the others. The law builds superb Churches
for the one, -- it leaves the others to build their own Churches. the law, by
incorporating the one Church, enables it to hold estates, and to sue for
rights; the law does not enable the others to hold any religious property, not
even the pistances which are bestowed by the hand of charity for their support.
No diffenting Church can hold or sue for their own property at common law. They
are obliged therefore to deposit it in the Hands of Trustees, to be held by
them as their own private property, and to lie at their mercy. The consequence
of this is, that too often their funds for the support of religious worship,
get into bad hands, and become either alienated from their proper use, or must
be recovered at the expense of a suit in chancery.

These are important distinctions indeed, but these are not all. The law vests
the officers of the Church of England with power to tax not only her own
people, but all other denominations within the bounds of each respective
parish, for the support of the poor: an enormous power! which ought to be
vested in no one denomination more than another. Greater distinctions still!
where there are parishes the law throws the whole management of elections, that
most inestimable of all the rights of freemen, into the hands of Church
officers exclusively.

And why all this inequality? Why does the law thus favor one, and bear hard
upon every other denomination of Christians? The reason is only to be found in
the spirit of the times when this unequal establishment was framed, and in the
Machiavelian policy of the British government; which ought not any longer to
take place in this country.

But that which shows much of the injustice and oppression of the present
establishment, is the tax which it makes all other denominations pay to the
support of the religion of one. It puts its hand into the pocket of nine
denominations, all equally pretending to the merit of good subjects and
citizens, to bestow upon one and support its dignity.

Sir! is this consistent with our first notions of justice and equality? And
here, it matters not whether the religious tax is equally levied upon the
people at large, or whether it is paid by a general duty. The treasury is the
equal property of all denominations in the State, and if it comes out of the
treasury, it comes in effect out of their pocket. The only difference is, that
in the one case the imposition would be so open, that the most ignorant would
know and feel it; in the other it is more sly and concealed from the vulgar
eye. We admire the policy of this measure more than its justice. But it ought
to be known, that by low, the moment the treasury ceases to pay the clergy, the
inhabitants are to be assessed for their support.


The sums advanced by the treasury, for the support of the Church of England,
within the space of the last ten years preceding the 31st of December 1775,
amount to 164, 027 l. 16 s. 3 d. The expense of the year 1772 only, was 18, 031
l. 11 s. 1 d I have not been able to satisfy myself in computing the experes of
the establishment from its beginning to the present day, but am convineed from
a specimen of thirty years, that it would hardly be credited.
The religious estate, now in the actual possession of the Church of England,
drawn more or less from the purses of all deno minations by law, would probably
sell for three hundred and thirty thousand pounds This computation was made at
a low rate, perhaps too low. The Author would be glad to be corrected in his
Estimate, by any abler hand, who is possessed of better materials. It is said,
that a great part of this estate came by private benefactions. I find, however,
the sum of 33, 656 l. given from the treasury to the Church of St. Michael, in
Charies-Town, before the end of 1758 of which 3500 l. is expressly for the
steeple. The whole of the transient duties, and an heavy duty on all rum and
brandy, was given to St. Philip's for several years.


Now, if you suppose that Dissenters have always made more than one half of
this government, This has usually been allowed to be the state of the case; at
present I believe it is on all hands agreed, that they are a great majority.
-- the sum that has been actually taken out of their pockets for the support
of a Church with which they did not worship, must amount to more than 82013 l.
10 s. within the ten years aforesaid; and a very large sum of their property,
in globes, parsonages and Churches, lies in the possession and improvement of
the Church of England. [Were we to compute the lawful interest of all, and the
usual rent of the glebes, etc. from the time when they were severally granted
and appropriated, I don't know how far it would swell the sum.]

But if the dissenters do make a great majority of the inhabitants, the
argument is still stronger, and the impropriety of obliging the purse of the
major to suit itself to the consciences of the minor, cannot fail to weigh with
every candid mind. The inequality of the religious burden, is the more evident,
when you consider, that the number of the established Churches in this State is
only twenty and many of them very small, whereas the number of formed
differenting congregations, the generality of which are much larger than those
of the establishment, is at least seventy-nine, as appears from a schedule now
in my hand. The Quakers and sundry others of which I had not then heard, were
not put into that list; I think there are ninety.
Still more unequal it appears, when you take into computation the large sums
which dissenters do actually pay over and above their share of expense to the
Church of England, for the support of their own worship. From the best
intelligence that I can obtain, they have made provision for the support of
their own worship, and would actually pay the sum of 40,000 l. annually, could
they be furnished with Clergy. But the deficiency of gospel ministers reduces
the sum very considerably.

Sir! you may say, that the doors of the established Church are open equally to
all denominations, and that all may equally enjoy the benefit of it. I have
heard of such an argument.

But besides that it is notorious, that what the public has paid for, in some
instances has been converted into private property, and become the real estate
of individuals, The pews in St. Philip's and St. Michael's Churches are now
private property, and sell from twelve hundred to nineteen hundred and fifty
Pounds; what they sell for in St. George's I have not heard.
it would here be extremely natural to ask, how a rational Dissenter can enjoy
the benefit of the establishment? The only answer that I can give to such a
question is a very short one, He must do it at the expense of his own private
judgment and conscience.

But Dissenters are tolerated; there is a free toleration: Does any man impose
upon them? who prevents their worshipping as they please?

I answer. In this respect they stand upon the same footing with the Jews. No
body molests them. But would it, Sir, content our brethren of the Church of
England, to be barely tolerated? that is, not punished for presuming to think
for themselves. Is a bare toleration sufficient for the majority of a free
State? of a free State that expects to gain its liberties by the sword? Would
not a bare toleration be viewed by our brethren with infinite disdain; Is this
equality? Sure the justice of this house, now unfettered by British violence,
will not permit the continuance of such a monument of inequality.

3. There are some who entertain an idea of keeping up the Establishment,
merely as a matter of religious superiority, without taxing other
denominations. But they seem to forget, that every reason for which they desire
the superiority by establishment, operates as an abridgment of Religious
liberty. For when a man presumes to follow his own judgment in religious
matters, and refuses to conform, he must at least submit to this inferiority,
or rather bear the reproach of the law, as not being on a level with those that
are Christians in its esteem. Still there remains injustice, and a foundation
for dissatisfaction. For Sir! let it be remembered, that there are many
Dissenters in this State, who care but little for money that it costs them to
support the Church of England. They value much more their relilious, their
unalienable rights, than the expense. Sir! you very well know, that it was not
the Three Pence on the Pound of Tea, that roused all the virtue of America. It
is our birthright that we prize. It is a full and undiminished freedom in the
exercise of our own judgment, in all religious matters, that we value and
esteem.

And for a mere empty name, without profit, -- for a mere title of pre-eminency
without emolument, -- is it worth while to have a bone of endless contention in
the State, and to maintain these odious distinctions?

4. There is proposal Mr. Speaker, to establish all denominations by law; and
to pay them all equally.

This, Sir! may operate as a scheme of division, but in practice it must appear
equally absurd and impossible. Absurd, as the establishment of all religions
would in effect be no establishment at all. It would destroy the very end of an
establishment, by reducing things just to the same state they would be in
without it, with this disadvantage, that large bodies of men who could not
obtain Church officers, might be oppressed, by being obliged to pay for that
which they received no benefit from. But it would be found impracticable, as
people of different sentiments live intermingled, and there could be no
possible distinction of parishes, so as to accommodate different denominations.
But if the establishment must from time to time conform itself to the
prevailing party in each parish or district, there would not only be the same
ground for complaint that there now is, but it would prove the means of
everlasting strife. And indeed I am afraid that the expense would be found upon
trial insupportable. Sir! it is impracticable in this State to establish all
denominations, and it is only thrown out to amuse us. But to admit the
establishment of a few dissenting Churches, in preference to all others, as a
means to make them acquiesce! It is too big with injustice to procure the
consent of an honest man. Let us all have equal privileges or nothing. EQUALITY
OR NOTHING! ought to be our motto.

In short, every plan of establishment, The author had a reference in this
position, and in all others of this nature, to an establishment of Parishes,
with legal boundaries, and those supported out of the public treasury. He has
the pleasure to find, that a general establishment, or rather incorporation of
all denominations is now thought of, and likely to be adopted, which while it
makes all parties happy, is not liable to the above objections. The plan he
refers to, leaves only the incorporation of the Church of England standing, and
opens the door to the equal incorporation of all denominations. -- while not
one Sect of Christians in preference to all others, but Christianity itself is
the established religion of the State.
must operate as a plan of injustice and oppression; and therefore Sir! I am
utterly against all establishments in this State. Leave each Church to be
supported by its own members, and let its real merit be all its pre-eminence
Thus while you give proper scope for a laudable emulation, you take away all
complaint of injustice, and build your State upon the solid foundations of
equity and righteousness.

If these arguments have failed to weigh at other times, they ought now to have
amazing weight. While you are contending for the rights of mankind with one of
the greatest powers upon earth, will you leave your own Constitution marked
with injustice and oppression, and that in the most important of all respects
that ever mortals contended for? What are all the Liberties for which we dare
to grapple with Great Britain, when compared with our religious Liberties? Can
you imagine, that the numerous Dissenters who venture their all in support of
American Freedom, would be fond of shedding their blood in this cause if they
did not with confidence expect, that they should have justice done them, and
that they should stand upon the same footing with their brethren? Can you
imagine that a refusal of justice would not damp their ardour, if not utterly
disarm them? Do they ask any more than what they have an absolute and
indefeasible right to enjoy? Sir! these are rights which they cannot possibly
relinquish. Their claim is founded in eternal justice, and this stands
confessed by their most violent opposers. They must pay an equal share of that
tax which independency will cost you -- they must spill a greater share of
blood, and therefore they cannot, I say they cannot consent to the smallest
inferiority in privileges either civil or religious.

But Sir! in the present case, the claims of good policy join those of common
and confessed justice. Religious establishments discourage the opulence and
cramp the growth of a free State. Every fetter, whether religious or civil,
deters people from settling in a new country. Take off every unnecessary yoke,
and people of all denominations and professions will flock in We are told that
North Carolina and Maryland have taken down their establishments; that Virginia
as yet refuses to do it. It this State acts upon a liberal plan, we may expect
that the rich (...) of West-Virginia will depopulate to crowd these happier
regions.
upon you with all their arts and industry. If a spirit of toleration raised
the United Provinces to such a pitch of glory and grandeur, by inviting people
from every quarter of Europe; if an entire equality has made Pennsylvania the
Emporeum of America, to the immortal honor of its wise legislator; what good
effects may not be expected from the same spirit of laws in this State. That
State in America which adopts the freest and most liberal plan will be the most
oppulent and powerful, and will well deserve it. Sir! as a narrowness in these
matters is the disgrace of the human mind, so is it the disgrace of any system
of laws whatever.

I could wish to draw the attention of the House to another important motive,
-- that is, the future peace and happiness of this State. Grant this petition,
and the foundation of religious discord is eternally removed. It is inequality
that excites jealousy and dissatisfaction. Make your laws partial toward
people of any one set of opinions, suppose it only in philosophy, and you
entail immortal strise and debate upon your children. If all your people are
equally free and happy, it will be no matter who is in or who is out, i. e. in
respect to denomination.

Where the people have a full voice in legislation, the case is vastly
different from what it has been in times past, while royal violence stood ready
to support the claims of injustice. Gentlemen of the Church of England, should
methinks be as much concerned to obtain the prayer of this petition as any
others. The course of things is very uncertain. None know where numbers and
interest may carry matters in future time. Some have unjustly Of nine
denominations, all equally jealous, can eight be found sufficiently tame to
join in setting the ninth into the saddle, to ride them and the Church of
England with them? If any are able to impose upon themselves so far as to
believe this absurdity, the best way to prevent the evil is, to put it out of
their power, by granting the prayer of the petition.
accused Dissenters with an intention to establish themselves. It was partly
that accusation that gave birth to the petition before you. But if the
gentlemen of the Church of England do really apprehend danger of such a
mortisying issue in process of time, sure they of all men ought to be most
anxious so to six the basis of the Constitution, as forever to prevent it: I
mean by making it a foundation article, that there never shall be any such
establishment. This is the only security of the Church of England, as well as
of other Churches. That Church has long had the advantage; she has reaped
uncontrouled, the emoluments of the State; she has subsisted on the abridgment
of the equal privileges of others; she has fluorished by aid of their property.
Let the time past suffice. With the new Constitution, let the day of justice
dawn upon every rank and order of men in this State. I et us bury what is past
forever. We even consent, that the estate which she has for a century past been
drawing more or less from the purses of all denominations; an estate of no less
value than three hundred and eighty thousand pounds, remain in her quiet
possession, and be fixed there. Let her only for the future cease to demand
preeminence. Let her freely content that others enjoy the same privileges, in
every respect with herself. This is all we ask, we seek no restitution. After
the vast sums partially expended by the State upon one denomination, all the
others ask not a farthing to be returned them. Let her be contented with her
superb churches, her spacious burying-grounds, her costly parsonages, her
humerous glebes, and other church estates, obtained in a great degree from the
publie purse, while not a farthing has been granted to other Churches; and let
her not now insist upon such glaring partiality any longer.

Mr. Speaker! I know I transgress the usual bounds. Although I know it is my
right, -- yet I can hardly keep from asking pardon of the House for being
tedious. But it is impossible to do justice to this great cause by confining
myself to a narrow compass. I am obliged to answer one capital objection before
I sit down, -- and reserve to myself the right of answering the arguments which
are used in favor of a continuance of the establishment, in case I find it
needful.

The objection I mean is that with respect to the Time. You hear it from all
quarters by those who speak in favor of the establishment, It is perfectly
just, that an equality of privileges should take place. None can contradict the
justice of the petition. If you had only delayed it to a proper time, we should
have become advocates for it ourselves. But we have too much now upon our
hands. Wait until matters are better settled, and you are sure of it.

I believe the gentlemen that I have heard speak in this manner, are sincere as
to their own intentions; but I must be excused from believing, that the zealous
friends of an establishment so partial, will be of the same mind with them. I
think if the time is left to them, it will prove as it did in the case of the
man, the time of whose execution was left to himself: It so happened, that all
the persuasions of the executioner could never make him believe that the time
present was proper. I remember from the history of the revolution, when the
Papists were like to prove too strong for the favorers of the Accession, --
the Dissenters thought it a proper time to insist on some alterations in the
penal laws, which, though leveled against Papists, were so artfully managed, as
to take in all Dissenters with them. The only way found to content them, was,
by solemnly promising to give them relief, as soon as ever the affairs of the
nation would permit it. They were prayed and entreated to be silent at that
time: "it would be dangerous to make any alterations -- the Papists would take
advantage of it, and endanger the accession." They simply yielded to the
prayers of the establishment: But, a full proof, that to postpone where the
rights of justice demand, is to betray them; a full proof of the danger of
deferring to another time, what ought to be done now -- I will only ask any
man, who knows the history of the nation since that time, whether those
promises have ever been fulfilled? Are they placed upon the equal footing that
was promised? Not that there were not found some who faithfully endeavored to
fulfill their promises, -- but the majority thought it proper to ride on in the
same manner, after they found themselves well fixed in the saddle.

But Sir! suppose the petitioners had no such instance to warn them; suppose
the event was not so perfectly natural and to be expected. Yet let me ask any
gentleman, who thinks that this is not a proper time, a few questions.

Is it not a fact, that we are now reviewing the Constitution; that what was
designed only as a protempore affair may become so perfected as to be fit to
stand? Is it not an agreed point, that it is dangerous to have the Constitution
placed upon the same footing with any common law, subject to be canvassed every
sessions? If then, there is ever a time in which it is proper to apply for
redress of any grievance which may be supposed to lie in the present frame of
the State, when should that be, but when the Constitution is to be reviewed and
fixed? Is there, can there be another time so natural? Or should a thing in
which the Liberties of the people are so essentially concerned, not enter into
the Constitution, but be left to the precarious fate of any common law? Shall
it be left to be promoted or crushed at hazard? Should not the Constitution
take care of the religious as well as civil Liberties of the People? Or do you
think the former of less importance than the latter?

When these questions are properly answered, I then beg leave to ask; if this
matter is not now attended to, will not the Church of England be established by
law under the New Constitution, and become the constitutional Church? If so,
and none will deny it, as we presume; then will not all these oppressions which
have been groaned under heretofore, be constitutional in this free State? And
is this a matter of small moment to the major part of the people? And must they
sit still out of mere compliment? Must they compliment away their Freedom in
this Manner, and not only suffer, but even lend their aid, by putting their own
hands to it, with the sanction of the people at large? It is strange that
gentlemen can expect it. How can we answer our neglect to our constituents, who
expect that we shall make them free? How can we answer it to our posterity, who
even now ought to rise in our imagination, and demand of us to leave them free?
This is the natural time, and this is the only time. Things ought to be done in
their proper season. And gentlemen may pretend what they please, -- if they are
averse to grant justice in the present season of it, -- if they are unwilling
to do it now, they will be more so by and by. One thing I am sure of, they will
have less motives to engage them to do it by and by. He that is disposed to do
justice, is willing to do it without delay. The old law maxim is good, to delay
justice is to deny it.

Sir! at this time, all ranks of people more sensibly feel the claims of
justice, than they will hereafter. They now feel the rod of oppression: And
nothing like suffering to bring us to our senses. They are now struggling
against arbitrary power. They can now realize the hardship. Let these times
pass, and ease will naturally lull them into an inattention, to the rights of
mankind.

That this is a proper time the example of other States confirms. Pennsylvania,
New Jersey, Delaware have led the way; Virginia, and North Carolina are now
meditating the same important step. Maryland has done it already.

That this is the proper time is plain, as the people are now waiting to see
what they have to expect, for what it is they are to waste their treasure and
their blood? They are ready to do it cheerfully, if they may with certainty
expect to be made and kept as happy as their brethren. They ask no favors,
they ask only the common rights of mankind.

By some it is said to be dangerous to grant this request at the present time.
They own it is just. -- It ought to be. No member, say they, in the house will
deny it; but the time is dangerous.

But Sir! are we indeed reduced to that situation, that it is dangerous to do
common justice? Every man allows it to be just: Well then, who is to be feared?
Are you afraid of those who confess the justice of the present application?
Acknowledging it to be just and right, will they be apt to revolt against their
own sentiments? Will the danger arise from the dissenting denominations No; it
answers the prayer of their petition. Will the danger arise from the Church of
England? I cannot think it. It is too harsh an imputation upon the gentlemen of
that Church. They will not endanger the State on account of that which they
know and universally allow to be just. I cannot, I will not admit the
supposition. Sir! I have the pleasure of knowing too many of them to think so.
Many of them have signed the petition. Many more have declared their sentiments
in the most liberal terms. There is too much Catholicism and love to Liberty
among them. They don't desire any longer to oppress their brethren. They
profess a generous disdain of the thing. They have property sufficient to
maintain their own Clergy liberally; and if the State did not take it off their
hands, I believe they would do it more liberally than it is now done.

If the Diffenters did not apply now, -- it might by and by be retorted upon
them, and that with great justice: -- You have had an hand in framing the
Constitution, as well as we. The Church of England is the constitutional
Church, by your own act and deed. Why did you not make your opposition in
proper time? Why so much out of season? Why endeavor to subvert what your own
hands have reared? Sir! we should be dumb; or, what is as bad, we should justly
lie under the charge of some species of sedition. Sir! we mean to act a
rational and constitutional part.

And now Sir! it only remains to be seen, whether this legislative body, now,
by God's goodness, free from the chains of foreign compulsion, will rectify the
errors of less happy times: whether they will rise in the annals of this
important age, by showing a temper superior to all illiberality and oppression.

Will you Sir! comply with the demands of common justice? or are you willing to
listen longer to the cry of oppression? Will you make all your people equally
free and happy? Do you desire to put an effectual end to all religious broils
and contentions forever? Will you strengthen your own hands in defense of your
bleeding country? Do you wish to enrich it by an influx of healthy inhabitants
from every quarter of the world? Would you secure yourself from the fetters of
any one denomination, with which the uncertainty of time may inundate this
country? Will you give to every denomination the best security of future
religious freedom and happiness that the nature of the case admits?

Grant them the prayer of the Petition: Grant it in substance, if not in the
very expressions. Let it be a foundation article in your Constitution, That
there shall be no establishment of one religious denomination of Christians in
preference to another. That none shall be obliged to pay to the support of a
worship in which they do not freely join. Yield to the mighty current of
American freedom and glory, and let our State be inferior to none on this wide
continent, in the liberality of its laws, and in the happiness of its people.


