ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION AND PERPETUAL UNION BETWEEN THE STATES OF
NEW HAMPSHIRE, MASSACHUSETTS BAY, RHODE ISLAND AND PROVIDENCE PLANTATIONS,
CONNECTICUT, NEW YORK, NEW JERSEY, PENNSYLVANIA, DELAWARE, MARYLAND, VIRGINIA,
NORTH CAROLINA, SOUTH CAROLINA, AND GEORGIA.

EXETER, New Hampshire. PRINTED BY ZECHARIAH FOUL. M, DCC, LXXVII.

ARTICLES Of Confederation and perpetual Union between the States of
New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations,
Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia,
North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia.
ARTICLE I.
THE Style of this confederacy shall be, "The United-States of America."

ARTICLE II.
Each state retains its sovereignty, freedom and independence, and every power,
jurisdiction and right, which is not by this confederation expressly delegated
to the United-States, in Congress assembled.

ART. III.
THE said states hereby severally enter into a firm league of friendship with
each other, for their common defense, the security of their liberties, and
their mutual and general welfare, binding themselves to assist each other,
against all force offered to, or attacks made upon them, or any of them, on
account of religion, sovereignity, trade, or any other pretense whatever.

ART. IV.
THE better to secure and perpetuate mutual friendship and intercourse among
the people of the different states in this union, the free inhabitants of each
of these states, paupers, vagabonds, and fugitives from justice excepted, shall
be entitled to all privileges and immunities of free citizens in the several
states; and the people of each state shall have free ingress and regress to and
from any other state, and shall enjoy therein all the privileges of trade and
commerce, subject to the same duties, impositions and restrictions as the
inhabitants thereof respectively, provided that such restriction shall not
extend so far as to prevent the removal of property imported into any state, to
any other state of which the owner is an inhabitant; provided also that no
imposition, duties or restriction shall be laid by any state, on the property
of the United-States or either of them.

IF any person guilty of, or charged with treason, felony, or other high
misdemeanor in any state, shall flee from justice, and be found in any of the
United-States, he shall upon demand of the Governor, or executive power, of the
state from which he fled, be delivered up and removed to the state having
jurisdiction of his offense.

FULL faith and credit shall be given in each of these states to the records,
acts and judicial proceedings of the courts and magistrates of every other
state.

ART. V.
For the more convenient management of the general interests of the
United-States, delegates shall be annually appointed in such manner as the
legislature of each state shall direct, to meet in congress on the first Monday
in November, in every year, with a power reserved to each state, to recall its
delegates, or any of them, at any time within the year, and to send others in
their stead, for the remainder of the year.

No state shall be represented in congress by less than two, nor by more than
seven members; and no person shall be capable of being a delegate for more than
three years, in any term of six years; nor shall any person, being a delegate,
be capable of holding any office under the United-States, for which he, or
another for his benefit receives any salary, fees or emolument of any kind.

EACH state shall maintain its own delegates in a meeting of the states, and
while they act as members of the committee of the states.

IN determining questions in the United-States, in congress assembled, each
state shall have one vote.

FREEDOM of speech and debate in congress shall not be impeached or questioned
in any court, or place out of congress, and the members of congress shall be
protected in their persons from arrests and imprisonments, during the time of
their going to and from, and attendance on congress, except for treason,
felony, or breach of the peace.

ART. VI.
No state without the consent of the United-States in congress assembled, shall
send any embassy to, or receive any embassy from, or enter into any conference,
agreement, alliance or treaty with any king, prince or state; nor shall any
person holding any office of profit or trust under the United-States, or any of
them, accept of any present, emolument, office or title of any kind whatever
from any king, prince or foreign state; nor shall the United-States in congress
assembled, or any of them, grant any title of nobility.

No two or more states shall enter into any treaty, confederation or alliance
whatever between them, without the Consent of the United-States in congress
assembled, specifying accurately the purposes for which the same is to be
entered into, and how long it shall continue.

No state shall lay imposts or duties, which may interfere with any
stipulations in treaties, entered into by the United-States in congress
assembled, with any king, prince or state, in pursuance of any treaties already
proposed by congress, to the courts of France and Spain.

No vessels of war shall be kept up in time of peace by any state, except such
number only, as shall be deemed necessary by the United-States in congress
assembled, for the defense of such state, or its trade; nor shall any body of
Forces be kept up by any state, in time of peace, except such number only, as
in the of the United-States, in congress assembled, shall be deemed requisite
to garrison the forts necessary for the defense of such state; but every state
shall always keep up a well regulated and disciplined militia, sufficiently
armed and accoutred, and shall provide and constantly have ready for use, in
public stores, a due number of field pieces and tents, and a proper quantity of
arms, ammunition and camp equipage.

No state shall engage in any war without the consent of the United-States in
congress assembled, unless such state be actually invaded by enemies, or shall
have received certain advice of a resolution being formed by some nation of
Indians to invade such state, and the danger is so eminent as not to admit of a
delay, till the United-States in congress assembled can be consulted: nor shall
any state grant commissions to any ships or vessels of war, nor letters of
marque or reprisal, except it be after a declaration of War by the
United-States in congress assembled, and then only against the kingdom or state
and the subjects thereof, against which was has been so declared, and under
such regulations as shall be established by the United-States in congress
assembled, unless such state be infested by pirates, in which case vessels of
war may be fitted out for that occasion, and kept so long as the danger shall
continue, or until the United-States in congress assembled shall determine
otherwise.

ART. VII.
WHEN landforces are raised by any state for the common defense, all officers
of or under the rank of colonel, shall be appointed by the legislature of each
state respectively, by whom such forces shall be raised, or in such manner as
such state shall direct, and all vacancies shall be filled up by the state
which first made the appointment.

ART. VIII.
All charges of war, and all other expenses that shall be incurred for the
common defense or general welfare, and allowed by the United-States in congress
assembled, shall be defrayed out of a common treasury, which shall be supplied
by the several states, in proportion to the value of all land within each
state, granted to or surveyed for any person, as such land and the buildings
and improvements thereon shall be estimated according to such mode as the
United-States in congress assembled, shall from time to time direct and
appoint. The taxes for paying that proportion shall be laid and levied by the
authority and direction of the legislatures of the several states within the
time agreed upon by the United-States in congress assembled.

ART. IX.
THE United-states in congress assembled, shall have the sole and exclusive
right and power of determining on peace and war, except in the cases mentioned
in the sixth article -- of sending and receiving ambassadors -- entering into
treaties and alliances, provided that no treaty of commerce shall be made
whereby the legislative power of the respective states shall be restrained from
imposing such imports and duties on foreigners, as their own people are
subjected to, or from prohibiting the exportation or importation of any species
of goods or commodities whatsoever -- of establishing rules for deciding in all
cases, what captures on land or water shall be legal, and in what manner prizes
taken by land or naval forces in the service of the United states shall be
divided or appropriated -- of granting letters of marque and reprisal in times
of peace -- appointing courts for the trial of piracies and felonies committed
on the high seas and establishing courts for receiving and determining finally
appeals in all cases of captures, provided that no member of congress shall be
appointed a judge of any of the said courts.

The United-States in congress assembled shall also be the last resort on
appeal in all disputes and differences now subsisting or that hereafter may
arise between two or more states concerning boundary, jurisdiction or any other
cause whatever; which authority shall always be exercised in the manner
following. -- Whenever the legislative or executive authority or lawful agent
of any state in controversy with another shall present a petition to congress
stating the matter in question and praying for a hearing, notice thereof shall
be given by order of congress to the legislative or executive authority of the
other state in controversy and a day assigned for the appearing of the parties
by their lawful agents, who shall then be directed to appoint by joint consent,
commissioners or judges to constitute a court for hearing and determining the
matter in question; but if they cannot agree, congress shall name three persons
out of each of the United-States, and from the list of such persons each party
shall alternately strike out one, the petitioners beginning, until the number
shall be reduced to thirteen, and from that number not less than seven, nor
more than nine names as congress shall direct, shall in the presence of
congress be drawn out by lot, and the persons whose names shall be so drawn or
any five of them, shall be commissioners or judges, to hear and finally
determine the controversy, so always as a major part of the judges who shall
hear the cause shall agree in the determination: and if either party shall
neglect to attend at the day appointed, without showing reasons, which congress
shall judge sufficient, or being present shall refuse to strike the congress
shall proceed to nominate three persons out of each state, and the secretary of
congress shall strike in behalf of such party absent or refusing; and the
judgment and sentence of the court to be appointed, in the manner before
prescribed, shall be final and conclusive; and if any of the parties shall
refuse to submit to the authority of such court, or to appear or defend their
claim or cause, the court shall nevertheless proceed to pronounce sentence, or
judgment, which shall in like manner be final and decisive, the judgment or
sentence and other proceedings being in either case transmitted to congress,
and lodged among the acts of congress for the security of the parties
concerned: provided that every commissioner, before he sits in judgment, shall
take an oath to be administered by one of the judges of the supreme or superior
court of the state, where the cause shall be tried, "well and truly to hear and
determine the matter in question, according to the best of his judgment,
without favor, affection, or hope of reward: -- provided also that no state
shall be deprived of territory for the benefit of the United-States."

ALL controversies concerning the private right of soil claimed under different
grants of two or more states, whose jurisdictions as they may respect such
lands, and the states which passed such grants are adjusted, the said grants or
either of them being at the same time claimed so have originated antecedent to
such settlement of jurisdiction, shall on the petition of either party to the
congress of the United States, be finally determined as near as may be in the
same manner as is before prescribed for decidding disputes respecting
territorial jurisdiction between different states.

THE United-States in congress assembled shall also have the sole and exclusive
right and power of regulating the alloy and value of coin struck by their own
authority, or by that of the respective states -- fixing the standard of
weights and measures throughout the United-States -- regulating the trade and
managing all affairs with the Indians, not members of any of the states,
provided that the legislative right of any state within its own limits be not
infringed or violated -- establishing and regulating postoffices from one state
to another, throughout all the United-States, and exacting such postage on the
papers passing through the same as may be requisite to defray the expenses of
the said office -- appointing all officers of the land forces, in the service
of the United-States, excepting regimental officers -- appointing all the
officers of the naval forces, and commissioning all officers whatever in the
service of the United-States -- making rules for the government and regulation
of the said Land and naval Forces, and directing their operations.

THE United States in congress assembled shall have authority to appoint a
committee, to fit in the recess of congress, to be denominated " A Committee of
the States," and to consist of one delegate from each state; and to appoint
such other committees and civil officers as may be necessary for managing the
general affairs of the United States under their direction -- to appoint one of
their number to preside, provided that no person be allowed to serve in the
office of president more than one year in any term of three years; to ascertain
the necessary sums of money to be raised for the service of the United States,
and to appropriate and apply the same for defraying the public expenses -- to
borrow money, or emit bills on the credit of the United states, transmitting
every half year to the respective states an account of the sums of money so
borrowed or emitted -- to build and equip a navy -- to agree upon the number of
Land Forces, and to make requisitions from each state for its quota, in
proportion to the number of white inhabitants in such state; which requisition
shall be binding, and thereupon the legislature of each state shall appoint the
regimental officers, raise the men, and cloth, arm and equip them in a soldier
like manner, at the expense of the United States, and the officers and men so
clothed, armed and equipped shall march to the place appointed, and within the
time agreed on by the United States in congress assembled: But if the United
states in congress assembled, shall, on consideration of circumstances judge
proper that any state should not raise men, or should raise a smaller number
than its quota, and that any other state should raise a greater number of men
than the quota thereof, such extra number shall be raised, officered, clothed,
armed and equipped in the same manner as the quota of such state, unless the
legislature of such state shall judge that such extra number cannot be safely
spared out of the same, in which case they shall raise, officer, cloth, arm
and equip as many of such extra number as they judge can be safely spared. And
the officers and men so clothed, armed and equipped, shall march to the place
appointed, and within the time agreed on by the United States in congress
assembled.

THE United states in congress assembled shall never engage in a war, not grant
letters of marque and reprisal, in time of peace, nor enter into any treaties
or alliances, nor coin money, nor regulate the value thereof, nor ascertain the
sums and expenses necessary for the defense and welfare of the United-States,
or any of them, nor emit bills, nor borrow money on the credit of the
United-States, nor appropriate money, nor agree upon the number of vessels of
war, to be built or purchased, or the number of land or sea forces to be
raised, nor appoint a commander in chief of the army or navy, unless nine
states assent to the same: nor shall a question on any other point, except for
adjourning from day to day be determined, unless by the votes of a majority of
the United States in congress assembled.

THE congress of the United States shall have power to adjourn to any time
within the year, and to any place within the United States, so that no period
of adjournment be for a longer duration than the space of six months, and shall
publish the journal of their proceedings monthly, except such parts thereof
relating to treaties, alliances or military operations, as in their judgment
require secresy; and the yeas and nays of the delegates of each state on any
question shall be entered on the journal, when it is desired by any delegate;
and the delegates of a state, or any of them, at his or their request shall be
furnished with a transcript of the said journal, except such parts as are above
excepted, to lay before the legislatures of the several states.

ART. X.
THE committee of the states, or any nine of them, shall be authorized to
execute, in the recess of congress such of the powers of congress as the United
States in congress assembled by the consent of nine states, shall from time to
time think expedient to vest them with; provided that no power be delegated to
the said committee, for the exercise of which, by the articles of
confederation, the voice of nine states in the congress of the United-states
assembled is requisite.

ART. XI.
CANADA acceding to this confederation, and joining in the measures of the
United-states, shall be admitted into, and entitled to all the advantages of
this union: but no other colony shall be admitted into the same, unless such
admission be agreed to by nine states.

ART. XII.
ALL bills of credit emitted, moneys borrowed, and debts contracted by, or
under the authority of congress, before the assembling of the United-states, in
pursuance of the present confederation, shall be deemed and considered as a
charge against the United-states, for payment and satisfaction whereof the said
United-states, and the public faith are hereby solemnly pledged.

ART. XIII.
Every state shall abide by the determinations of the United-states in congress
assembled, on all questions which by this confederation are submitted to them.
And the Articles of this confederation shall be inviolably observed by every
state, and the union shall be perpetual; nor shall any alteration at any time
hereafter be made in any of them; unless such alteration be agreed to in a
congress of the United-states, and be afterward confirmed by the legislatures
of every state.

THESE Articles shall be proposed to the legislatures of all the United-States,
to be considered, and if approved of by them, they are advised to authorize
their delegates, to ratify the same in the congress of the United-States; which
being done, the same shall become conclusive.

By Order of Congress. HENRY LAURENS, President.

STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE.
"THE foregoing Articles of Confederation as formed by the Honorable the
Continental CONGRESS, are printed and to be dispersed through this State, that
every person may give their Sentiments thereon: and the following Vote of the
General-Assembly of this State is also published for the same Purpose."

In the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES, December 17th, 1777.

Voted, THAT it be recommended to the several Towns, Parishes, and Places in
this State, if they see fit, to instruct their Representatives at the next
Session to appoint and call a full and free Representation of all the People in
this State, to meet in Convention at such Time and Place as shall be appointed
by the General Assembly, for the sole purpose of framing and laying a permanent
Plan or System for the future Government of this State.

Sent up for Concurrence. JOHN LANGDON, Speaker. In COUNCIL, the same Day read
and concurred. E. THOMPSON, Secretary.


