Mr. STRONG's SERMON.

The Reasons and Design of public Punishments; A SERMON, DELIVERED BEFORE THE
PEOPLE WHO WERE COLLECTED TO THE EXECUTION OF MOSES DUNBAR, Who was condemned
for HIGH TREASON against the STATE of CONNECTICUT, and executed MARCH 19th, A.
D. 1777.

By NATHAN STRONG, Pastor of the first CHURCH in HARTFORD.

Bloody and deceitful Men shall not live out half their Days. HARTFORD: Printed
and Sold by EBEN. WATSON, M.DCC.LXXVII.

The Reasons and Design of public Punishments.
I TIMOTHY, v. 20. Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear.


THE occasion of our being collected to worship GOD is one of the most solemn
that can be conceived. This day is appointed to close the life of an unhappy
person, who is condemned for conspiring against his country and all its
privileges. He has been judged by men in righteousness, the sentence of death
pronounced, the day of execution come; an event indeed awful, and affecting to
every mind of humanity or religion. Though justice to our country and reverence
for its laws, forbids any thing that would impede a full execution of them;
there is room for prayer to ALMIGHTY GOD that this days business may be blessed
for our good, and that the unhappy criminal may receive the forgiveness of his
sins from GOD, though he cannot have forgiveness from the State, consistent
with public safety.

FOR reasons, we must in charity hope, honest to himself, he refuses to be
present at this solemnity; my discourse therefore will not be calculated, as
has been usual on such occasions, for a dying creature who is to appear
immediately before the GREAT JUDGE: but to assist my hearers in making an
improvement of the event, for their own benefit.

THE text from which I discourse, is a direction of the apostle Paul to
Timothy, for executing his ministerial power with dignity; and for conducting
the punishments that should be inflicted on offenders, in such manner, that all
might derive benefit from them. Them, who sin so as to make punishment
necessary, rebuke before all, that others may be deterred when they see the
danger of transgression -- the infamy and misery in which the disobedient are
finally involved.

THIS sacred precept, though written originally to direct the church in its
proceedings against offenders, may be applied with equal propriety to civil
government. Several reasons for the punishment of transgression are the same,
both in the church of CHRIST, and in the civil state; and there are the same
reasons that it should be publicly inflicted -- that others may fear and be
guarded against temptation. If all men had faith in the perfections and
government of JEHOVAH, and loved him with christian affection, there would be
no disposition to do unreasonable things; no other principles of obedience,
would be necessary to maintain good order, holiness and virtue. That all men
have not faith, are not disposed to live peaceably and justly, we know from the
word of GOD, and from daily experience -- Such is the degeneracy of human
nature, that we need every motive which can be adduced in favor of virtue --
every principle and passion of the soul, must be skilfully addressed to promote
an habitual abhorrence of these things, which the LORD hates on account of
their unreasonableness -- of the dishonor they bring on his laws and government
-- and the damage done to mankind.

THE event which calls us together is an awful and affecting demonstration, of
the danger of sin -- a warning to hold our passions and appetites in constant
subjection to reason -- to cultivate fixed principles of honesty, justice and
benevolence -- to be conscientiously strict in obeying the laws of GOD, and our
country.

PERMIT me to consider the following points.

THE reasons why it is necessary sin should be publicly rebuked and punished by
civil government. -- The infamy and misery which the wicked bring on themselves
in this world, by transgressing the good laws of GOD and man. -- The importance
of being constantly guarded, lest inadvertently we plunge into destruction.

I AM first to consider some reasons, why it is necessary that sin should be
publicly punished by civil government The most important are, the glory of GOD
-- the safety of mankind -- and that others may be deterred from wickedness by
the example. -- Each of these considerations warrant the severity of human laws
against iniquity.

NATURAL religion and christianity require us visibly to exalt and glorify the
MOST HIGH by all possible means. This duty is equally incumbent on individuals,
and on public societies; for both are preserved by his providence, and under
solemn obligations in their proper character to dignify his name and
government, reverence his laws, and exert their whole influence for the support
of virtue. In the holy scriptures, GOD often addresses civil societies in their
national character -- reproves their vices -- points out their danger -- and
promises public blessings as a reward of visible morality, and of care to
celebrate the honor of his name, and obedience to his laws.

GOVERNMENT is a divine institution, equally designed to encourage those
virtues GOD commands; as to support the temporal interests of mankind. The
particular mode is left to be determined by human wisdom; but the institution
is divine.

RULERS and judges of nations are called the ministers of GOD, for good unto
men; and if ministers of GOD ALMIGHTY, certainly bound to consult his visible
glory. How can nations, their rulers and laws pay any respect unto the DEITY,
unless they encourage morality, and publicly punish the iniquities he has
prohibited? Is it not a part of national holiness to frown on visible sin, and
chastise the transactions, which dishonor him by whom States are preserved or
destroyed? Does not gratitude to the glorious preserver of empires direct, that
the ungodly and unrighteous should be punished, and the friends of religion,
good order and their country protected by its power. I have sometimes heard the
idea of national obligations to promote GOD's visible honor derided; but if it
is not thus, can conceive of no reasons why mankind are addressed, warned,
threatened and encouraged in that character.

THE safety of mankind, is a second reason, why sin should be punished by the
power of the State.

THE law of self-preservation implanted in the mind by its creator, many times
obliges societies to exercise severity for their own defense. All men are
sinful, and some so horridly wicked -- so much influenced by covetousness, envy
and malice -- so destitute of honesty and justice, humanity and benevolence --
so cruel to their neighbors and their country, as not to hesitate at any thing
which will promote a temporary interest of their own, whatever misery may be
brought thereby on others. Every wicked person is an enemy to GOD and man --
inclined to gratify himself at the expense of their rights, prerogatives and
existence. Every sinful disposition -- all the practices of iniquity, in their
nature imply danger to mankind -- are pointed against the peace, privileges,
and dearest interests of the world; so that self-preservation, were there no
other reasons, should induce States to discourage sin by punishment.

WERE there time for a particular enquiry, it might easily be made evident that
the dispositions, passions and practices, which are denominated sinful, are in
their nature hostile to ALMIGHTY GOD, and to existence generally. Hence the
safety of mankind requires, that punishment should be inflicted on those, who
will not be restrained by mildness from injuring their fellow-men. Is it not
reasonable -- is it not just, that those who have not the fear of GOD, who are
not restrained by their own consciences, should be obliged by punishment to
consider sin immediately dangerous to themselves? Is it not proper that those,
who by their actions show a fixed design against society -- a desire to involve
it in the most awful calamities, death or what is worse, the torments of
slavery; should be cut off from the earth, and thereby prevented an opportunity
of executing the intended mischief. The revealed law of GOD warrants this
proceeding, and enjoins on civil states the preservation of their interests,
liberties and existence, when it cannot be done otherwise, by cutting off the
offenders from among men. If there were need of justifying the divine law, it
might easily be done from the experience of ages and history of the whole
world. Human nature has always been found such -- that where law and
government so far lost their energy, as not to be able to punish offenders; a
numerous swarm of unjust persons, murderers, assassins and tyrants have
immediately appeared to indulge their lust and satiate their cruelty in the
blood of innocence. This leads us to

A THIRD reason, why punishment should be publicly inflicted on the wicked --
that others may see and fear. This principle has mighty influence in
preserving that regularity, good order, honesty and justice which subsists
among mankind. I do not wish to calumniate human nature, or represent it more
wicked, than it really is; but is it not probable -- is it not certain, that if
the restraint of fear were wholly taken off the world would exhibit a scene of
confusion, of cruelty, of hellish wickedness unparellelled by all discriptions
that have been given. Have we not, my christian hearers, often felt ourselves
restrained by this principle? Should we not have done many more evil things,
had not fear of men's indignation prevented? Sometimes we have feared the loss
of reputation -- sometimes of interest -- sometimes the more awful punishments
inflicted by public justice. Even those who generally appear to be honest,
well-meaning persons, are at certain times so much influenced by passion and
appetite; that they would commit horrid evils, were they not restrained by fear
of the consequences. For this reason it has always been esteemed proper, that
punishments should be inflicted in the most public manner possible -- they are
a warning, a solemn lecture to all who see and hear them, and speak with the
greatest energy, watch and pray, lest you enter into temptation, and commit
those evils which men must punish in this world for their own safety, and GOD
ALMIGHTY in the other for the glory of his justice.

WE will proceed to the second branch of discourse. The infamy and misery which
the wicked bring on themselves in this world, by transgressing the good laws of
GOD and man.

EVERY violation of the divine law, and the righteous laws of society is a
moral evil -- an abuse of reason; and is intimately connected with such natural
evils and miseries, as are dreadful to be endured. Were we to be influenced by
no motives but the peace and happiness of this world* we ought to be holy and
virtuous in all our conduct -- temperate in our indulgencies -- just, honest,
faithful and benevolent in all connections with individuals and our country.
All kinds of transgression, which can be mentioned, draw after them a horrid
train of miseries, sufficient to terrify the boldest mind, when they are
realized and felt. Iniquity has often a gaudy covering, which glitters at a
distance and deceives the unwarry into an opinion real happiness is there --
walk with it -- embrace it -- bring it home to the bosom, and it is death. Sin
is only another name for misery. So GOD's holy word has warned us, so
experience has taught from the beginning of days, yet fools indeed! we seek
its indulgencies, and court its gains, at the expense of life. The apostle
mentions three principal idols, to which the wicked sacrifice, sensuality,
covetousness and ambition. Their votaries, instead of finding the expected
happiness, plunge themselves into misery, loss and infamy.

WHAT be the natural consequences of indulging the animal affections and
appetites, in wantonness and sensuality? Do they not produce pain and woe -- a
crazy body, loaded with ill-humours, tormented with anxiety, and thick sown
with the seeds of death -- a constitution bending over the grave at an untimely
age by the weight of iniquity. What be the fruits of falsehood, fraud, injustice
and cruelty? Should they be secreted from mankind in general, which is
impossible to be done any considerable time; yet they deprive the mind of that
peace and serenity, which is better than life -- they create a guilty accuser
within, from which it is impossible to flee: and when detected by the world,
character and the confidence of others is forever lost.

WHEREVER the guilty person goes, he is esteemed dangerous -- in whatever
character he acts, contemptible -- in whatever business engaged, jealousy
watches him, detects his baseness, and should he chance to do an honest action,
brands it with a false construction. Every one judges him designing some
mischief, plotting some base, unrighteous advantage to himself, by the spoil of
his neighbors, and destruction of his country. How awful the situation! to be
esteemed an enemy to mankind, and treated with that mortifying cautiousness,
which is used when dealing with one esteemed to be a dishonest and wicked
person.

This infamy, and ill opinion which we are obliged to entertain of the person,
who deals in fraud, injustice and cruelty, is an evil greatly to be dreaded --
to be cut off from the confidence of mankind, excluded the social delights of
virtue, and justly marked out an enemy to our neighbors and our country is
bitter as death.

THE unhappiness is still more increased by a consciousness, which every such
person must have unless given up by GOD to singular impenitence, that he merits
all the odium thrown upon him. The feelings of guilt are a death to the mind.
Cain discribed them truly, " every one that finds me, shall slay me."
Whatever be the crime, there is something of this nature in all guilty feelings.

THESE consequences, loss of health, of reputation, of the friendship of
mankind, of sacred social pleasures, of public confidence, of peace in our
minds, naturally flow from indulging the appetites, and violating the just laws
of GOD and our country. Are they not sufficient to deter every person from
meddling with the mysteries of iniquity; and the greater half of its danger
remains yet untold. Frequently it arrests life cuts short the time of probation
and introduces to the just condemnation of GOD. The Almighty shall bring the
wicked down into the pit of destruction: bloody and deceitful men shall not
live out half their days. Vengeance cannot sleep -- they are either destroyed
by the immediate act of GOD, to glorify his name* and vindicate his justice; or
men are reduced to the horrid necessity of cutting them off from the earth, for
their own preservation. When those crimes are committed, which strike at public
life, the sacred law of self-preservation commands the guilty name to be erased
from among the people.

THOUGH only a few crimes are made capital by the laws of the land, we should
esteem every sin tending to the same awful fate -- vices through all their
gradations are intimately connected -- Such as knowingly indulge themselves in
smaller faults, have reason to fear the habit of iniquity will grow
irresistible -- that GOD will permit them to do some great evil, which the
justice of men must punish in the last and most awful manner. How many, who
have come to an untimely end by the hand of public justice, in the last moments
of their shame, have lamented the beginnings of vice, and dated their
destruction from guilty practices common among men -- they began the fatal race
no more wicked than their cotemporaries, but were permitted by GOD to indulge a
sinful heart, and execute purposes which end in the most public infamy and
death. The present days business is a warning to all, to such particularly as
indulge themselves in known sin, to break off iniquity by repentance; lest GOD
ALMIGHTY should determine in anger to withdraw his restraint, and leave them to
commit those atrocious deeds which public justice must avenge.

SUFFER me in the third place, to say a few words on the importance of being
constantly guarded against sin.

WE have briefly viewed the horrid calamities transgressors bring on themselves
by sinful indulgence -- the loss of every desirable blessing, and many times of
life itself. Will not he who is wise be guarded against temptation? As we
regard ourselves; as we regard every thing that can be dear to a rational
being, we should take every step with caution, and rush into no course without
previous examination whether or not it be forbidden.

TWO reasons require us to keep a constant guard -- there are many tempters
ready to throw in the fatal insinuation, when danger is least suspected -- and
our own sinful passions are easily enkindled.

FIRST. None are free from the influence of seducing spirits, who watch with
infernal art to catch the unguarded moment -- the chosen opportunity of
destroying. From those who resist satan will flee; but the incautious and
secure he will follow with temptation, until their infamy and destruction is
sealed. Added to the influence of evil spirits, there is the designing policy
of wicked men, who take pleasure in propagating calamity and seducing the
unwarry into the paths of destruction.

UNGODLY men, who mean to destroy, frequently make their approaches with an
appearance of much friendship, and betray us to death with a kiss, as Judas did
the SON of GOD. On happening into the company of those, who profess veneration;
but remotely insinuate against the good laws of GOD or men, we should
immediately set a double guard -- dwell on the danger -- and not give up a
single moment to carelessness, for a moment may be fatal. Watch and pray lest ye
enter into temptation, is a most excellent maxim for preservation, and
singularly necessary in a day of public calamity, when the State is in so
critical a situation, that the dishonesty and bad example of a few persons may
shake its foundation.

THE depraved principles and passions of human nature, which are easily
excited, is a second reason why we should be constantly guarded against sin.

OUR passions, like the most combustible matter, may instantaneously kindle at
the touch of a single spark -- our appetites which are hushed into moderation
one hour, may the next be fierce and victorious over reason, interest, duty,
and every sacred obligation. Danger carried in our own breasts, is doubly
great. There is no moment, in which a wise person who knows himself will say, I
am safe from falling by the corruption of my own nature.

" Say not, my brethren, when ye are tempted, I am tempted of God: for God
cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man. For every man is
tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed. When lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin: and sin when it is finished, brings forth
death." O how awful the death! both of body and spirit language looses its
energy in describing things so awful. Glory to GOD! who is able to deliver --
Let us pray him to save us from the temptation of our own hearts -- to give us
christian repentance, love and faith in his SON, that our sins may be forgiven
-- that by the energy of his good spirit he would enable us to purify
ourselves, even as he is pure.

I WILL conclude with some observations suggested by the occasion of the day.

1st. IT learns us to love and revere our country, to obey its laws, to devote
ourselves to its service, and abhor every practice which has any tendency to
increase the public calamities. Had the unhappy person who is soon to be
executed done this; he might now have been prosperous, beloved and respected --
as fair a candidate for long life, as any person in this great assembly. Now he
is covered with infamy, bound in chains, surrounded with the instruments of
horror and death. From his fate let us learn the danger of encouraging a
traterous disposition, and secretly attempting practices against our country;
the mercy of men cannot pardon them, for darkness will not cover them, hell
will not hide them. Our country, its privileges and laws are sacred -- they
guard our peace, our interest and lives -- being enacted in a public manner,
with the free consent of the people, they become ordinances of God; and the
transgressor offends against Heaven and earth. Our liberties and free
constitution, are the patrimony which GOD ALMIGHTY has given to every
individual in the community; and is not that a cruel sinner who would defraud
his brethren of Heaven's sacred and invaluable gift? and this may be done many
ways -- by open force and private artifice -- not only by throwing off the mask
and joining our enemies in the face of day; but by fomenting internal division;
by insinuations against those who stand foremost in the civil and military
departments; by destroying public credit; by impeding good government and the
measures of defense; by violating our own laws enacted for the most salutary
purposes; by every kind of dishonesty, fraud and injustice, which dissolves
that harmony which is the beauty and strength of society.

IT is unhappy that so many are insensible of the veneration and punctual
obedience due to the laws of the land. That people are not far from
destruction, who disobey the public acts of their own government -- who
endeavor artfully to elude the institutions of their own legislature -- who
think themselves better judges of safety, and the means of preservation than
the collected wisdom of the whole -- who are generally become so avaricious as
to prefer the smallest interests of their own, to the most capital and sacred
interests of the State. A nation generally of this complexion, are the most
miserable on earth, are prepared for destruction and deserve all its horrors --
destruction not only by a foreign enemy, but by themselves, by the hands of
their brethren. I ardently wish there were no appearance of this nature among
us. It is known, and cannot be secreted; that many prefer a sordid gain to the
salvation of their country, and would damn an empire to share a penny. I would
not confine the charge of avarice to any particular character or class of men;
for such as till the field, and those who barter the commodities of nations are
equally infected. Let such persons whatever their character may be in life; or
however sacred or safe they may esteem themselves, be warned by the proceedings
of this day and do no more so wickedly. Their principles are the same, and
their practices almost as dangerous, as those which condemned the unhappy
person who must die this day. The particular way in which a wicked man betrays
his country, is but a circumstance; the design of his heart, and the horrid
effects of his practices, furnish a true rule to determine his guilt. Is there
not reason to think, that those who knowingly injure the State by fraud,
avarice and oppression, would plunge their swords into its bowels, if they had
courage to face danger? Those people have reason to fear, that a righteous GOD
provoked by their dishonesty, will leave them to be tempted, and commit those
political sins which must be punished by the halter and the gallows. My
brethren, let us learn to love and venerate our country, to obey the laws,
honor the constitution, and despise all those who are wickedly undermining the
privileges of mankind.

LET us be prepared to bleed in defense of ourselves, our friends and families,
should it be the will of GOD to call us thereto. We profess to be christians;
Can a christian, can one who imitates the temper and manners of the SON of GOD,
wish servitude and the horrors of slavery to any creature on earth? Love to
mankind, their happiness and liberties, is essential to the religion of JESUS.
He died to purchase present and future liberty for men; and we cannot with any
propriety call ourselves after his name, unless we are benevolent, love the
peace and happiness of others, and promote their good by all honesty and
justice.

2dly. THE melancholy spectacle which is soon to be exhibited, has drawn
together a vast concourse of people, who are doubtless influenced by various
motives to be spectators of so awful a scene. Some by true seriousness, and
many to gratify a vain curiosity. Curiosity is but a poor motive for collecting
on such an occasion -- the person who can go and look on death, merely to
gratify an idle humor, is destitute both of humanity and piety.

SUCH awful exhibitions are designed that others may see and fear. -- Go not to
that place of horror with elevated spirits, and gay hearts, for death is there!
justice and judgment are there! the power of government, displayed in its most
awful form, is there.

ONE reason why it is necessary the unhappy person should thus die, is that
others may be fortified against temptation by the spectacle of horror, and the
bitter consequences of transgression. When you look thereon, learn the
venerableness of the state and of civil government -- the sacred nature of
those laws made to protect liberty and property, and our obligations to
obedience -- learn that sin is punished by infamy, distress and death -- that
the man who injures his country, and will not be restrained by considerations
of duty, justice and gratitude, must be cut off from the earth that others may
be safe -- remember that lesser sins, though they are not made capital by the
laws of the State, lead directly toward the same untimely end.

ABOVE all things, learn that we must all die. Though we may hope to escape the
same circumstances and manner of death; the change in one form or another is
certain. Realize the importance of being prepared to leave the world -- how it
feels to be within a few minutes of eternity! of the bar of GOD! of the solemn
sentence which determines a state of happiness or misery forever!

WITH regard to the dying criminal, while you acquiesce in the necessity of his
fate, give him your prayers. Though public safety forbids him pardon from the
State, he may be pardoned by GOD ALMIGHTY. As christians, forgive him -- let
not an idea that he has sinned against the country, keep alive the passions of
hatred and revenge.

REMEMBER the instruction of CHRIST, forgive our trespasses as we forgive those
that trespass against us -- forgive your enemies, and pray for those who use
you wickedly -- commend his spirit to the mercy of GOD, and the SAVIOR of
men's souls.

GOD grant, that the awful scene may do us good -- confirm us in holiness and
virtue, in the love of GOD and our country -- that it may guard us against
temptation, and make us careful to live in all good conscience toward GOD and
men -- that we may finally lay down these tabernacles of flesh in peace,
trusting in the Savior's merits, and be received to the holy presence of GOD.

TO HIM WHO RULES ALL THINGS ACCORDING TO HIS OWN PLEASURE AND WISDOM, WHO
SAVES THE WORLD BY HIS BLOOD, AND SANCTIFIES THE UNGODLY, BE PRAISE, GLORY AND
DOMINION FOREVER AND EVER, AMEN.


