OBSERVATIONS UPON THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT OF PENNSYLVANIA IN FOUR LETTERS TO
THE PEOPLE OF PENNSYLVANIA.

"A Republic (which is an empire of laws and not of men) is the BEST of
governments; and that arrangement of the powers of society, or, in other words,
that form of government which is best contrived to secure an impartial and
exact execution of the laws, is the BEST of republics."

ADAMS on Government. "Nothing is more certain from the history of nations, and
the nature of man, than that SOME FORMS of government are better fitted for
being WELL ADMINISTERED than others."

IDEM. PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by STYNER and CIST, in Second-street, six
doors above Arch-street. MDCCLXXVII.

OBSERVATIONS, etc.
LETTER I.
EVERY free government should consist of three parts, viz. I. A BILL OF RIGHTS.
II. A CONSTITUTION, And III. LAWS.

I. The BILL OF RIGHTS should contain the great principles of natural and civil
liberty. It should be unalterable by any human power.

II. The CONSTITUTION is the executive part of the Bill of Rights. It should
contain the division and distribution of the power of the people. -- The modes
and forms of making laws, of executing justice, and of transacting business:
Also the limitation of power, as to time and jurisdiction. It should be
unalterable by the legislature, and should be changed only by a representation
of the people, chosen for that purpose.

III. LAWS are the executive part of a constitution. They cease to be binding
whenever they transgress the principles of Liberty, as laid down in the
Constitution and Bill of Rights.

Let us now apply these principles to the Bill of Rights, Constitution and Laws
of Pennsylvania. But previous to my entering upon this task, I beg leave to
declare, that I am not led to it by a single party or personal prejudice; on
the contrary, I honor most of the friends of the present government as the
warmest Whigs among us, and I am proud of numbering several of the gentlemen
who were concerned in making, and in attempting to execute the government,
among my particular friends.

I. The Bill of Rights has confounded natural and civil rights in such a manner
as to produce endless confusion in society.

II. The Constitution in the gross is exceptionable in the following
particulars:

1. No regard is paid in it to the ancient habits and customs of the people of
Pennsylvania in the distribution of the supreme power of the state, nor in the
forms of business, or in the style of the Constitution. The suddenness of the
late revolution, the attachment of a large body of the people to the old
Constitution of the state, and the general principles of human nature made an
attention to ancient forms and prejudices a matter of the utmost importance to
this state in the present controversy with Great Britain. Of so much
consequence did the wise Athenians view the force of ancient habits and customs
in their laws and government, that they punished all strangers with death who
interfered in their politics. They well knew the effects of novelty upon the
minds of the people, and that a more fatal stab could not be given to the peace
and safety of their state than by exposing its laws and government to frequent
or unnecessary innovations.

2. The Constitution is wholly repugnant to the principles of action in man,
and has a direct tendency to check the progress of genius and virtue in human
nature. It supposes perfect equality, and an equal distribution of property,
wisdom and virtue, among the inhabitants of the state.

3. It comprehends many things which belong to a Bill of Rights, and to Laws,
and which form no part of a Constitution.

4. It is contrary, in an important article, to the Bill of Rights. By the
second article of the Bill of Rights, "no man can be abridged of any civil
right, who acknowledges the being of a GOD;" but by the Constitution, no man
can take his seat in the Assembly, who does not "acknowledge the Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament to be given by divine inspiration."

5. It is deficient in point of perspicuity and method. Instead of reducing the
legislative, executive and judicial parts of the constitution, with their
several powers and forms of business, to distinct heads, the whole of them are
jumbled together in a most unsystematic manner.

6. It fixes all these imperfections upon the people for seven years, by
precluding them from the exercise of their own power to remove them at any
other time, or in any other manner than by a septennial convention, called by a
Council of Censors.

III. The laws and proceedings of the Assembly of Pennsylvania are in many
particulars contrary to the constitution. Only one half of the Members took the
oath of allegiance, prescribed in the tenth section of the constitution. The
Speaker of the House issued writs for the election of Members of Assembly and
of Counselors, notwithstanding this power is lodged, by the 19th section of
the constitution, only in the President and Council. Two gentlemen were
appointed Members of Congress, who held offices under the Congress, which is
expressly forbidden in the 11th section of the constitution. The constitution
requires further in the 40th section, that every military officer should take
the oath of allegiance, before he enters upon the execution of his office; but
the Assembly have dispensed with this oath in their Militia Law. The 15th
section of the constitution declares, that no law shall be passed, unless it be
previously published for the consideration of the People; but the Assembly
passed all the laws of their late session, without giving the People an
opportunity of seeing them, till they were called upon to obey them. These
proceedings of the Assembly lead to one, and perhaps to all the three following
conclusions: First, That the Assembly have violated the principles of the
constitution; secondly, that the constitution is so formed, that it could not
be executed by the Assembly, consistent with the safety of the State; lastly,
that none of their laws are binding, inasmuch as they are contrary to the
superior and radical laws of the constitution. These considerations are all of
a most alarming nature. Farewell to Liberty, when the sacred bulwarks of a
constitution can be invaded by a legislature! And if the constitution cannot be
executed in all its parts, without endangering the safety of the State, and if
all our late; laws must be set aside in a court of justice, because they were
not assented to by the People, previous to their being enacted, is it not high
time for the People to unite and form a more effectual, and more practicable
system of government? --

If strict justice should poise the scale in the trial of tory property, I can
easily foresee from the virtue of the People, on which side the beam would
turn; but it becomes us to reflect, that all trials for forfeited property must
be held in courts of written law, and the flaws of our constitution and laws
are so wide, that the most gigantic Tory criminal might escape through them.

LETTER II.
I SHALL now proceed to say a few words upon particular parts of the
Constitution.

In the second section, "the supreme legislature is vested in a ' single' House
of Representatives of the Freemen of the Commonwealth." By this section we
find, that the supreme, absolute, and uncontrouled power of the whole State is
lodged in the hands of one body of men. Had it been lodged in the hands of one
man, it would have been less dangerous to the safety and liberties of the
community. Absolute power should never be trusted to man. It has perverted the
wisest heads, and corrupted the best hearts in the world. I should be afraid to
commit my property, liberty and life to a body of angels for one whole year.
The Supreme Being alone is qualified to possess supreme power over his
creatures. It requires the wisdom and goodness of a Deity to control, and
direct it properly.

In order to show the extreme danger of trusting all the legislative power of a
State to a single representation, I shall beg leave to transcribe a few
sentences from a letter, written by Mr. JOHN ADAMS, to one of his friends in
North Carolina, who requested him to favor him with a plan of government for
that State above a twelvemonth ago. This illustrious Citizen, who is second to
no man in America, in an inflexible attachment to the liberties of this
country, and to republican forms of government, writes as follows,

"I think a people cannot be long free, nor ever happy, whose government is in
one Assembly. My reasons for this opinion are as follow,

1. "A single Assembly is liable to all the vices, follies and frailties of an
individual, -- subject to fits of humor, -- starts of passions, A Committee of
the Convention, which formed the Constitution of Pennsylvania, published in the
Pennsylvania Packet of October 15, 1776, as an apology for one of their
Ordinances, that was thought to be arbitrary and unjust, that it was passed
when "the minds of the Convention were agitated, and their passions inflamed."
flights of enthusiasm, -- partialities of prejudice, and consequently
productive of hasty results and absurd judgments. All these errors ought to be
corrected, and defects supplied by some controuling power.

2. "A single Assembly is apt to be avaricious, and in time will not scruple to
exempt itself from burdens, which it will lay, without compunction, upon its
constituents.

3. "A single Assembly is apt to grow ambitious, and after a time will not
hesitate to vote itself perpetual. This was one fault of the long parliament,
but more remarkably of Holland, whose Assembly first voted themselves from
annual to septennial, then for life, and after a course of years, that all
vacancies happening by death or otherwise, should be filled by themselves,
without any application to constituents at all.

4. "Because a single Assembly possessed of all the powers of government would
make arbitrary laws for their own interest, and adjudge all controversies in
their own favor." These reasons are given by our Author for not lodging all
power legislative, executive and judicial, in one body of men. This has been
done, as will be shown hereafter in the Constitution of Pennsylvania: But,
supposing it had been otherwise, our Author adds, "shall the whole power of
legislation rest in one Assembly? Most of the foregoing reasons (one is
omitted) apply equally to prove, that the whole legislative power ought to be
more complex."


If any thing could be necessary upon this subject, after such an authority, I
might here add, that Montesquieu -- Harrington -- Milton -- Addison -- Price --
Bolingbroke, and others, the wisest statesmen, and the greatest friends to
Liberty in the world, have left testimonies upon record of the extreme folly
and danger of a people's being governed by a single legislature. I shall
content myself with the following extract from the last of those authors. The
sentiments correspond exactly with those of our countryman beforementioned.

"By simple forms of government, I mean such as lodge the whole supreme power,
absolutely and without control, either in a single person, or in the principal
persons of the community, or in the whole body of the people. Such governments
are governments of arbitrary will, and therefore of all imaginable absurdities
the most absurd. They stand in direct opposition to the sole motive of
submission to any government whatsoever; for if men quit the State, and
renounce the rights of nature, (one of which is, to be sure, that of being
governed by their own will) they do this, that they may not remain exposed to
the arbitrary will of other men, the weakest to that of the strongest, the few
to that of the many. Now, in submitting to any single form of government
whatever, they establish what they mean to avoid, and for fear of being exposed
to arbitrary will sometimes, they choose to be governed by it always. These
governments do not only degenerate into tyranny; they are tyranny in their very
institution; and they who submit to them, are slaves, not subjects, however the
supreme power may be exercised; for tyranny and slavery do not so properly
consist in the stripes that are given and received, as in the power of giving
them at pleasure, and the necessity of receiving them, whenever and for
whatever they are inflicted."

I might go on further and show, that all the dissentions of Athens and Rome,
so dreadful in their nature, and so fetal in their consequences, originated in
single Assemblies possessing all the power of those commonwealths; but this
would be the business of a volume, and not of a single essay. -- I shall
therefore pass on, to answer the various arguments that have been used in
Pennsylvania, in support of a single legislature.

1. We are told, that the perfection of every thing consists in its simplicity,
-- that all mixtures in government are impurities, and that a single
legislature is perfect, because it is simple. -- To this I answer, that we
should distinguish between simplicity in principles, and simplicity in the
application of principles to practice. What can be more simple than the
principles of mechanics, and yet into how many thousand forms have they been
tortured by the ingenuity of man. A few simple elementary bodies compose all
the matter of the universe, and yet how infinitely are they combined in the
various forms and substances which they assume in the animal, vegetable, and
mineral kingdoms. In like manner a few simple principles enter into the
composition of all free governments. These principles are perfect security for
property, liberty and life; but these principles admit of extensive
combinations, when reduced to practice: -- Nay more, they require them. A
despotic government is the most simple government in the world, but instead of
affording security to property, liberty or life, it obliges us to hold them all
on the simple will of a capricious sovereign. I maintain therefore, that all
governments are safe and free in proportion as they are compounded in a certain
degree, and on the contrary, that all governments are dangerous and tyrannical
in proportion as they approach to simplicity.

2. We are told by the friends of a single legislature, that there can be no
danger of their becoming tyrannical, since they must partake of all the burdens
they lay upon their constituents. Here we forget the changes that are made upon
the head and heart by arbitrary power, and the cases that are recorded in
history of annual Assemblies having refused to share with their constituents in
the burdens which they had imposed upon them. If every elector in Pennsylvania
is capable of being elected an assembly-man, then agreeably to the sixth
section of the constitution, it is possible for an Assembly to exist who do not
possess a single foot of property in the State, and who can give no other
evidence of a common interest in, or attachment to, the community than having
paid "public taxes," which may mean poor-taxes. Should this be the case, (and
there is no obstacle in the constitution to prevent it) surely it will be in
the power of such an Assembly to draw from the State the whole of its wealth in
a few years, without contributing any thing further toward it than their
proportion of the trifling tax necessary to support the poor. -- But I shall
show in another place equal dangers from another class of men, becoming a
majority in the Assembly.

3. We are told of instances of the House of Lords, in England, checking the
most salutary laws, after they had passed the House of Commons, as a proof of
the inconvenience of a compound legislature. I believe the fact to be true, but
I deny its application in the present controversy. The House of Lords, in
England, possess privileges and interests, which do not belong to the House of
Commons. Moreover they derive their power from the crown and not from the
people. No wonder therefore they consult their own interests, in preference to
those of the People. In the State of Pennsylvania we wish for a council, with
no one exclusive privilege, and we disclaim every idea of their possessing the
smallest degree of power, but what is derived from the annual suffrages of the
People, A body thus chosen could have no object in view but the happiness of
their constituents. It is remarkable in Connecticut, that the legislative
council of that State has in no one instance made amendments, or put a negative
upon the acts of their Assembly, in the course of above one hundred years, in
which both have not appeared to the people in a few months to have been
calculated to promote their liberty and happiness.

4. We are told, that the Congress is a single legislature, therefore a single
legislature is to be preferred to a compound one. -- The objects of legislation
in the Congress relate only to peace and war, alliances, trade, the
Post Office, and the government of the army and navy. They never touch the
liberty, property, nor life of the individuals of any State in their
resolutions, and even in their ordinary subjects of legislation, they are
liable to be checked by each of the Thirteen States.

5. We have been told, that a legislative council or governor lays the
foundation for aristocratical and monarchical power in a community. However
ridiculous this objection to a compound legislature may appear, I have more
than once heard it mentioned by the advocates for a single Assembly. Who would
believe, that the same fountain of pure water should send forth, at the same
time, wholesome and deadly streams? Are not the Council and Assembly both
formed alike by the annual breath of the people? But I will suppose, that a
legislative Council aspired after the honors of hereditary titles and power,
would they not be effectually checked by the Assembly?

I cannot help commending the zeal that appears in my countrymen against the
power of a King or a House of Lords. I concur with them in all their prejudices
against hereditary titles, honor and power. History is little else than a
recital of the follies and vices of kings and noblemen, and it is because I
dread so much from them, that I wish to exclude them for ever from
Pennsylvania, for notwithstanding our government has been called a simple
democracy, I maintain, that a foundation is laid in it for the most complete
aristocracy that ever existed in the world.

In order to prove this assertion, I shall promise two propositions, which have
never been controverted: First, where there is wealth, there will be power;
and, secondly, the rich have always been an over-match for the poor in all
contests for power.

These truths being admitted, I desire to know what can prevent our single
representation being filled, in the course of a few years, with a majority of
rich men? Say not, the people will not choose such men to represent them. The
influence of wealth at elections is irresistible. It has been seen and felt in
Pennsylvania, and I am obliged in justice to my subject to say, that there are
poor men among us as prepared to be influenced, as the rich are prepared to
influence them. The fault must be laid in both cases upon human nature. The
consequence of a majority of rich men getting into the legislature is plain.
Their wealth will administer fuel to the love of arbitrary power that is common
to all men. The present Assembly have furnished them with precedents for
breaking the Constitution. Farewell now to annual elections! Public emergencies
will sanctify the most daring measures. The clamours of their constituents will
be silenced with offices, bribes or punishments. An aristocracy will be
established, and Pennsylvania will be inhabited like most of the countries in
Europe, with only two sorts of animals, tyrants and slaves.

It has often been said, that there is but one rank of men in America, and
therefore, that there should be only one representation of them in a
government. I agree, that we have no artificial distinctions of men into
noblemen and commoners among us, but it ought to be remarked, that superior
degrees of industry and capacity, and above all, commerce, have introduced
inequality of property among us, and these have introduced natural distinctions
of rank in Pennsylvania, as certain and general as the artificial distinctions
of men in Europe. This will ever be the case while commerce exists in this
country. The men of middling property and poor men can never be safe in a mixed
representation with the men of overgrown property. Their liberties can only be
secured by having exact bounds prescribed to their power, in the fundamental
principles of the Constitution. By a representation of the men of middling
fortunes in one house, their whole strength is collected against the influence
of wealth. Without such a representation, the (...) violent efforts of
individuals to oppose it would be divided and broken, and would want that
system, which alone would enable them to check that lust for dominion which is
always connected with opulence. The government of Pennsylvania therefore has
been called most improperly a government for poor men. It carries in every part
of it a poison to their liberties. It is impossible to form a government more
suited to the nations and interests of rich men.

6. But says the advocate for a single legislature, if one of the advantages of
having a Legislative Council arises from the Counselors possessing more wisdom
than the Assembly, why may not the mentors of the Council be thrown into the
Assembly, in order to instruct and enlighten them? If sound reasoning always
prevailed in popular Assemblies, this objection to a Legislative Council might
have some weight. The danger in this case would be, that the Counselors would
partake of the passions and prejudices of the Assembly, by taking part in their
debates; or, if they did not, that they would be so inconsiderable in point of
numbers, that they would be constantly out-voted by the members of the Assembly.

7. But would you suffer twenty or thirty men in a Legislative Council to
control seventy or eighty in an Assembly? Yes, and that for two reasons:
First, I shall suppose that they will consist of men of the most knowledge and
experience in the State: Secondly, that their obligations to wisdom and
integrity will be much stronger than the Assembly's can be, because fewer men
will be answerable for unjust or improper proceedings at the bar of the public.
But I beg pardon of my readers for introducing an answer to an objection to a
small number of men controuling the proceedings of a greater. The friends of
the present Constitution of Pennsylvania cannot urge this objection with any
force, for in the 47th section of the Constitution I find twenty-four men
called a COUNCIL of CENSORS, invested with a supreme and uncontrouled power to
revise and to censure all the laws and proceedings of not a single Assembly,
but of all the Assemblies that shall exist for seven years, which Assemblies
may contain the united wisdom of five hundred and four Assembly-men. They are
moreover, invested with more wisdom than the Convention that is to be chosen by
their recommendation; for this Convention, which is to consist of seventy-two
men, is to make no one alteration in the Constitution but what was suggested to
them by the Council of Censors. I can easily conceive, that two houses
consisting of an unequal number of members, both viewing objects through the
same medium of time and place, may agree in every thing essential, and disagree
in matters only of doubtful issue to the welfare of the state; but I am sure, a
body of twenty-four men fating in judgment upon the proceedings of a body of
men defunct in their public capacity seven years before them, cannot fail of
committing the most egregious mistakes from the obscurity which time, and their
ignorance of a thousand facts and reasonings must throw upon all their
deliberations. But more of the arbitrary power of the Censors hereafter.

8. We are told that the state of Pennsylvania has always been governed by a
single legislature, and therefore, that part of our Constitution is not an
innovation. There is a short way of confuting this assertion by pronouncing it
without any foundation. The Governor always had a negative power upon our laws,
and was a distinct branch of our legislature. It is true, he sometimes
exercised his power to the disadvantage of the people; for he was the servant
of a King who possessed an interest distinct from that of his people, and in
some cases the Governor himself possessed an interest incompatible with the
rights of the people. God forbid that ever we should see a resurrection of his
power in Pennsylvania, but I am obliged to own, that I have known instances in
which the whole (...) have thanked him for the interposition of his negative
and amendments upon the acts of the Assembly. Even the Assembly themselves have
acknowledged the justice of his conduct upon these occasions, by condemning in
their cooler hours their own hasty, and ill-digested resolutions.

9. But why all these arguments in favor of checks for the Assembly. The
Constitution (says the single legislative-man) has provided no less than four
for them. First, Elections will be annual. Secondly, The doors of the Assembly
are to be always open. Thirdly, All laws are to be published for the
consideration and assent of the people: And, Fourthly, The Council of Censors
will punish, by their censures, all violations of the Constitution, and the
authors of bad laws. I shall examine the efficacy of each of these checks
separately.

I hope, for the peace of the state, that we shall never see a body of men in
power more attached to the present Constitution than the present Assembly, and
if, with all their affection for it, they have broken it in many articles, it
is reasonable to suppose that future Assemblies will use the same freedoms with
it. They may, if they choose, abolish annual elections. The late Convention was
chosen for the sole purpose of making a government, and was composed of honest,
well-meaning men, and yet, I have good authority to say, that several of them
proposed to their friends forming themselves into an Assembly, to execute the
government.
They may tell their constituents that elections draw off the minds of the
people from necessary labor; or, if a war should exist, they may show the
impossibility of holding elections when there is a chance of the militia being
called into the field to oppose a common enemy: Or lastly, they may fetter
elections with oaths in such a manner as to exclude nine-tenths of the electors
from voting. Such stratagems for perpetual power will never want men nor a
society of men to support them; for the Assembly possesses such a plenitude of
power from the influence of the many offices of profit and honor The President
is appointed chiefly by the Assembly. His salary, together with the salaries of
the Judges, are fixed by the Assembly. Delegates in Congress, the Lieutenants
and Sub-Lieutenants of counties, Pretonotaries, Registers of Wills,
Money-Signers, etc. etc. are all appointed solely by the Assembly. Each of
these officers brings with him the influence of his friends and
family-connections. When collected together, they make a little army of
placemen.
that are in their gift, that they may always promise themselves support from a
great part of the state. But I will suppose that no infringement is ever made
upon annual elections. In the course of even one year a single Assembly may do
the most irreparable mischief to a state. Socrates and Barnevelt were both put
to death by Assemblies that held their powers at the election of the people.
The same Assemblies would have shed oceans of tears to have recalled those
illustrious citizens to life again, in less than half a year after they imbrued
their hands in their blood.

I am highly pleased with having the doors of our Assembly kept constantly
open; but how can this check the proceedings of the Assembly, (...) none but a
few citizens of the town or county, where the Assembly sits, or a few
traveling strangers, can ever attend or watch them?

I shall take no notice of the delays of business, which must arise from
publishing all laws for the consideration and assent of the people; but I beg
to be informed how long they must be published before they are passed? For I
take it for granted, that each county has a right to equal degrees of time to
consider of the laws. In what manner are they to be circulated? How are the
sentiments of the people, scattered over a county fifty or sixty miles in
extent, to be collected? Whether by ballot, or by voting in a tumultuary
manner? These are insurmountable difficulties in the way of the people at large
acting as a check upon the Assembly. But supposing an attempt should be made to
restrain the single legislature in this manner, are we sure the disapprobation
of the people would be sufficient to put a negative upon improper or arbitrary
laws? Would not the Assembly, from their partiality to their own proceedings,
be apt to pass over the complaints of the people in silence? to neglect or
refuse to enter their petitions or remonstrances upon their Journals? or to
raise the hue and cry of a fostered junto upon them, as " tories" or " apostate
whigs," or " an aristocratic faction?"

To talk of the Council of Censors, as a check upon the Assembly, is to forget
that a man or a body of men may deceive, rob, and enslave the public for seven
years, and then may escape the intended efficacy of the censures of the Council
by death, or by flying into a neighboring state.

10. We are informed that a single legislature was supported in the Convention
by Dr. Franklin, and assented to by Mr. Rittenhouse; gentlemen distinguished
for their uncommon abilities, and deservedly dear for their virtues to every
lover of human nature. The only answer, after what has been said, that I shall
give to this argument, is, that Divine Providence seems to have permitted them
to err upon this subject, in order to console the world for the very great
superiority they both possess over the rest of mankind in every thing else,
except the science of government.

Thus have I answered all the arguments that ever I have heard offered in
favor of a single legislature, and I hope, silenced all the objections that
have been made to a double representation of the people. I might here appeal
further to the practice of our courts of law in favor of repeated
deliberations and divisions. In a free government, the most inconsiderable
portion of our liberty and property cannot be taken from us, without the
judgment of two or three courts; but, by the Constitution of Pennsylvania, the
whole of our liberty and property, and even our lives, may be taken from us, by
the hasty and passionate decision of a single Assembly.

I shall conclude my observations upon this part of the Constitution, by
summing up the advantages of a compound or double legislature.

1. There is the utmost freedom in a compound legislature. The decisions of two
legislature bodies cannot fail of coinciding with the wills of a great majority
of the community.

2. There is safety in such a government, in as much as each body possesses a
free and independent power, so that they mutually check ambition and usurpation
in each other.

3. There is the greatest wisdom in such a government. Every act being obliged
to undergo the revision and amendments of two bodies of men, is necessarily
strained of every mixture of folly, passion, and prejudice. The Militia Law of
the Delaware State received twenty-four amendments from the Council after it
had bad three readings in the Assembly; all of which were adopted at once by
the Assembly. I grant, the wisdom of men collected in any way that can be
devised, cannot make a perfect law; but I am sure a Legislative Council would
not have overlooked many inaccuracies in the laws passed in the last session of
the present Assembly of Pennsylvania.


4. There is the longest duration of freedom in such a government. Sparta,
which possessed a compound legislature, preserved her liberties above five
hundred years. The fatal dissentions of Athens and Rome ceased as soon as their
Senates, which were filled only with rich men, were checked by another
Representation of the people.


5. There is the most order in such a government. By order, I mean obedience to
laws, subordination to magistrates, civility and decency of behavior, and the
contrary of every thing like mobs and factions.

6. Compound governments are most agreeable to human nature, inasmuch as they
afford the greatest scope for the expansion of the powers and virtues of the
mind. Wisdom, learning, experience, with the most extensive benevolence; the
most unshaken firmness, and the utmost elevation of soul, are all called into
exercise by the opposite and different duties of the different representations
of the people.

LETTER III.
THE powers of government have been very justly divided into legislative,
executive and judicial. Having discussed the legislative power of the
government of Pennsylvania, I shall proceed now to consider the executive and
judicial.

It is agreed on all hands that the executive and judicial powers of government
should be wholly independent of the legislative. The authors of the
Pennsylvania Constitution seem to have given their sanction to this opinion, by
separating those powers from the powers of the Assembly. -- It becomes us to
enquire whether they have made them so independent of the Assembly as to give
them the free exercise of their own judgments.

The insignificant figure the President and Council make in the Constitution
from not having a negative upon the laws of the Assembly, alone would soon have
destroyed their authority and influence in the State. But the authors of the
Constitution have taken pains to throw the whole power of the Council at once
into the hands of the Assembly, by rendering the former dependant upon the
latter in the two following particulars.

1. The President is chosen by the joint ballot of the Assembly and Council.
The Assembly being to the Council, in point of numbers, as five are to one, of
course choose the President. Each member will expect in his turn to fill the
first chair in the State, and hence the whole Council will yield themselves up
to the will of the Assembly.

2. The salaries of the President and of each of the Counselors are fixed by
the Assembly. This will necessarily render them dependant upon them. It is
worthy of notice here, that a rotation is established in the 19th section of
the Constitution, to "prevent the danger of an inconvenient aristocracy." --
From what abuse of power can this aristocracy arise? Are they not the creatures
of the Assembly? But there is a magic terror in the sound of a Counselor. Call
a man an Assemblyman, or a Censor, and he becomes an innocent creature, though
you invest him with the despotism of an eastern monarch. If the Council are
dependant upon the Assembly, it follows of course that the Judges, who are
appointed by the Council, are likewise dependant upon them. But in order more
fully to secure their dependence upon the will of the Assembly, they are
obliged to hold their salaries upon the tenure of their will. In vain do they
hold their commissions for seven years. This is but the shadow of independance.
They cannot live upon the air, and their absolute dependence upon the Assembly
gives that body a transcendent influence over all the courts of law in the
State. Here then we have discovered the legislative, executive and judicial
powers of the State all blended together. -- The liberty, the property and life
of every individual in the State are laid prostrate by the Constitution at the
feet of the Assembly. This combination of powers in one body has in all ages
been pronounced a tyranny. To live by one man's will became the cause of all
men's misery; but better, far better, would it be to live by the will of one
man, than to live, or rather to die, by the will of a body of men. Unhappy
Pennsylvania! Methinks I see the scales of justice broken in thy courts. -- I
see the dowry of the widow and the portion of the orphans unjustly taken from
them, in order to gratify the avarice of some demagogue who rules the Assembly
by his eloquence and arts. -- I see the scaffolds streaming with the blood of
the wisest and best men in the State. -- I see the offices of government -- But
the prospect is too painful, I shall proceed to take notice of some other parts
of the Constitution.

It was not sufficient to contaminate justice at its fountain, but its smallest
streams are made to partake of impurity by the Convention. In the (...) section
of the Constitution "all Justices of the Peace are to be elected by the
freeholders of each city and county." The best observations that can be made on
this part of the Constitution is to inform the public, that not above one half
the people of the State chose magistrates agreeable to the laws of the Assembly
for that purpose; that more than one half of those that were chosen have
refused to accept of commissions, and that many of those who act are totally
disqualified from the want of education or leisure for the office. -- It has
been said often, and I wish the saying was engraven over the doors of every
statehouse on the Continent, that "all power is derived from the people," but
it has never yet been said that all power is seated in the people. Government
supposes and requires a delegation of power: It cannot exist without it. And
the idea of making the people at large judges of the qualifications necessary
for magistrates, or judges of laws, or checks for Assemblies proceeds upon the
supposition that mankind are all alike wise, and just, and have equal leisure.
It moreover destroys the necessity for all government. What man ever made
himself his own attorney? And yet this would not be more absurd than for the
people at large to pretend to give up their power to a set of rulers, and
afterward reserve the right of making and of judging of all their laws
themselves. Such a government is a monster in nature. It contains as many
Governors, Assemblymen, Judges and Magistrates as there are freemen in the
State, all exercising the same powers and at the same time. Happy would it be
for us, if this monster was remarkable only for his absurdity; but, alas! he
contains a tyrant-in his bowels. All history shows us that the people soon grow
weary of the folly and tyranny of one another. They prefer one to many matters,
and stability to instability of slavery. They prefer a Julius Caesar to a
Senate, and a Cromwell to a perpetual parliament.

I cannot help thinking a mistake lays rather in words than ideas when we talk
of the rights of the people. Where is the difference between my choosing a
Justice of Peace, and my choosing an Assemblyman and a Counselor, by whose
joint suffrages a Governor is chosen, who appoints a Justice for me? I am still
the first link of the sacred chain of the power of the State. But are there no
cases in which I may be bound by acts of a single, or of a body of magistrates
in the State, whom I have had no hand in choosing? Yes, there are. Here then I
am bound contrary to the principles of liberty (which consist in a man being
governed by men chosen by himself), whereas if all the magistrates in the State
were appointed by the Governor, or executive part of the State, it would be
impossible for me to appear before the bar of a magistrate any where who did
not derive his power originally from me.

By the 5th section all militia officers below the rank of a Brigadier General
are to be chosen by the people. Most of the objections that have been mentioned
against magistrates being chosen by the people, apply with equal force against
the people's choosing their military officers. By the militia law of this State
we find the soldier ceases to be commanded by the officer of his choice as soon
as he comes in the field. He might as well be commanded by an officer of
another State as by one of his own State, for whom he did not vote. Had he been
appointed by the executive power of the government, he might have looked upon
him originally as the creature of his own power, and might have claimed his
care in the camp, from his influence at elections, in moving those springs in
government, from which he derived his commission. But the unsuitableness of
this part of the Constitution to the genius of the people of Pennsylvania, will
appear in the strongest point of light, from attending to the two following
facts: 1st: Most of the irregularities committed by the militia, that were in
service last year, were occasioned by that laxity of discipline, which was
introduced and kept up by officers holding their commissions by the breath of
the people: And 2dly, Above one half of the State have refused or neglected to
choose officers, agreeably to the recommendation of the Assembly. -- And even in
many of those places, where elections for officers have been held, Colonels
have been chosen by forty and Captains and Subalterns by only four or five
votes.

In the 22d section of the Constitution it is said, "every officer of the
state, whether judicial or executive, shall be liable to be impeached by the
General Assembly, before the President and Council, either when in office or
after his resignation or removal for maladministration." Why is a man in this
case to be deprived of a trial by jury? and what is the reason that no time is
fixed for the commencement of this impeachment after resignation or removal for
maladministration? A judicial or military officer may be innocent, and yet,
from the delay of his trial for six or seven years, he may be deprived by death
or otherways of the vouchers of his innocence. Woe to the man that ever holds
one of the high offices of the State of Pennsylvania! He must ever, after his
resignation, hold his life at the pleasure of the orator who rules the
Assembly. The least mark of disrespect shown to him, or to any of the Assembly,
rouses the Constitution and laws of his country against him; and perhaps, after
an interval of twenty or thirty years conscious integrity, his gray hairs are
dragged with sorrow to the grave. Let not this be thought to be too high a
picture of this part of the Constitution of Pennsylvania. It is a picture of
human nature in similar circumstances, in every age and country. Men possessed
of unlimited and uncontrouled power are beasts of prey.

But, is there no power lodged in the Constitution to alter these
imperfections? Has our Convention monopolized all the wisdom of succeeding
years, so as to preclude any improvements being made in the infant science of
government? Must we groan away our lives in a patient submission to all the
evils in the Constitution which have been described? Let the 47th and last
section of the Constitution answer these questions. By this section it is
declared, that after the expiration of seven years, there shall "be chosen two
men from each city and county, (a majority of whom shall be a quorum in every
case, except as to calling a Convention) who shall be called a Council of
Censors, and who shall have power to call a Convention within two years after
their fitting, if there appears to them an absolute necessity of amending any
article of the Constitution which may be defective, explaining such as may be
thought not clearly expressed, and of adding such as are necessary for the
preservation of the rights and happiness of the people." From this paragraph it
is evident, that the Constitution was thought to be the perfection of human
wisdom, and that the authors of it intended that it should last for ever. Every
section of the Constitution, I believe, was determined by a majority of the
Members of the Convention, and in the 12th section of the Constitution we find,
that if only two-thirds of the people concur in the execution of it, the
members of Assembly chosen by them, are to "possess all the powers of the
General Assembly as fully and amply as if the whole were present." This is
strictly agreeable to the principles of good government; but, why are these
principles to be trampled upon, when the great question is to be agitated,
whether the Constitution shall be altered? For, unless every county and city in
the State concur in electing Censors, and unless two thirds of them agree in
calling a Convention, there is no possibility of obtaining an alteration of a
single article of the Constitution. If the Assembly had not taught us that it
was neither treason nor perjury to break the Constitution, I am sure it would
have remained inviolate for ever; for I am persuaded that several of the
counties would have refused to have chosen Censors. But suppose they had, if
only one short of two thirds of them refused to agree in the measure, we could
have no Convention. The minority would give laws to a majority. A solecism in
government! But there is no end to the tyranny and absurdity of our
Constitution.

But the Council of Censors have not yet finished their business. They are
empowered by the Constitution "to enquire, whether the Constitution has been
preserved inviolate in every part? and whether the legislative and executive
branches of government have performed their duty, as guardians of the people;
or assumed to themselves, or exercised other or greater powers than they are
entitled to by the Constitution: They are also to enquire, whether the public
taxes have been justly laid and collected in all parts of this commonwealth; --
in what manner the public moneys have been disposed of, and whether the laws
have been duly executed: For these purposes they shall have power to send for
persons, papers and records; they shall have authority to pass public censures,
and to recommend to the legislature, the repealing such laws as appear to them
to have been enacted contrary to the principles of the Constitution: These
powers they shall continue to have for, and during the space of one year, from
the day of their election, and no longer."

Is this the commission of the Grand Turk? or is it an extract from an act of
the British Parliament, teeming with vengeance against the liberties of
America? -- No. -- It is an epitome of the powers of the Council of Censors
established by the late Convention of Pennsylvania. Innocence has nothing to
fear from justice, when it flows through the regular channels of law; but where
is the man who can ensure himself a moment's safety from a body of men invested
with absolute power for one whole year to censure and condemn, without judge or
jury, every individual in the State. I shall suppose the Council to consist of
a majority of those Members of Assembly, who took the oath of allegiance to the
Constitution, and who voted, that no officer should be excused from taking it,
who accepted of a militia-commission under the authority of this State. I shall
suppose them assembled for the business of their office. The work of an age is
to be performed in a single year. -- Methinks I see such of those worthy
gentlemen as are living, who, for the sake of union, consented to dispense with
the oath of allegiance to the Constitution, led like criminals to their bar. --
I hear peals of wrath denounced against them. I see those virtuous gentlemen,
who composed the Executive Council in the year 1777, summoned to appear at
their tribunal, to answer for their having abdidicated the duties of their
office, by an adjournment, at a time when the State was threatened with an
invasion. In vain they plead, that the Constitution had invested them with no
power for the defense of the State. Their names and their families are branded
with infamy by a "public censure." I see hundreds and thousands coming, one
after another, before the Council, to be censured for refusing to choose
magistrates and militia-officers, agreeably to the laws of the Assembly. But
who are they who are dragged with so much violence to the inquisitorial
tribunal? They are a number of citizens who prayed for some alterations to be
made in the Constitution. In vain they plead the obligations of reason and
conscience against submitting to the government. In vain they plead their zeal
and services in the common cause of America. It is all to no purpose. They
recommend to the Assembly to impeach them for high treason. They are condemned
as traitors, and the streets swim with their blood. -- Good heavens! where was
the mild genius of Pennsylvania, when this part of the Constitution obtained
the assent of the Convention? -- Spirit of liberty, whither waft thou sled? --

But perhaps the Constitution has provided a remedy for its defects, without
the aid of the Council of Censors? No -- this cannot be done; for every Member
of Assembly, before he takes his seat, is obliged, by the 10th section of the
Constitution, to swear that he will not "do nor consent to any act whatever,
that shall have a tendency to lessen or abridge their rights and privileges as
declared in the Constitution of this State," as also, "that he will not
directly or indirectly do or consent to any act or thing prejudicial or
injurious to the Constitution or Government thereof, as established by the
Convention," agreeably to the 40th section of the Constitution. These oaths of
infallibility and passive obedience to the form of the Constitution,
effectually preclude every man, who holds an office under it, from attempting
to procure the least amendment in any part of it. That it was the design of the
Convention, that the Constitution should not be touched by any power but a
Convention to be called by the Council of Censors, appears from the oath
contained in the 40th section, being required by one of their ordinances as the
only condition upon which an Elector could vote for an Assemblyman. Strange!
that men should call God to witness their determination to support a
government, which a majority of them had not seen, and which even the minority
of them did not understand or disliked! But, for the honor of the State it
should be recorded, that not above 1500 of the 2500, who voted for the
Assembly, took the oath required by the ordinance of the Convention.
It is a mere quibble upon words to say, that a man may mend the Constitution,
without "doing any thing prejudicial or injurious to it." The Convention did
not intend any such construction to be put upon their oaths, and hence we find
in the introduction to the Constitution, they "declare the frame of government
to be the Constitution of this commonwealth, and to remain in force therein for
ever, unaltered, except in such articles as shall hereafter, upon experience,
be found to require improvement, and which shall, by the same authority of the
people fairly delegated, as this frame of government directs, be amended and
improved." Now we know, that the frame of government forbids the least
amendment being made in the Constitution in any other than by the
recommendation of a Council of Censors.

Had the Constitution appeared to me to have been unexceptionable in every
part, and had it been the result of the united wisdom of men and angels, I
would not have taken an oath of passive obedience to it, for seven or nine
years. The constant changes in human affairs, and in the dispositions of a
people, might render occasional alterations, in that time, necessary in the
most perfeft Constitution. But to take an oath of allegiance to a Constitution,
-- full of experiments, -- a Constitution that was indeed a new thing under the
sun, -- that had never been tried in some of its parts in any country, -- and
that had produced misery in other of its parts in every country, -- I say to
swear to support or even to submit, for seven or nine years, to such a
Constitution, is to trifle with all morality, and to dishonor the sacred name
of GOD himself.

What would you think of a man, who would consent to shut his eyes, and swallow
a quantity of food that had never before been tasted by a human creature, and
swear at the same time, that if it should disorder him in ever so great a
degree, he would take nothing to relieve him for eight and forty hours? Such a
man would be wife, compared with the man who takes an oath of allegiance to the
Constitution of Pennsylvania.

It is to no purpose to talk here of the many excellent articles in the Bill of
Rights; such as religious toleration, -- the habeas corpus act, -- trials by
juries, -- the rotation of office, etc. None of them can flourish long in the
neighborhood of a single Assembly, and a Council of Censors possessing all the
powers of the State. -- These inestimable privileges in the Constitution of
Pennsylvania resemble a tree loaded with the most luscious fruit, but
surrounded with thorns, in such a manner, as to be for ever inaccessible to the
hungry traveller.

Perhaps, while the government is upon its good behavior, and while the
passions of the State are directed against a cruel and common enemy, we may not
experience all the calamities that have been demonstrated to flow from the
Constitution. -- But the revolution of a few years, and the return of peace,
will most certainly render Pennsylvania, under her present Constitution, the
most miserable spot upon the surface of the globe.

I believe all the Members of the late Convention were true Whigs, and aimed
sincerely at forming a free and happy government: But, I am sure, that if
Filmar and Hobbes had sat among them, they could not have formed a government
more destructive of human happiness; nor could Lord North or General How have
formed one more destructive of union and vigor, in our public affairs, than
the present Constitution of Pennsylvania.

It is one thing to understand the principles, and another thing to understand
the forms of government. The former are simple; the latter are difficult and
complicated. There is the same difference between principles and forms in all
other sciences. Who understood the principles of mechanics and optics better
than Sir Isaac Newton? and yet Sir Isaac could not for his life have made a
watch or a microscope. Mr. Lock is an oracle as to the principles, Harrington
and Montesquieu are oracles as to the forms of government.

LETTER IV.
A Question very naturally arises from taking a review of the tyranny of the
government of Pennsylvania, What measures shall be taken to amend them? There
can be but two answers to this question. 1st. To submit to the Constitution for
the present, till a peace with Great Britain will give us leisure to make a
better; or, 2dly, to call a Convention immediately for the purpose of making a
new Constitution. I believe the State is divided only about these two things;
for the party who believe the government to be a good one, is too
inconsiderable to be noticed in this place.

I. I beg leave to offer a few objections to our submitting to the
Constitution, and shall endeavor, II. to obviate the objections that have been
made to the immediate calling of a Convention, for the purpose of altering and
amending it.

I. There is the utmost danger to the State of Pennsylvania to a temporary
submission to the Constitution from the following causes, 1. The government is
a tyranny. The moment we submit to it we become slaves. We hold every thing
dear to us in society upon the tenure of the will of a single man in a single
Assembly. Perhaps the mark of the beast may not be fixed immediately upon us,
but the contract is made, and we are sold, together with our posterity, the
hewers of wood and drawers of water for ever. 2. The Constitution cannot be
executed in part without being broken. Now there cannot be a more dangerous
precedent in a free country, than a legislature violating in a single article
even the forms of a Constitution. 3 The present government will not draw forth
the wisdom nor strength of the State, nor afford that assistance to our (...)
States which is expected from us in the present (...) Great Britain. Wise and
good men every where (...) in the government. The militia law is only partially
executed. (...) justice open for the sequestration or confiscation of Tory
property; and, lastly, we shall never be able under the present government to
contribute our share toward sinking the Continental debt by taxes. There is
not force enough in the whole State to draw taxes from a single county against
their consent. The gentlemen in the opposition to the government have
constantly prayed, that the Constitution might be referred to the arbitration
of a Convention, and have declared their willingness to submit to, or concur in
the execution of it, if it should be confirmed by a representation of the
people fairly chosen. I am sorry to find upon the Journals of the Assembly, an
address from a battalion of militia in Chester county, to the Honorable House,
assuring them, that "they will support the present government with their lives
and fortunes." Such addresses indicated the weakness, and foreboded the present
contemptible situation of the court of Britain. They were presented in times
similar (...) our own, viz. when the American colonies were upon their knees to
the throne, praying to be governed by their own representatives, and to be
delivered from IMPENDING slavery. But it is characteristic of the present
Constitution, that, in the first year of it, execution, the journals of our
rulers were stained with threats of bloodshed against men who only petitioned
for a redress of grievances.
Alas! we are (...) the brink of ruin. Our State has lifted a knife to her
throat, and is about to undo herself by a hasty and ill-judged exercise of her
own power. Our enemies are exulting, and our friends are weeping over our
alarming situation. Our ancestors look down, and our posterity look up to us
for a happier Constitution. We are engaged with our Sister States in 2 bloody
and expensive war. The liberty of the whole world is the price for which we
fight. Human nature looks to us to avenge the mighty ills she has suffered from
the tyrants of the old world. She has already dropped a tear of joy upon the
prospect of recovering among us her first and original dignity. A good
government is an engine not less necessary to ensure us success in these
glorious purposes than ammunition and firearms. The way of duty is plain. Let
a Convention be chosen, to alter and amend the government. This measure alone
will restore vigor and union to Pennsylvania. Say not, my dear countrymen, THIS
IS NOT THE TIME, THE ENEMY ARE AT OUR GATES, LET US FIRST REPEL THEM. Look at
our militia on a field day -- see the attempts of the friends to the
Constitution to open our courts -- hear the complaints and murmurs of the
people. They all proclaim that NOW is the time for altering our Constitution.
No confusion can arise from It. The gentlemen in the opposition declare their
determination to support the present Assembly in the execution of every law
necessary for the safety and defense of the State, and above all in the
execution of the militia and test laws. They have no interest unconnected with
yours. They see with the same distress as you do the Tories triumphing in our
disunion. Be not deceived. The Tories are not enemies to the present
government; they enjoy the benefits of its weakness, and there is good
authority to say they have secretly helped to carry it into execution. Let us
beware of being imposed upon by the popular cry of the necessity of the times.
When the Dissenters in Virginia and South Carolina prayed for the abolition of
the Episcopal establishment in those States, the High-Churchmen acknowledged
that their demands were just, but said, that this was not the time for
attending to them, and that such a change in the government would throw all
things into confusion. The demands were notwithstanding complied with, and an
union unparalleled in former times was immediately produced in those Spates.
When a declaration of independance last summer appeared to be the only measure
that could save America, the Tories and moderate men acknowledged the justice
of our separation from Great Britain, but said, "This is not the time." The
event showed that the time was come, for, exclusive of the advantages we have
gained from it in foreign Courts, it served to precipitate the timid, the
doubtful and the disaffected characters from their mixture with the real Whigs,
and although it lessened the numbers in the opposition, it added to their
strength by producing union and decision among them. To delay justice (has been
emphatically said) is to deny it. In like manner to delay liberty is to take it
away.

The Convention of New York formed their government within the reach of the
thunder of the enemy's cannon, and while one half of their State was in their
possession. Is our situation more dangerous than it was last year? The members
of the late Convention were chosen on a day when the Associators of the whole
State were in motion. The Constitution was made while above 5000 of them were
in the field. The sense of the people was not asked upon the subject of the
Constitution; but it was given in the most public manner. No more than 1500
freemen voted for its being executed, for that number only took the oath of
allegiance to the Constitution at the election in October. Let us talk no more
then of the " necessity of the times." This is the State apology at St. James's
for all the crimes of the present reign and for all the savages and bloodshed
we have witnessed in America. The State of Massachusetts Bay are preparing for
an invasion; they expect General Burgoyne every hour in their harbors with a
powerful army, and yet in a Boston paper, of the 5th of May, I find the
following resolution of their Assembly and Council,

STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS BAY.
In the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES, May 5, 1777.

" Resolved, That it be, and hereby is recommended to the several towns and
places in this State, empowered by the laws thereof, to send Members to the
General Assembly, that, at their next election of a Member or Members to
represent them, they make choice of men, in whose integrity and abilities they
can place the greatest confidence; and, in addition to the common and ordinary
powers of representation, instruct them in one (...) with the Council, to form
such a Constitution of Government, as they shall judge best calculated to
promote the happiness of this State; and when completed, to cause the same to
be printed in all the Boston Newspapers, and also in Hand-Bills, one of which
to be transmitted to the Selectmen of each town, or the Committee of each
plantation, to be by them laid before their respective towns or plantations, at
a regular meeting of the inhabitants thereof, to be called for that purpose; in
order to its being, by each town and plantation, duly considered. And a return
of their approbation or disapprobation to be made into the Secretary's Office
of this State, at a reasonable time to be fixed on by the General Court,
specifying the numbers present in such meeting, voting for, and those voting
against the same: And if, upon a fair examination of the said returns by the
General Court, or such Committee as they shall appoint for that purpose, it
shall appear, that the said Form of Government is approved of by at least two
thirds of those who are free, and twenty one years of age, belonging to this
State, and present in the several meetings, then the General Court shall be
empowered to establish the same as the Constitution and Form of Government of
the State of Massachusetts Bay, according to which the inhabitants thereof
shall be governed in all succeeding generations, unless the same shall be
altered by their own express direction, or that of at least two thirds of them.
And it is further recommended to the Selectmen of the several towns, in the
return of their precepts for the choice of Representatives, to signify their
having considered this Resolve, and their doings thereon."

But further, recollect, my dear countrymen, our conduct upon reading the
resolution of the Honorable Congress of the 15th of May, 1776. We seized it as
a Warrant that proclaimed liberty to us and our posterity for ever. It was said
by some people at that time, "Let the Assembly execute that resolution;" but we
spurned the advice, and we acted like men. We said, that the "Assembly was not
chosen by a majority of votes in the State," owing to the inequality of our
representation, and that they wanted the "confidence of the people." We thought
nothing then of the loss of time occasioned by the meeting of a Conference of
Committees, to settle the mode and time of choosing a Convention. The delay of
months, the distractions of the State, and the danger of an invasion, were
thought to be trifling when compared with the prospect of a good Constitution,
that should immediately collect and exert the Whig strength of the State.

Thus have I finished my observations upon the Constitution of Pennsylvania. I
have taken notice only of its most essential defects, and have aimed to discuss
them with candor. The occasional remarks upon the proceedings of the Assembly,
are to be charged entirely to the faults of the Constitution. -- I believe the
gentlemen in power have nothing in view but the freedom and independance of the
State; and such has been the zeal and integrity of many of them in the pursuit
of those great objects, that it gives me pain to reflect, that I have been
obliged to differ from them in the best means of obtaining them.

With this declaration I shall close my letters to the people of Pennsylvania.
Accept thou dear asylum of my ancestors, nurse of my infancy, protectress of my
childhood, and generous rewarder of the toils of my youth, accept of these
humble efforts to restore thee to freedom and happiness! If I have labored in
vain, I shall henceforth mourn in secret only over my beloved country, and
lament the day that I was born a Pennsylvanian.


