TWO SERMONS, PREACHED AT EPPING, IN THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE, JANUARY 29TH,
1777, ON A PUBLIC FAST, APPOINTED BY AUTHORITY, ON ACCOUNT OF THE UNNATURAL AND
DISTRESSING WAR WITH GREAT BRITAIN, IN DEFENSE OF LIBERTY.

BY JOSIAH STEARNS, A. M. PASTOR OF A CHURCH THERE.

BE OF GOOD COURAGE, AND LET US PLAY THE MEN, FOR OUR PEOPLE, AND FOR THE
CITIES OF OUR GOD; AND THE LORD DO THAT WHICH SEEMS HIM GOOD. JOAB.
NEWBURY-PORT: PRINTED BY JOHN MYCALL. -- 1777.

SERMON I.
JUDGES, Chap. XX. Ver. 26, 27, 28. Then all the Children of Israel, and all
the People went up, and came unto the House of GOD, and wept, and sat there
before the Lord, and fasted that day until even, and offered burnt-offerings,
and peace offerings before the Lord. And the Children of Israel enquired of the
Lord -- saying, Shall I yet again go out to Battle against the Children of
BENJAMIN my Brother, or shall I cease? And the Lord said, go up, for tomorrow
I will deliver them into thine hand.
IN the Context, we find the men of Israel gathered together, from one end of
the land, even to the other, in a general assembly, to see justice done upon
the perpetrators of an horrid rape, committed upon the Levite's concubine:
Which, also, carried murder with it; for she presently died of the abuse.

AFTER a particular account of this tragical scene, had from the Levite, the
party injured, they send messengers through the tribe of Benjamin, to which the
profligate wretches, who had done this deed, belonged, to make further enquity;
and demand the criminals to be delivered into their hand, to be punished as
their crime deserved, that the guilt thereof might be put away from Israel: But
they refuse to deliver them, and prepare for war. Upon this the men of Israel
consider the guilt of this horrible wickedness, as lying on the whole tribe,
who had undertaken to skreen the criminals from justice; and resolve to avenge
it on them, accordingly, by the sword. But first, they religiously consulted
Heaven upon the solemn affair: Not so much indeed, as to the thing, whether
they should go on with their design; the reason and right of this, being even
self-evident, and apparent at first view; but rather as to the manner, and
circumstantial management of the cause. " The children of Israel arose, and
went up to the house of GOD, and asked counsel of GOD, and said, which of us
shall go up first to the battle against the children of Benjamin? And the Lord
said, Judah shall go up first" They proceed to battle; Benjamin prevails that
day, and kills twenty-two thousand of the men of Israel. This seems to have
made them somewhat suspicious of their cause, whether it was just and right in
the sight of GOD: However, upon the whole, they are so far satisfied it is so,
that they resolve to go on with it, if the Lord does not forbid them; under
whose awful hand, they first humble themselves, and ask further counsel of him:
" The men of Israel encouraged themselves, and set their battle in array; and
went up, and wept before the Lord until even, and asked counsel of the Lord,
saying, shall I go up again to battle against the children of Benjamin, my
brother? And the Lord said, go up against him." They go up, therefore, a second
time; but, still Benjamin prevails, and destroys of them eighteen, thousand
more. Whereupon, not only the men of war, but all the people that were
assembled on this sad occasion, repair again to the house of the Lord, and
spend the remainder of the day in religious mourning, fasting and prayer, and
offering sacrifices of atonement for sin: For they perceive, by this time, that
the Lord is angry with them. Yet they do not desist from their enterprise; but,
in this way of humbling themselves under the awful, and repeated rebukes of
Heaven, and earnest seeking GOD'S reconciled face and favor, they determine
still to prosecute the cause in hand, and if possible, to carry it through, if
the Lord does not forbid them; whose will, they yet further enquire after, on
this occasion: " Then all the children of Israel, and all the people went up,
and came to the House of GOD, and wept, etc." And in their next encounter with
the Benjamites, their arms had full success. It pleased GOD to permit Benjamin
to prevail against them, in a first and second engagement, because there were
with them, even with them, great and grievous sins against the Lord their GOD,
for which he would punish them, in this awful way; and yet, in his own time, he
appeared for the support, and carrying through of the cause in which they were
engaged. An awful scene, truly this was! And yet, on the side of Israel,
undoubtedly just. Not only a part which they might act without sin, but a part
which they were in duty bound to act, and could not neglect, without great sin,
however severely they suffered by it themselves, as a just punishment for their
other sins. Although there is not a universal correspondence of circumstances,
yet in many respects, the hearer will undoubtedly see an evident agreement
between my subject, and the sad occasion of this solemnity -- the awful war in
which we are engaged with Britain, and our duty and interest depending; in
reference whereunto, we are professedly humbling ourselves before the Lord,
this day, and asking counsel of Heaven.

MY subject opens a large field before us; time will be wanting to travel it
fully over: I shall study brevity, and, therefore, omit many points that are
contained in the text: Neither shall I run the length, with those I take under
consideration, which they might naturally lead me. Let me crave your serious
attention to these four things, viz. That in certain circumstances, it is just
and right, and agreeable to the will of GOD, for his own professing, covenant
people, to take the sword and go to war, even against their brethren. -- That,
in first commencing, and after prosecuting a war, especially with brethren,
there should be a fair, impartial, often-repeated enquiry into the right of it,
that we may act with a safe conscience, and be able to justify our proceeding
-- That it is nothing strange and new, if, in prosecuting a just war, for our
sins against heaven, we meet with severe and repeated rebukes. And therefore,
although this calls for mourning, and deep humiliation before the Lord, and a
serious concern to obtain pardon and reconciliation with him; yet it is not
sufficient ground of discouragement from a further prosecution of the cause,
with hope in the mercy of GOD, to support and carry it through, in his own,
wise and holy, time and way.

PROPOSITION I. IN certain circumstances, it is just and right, and agreeable
to the will of GOD, for his own professing covenant people, to take the sword,
and go to war, even against their brethren: Shall I go up to battle (says
Israel) against my brother Benjamin? Yes, says the Lord, go. They repeat the
enquiry again and again, (stumbled, perhaps, at their ill success) and the Lord
as often repeats his affirmative answer, Go, go.

WAR, indeed, is an awful scene; that mankind, all made of one blood, should
kill and devour one another, and by the destroying sword, make even rivers of
human blood to flow -- how horrible the thought!

THE individual that sheds the blood of another, by his own private will
(except in some singular cases of extreme necessity) is guilty of the highest
wrong to his neighbor -- horribly violates the law, the righteous law of GOD
and man -- is a murderer -- near akin to him, who was a murderer from the
beginning, and forfeits his life into the hands of justice: And shedding human
blood in a more public way, by a community warring against another community,
always, I think, must carry a murderous guilt with it, unless the cause be
great and good.

THE sword can never be lawfully used for the support of an unjust cause: Nor
may a people have recourse to arms, to redress every little trifling wrong, and
support a real right and interest, if it be but small; for, if so, the world
would always be full of wars, and constant scenes of blood. Even reason, and
plainly our holy christian institution, not only forbids private revenge, and
requires forbearance of individuals toward their neighbors; but, it also,
forbids communities contending by the sword, with other communities, about
small, and inconsiderable matters; or, indeed, about their highest rights and
interests, 'till other, and milder measures have been tried and pursued, as
long as there was any encouragement to it, or any rational hope and prospect of
success.

IF sin had not depraved the human heart, war had never been practiced among
mankind. Not only private and personal feuds and quarrels, but also public and
national ones, derive their original from the lusts of men. War has always a
sinful root and cause somewhere; I suppose it never can possibly be just on
both sides, in any circumstances whatsoever; yet, on one side, it certainly may
be.

THE great Sovereign, the righteous Governor of the world has committed his
sword into the magistrates hand, to restrain therewith, or if necessary, to
destroy the wicked; that so his people may be in a capacity to " lead quiet and
peaceable lives in godliness and honesty." (For you are to know that the end
and aim of every just and lawful war is peace, safety and happiness, in the way
of duty and obedience to the great Sovereign, our common Lord.)

THE Magistrate is not only to defend his subjects from private violence, but
also from public and national injury and abuse: And where there is no settled
form of government -- no supreme standing magistrate, to whom this trust has
been properly delegated, there the right and authority to defend themselves
from extreme danger and abuse -- to restrain, and if it cannot otherwise be
done, even to destroy the notoriously wicked and injurious, is in the hands of
the people.

ACCORDINGLY we find the commonwealth of Israel, when they had no supreme
Magistrate, to whom they had committed this trust to manage it for them, once
and again acting in virtue of this right themselves, on necessary occasions.
Thus the ten tribes intended to make war upon their brethren, on the other side
of Jordan, because, as they supposed, they had fallen off from the true worship
of the GOD of Israel, into idolatry -- and actually did so, against their
brethren of Benjamin, for protecting the perpetrators of an horrid crime, from
deserved punishment.

IF the supreme magistrate, in a community, violates the sacred trust reposed
in him by the people, if " instead of being a minister of God for good" unto
them, he becomes an oppressor, disregards the constitution, by which he was as
much bound as the people, and which gave him all the authority, which he has
over them -- if he wantonly tramples on their most important and sacred rights,
and is deaf to their multiplied, dutiful and loyal complaints and prayers, for
redress of their grievances and wrongs, 'till there remains no hope in this
way, but their oppressions, are continued, increased, and multiplied upon them
more and more; they have a plain right in the sight of Heaven and earth, to
recall the delegated power, that is thus abused; otherwise, the case of the
people would be wretched indeed; inasmuch as those that are exalted, in power,
above others, are so apt to abuse it, and turn oppressors, and to persist
irreclaimably in it when they have so done. If the people have not a right to
recall this delegated power, when, thus grossly abused; they had better (I think)
never entrust it in the hands of any man, but keep it in their own.

As to the doctrine of passive obedience, and non-resistance, it is so contrary
to religion, and even to common sense, that it is high time it were banished
out of the world. It flatters and supports Tyrants in their pride and
wickedness, and is highly injurious to the rights of human nature: It has been
so often, so solidly and clearly confuted, by many worthy treatises, wrote,
some in these times, and some in former unhappy times, similar to these; some
or other of which must be supposed to have fallen into the hands of almost
every one, unless any have been strangely and criminally inattentive to the
very important and interesting scenes that have been acting of late, between
Britain and America, that it is needless, as it would probably be fruitless, to
add many words upon it.

AWAY with that unreasonable doctrine of the divine right of Kings, or any
other magistrates, in that absolute sense in which some plead for it. In a
sober, qualified sense, I believe this doctrine: I believe that magistracy is
of divine right; but I believe withal, that GOD has left it with the people, to
choose their form of Government, and appoint and constitute the magistrate;
although he expects them to act the rational part herein, and commit this great
trust, only into suitable and proper hands. " The powers that be, are ordained
of God;" but, if I mistake not, this rather refers to Government in its various
forms, than to Governors -- to the office, rather than the person who shall
fill it. Even in this, the providence of GOD is not to be denied, for it
extends itself to all events; but none, I believe, can show an ordinance of
God, that this or that individual or family in succession, shall fill the
supreme office of magistracy, in this or the other community.

THE great Governor of the world, from a kind regard to the welfare of mankind,
has ordained that there shall be magistracy among them; and when a community
have, regularly and orderly settled this authority upon particular men, they
have a divine right to execute just that authority over the people, that is
thus committed into their hands, but no more. I believe they have now, a divine
right to rule well; but not to oppress the people, and infringe and trample on
their highest rights; which, if they do, and persist in it, against the
repeated complaints and prayers of the people, for redress of wrongs,
protracted even to long suffering; I believe that as it was by covenant
pointing out the duty of each party, and carrying in it the solemn engagement
of each to conduct accordingly, that they came into the relation of King
(suppose) and subjects; this resolved unrelenting violation on the one part*
dissolves the obligation of it on the other; so that the people have a divine
right to take the forfeiture, renounce their allegiance, and take the best care
of themselves they can.

AND, if such an oppressor pursues them with the sword for so doing, I believe
he greatly adds to his sin hereby, and incurs the awful displeasure of the
great sovereign, his master, as well as theirs. And that the people have a
divine right, in case of such manifest, extreme wrong -- such wanton abuse of
power to enslave or destroy them, to take the sword too, for their own defense.

NOT only may one State use the Sword against another, in cases of weighty and
urgent necessity, but so likewise may a part of the State, against the other
part of the same, in like cases. Not only may a people, driven to it by
unavoidable necessity, draw the sword against a foreign nation, but so may they
likewise, against their own brethren, though it is an awful thing indeed, and
should be considered as a sore frown of Heaven on the whole community, that
ever there should be occasion for it. Such, evidently was the case with Israel,
in the awful scene, my text refers to; the children of Benjamin were their
brethren -- a part of the same Commonwealth with themselves; and yet their
design of making war upon them, for a gross and obstinate violation of equity
and right, the righteous Sovereign of the world expressly approves, and
repeatedly bids them go on with it: And this, by the way, was an offensive war;
and if that was lawful and right, how much more evidently and apparently, a
defensive one, to ward off the assaults of violence and oppression?

AGAINST what has been offered, perhaps it may be said, by way of objection,

IT is enough for the Heathen, who know not God, to fight and devour one
another; Christians surely should not fight.

I answer, Christians should never give occasion for the use of the sword; nor
should they, lightly and hastily take occasion to use it: But let them show
that can, where christians are required to give up their liberty, and submit to
slavery -- to give up their property and the great rights which indulgent
Heaven has invested them withal, in common with the rest of mankind, at the
demand of an assuming community, with a Tyrant at the head of it, rather than
defend themselves by the sword if it be in their power to do it, against such
great and manifest injury and wrong.

Obj. 2. THE gospel every where requires forbearance, and forbids revenge.

Ans. WHEN there is the greatest necessity for using the sword, it must not be
from malice, and a desire of revenge: Woe to them that use it thus, be it in
ever so just a cause: Its just and lawful use, even on the weightiest
occasions, is to obtain peace and quietness on terms of reason and right, which
cannot otherwise be had: And further, if the objectors will impartially consult
their Bibles again, I am persuaded they will find, that the most, if not all
those passages, on which this objection is grounded, refer to private revenge
of private and personal injuries, and do not forbid a community to defend
themselves from violence, and right themselves from extreme wrong, not
otherwise to be righted, even by the sword. If this be duly attended to, I
think it will certainly dispel a cloud of objections against the point in hand,
raised from these and such like scriptures, Render to no man evil for evil. Do
violence to no man. If any man will take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak
also. If any smite thee on the one cheek, turn to him the other also. Put up
thy sword into the sheath, for all they that take the sword, shall perish by
the sword, etc."

Obj. 3. WHATEVER was allowed and practiced in this respect, under the law, yet
there is no allowance for it now under the gospel,

Ans. THIS point -- the lawfulness or unlawfulness of using the sword, on
urgent occasions, does not belong to the ceremonial law, but to the moral law,
or law of nature, which is fixed and invariable, from the beginning to the end
of time; and abides just the same, through all the various dispensations of GOD
to his Church, in way of ceremonial, or possitive law. Therefore, the use of
the sword having been lawful heretofore, is plainly so now, and always will be,
in similar circumstances. Self-preservation, self-defence from extreme violence
and wrong, is the great and universal law of nature, which I dare say the
gospel does not disannul; for I have the Apostle's affidavit, viz. St, Paul's,
to support me in it: " Do we make void the law, through faith? God forbid: Yea
we establish the law." And if I do not mistake, the gospel does plainly
countenance the soldiers calling (and you know, the sword, and the use of it
too, on necessary occasions, is closely connected with it) for, not to insist
on those words of our Savior, which are sometimes applied as a proof of the
point in hand (though perhaps not much to the purpose) " He that has no sword,
let him sell his garment and buy one," we find soldiers, among others,
enquiring their duty of John, a famous preacher of righteousness; upon which
fair occasion, he does not condemn the calling, and bid them relinquish it; but
gives them direction how to behave in it; which I think must have been absurd,
if the calling was unlawful; for I cannot conceive it possible, to conduct and
manage a calling lawfully and well, which is itself wrong; and if so, then
every kind and manner of conducting it, must be wrong too.

So among others, we find upon a certain time, a centurion, a captain over an
hundred soldiers, coming to Christ, with a request that he would heal his
servant that was sick; upon which, that great Teacher sent from GOD, who was
constantly careful, on all occasions, to reprove the faults, and rectify the
mistakes of the people, don't condemn his calling, and bid him relinquish it,
burn his commission -- throw away his sword, and betake himself to an honester
occupation; but rather, he bestows a high encomium upon him; " I have not found
so great faith, no not in Israel." And here, by the way, we plainly see one
very good man of the military profession, under the gospel. Oh! would to God,
our centurions, our officers of every rank, and soldiers; yea, and we too, who
stay by the stuff, were of a like character, with him.

BUT, perhaps it may be thought to be needless, to insist so long on a point so
plain and clear: Well, my friend, suppose it is sufficiently plain to me and
thee; yet, some of our brethren profess (and peradventure, this may be just the
case with a number more, who do not openly profess it) that it is not so plain
to them: Some profess to believe the cause, in which we are engaged, is not
just; others are wavering and not established as to the right and justice of
it, and are easily staggered by stumbling blocks thrown in their way, and
carried away by a plausibility of argument: Now, if the cause depending be, in
thy mind and mine, not only just and good, but also, exceeding great and
important, is it not worth while to take some pains, clearly to prove it out,
and confirm it, in order to settle and establish the doubting, and wavering;
and if it may be, to convince the mistaken; or else if that cannot be, to leave
them the more without excuse?

And now, my brethren, who are not satisfied of the justice of the cause in
which we are engaged, for our defense, against the hostile invasions of
Britain; if any such hear me (and be that as it may, yet very probably
curiosity will lead some such to read these lines, now they are offered to a
more public view) upon what ground can you raise an objection, which, my
subject fairly considered and regarded, will not effectually remove? That
Israel's taking the sword, and going to war against Benjamin, was just and
right, I think you will not deny; for when they consulted Heaven upon it, once
and again, by solemn fasting and prayer, the Lord expressly said, go. Was it
for skreening notorious offenders from public justice, that Israel made war
upon Benjamin? Yes. Well, and has not Great Britain, among many other unjust
and unreasonable proceedings, done nearly the same thing? I allude to an act of
the British Parliament, for exempting their soldiers that should be impeached
for murders, committed in America, from being tried, in order to their being
punished if found guilty, by the law of the land. Are the Britons our brethren?
So were the Benjamites theirs -- Are we the professing people of GOD? So were
they -- Or if it be said, that scene was acted under the law, when many things
were permitted, that are unlawful now, under the gospel; I reply, it was not a
bare permission, that Israel had to wage war against Benjamin, but an express
command, and repeated too, go, go: And though it was indeed, under the law
(ceremonial) yet it was a point that did not belong to that law: and therefore,
it makes no odds at all, whether it were under, or during the authority of that
law, or not; but it belongs to the law natural and moral, which forbad Israel
every thing that it fordids us; and indulges Christians in every thing that it
did the Jews: It allowed them undeniably, in an offensive war against their
brethren of Benjamin, because they undertook to skreen notorious criminals from
public justice; and with what face then, or appearance of truth and reason, can
it be pretended, that it does not allow us in a defensive war with our brethren
of Britain, who, after they have done the same, and a great many other
high-handed acts of cruelty and oppression against us, have sent their Fleets
and Armies -- an huge host, sword in hand, to rivet on our chains of slavery,
or else destroy us.

UPON the whole, it seems impossible for a person, who has his mind free from
prejudice, and undue influence from every quarter; and has but a tolerable
acquaintance with the state and grounds of our controversy with Great Britain;
and fairly compares it with the awful scene in the commonwealth of Israel, now
under consideration, any longer to doubt or hesitate about the lawfulness of
the present war, on the part of America.

THE END OF THE FIRST SERMON.
SERMON II.
JUDGES, Chap. XX. Ver. 26, 27, 28. Then all the Children of Israel, and all
the people went up, and came unto the House of GOD, and wept, and sat there
before the Lord, and fasted that day, until even, and offered burnt-offerings,
and peace offerings before the Lord. And the Children of Israel enquired of the
Lord -- saying, shall I yet again go out to Battle against the Children of
BENJAMIN my Brother, or shall I cease? And the Lord said, go up, for tomorrow
I will deliver them into thine hand.
WE have considered, that in certain circumstances, of urgent necessity, it is
just and right, and agreeable to the will of GOD, for his own professing people
to take the sword, and go to war, even against their brethren.

LET us proceed, and consider, according to Prop. 2. That in first commencing,
and after prosecuting a war, especially with brethren, there should be a fair,
impartial, often-repeated enquiry into the right of it; that we may act with a
safe conscience, and be able to justify our proceeding.

So did the children of Israel, with respect to the war with their Brethren of
Benjamin; they do not rush precipitately upon it, but first they seriously
deliberate the matter with themselves, and weigh the merits of the cause;
whether it requires, and will justify such a procedure: Thus they call upon one
another, as the first step to be taken, " Consider of it, take advice and speak
your minds" And not only did they seriously weigh and deliberate the matter,
with themselves, but they ask counsel of the Lord about it too, previous to the
first beginning of the war, and repeatedly afterward, during the continuance
of it. No important enterprise should ever be engaged in, without serious
forethought, and enquiry after the path of duty, " Remember and show
yourselves men" let reason search out the path of duty, and then let action
follow, and exertion in proportion to the greater or less importance of the
cause; Yea and why, even of yourselves, judge ye not what is right."

REASON is to be consulted, but Heaven must be consulted too: " He that trusts
in his own Heart, is a fool. The way of man is not in himself; it is not in man
that walks to direct his steps:" Therefore, " trust in the Lord with all thy
heart, and lean not to thine own understanding." It is true, " the spirit of a
man is the candle of the Lord," set up within him, to direct his goings; and
the voice of reason, is always the voice of GOD; but our manifold corruptions
and prejudices, are in the greatest danger, so to blind and deceive us, as to
make us think that to be the voice of reason which is not; therefore, in
searching out the dictates of reason, we must make diligent and honest enquiry
at the oracles of GOD, and prayerfully consult the sacred pages of revelation,
where things are stripped of their false guises and deceitful shows; and set to
view in their simple truth: Withal, applying ourselves to the Father of Lights
-- the fountain of Truth, " who gives wisdom liberally, to them that
(honestly) ask it of him, without upbraiding," to keep us from a false
judgment, and mistaken apprehension of things, which would embolden us to
engage in rash and unjustifiable enterprises. " In all thy ways acknowledge
him, and he shall direct thy paths;" and especially, " with good advice make
war." Be it with strangers and heathen, it is a matter of too solemn, and
weighty importance, to be lightly and hastily engaged in; especially, when it
is with Brethren, by blood, by profession, or both.

SUCH an awful scene should never be entered upon, without the greatest
reluctance; consequently never, without the most serious enquiry into the
lawfulness, the duty, the necessity of it; and all other rational methods first
tried, that could be thought likely to bring matters of controversy to an
amicable settlement, on terms of reason and right.

ALTHOUGH, in respect to the controversy, between Britain and America, which
has been some time ripened into the present awful scene of war, there is no
doubt but that America has been faulty in many things; it is scarce ever
otherwise, in public or private feuds and quarrels, that are carried to any
considerable length, but that there is blame, more or less, on both sides: It
is hard, for such depraved creatures to bear grievous injuries and wrongs,
without being thrown out of proper temper by it, and getting quite beside the
path of duty: yet, I think, as it is plain that Britain was the aggressor, by
whom the offense came; who first took the sword, and began the quarrel; so it
is pretty evident to a fair, and impartial mind, that America (I speak not of
individuals; the speeches and conduct of some of these have been utterly too
rash and unjustifiable; but of our public councils; the representative bodies
of America) have proceeded with very considerable deliberation, moderation and
caution, while matters were coming on to this sad pass, as much as could be
rationally expected, under such sore "oppression as makes even the wise man
mad," and bare and forbear, until violence had risen to such an height, as to
make it a matter of plain duty, and indispensable necessity, to take the sword
for self defense: And, before and since the commencement of the war, we have
been frequently setting apart days of fasting and prayer, professedly on the
design of asking counsel and direction of Heaven, how we should proceed and
conduct, in the embarrassed, and very distressing state of our affairs; which,
were they attended only with a moral sincerity, I doubt not but they would be
followed with some happy consequences: But I fear the most of us do not observe
them so well as that -- do not attend them with that concern, and
thoughtfulness, that even natural conscience, and the common law of
self-preservation, might well be expected to engage us to, at such an awful day
as the present is, when a cause of such high importance hangs, wavering, in
doubtful expectation. Do not many of us regard these solemn days, only as mere
matters of form, without heart, without the thoughtfulness, and proper temper
and exercises of men, as well as without the piety and sincerity of christians?
and so, only mock, and insult Heaven, while we profess to humble ourselves
before the Lord, and ask counsel of him. But, oh! beware my friends, what you
do. This is exceedingly provoking to GOD, and dangerous to yourselves. However,
I trust there is a goodly number, scattered here and there, who truly fear the
Lord, and tremble under his up-lifted hand; who, on these occasions especially,
and indeed from day to day, are mourning before the Lord, for the sins of the
Land, particularly their own, which have provoked him to suffer matters to come
to this sad pass with us; and sensible of the great need of divine guidance and
conduct in such an awful embarrassed, and threatening state of things as we are
in, are earnestly asking counsel and direction of Heaven; But as to a great
many, I fear they are exceeding faulty, in not taking proper care and pains, by
serious, prayerful enquiry, to inform themselves into the state of the
controversy in hand, and about the reason and right of our cause: And yet,
perhaps they are zealously engaged, some on one side, and some on the other,
while they neither know, nor seriously concern themselves to know with any
clear, distinct knowledge, what the cause is. How can you be sure to walk safe,
when you do not know what ground you go upon? If the cause is good and just,
what is that to you that neglect to search it out as far as in you lies, and be
at reasonable and proper pains to see it to be so? Will you act in matters of
weightiest importance, upon a mere presumption of right, without a rational
sight, and conscientious satisfaction thereof? It will never do to see merely
with others eyes, and take things of weighty importance upon trust, where the
way is open and fair, by proper enquiry to see for ourselves. The awful scene
now acting, must certainly have a further hearing: And how without a serious
enquiry into the right of it, shall they that act for the cause, be able to
justify their conduct at the great day? How shall they know but they are
bringing blood guiltiness upon themselves? And how, without a fair enquiry,
shall they that oppose the public measures of the day, or only stand neuters,
know but they are bringing the curse of Heaven (as well as Earth) upon
themselves? As it is written, "curse ye Meroz, curse ye bitterly, the
inhabitants thereof; because they came not to the help of the LORD, to the help
of the Lord, against the mighty." Verily, the cause depending, is too great and
solemn, to be treated with a careless indifferency: if it be an unjust cause,
woe be to them that put an hand to it, to shed blood unjustly; and that the
blood of brethren: If it is just, I am sure it is great, and calls upon all to
join heart and hand for its support; left even by a neutrality in so important
a cause, they greatly sin against themselves, against the public, against
posterity and against Heaven too. Therefore, what I urge here is, that every
one that is capable of it, will seriously and prayerfully, without prejudice or
undue influence from any quarter whatever; and with the best helps he can get
to assist him, examine and search out the cause for himself; honestly
endeavoring to see it in its simple, undisguised truth; that he may know how to
act with a safe conscience, and so as to be able to answer it, another day. Say
not, it is too late now, to make enquiry into the merits of the cause: It is
true, it should have been done by every one capable of it, long ago; but if it
has not been seriously attended to, thoroughly deliberated, and brought to a
rational issue in any of your minds, it is high time to do it now, and better
late than never -- if it has, yet, in so weighty and solemn a matter, there is
the greatest propriety in a further, and often-repeated enquiry; after the
example of Israel, in my text and context.

THE cause depending is plainly, one that nearly concerns the honor of GOD, and
our Ecclesiastical, religious interest, as well as civil and secular welfare:
And therefore, if we have gone in a wrong path, it is time to see it, and stop,
be the consequence as it may: But if in a right one -- if our cause is just, it
is high time we were all rationally satisfied of it; and, with a cordial union,
and spirited resolution, engaged for the support of it.

Prop 3. IT is nothing strange, or new, if in prosecuting a just war, we meet
with severe and repeated rebukes of Heaven, for our sins.

MANKIND are apt to judge of a cause by its good or bad success, and that from
some of the first and earliest events that turn up; and before it comes any
thing near the turning point, and final issue. This has been the case with
some, in respect to the controversy subsisting between us and Britain.

BUT where did we learn that a good cause shall certainly have a constant,
uninterrupted series of successes, from beginning to end; or that a bad cause
is never attended with any fortunate events, that for the present, seem to
favor and support it? -- Not from a just observation of the course of things in
our world, under the administration of the great Sovereign -- Not from the
sacred scriptures, certainly: When Israel was come over Jordan, to root out the
inhabitants of Canaan, and take possession of their land, certainly their cause
was just, for they were acting by express orders from Heaven; yet they had not
an uninterrupted course of successes. When they went up against Ai, they were
repulsed with loss. There may be other Achans, besides a bad cause, which may
occasion bad success. So when Israel went to war against their brother
Benjamin, they were right in this, their cause was just, GOD repeatedly
approves of it, and bids them go on with it: And yet they met with very awful
scenes of divine rebuke, and ill success, in the prosecution of it: Their two
first encounters with Benjamin, cost them no less than forty thousand lives,
with the loss of the battle, each time; so that it is no new thing, for a
people, prosecuting a just cause, to meet with sore frowns and rebukes of
Heaven, by the way:

AND therefore, according to Prop. 4. Although this calls for mourning and deep
humiliation before GOD, and a serious concern to obtain pardon and
reconciliation with him, yet it is no sufficient ground of discouragement, from
a further prosecution of the cause, with hope in the mercy of GOD, to support
and carry it through, in his own wise and holy, time and way.

THIS head, I consider as the improvement of my subject, and accordingly, shall
handle it with a more express and particular application to our own case. We
see the conduct of Israel in my text, it is a worthy example; I pray come, let
us set upon the imitation of it. Not only do they enquire and search further
into the cause, upon repeated ill success, to see if it be agreeable to the
divine will, that they prosecute it still (which I have already spoken to) but
also, with great and serious concern, they set themselves to enquire out the
cause of these sore misfortunes, which had befallen them, and to put it away: "
They went up to the House of God, and wept, and sat there before the Lord, and
fasted until even; and offered burnt-offerings, and peace offerings before the
Lord."

WE are following their example this day, in externals: O that we might also,
in the spirit and truth of these great duties, which we find them here engaged
in. Many awful scenes have turned up, since the commencement of this unhappy
war, with our brethren of Britain; much American, as well as British blood has
been shed: The enemy has at one time and another, gotten considerable advantage
against us: And could we reasonably expect any other, even in the natural
course of things? Could a cause, so circumstanced as ours, be carried on
without such scenes of calamity and distress attending it, unless the Lord
would work very miracles for us, to prevent it? (which we have no reason to
expect.) But as all events are in the hand of GOD, so the most natural
occurrences are capable of a moral view, and should be ever considered by us in
that light: And in a moral view, that is to say, in a view of the character of
the great Governor of the world, and our own character as a people, had we not
reason to expect all this that has already befallen us? Yea, and a great deal
more scourging and correction from the Lord's righteous hand. Even though our
cause was good, and he was determined to support it, and give us the desired
success, in the end. The serious, sensible and thinking part of America were,
even ready to tremble with awful concern, at our plunging into this unnatural
war with Britain, to think what a sore scourge the righteous Governor of the
world, would probably make it to us, according to his wonted way with his
people, under great degeneracy; even while they were fully persuaded of the
justice of the cause, and duty of prosecuting it; and entertained withal, a
comfortable hope that it would please him to crown our efforts with final
success. When Israel met with repeated and heavy frowns and losses in the war
with their brother Benjamin, "they wept before the Lord," not only, nor
chiefly, for their ill success, but also and especially, for their sins,
whereby they had procured these awful rebukes of Heaven -- to be so severely
punished, though on the right side of the question, by the hand of Benjamin,
who were altogether in the wrong: Hereby they were convinced of sin, and
brought to a concerned sense of their guilt, not in respect to the cause in
hand, but in other things; in respect to their general character, as being now,
a very degenerate, backslidden people, and of the divine anger against them
herefor: Therefore they fall to offering sacrifices of atonement to the
offended Deity; which, if done in faith, looking forward, to the great
Propitiation to be offered in due time, to put away sin, with broken, penitent
hearts, and a fixed resolution (Divine Grace helping) to put away their sins,
and reform their lives, was just the thing that Providence was so loudly
calling them to; the likeliest, yea, a sure way to better success: And it is
with manifold wisdom, that the Lord takes this method with his people, even
when justly called to arms, to chasten and correct them by the hand of the
enemy, especially when they are grown very corrupt, before he smiles upon their
enterprise, and works the desired salvation for them: Thus, he uses to humble
their pride, beat them off from self-dependance, and bring them to trust in
him, seeing all their hope and help to lie on him: Thus he prepares the way,
for the glory of their deliverance and salvation to be given to him, to whom it
of right belongs; which, otherwise, they would ascribe to themselves. This
method is necessary to be taken with them, to bring them to a sense of their
sins, of GOD'S righteous anger thereat; and so, of their awful danger, and put
them upon a concerned seeking his reconciled face and favor; and thus prepare
them for mercy, that it may be conferred upon them, in a way, honorary to GOD,
and his government.

Oh! that the sore correction, we have already had from the hand of GOD, by our
unnatural, opppressive and bloody brethren of Britain, as his instruments,
might effectually answer these wise and holy ends of Providence with us. GOD'S
suffering this distressing war to arise, between our brethren and us, is an
awful token of his anger; and many things that have occurred, since the
commencement of it, must in all reason be ranked under the same head; And will
not all this alarm and rouse us? -- make us sensible of our sin and danger, and
fill us with a deep concern to obtain pardon and reconciliation with angry
Heaven. It is surprising to think how stupid, careless and secure, we, in
general are, under the very awful hand of GOD upon us: But truly, sirs, this
will never do, to sleep on thus; if we do, I am afraid that GOD will presently
rouse us with a dreadful vengeance; for it is an awful thing -- a matter of
highest insult, and provocation to Heaven, for a people, thus to trifle and
play with the dreadful shaking of the rod of GOD over them, and brandishing his
glittering spear about them: By and by, if thus we go on (and perhaps sooner
than we are aware) GOD will make us know it to our cost. We cannot harden
ourselves against him, and prosper: But when he judges, he will overcome.

IF peradventure for his own honor's sake, as moral Governor of the world, and
for the greatness and goodness of the cause, which we are engaged in against
our oppressive brethren of Britain, it should please GOD to support it, and
carry it through; yet we should have nothing, in reason, to expect at his hand,
if we are not humbled and reformed by all this, but some more dreadful and
destroying judgments, presently to overtake us.

COME then, I pray let us awake out of sleep -- let us " show ourselves men,"
at least, and, I trust there is a goodly number yet left, scattered here and
there, who are in a capacity, by virtue of new and divine principles implanted
in them, to show themselves christians: Let us set ourselves, with a prayerful
seriousness, to that great, and all-concerning duty of consideration, the
neglect, or too slight performance of which, undoes the world; let us seriously
consider the great and manifold mercies of GOD to us -- our precious and
distinguishing privileges, and ungrateful abuse of them -- the awful alarms of
Providence, and our careless and impious contempt of them, and the like; and
peradventure, while we are musing, the fire may burn, and a divine influence
concurring, our hearts be wrought by this means, to a broken, penitent,
concerned frame and temper; such as GOD has promised to have respect unto. Let
us set ourselves to an immediate reforming of the outward, gross, abominable
sins, that are so rise among us; extravagance, oppression, extortion,
profaneness, intemperance, uncleanness, and the like; for which nothing is
wanting, but a willing mind, and determined resolution; withal, uniting our
earnest, importunate and unwearied cries to Heaven, that GOD will please, by a
plentiful out-pouring of his spirit, to set on foot, and carry on the great and
blessed work, of real, internal, heart-reformation and vital piety among us.

Very evidently, the Lord is angry with us; but oh! surely that is a matter of
awful consideration. Dare we (...) in such a case? It exposes to all calamity,
misery and woe, temporal, spiritual and eternal: and will you not, in such a
surprising situation, immediately join with Israel in my text, and fall to
offering your burnt offerings and peace offerings, to appease the offended
Deity; You will say, but what may these be; I reply, not your prayers, tears,
or duties of reformation and better obedience; these indeed, fall in very
fitly, in their proper place (as observed before) and certainly, your hearts
are in no measure right; nor have the divine corrections, even begun to work
their proper effect upon you, until you are brought to consider, mourn and
pray, and reform the evils of your lives: But all this is of no virtue or
value, as an attoning sacrifice, to appease the angry Deity, and procure you
his pardon and mercy: If you do it with this view, it is all nothing, in
respect to yourselves, or worse than nothing, however it may be, in respect to
the community; for GOD will view it in this very different and awful light,
viz. " He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a man; he that sacrifices a lamb,
as if he cut off a dog's neck; he that offers an oblation, as if he offered
swine's blood, and he that burns incense, as if he blessed an Idol." He that
endeavors to appease and please the injured, offended Jehovah, with his own
poor, sorry sacrifices (no respect had to the great Gospel-Sacrifice) can be no
more accepted of him, than a murderer, an idolater, or he that should offer the
most unclean and abominable things on GOD'S Altar: The sacrificer of old
conforming ever so exactly to the divine right of the law, could not be
accepted without an eye to the great Antitype: By faith in the seed of the
woman, as who, with his bruised heel, should bruise the Serpent's head, Abel
offered a more excellent sacrifice than Cain. There is one only sacrifice of
atonement for sin -- a crucified Christ: " By one offering, HE has perfected
forever, them that are sanctified." Only " the blood of Jesus Christ, the son
of God, cleanses us from sin, all sin." O come let us then, a polluted, guilty
generation, awfully exposed to the revenges of justice, immediately " lay hold
on the hope set before us," embracing this great Propitiation, let us offer it
to an angry GOD, and it will surely appease his wrath, and procure us his
favor: " The Lord is well-pleased for his righteousness sake," and is ever
ready to " make us accepted in the beloved." This is the very method that Moses
took for himself and his dear people of Israel, in Egypt, in a time of
impending danger; and it proved effectual for their defense and security. " By
faith he kept the Passover, and sprinkling of blood, lest he that destroyed the
first born should touch them." Thus doing, we should be happily safe, amidst
all the dangers of this evil time; and might with courage, and confidence of
success, through the mercy and help of GOD, notwithstanding the frowns and the
rebukes of Providence upon us, in time past, go up yet again to battle, against
our invading, oppressing brethren of Britain, and their mercenary Assistants.

WHEN Israel was brought to this, in a brokenhearted sense of their sins, " to
weep before the Lord, and offer to him their burnt-offerings, and
peace offerings," why now, says he, " go up again, and tomorrow I will deliver
them into your hands:" This tomorrow (blessed be GOD) seems to be already
dawned upon us, in the late repeated, and very considerable successes of the
American Arms. If his judgments have not yet, oh! may the goodness of GOD to so
undeserving, and ill-deserving a people, lead us to repentance: And while we
evidently see that he is yet waiting to be gracious, let us immediately fall at
his feet, on the knee of submission, and implore his further mercy and aid; and
let us bear it in mind, that we have reason to expect GOD'S protection and
help, only in the use of proper means, or by his blessing on our exertions.

IT was an ancient maxim, " Woe! to the conquered." This woe, my brethren, will
be like to fall on us, with many a horrible circumstance of aggravation; and so
abide on our posterity; if we are conquered by our assuming, imperious brethren
of Britain.

THEY told us long ago, before they were half so angry with us as now, that
they had a right to make laws to bind us in ALL cases whatsoever: Horrid power!
And (if, to be literally understood) sacrilegious invasion of the sole
prerogative of the great Sovereign! Or, if it be attempted to be, ever so
softened down from the alarming sound of the latter, I see not how it will mend
the matter much; for, if it means any thing, I think it must mean so much as
this, viz. that we lie, merely at their will (suppose in temporals only) and
they are the sole judges, how we are to be governed and disposed of. Horrid
power still! Unrighteous claim! Where is our liberty then? What but despotism
in its altitude, is here? What but slavery in the abstract? What assurance can
we have, that they will, deliberately make, and hang up to public view, this
surprising claim, will not carry matters, in the exercise of this supposed
right, to the most distressing and unsufferable length? Is not such a claim to
be denied by freemen, and its correspondent measures to be rectified, with a
spirited, firm and persevering resolution? Surely, our cause is such as calls
for exertion, for its support -- an exertion not to be discouraged, not to be
hindered, by a thousand dangers and difficulties in the way, so long as there
is any hope of success left.

NEVER let it be said, that men are slow to run, when necessity calls; nor let
a worthy reward (besides the generous satisfaction of assisting to rescue
invaded liberty, out of the hands of assuming tyranny) be grudged to them, who
willingly offer themselves to the difficulties, and dangers of the camp and
field, in defense of a cause so just, so great, and of such interesting
importance to the common rights of mankind, and the Liberty and welfare of our
dear country, not only in the present, but also, in succeeding times and
generations.

FINALLY; would we, unfeignedly return to GOD, from whom we have greatly
backslidden; and in the faithful discharge of our duty, as to a spirited and
persevering use of the proper and necessary means, for our defense, reposing
the confidence of our hearts on the GOD of armies, for success, I am persuaded,
we might justly adopt the language of the Prophet, Micah 7. 8, 9: Rejoice not
against me, O mine enemy; when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness,
the Lord will be a light unto me; I will bear the indignation of the Lord,
because I have sinned against him; until he plead my cause, and execute
judgment for me; he will bring me forth to the light, and I shall see his
righteousness."

AMEN.

