The AMERICAN STATES acting over the Part of the Children of Israel in the
Wilderness, and thereby impeding their Entrance into Canaan's Rest: OR, The
human Heart discovering itself under trials. A SERMON, Preached at East-Haven,
April, 1777. And occasionally at Branford.

By the Rev. NICHOLAS STREET, A. M. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in
East-Haven.

And now made public at the Request of the Hearers.

NEW HAVEN: Printed by THOMAS and SAMUEL GREEN.

DEUTERONOMY viii. 2. And thou shall remember all the way which the Lord thy
GOD led thee these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove
thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether thou would keep his
commandments or no.


THE history of the children of Israel in Egypt, their sufferings and
oppression under the tyrant Pharaoh, their remarkable deliverance by the hand
of Moses out of that state of bondage and oppression, and their trials and
murmurings in the wilderness, is well known by those who have been conversant
with their bibles, and have attended to those important lessons contained in
the five books of Moses. But why God thus dealt with that people, perhaps has
not been duly attended to by those that have made conscience of reading the
sacred story. But the text tells us, that it was to humble them, and to prove
them, that they might know what was in their hearts, and whether they would
keep his commandments, or no. All the events which befell them in the way; the
miraculous protections, deliverances, provisions and instructions which God
gave them, and withal, the frequent and severe punishments which were inflicted
for their disobedience, was to discover to themselves and others, all that
infidelity, inconstancy, hypocrisy, apostasy, rebellion and perverseness which
lay hid in their hearts; the discovery of which was of singular use both to
them, and to the church of God in all succeeding ages. For as Watts has it,
There, as in a glass our hearts may see,
How fickle and how false they be.


God, by them, designed to let after generations know what was in their hearts;
but it is not generally known and believed till it comes to the trial; and then
it is found that we are prone to act over the same stupid vile part that the
children of Israel did in the wilderness, under the most instructive and
speaking providence that ever obtained in the world, -- So that the notes from
the words may be these following, namely,

I. That the hearts of the children of men are naturally the same from one
generation to another.

II. That God frequently brings his own people into a state of peculiar trials
to discover to them and others what there is in their hearts.

III. That people when they are proved and tried, generally show what they are.

IV. The discovering to a people their errors and wickedness, is designed to
humble and reform them.

And then conclude with some improvement.

I. I am to show that the hearts of the children of men are naturally the same
from generation to generation. -- This is so plain a point that I need not
stand long for the proof of it, though it may be profitable to illustrate it by
some examples; for of one blood God made all nations of men that dwell upon the
face of the earth, Acts 17, ^^ And this blood is under one common (...) by
guilt; for by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, says the apostle,
Romans 5, 19. (...) apostle speaking of the natural state of the heart says, that
it is enmity against God, not subject to his law, neither indeed can be, Romans
8.7. And our Savior testifies, That out of the heart of man proceed evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornication, thefts, covetousness, wickedness,
deceit, laciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness, all these
things come from within and defile the man. Mark 7 21, 22, 23. And we find this
radical evil of the heart early breaking forth and exemplifying itself in the
lives of all the generations of men that have been upon the earth, from Adam
our primogenitor to the present race of men that inhabit the earth. Adam was
ready to excuse his sin by laying it upon Eve, and Eve upon the serpent. Genesis
3.12. And we find sin so deeply rooted in the nature of man by the apostasy,
that those horrid sins of envy and murder early broke out in the family of
Adam; for Cain perceiving that God had not respect to his offering as he had to
his brother Abel's, was wroth, and his countenance fell, and so rose up against
his brother and slew him. Genesis 4.5. And we don't read far before we find this
sad account, that all flesh had corrupted their way upon the earth, and that
the earth was filled with violence. Genesis 6.11. And we find the most sordid
lusts and wickedness breaking forth in the people of Sodom. Genesis 19. And the
sins of bribery and oppression early taking place between Jacob and Esau, the
latter being induced by the former to sell his birthright for a mess of
pottage. Genesis 25.32. And the sins of envy and hatred prevailing in the hearts
of the brethren of Joseph, so that they could not speak peaceably to him, but
conspired against him to slay him. Genesis 27.24. And we find the sins of pride,
tyranny and oppression, together with the spirit of self-sufficiency and
contempt of God and his authority in the haughty tyrant Pharaoh. Exodus 5.2. Who
is the Lord, says he, that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not
the Lord, neither will I let Israel go. And after all the wonders Moses
wrought, and the judgments against Egypt, his heart was still hardened against
God and would not yield. Exodus 7.8. Showing that hardness of heart was an early
sin; and that people would persist in sin under sore corrections and the
evident rebukes of Heaven; this was exemplified not only in Pharaoh, but in
king Ahaz, who in the time of his distress did trespass yet more and more
against the Lord. This is that king Ahaz who is so noted for his wickedness. 2 Chronicles. 28.19. And we find this temper not only in wicked kings, but in the
people of Israel under sore chastisements. Jer. 5.3. Thou have stricken them,
but they have not grieved; thou have consumed them, but they have refused to
receive correction; they have made their faces harder than a rock; they have
refused to return. And Jer. 8.6. No man repented him of his wickedness, saying,
What have I done? every one turned to his course as the horse rusheth into the
battle. They were so greedily set upon their iniquities, that the prophet
compares them to a war horse that with unbridled force rusheth into the battle.
Thus greedily did this people rush into the ways of sin. And lest we should
conceive this to be the peculiar wickedness of this particular people, he adds
in Jer. 17.9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked,
and who can know it? Though we have all the wickedness of the world to teach us
what there is in our hearts, and our daily experience to instruct us, yet we do
not learn the depths of wickedness that lodge in that cavern, till a suitable
temptation draws it forth into exercise. The children of Israel were not aware
('it is like) of the hundredth part of the wickedness that lay lurking in their
hearts, while they were in Egypt in that cruel state of bondage to Pharaoh.
They were doubtless ready then to think, that if they could once get free from
that state of vassalage, that they would serve the Lord with cheerfulness, and
that none of his commandments should be grievous. But when they came to the
trial, they found unbelief, distrust of God and of his tender care of them,
springing up in the midst of the most extraordinary manifestations of God's
power and goodness on their behalf, that ever were made to a people. And though
they had been lately delivered from the severest bondage and oppression, yet
they were as impatient under trials, and as ready to murmur at any difficulties
in their way, as though they had newly come out of the most prosperous state. Now
if any one had told them while in their cruel state of bondage, that such were
their hearts, they would not have believed them, it is like: Therefore God led
them those forty years in the wilderness to humble and prove them, that they
might know what was in their hearts, as it is said in the text. And though when we
read their history, we are ready to be moved with indignation toward them; yet
we are acting over at this day the same stupid part with them in the
wilderness. We in this land are, as it were, led out of Egypt by the hand of
Moses; and now we are in the wilderness, i. e. in a state of trouble and
difficulty; Egyptians pursuing us, to overtake us and reduce us; there is the
Red Sea before us, I speak metaphorically, a sea of blood in your prospect
before you, perhaps; and when you apprehend this in your imaginations, are you
not ready to murmur against Moses and Aaron that led you out of Egypt, and to
say with the people of Israel, It had been better for us to serve the
Egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderness. Exodus 14.12. And though God
has been pleased to work marvellously for us at times as he did for them; yet
if any new difficulty arises, and if things don't go on so prosperously as at
other times, how soon does our faith fail us, and we begin to murmur against
Moses and Aaron, and wish ourselves back again in Egypt, where we had some
comforts of life, which we are now deprived of? not considering that we chose
our leaders, and that in obtaining any deliverance there are great troubles and
difficulties generally attending it; neither considering that our ill successes
are owing to the sins of the people, as was the case of the people of Israel in
the wilderness: We find them ten times as ready to find fault with their
leaders, and to ascribe their misfortunes to them, as to recoil in upon
themselves, and to say, What have we done? Though it was owing entirely to them
that they were not delivered. And thus we in this land are murmuring and
complaining of our difficulties and ill successes at times, thinking our
leaders to blame, and the like, not considering at the same time that we are
practicing those vices that have a natural tendency to destroy us, besides the
just judgments of Heaven which they tend to draw down upon us as a people: See
Isa. 30.12, 13, which I think assigns the moral cause of our disasterous
events. And when we are favored with a little success, we are apt to be elated
in our minds like the children of Israel after the overthrow of the Egyptians
in the red sea, and then with them to rejoice, and to encourage ourselves in
the cause in which we are engaged; then we can trust, as we imagine, in God,
and hope for his salvation and deliverance: But let the scale turn a little
against us, our confidence begins to fail, and we grow distrustful of God and
his providence, and begin to murmur and repine.

Thus the faithless Jews forgot
The dreadful wonders God had wrought,
Then they provoke him to his face,
Nor fear his power, nor trust his grace.
Watts. Thus we are acting over the like sins with the children of Israel in
the wilderness, under the conduct of Moses and Aaron, who was leading them out
of a state of bondage into a land of liberty and plenty in Canaan. Again, we
are ready to marvel at the unreasonable vileness and cruelty of the British
tyrant and his ministry, in endeavoring to oppress, enslave and destroy these
American States, who have been some of his most peaceable and profitable
subjects; and yet we find the same wicked temper and disposition operating in
Pharaoh king of Egypt above 3000 years ago. See Exodus 1.7 to 17 verse. When
Israel began to increase in Egypt, the king said, Come on, let us deal wisely
with them lest they multiply; and it come to pass when there falls out any
war, they join unto our enemies and fight against us, and so get them out of
the land; therefore they did set over them taskmasters to afflict them with
their burdens; they made them to serve with rigor, and they made their lives
bitter with hard bondage, etc. And afterward they laid the burden heavier,
allowing them no straw, and yet requiring the full tale of brick. Exodus 5.6 --
11. And when they endeavored to make their escape from this cruel and
oppressive tyrant, Pharaoh pursued after Israel with a great army unto the Red
Sea. Exodus 14.7 -- 10. So that the British tyrant is only acting over the same
wicked and cruel part, that Pharaoh king of Egypt acted toward the children of
Israel above 3000 years ago. But some may be ready to wonder, that since we are
gone off from Great Britain, and have declared ourselves independent States,
and insist upon standing by ourselves, that they don't let us alone, especially
as they have pretended that we are but of little consequence to Great Britain.
But we find the same disposition in the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin, who
troubled them in building, and hired counselors against them to frustrate
their purposes. Afterward Rehum the chancellor wrote to the king, The Jews are
building the rebellious and bad city; if this city be builded, and the walls
set up again, say they, then they will not pay toll, tribute, etc. and so thou
shall endamage the revenue of the kings: Now because we have maintenance from
the king's palace, and it was not meet for us to see the king's dishonor, etc.
this city is a rebellious city, and hurtful to kings; and that they have moved
sedition within the same of old: if this city be built, by this means thou
shall have no portion on this side the river, and so they hasted to Jerusalem
to stay the work by force. Ezr. 4, from the beginning to the 24th verse. Now
this was a right Tory letter and conduct; and Sanballat's behavior toward
those that encouraged the work of building the city, was just like that of the
tories toward those that would build up these American States. See Nehem.
2.19. But when Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite,
heard it, they laughed us to scorn, and despised us, and said, What is this
thing that ye do? Will ye rebel against the king? Thus there were some men then
as well as in these days, that seemed to look upon it as a greater crime to
oppose the king in his most arbitrary measures, than to violate the law of the
realm and of their God. And when Sanballat and others heard that the walls of
Jerusalem were made up, they were very wroth, and conspired all of them
together to come and fight against Jerusalem, and to hinder it. Neh. 4.7, 8.
And Great Britain is now acting over just the same part toward us in these
American States; endeavoring to prevent our building ourselves up into Free,
Independent States; so that the temper and disposition of the world has been
much the same throughout all generations. -- Great men are generally proud,
ambitious and aspiring, disdainful of inferiors, and apt to resent the least
indignities: We see this in Haman, an aspiring courtier, who when he saw that
Mordecai bowed not nor did him reverence, was full of wrath; wherefore Haman
sought to destroy all the Jews that were throughout the whole kingdom of
Ahasuerus; and Haman said unto the king, There is a certain people scattered
abroad, and dispersed among the people in all the provinces of thy kingdom, and
their laws are diverse from all people, neither keep they the king's laws;
therefore it is not for the king's profit to suffer them; let it please the
king that it may be written that they may be destroyed; and I will pay ten
thousand talents of silver to the hands of those that have the charge of the
business, to bring it into the king's treasuries; and the king grants his
desire. Esth. 3.5 -- 11. And the British ministry have been acting over the
same wicked, mischievous plot against the American States, as Haman did against
the Jews, and we have reason to hope that they will meet with the like fate.
But what I mention these instances for, is to let you see that the wickedness
of man has been much the same throughout all ages: We see this in David's
complaints. Psalm. 10.8. The wicked in his pride does persecute the poor, etc.
And Plas. 35.20, 25. They devise deceitful matters against them that are quiet
in the land, etc. And Psalm. 94.3, 4, 5. How long shall the wicked triumph?
Shall they utter and speak hard things: They break in pieces thy people, Oh
Lord, and afflict thine heritage, which frame mischief by a law, etc. From all
which passages we see that our complaints and trials at this day are nothing
new: People have been oppressed under the color of law, as we are by the
British ministry; and have been most cruelly oppressed and insulted by those
that have been in power; and have been derided and laughed at by their enemies
in their most afflicted state.

I proceed to show,

II. That God frequently brings his own people into a state of peculiar trials,
to discover to them and others what there is in their hearts. Thus God tempted
Abraham, when he put him upon offering up his son Isaac, Genesis 22.2, 3. (i. e.)
tried him with that peculiar trial, that he might discover to himself and
others, what there was in his heart; whether he would keep God's commandments
or no, however trying or self-denying they might be: and the issue discovered
to himself and to others the firmness and fixedness of his principles to the
glory of God and his own comfort and satisfaction; for the trial proved his
sincerity in the cause of God, and that he would keep his commandments under
the most trying circumstances of obedience, that nothing should deter him from
the service of his God, though his best beloved son, as a sacrifice, should be
the test of his obedience. Thus nobly did the faith and obedience of this
Father of the faithful display itself under the exercise of peculiar trials.
And as Abraham, so Job, was brought into a state of very peculiar trials as a
test of his virtuous disposition. God challenges satan, the grand tempter, as
to the integrity of this man. See Job 2.3. And the Lord said unto satan, Have
thou considered my servant Job? etc. still he holds fast his integrity,
although thou movedst me against him without a cause. And though satan was not
willing to give up the point, but was permitted to prosecute him to the
extremity with all his hellish trials, yet Job resolved not to let his
integrity go as long as he lived; and thereby discovered to the honor of God,
and to satan's confusion, the excellency of that principle of which he was
possessed: and as God is thus pleased to bring his own people into a state of
peculiar trials for the discovery of their virtues, so likewise for the
discovery of their vices, that they and others may see what corruption there
still remains in their hearts unmortified and unsubdued: Thus good Hezekiah was
tried with a prosperous scene to discover what was in his heart; God gave him a
remarkable victory over the Assyrians and granted him miraculous restoration
from a dangerous sickness, and not only so, but God gave him peculiar honor by
an embassy from the great and potent king of Babylon; all which probably raised
in him too high an opinion of himself, as if these things were done, if not by
his power, yet at least for his piety and virtues; so that instead of walking
humbly with God, and giving the glory of all entirely to him, he took the
honor to himself, and vain gloriously showed his riches and precious treasures
to the Babylonish ambassadors. 2 Kings 20.12. To this purpose it is said, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. Howbeit in the business of the ambassadors of the princes of
Babylon, God left him to try him that he might know all that was in his heart;
(i.e.) God withdrew from him those supplies and assistances of his spirit,
which would have effectually kept him from that sin, and suffered satan to
tempt him, and him to fall into that sin of pride and oftentation, that
Hezekiah might know his own impotency and corruption, his infirmities as well
as his virtues, that he might know that the great mercies which he had
received, were not the effects of his own merits, as he might be prone to
imagine, but of God's free grace. It Is likely this king Hezekiah, when he first
came to the throne, and was so zealous for destroying all the idolatry of the
land, and setting up the pure worship of God in his kingdom, was not then aware
that there was such wickedness in his heart, as afterward he found when he
came to be tried with a prosperous scene; but when the warm sunshire of
prosperity came over him, the putrid matter that lay in his heart, began to
operate and stench forth: And so a suitable temptation will frequently draw
forth such corruptions into exercise, as persons before were not aware of being
in their hearts. This we see in a striking light in Hazael, whom the prophet
informed how wicked and cruel he would be when he came to be king, viz. that he
would burn their strong holds, and stay their young men with the sword, dash
their children, and rip up their women with child, etc. Hazael when he came to
hear the description, was shocked at it, and resented the thought, as you see
from his reply. 2 Kings 8.13. And Hazael said, But what is thy servant a dog,
that he should do this great thing? And yet we find, as a worthy author
observes upon this passage, that the dog did it. He could not conceive that
there was such cruelty and barbarity in his heart as to practice such
inhumanity as the prophet pointed out: But when he came to the trial, and was
made king, and felt the pleasing power of having the world under him, as it
were, then pride, insolence, and a tyrannical disposition sprung up in his
heart, like noxious and baleful weeds in an overfattened soil, to the
destruction of the design of regal dignity, whereby he became a curse and
destroyer of his people, rather than a minister of God for good unto them. But
he was not aware, it seems, when the prophet told him that he should be king of
Syria, that he should ever be left to practice such inhumanity and barbarity as
afterward he was guilty of: Neither is it probable that George the third, when
he first came to the throne of Great Britain, and swore to govern according to
the good and wholesome laws of the realm, and issued that serious proclamation
for the suppression of immoralities, would in a few years by a royal edict,
butcher a great number of his best subjects for not submitting to his arbitrary
mandates. Doubtless when he first came to the throne, if it had been suggested
to him, that he would have practiced all that tyranny, cruelty, and oppression
which he has not long since gone into, with regard to the American States, he
would have been ready to have replied in indignation with Hazael, Is thy
servant a dog that he should do this great thing? But we find he has done it to
our grievous wounding, and to his dishonor and bloody guilt! He that should
have been our father and protector, has become the bloody murderer of thousands
of his best subjects! And though this seems harsh to assert with regard to one
whom we have heretofore addressed with the kind and honorary epithet of a
gracious sovereign, yet I now boldly assert him to be a cruel tyrant, who seeks
to govern us without law, without reason, or the sacred dictates of revelation;
impiously declaring that he has a right to give us laws binding in all cases
whatsoever. If such a prince is not a tyrant, I know not who deserves the name!
But he is only with that dog Hazael, acting out the cruelty of his heart and
that of his bloody court. The seven abominations that have lain hid there, have
now come forth like the locusts from the bottomless pit upon this land to
distress and annoy it; burning and laying waste populous towns that were
erected without any of his expense or patronage; carrying fire and sword among
those who have been his most peaceable and faithful subjects; ravishing the
women where the armies have marched; exercising the greatest inhumanity and
barbarity toward their prisoners; freezing and starving them to death, etc.
and all this done by British troops, who used to be famed for their humanity
and generosity to prisoners! Who would have thought that such savage cruelty
had been in their hearts? But the (...) has brought it out to the disgrace of
the British tyrant and his bloody troops. Some are disposed, it is true, to talk
much of the mercy and mildness of British government, to encourage people to
submit to their lawless claims; but I am never disposed to look to that power
for mercy, that is devoid of justice, but forever reject the cruel wretch, who
for the sake of a lawless domination, would sacrifice almost one quarter of the
globe to his resentment. I think the trial has discovered what is in the heart
of British administration, and I never desire to be again connected with that
government, which instead of speaking peace to us, and to our seed, threatens
death and destruction to us and our posterity, etc. But as the trial has
discovered what is in the heart of British administration, so likewise the
peculiar situation that the American States have been in, have tried what is in
our hearts; as the American Crisis observes, These are times that try men's
souls; and many things are discovered in the trial, which otherwise might have
lain concealed in the heart; though as our Savior observes, Out of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaks; yet some will conceal what is within, till a
proper temptation draw it forth. The contest has been, whether we should submit
to the arbitrary, oppressive claims of British administration, or maintain our
own rights, and repel force by force: vastly the greatest majority has been for
the latter; and the general will is always said to be of the nature of a law; a
small part of the States have opposed the general will, and have openly taken
part with British administration: others have been more reserved, and have
waited to see which is the safest side, in order to determine their conduct.
These are men of no principle, only to save themselves, which is the most
sordid of all; for they will be on this side or the other, just as the scale is
like to turn, for or against the country. Now these are trying times to sift
men out, that they and others may know what is in their hearts; whether they
will sell their country and their God for a little worldly pelf; or whether
they will make a noble sacrifice of all their worldly goods, and even bleed and
die for their dear country, and dear bought privileges: many have done it
already, and many more seem ready to do it, whose names ought to be honored
and held dear in the annals of the American States, so long as there are any to
remember their deeds. But this will not be the fame of all that had their birth
and education in this noble land! No, it will be said to the eternal disgrace
of some, that instead of standing for the precious land of their nativity and
its dear bought privileges, that they vilely betrayed it; and with Esau they
sold their birthright for a mess of pottage; that they turned their sword,
which should have been drawn in the defense of their country, against the
father that begat them, and against the tender bowels of the mother that bare
them, and the loving brothers and sisters that solaced them, and all the dear
friends and neighbors that used to aid and assist them! Oh, this is an image
too horrid and shocking to look to! I turn from it as a picture too monstrous
to behold! and turn to one of a more diminutive size, though not much less
despicable than the former; and that is such as aim not to use the sword upon
either side, but aim to take a part upon that side that will best secure their
darling interest; their souls are so immersed in silver and gold, that they
would fall into that scale which would weigh down with the most penny weight!
These are they that make gold their hope, and the fine gold their confidence,
and deny the God that is above, as Job elegantly expresses it; Job 31.24. (i.
e.) His providence, that can easily disappoint them in their hope and
confidence: Such persons trust that their money and interest will secure them
from distresses and troubles, and therefore greedily procure it, and then are
ready to join with that party which they think are like to conquer; not
considering that the events of war are altogether uncertain, and that that side
which appears the most promising at present, may be in a few days the most
gloomy and threatening -- it is not worth while under the most promising
prospects, to say with David, My mountain stands so strong that I shall not be
moved; for God may hide his face as he did from him, and then with him we shall
soon be troubled* But then we should always act upon principle, and be uniform
in our conduct, committing our cause to God, who sits in the throne judging
righteously, and can save and deliver with few or with many. But some people
have no notion about trusting in God; they rise and fall just like a ship at
anchor with the ebbing and flowing tide. And these trying times are designed to
show us what is in our hearts; whether we will trust in him at all times, and
adhere to the cause which we profess to believe to be right in dark and gloomy
days, as well as in those that are more fair and prosperous. It is no great
matter for men to trust in God, when every thing looks fair and prosperous;
they then deceive themselves, thinking they trust in God, whereas they trust in
the fair prospect that is before them. But this is the trial of our sincerity,
when every thing looks dark and gloomy, according to human prospects, then to
commit our cause to God, and trust in him for a favorable issue: This is truly
trusting in God. And these shifting scenes of adverse and prosperous
appearances, are designed to humble us and prove us, that we may know what is
in our hearts. There is a variety of temptations arising from our particular
state and circumstances, to draw out what there is in our hearts: There are
many things to try us, whether we are of a public spirit; whether we regard our
country, our liberties and privileges more than our own private pelf; and some
we shall find shrinking back from the public cause, avoiding all occasions in
which the public calls for assistance, while others less able must bear the
weight of the public weal or let it sink. Others are tried as to their humanity
and benevolence, whether they will assist others with the necessary supports of
life, when they can do it, at a reasonable lay: And here, alas! we find the
trial betraying what is in the hearts of many, even a wicked, oppressive
disposition, refusing to part with their provision at that high price allowed
and stated by the legislature of the state; waiting, it seems, to take the
advantage of people's necessities, to get a more exorbitant price. This is a
wickedness prevailing in the country which we should not have imagined to have
been in their hearts, had not the trial brought it forth. And God is trying us
and proving us by all the variety of his dispensations, that we may know what
is in our hearts, and whether we will keep his commandments or no; whether the
sabbath-profaner will become a sabbath sanctifier; whether the profane swearer
will bridle his tongue, and leave off his profaneness; whether the wanton and
intemperate will become chaste and sober; and whether people will reform their
ways, mortify their corruptions, and become new creatures. The land have sadly
corrupted their way; religion has been losing ground for many years; and all
manner of vice and profaneness has become rampant in the land; and God is
visiting us for these things with general judgments; and it is likely God will
keep us in this wilderness of trouble to humble us and prove us, that we may
see our errors, and know that God has a righteous controversy with us at this
day. We are apt to think that our cause is so righteous with regard to
Great Britain, that I fear we are ready to forget our unrighteousness toward
God; and while we are endeavoring to get rid of the unreasonable commands of
an earthly sovereign, I fear we forget to obey the most reasonable commands of
the rightful Sovereign of the Universe. Let us look upon the ground on which we
stand; consider our guilt and danger, and be humble for our sins, and under all
the tokens of God's displeasure against us on the account of our sins, repent
and reform whatsoever is amiss in the midst of us, that we may be prepared for
a deliverance out of our troubles; that being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies, we may serve God without fear in righteousness and true holiness all
the days of our lives.

I proceed to show,

III. That people when they are proved and tried, generally show what they are:
A suitable trial generally shows what people are, whether virtuous or vicious;
if they are of a virtuous disposition, a suitable trial will generally bring
out their virtues to public view; and if vicious, their vices. We have been
ready to look upon ourselves as a virtuous people in this land, to be sure in
comparison with Great Britain, and so to encourage ourselves that we should not
be vanquished on account of our virtues: But the trial discovers that there is
not so much virtue in the land as we were ready to imagine; there is a vast
deal of wickedness brought out to public view in this day of trial; many we
find will betray their dear bought country for a little worldly pelf,
preferring their present interest, ease and advantage, to all the liberties and
privileges of their future posterity: And many who aim not to betray their
country, are so mercenary that they would imbark on that side that they think
would best save their interest, without any regard to the righteousness of the
cause. And others who profess to be zealous in the cause of their country, are
so fond of making a fortune, as we say, or of advancing their interest, that
they become blind to the bleeding wounds of their country, and deaf to the
cries of the poor and needy, and will not reach forth the helping hand to their
distresses, unless with the iron hand of oppression to extort an exorbitant sum
for their relief: Indeed the trial shows that there is but little of a public
spirit prevailing amongst people in general at this day; the bigger part seem
exceedingly selfish, striving for the highest price for every article that they
have to part with; and if they think there is a prospect of its arriving to a
more extravagant price through the exigencies of the country, they will withhold
it from the needy, though the stone should cry out of the wall, and the beam out
of the timber should answer it. Hab. 2.11. So that the sin of oppression seems
to be as rampant in the land as it was in Jerusalem, which was styled wholly
oppression. I am sorry to have occasion to observe, that our trials have
brought forth this wickedness to open view in the midst of us, especially as
this is the crime that we are complaining of and struggling against in British
administration* but doubtless this is to humble us and prove us, that we may
know what there is in our hearts. If this disposition had not appeared upon the
trial, we should have been self-righteous and trusted in ourselves; and have
been ready to have thought if we had any successes, this was owing to our being
more righteous than Great Britain, and so arrogated the glory to ourselves. But
God has been pleased to bring the people of this land into this trying
situation, wherein they could take the advantage of getting an extravagant
price for the necessaries of life; and upon trial they found it in their hearts
to take the advantage and to oppress; so that if we have any mercy shown us, we
may know that it is not for our sakes: Agreeable to that, Ezekiel. 36.32. Not for
your sakes do I this, says the Lord God, be it known unto you; be ashamed and
confounded for your own ways, Oh house of Israel! But then oppression is not
the only sin that our trials have brought forth to view, but the sins of
treachery, falsehood and deceit have crept out in one place and another through
the land, in diverse persons who would betray its sacred cause into the hands of
tyranny and oppression: And others under the notion of being high sons of
liberty, will act without law and above law, and so encourage and promote
universal tyranny under the notion of a plenitude of liberty; for to govern
without law is tyranny: for law is the guardian of liberty; securing a people
in their rights and liberties; and whosoever endeavors to set law aside or to
supersede it, so far endeavors to destroy the liberties of his country, and so
far to promote a tyrannical government. And yet the trying situation of the
country has discovered some to be of this complexion; and however high they may
think themselves for liberty, they are throwing down the very bulwark that
secures it. But the trial discovers another sort of people, who though they are
not for going against law, yet they are not for putting the laws in execution,
which enervates government, and renders the law of no force; and such, however
well meaning they may have been, have inadvertently fallen into an opinion that
has proved very hurtful to the country; for the relaxation of the laws has
encouraged some to act out themselves to the disadvantage of the country; the
civil sword has not been a terror to evil doers as heretofore, and a praise and
protection to such as do well; and the debtor has shown the dishonesty of his
heart in refusing to pay his honest dues, because courts of judicature have not
been kept up in times back, to oblige him to do this justice; and men have
hereby been defrauded of their honest dues. And this is not the greatest evil;
for this has laid the foundation for the most of that oppression that there is
in the midst of us; for the country finding themselves not obliged to part with
their moneys, feel not the necessity of parting with their provision, and so
withhold it from the consumer till an extortionate price draws it out of their
hands. This is a disposition which we should not have thought to have been so
prevalent in the land, if the unhappy trial had not brought it forth: but we
see and feel it to our distress and confusion; so that it appears that we have
much less public virtue in the country than we were aware of; many being
disposed to take the advantage of the distresses of their country, not caring
who sinks if they can but swim; some selling their country under the notion of
advancing their interest, and others oppressing their country in order to make
an estate; and this disease has took place not only among the trading part, but
has seized as violently upon the farmer and the tradesman as upon the former,
and threatens the death and ruin of the country, more than all the formidable
force of Great Britain, and the whole tory faction in the land: and yet these
would be thought to be friends to their country and conscientious people. Thus
the god of this world blinds the eyes of men; if they were not deluded by the
devil and the deceitfulness of their own wicked hearts, they could no more
think themselves conscientious and friends to their country, than the thief and
the highway man; for oppression is as much spoken against in scripture, as the
forementioned vices, and has as direct a tendency to ruin the country; for
these things the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience. And
when there is the oppression of the poor, and the sighing of the needy in the
midst of us, we cannot expect any other, but God will arise to judgment, and
make his plagues dreadful upon this land. We have been ready to wonder that
British troops should be so oppressive and cruel to our people; but it has been
observed by some worthy divines, that God is wont to punish people frequently
with such a kind of punishment as bespeaks the nature of their crimes: And our
Savior tells us, that such measure as you mete, shall be measured to you
again. Mat. 7.2. And we have reason to believe that God thus permits us to be
oppressed by the British troops, as a righteous correction for the oppressive
disposition that prevails in this land. We were not aware that there was such a
disposition prevailing till the trial brought it out. Trade used to regulate
itself; and in our peaceable state, when courts of judicature were kept up, and
the laws of the State put into execution, things went on regularly, one thing
answered another, and there was a considerable equality in our dealings one
with another; so that the poor were not oppressed, and the consumer in general,
could purchase the necessaries and even the superfluities of life at a
reasonable lay: But trade stopping, it naturally made the superfluities and
some of the necessaries of life scarce and dear; and the war naturally made the
circulating medium plenty, so that we might have grappled with the dearness of
those articles, they being few, and many of them non-necessaries, if it had not
fell upon the necessaries of life. It is true the farmer and tradesman resented
the high price upon those foreign imports, and called it oppression, and were
for making an insurrection, to seize their stores at what they called a
reasonable price; and doubtless there was oppression in the trading part of the
country with regard to their foreign imports; but no ways equal to what there
is now among the farmers and tradesmen: It is like the farmer and tradesmen
then were not aware that they had the same oppressive temper and disposition
with the merchant; but the trial has brought it out to our humiliation and
wounding; Providence has put them under such circumstances that they can take
the advantage of the times, and they find an heart to improve it to as much
rapacity and oppression, as ever the merchant improved it: refusing to part
with their grain at almost any price, though Heaven has been so bountiful in
granting them so plentiful a harvest: they have the cries of the poor and needy
against them, and they have reason to fear the curse that is denounced against
him that withholdeth corn from the people. Prove. 11.26. And in discourse with
them upon the affair, they will say, Oh, I should be willing to conform to the
ancient price if I could have salt, or some particular articles that have got
very high, at the ancient price; making the extravagant article the rule for
the common productions of the land; and so they oppress an hundred because they
are oppressed in some one particular article; But they will reply and say,
Paper money is not so good as it used to be: But I query why? If you have owed
one hundred pound to a man, will not an hundred pound in paper currency pay it,
as well as ten years ago? Yes, you will say, perhaps, but I cannot buy so much
with it, as I could some years back, especially of some articles, and therefore
it is not so good. To which I reply, according to this, money will always sink,
when some particular article gets to be higher than usual; according to this,
silver and gold may sink as well as our paper currency. You cannot buy so much
provision and forage in the city of New York now, by one third, with silver and
gold, as you could a year or two back, according to the best accounts; yet we
don't say that silver and gold is sunk because of that; but that provision is
scarce there and of more estimation there in comparison with silver and gold,
than usual: But that is no reason why every mechanic there should rise upon the
price of his labor. Sometimes one thing is scarce and sometimes another, so
that we should mutually bear these inconveniences; But because one thing is
dear, to make every thing so, is the way to kill and oppress the poor, and the
many that have to buy every thing: So that the way that the country has
precipitately run into, is not only vastly impolitic, but very wicked and
oppressive, and forebodes darker things to this land than any thing besides,
according to my apprehension: And this avaricious and oppressive humor breaks
out in so many ways and instances, that it is enough to confound and astonish
any considerate person that attends to it, and makes him fear the worst. But
besides, the trial has brought out many other vices, which we should have hoped
were not so predominant in the land, if the trial had not discovered them. To
instance in a few; the little regard that is shown to the sabbath by the
soldiery and others, who look upon themselves a little at liberty from the
restraints of human laws; and that profaneness that there is in our armies,
raised from the midst of us for the defense of our dear land, as well as
against people at home, at a time in which the land is involved in the greatest
distresses that ever it knew; and when there has been the most express
prohibitions against profane swearing, issued from the highest authority in
America. This profaneness, I say, is very surprising under these extraordinary
circumstances, and which we should not have thought to have been in our hearts
if the trial had not brought it forth. We used to think strange of British
troops, that they would be so profane in times of imminent danger; but we have
reason now to turn the astonishment upon ourselves, and to be sensible that we
have hearts as bad as they, and without the restraints of divine grace we shall
act as stupid and vile a part as the vilest of them: And not only this
wickedness has discovered itself upon trial, but a strange spirit of falsehood
has gone forth into the land, so that it is very difficult to ascertain facts
of the most interesting nature as to our military operations; bespeaking the
want of a spirit of integrity and uprightness in the land; all which forebode
ill concerning us as a people; for if public virtue fails, and people grow
vicious and profane, selfish and oppressive under the sorest judgments and
calamities, we have reason to fear the worst; that God will multiply our
distresses and increase his judgments, till we are brought to a repentance and
reformation. We see that God kept the children of Israel in the wilderness for
many years after he had delivered them from the hand of Pharaoh, on the account
of their wickedness; and he led them so long in the wilderness to humble and
prove them that they might know what there was in their hearts; and one trial
after another brought it out. And so our trials in this wilderness state are
bringing out our corruptions one after another, that we and others may know
what there is in our hearts; what pride, what selfishness, what covetousness,
what ingratitude, rebellion, impatience and distrust of God and his providence,
all these come flowing forth from the midst of us under our trials, in as
conspicuous a manner as they did from the children of Israel in the wilderness;
which if it had not been for our trials, that have discovered them, we should
not have imagined to have been in such a privileged, gospelized land as this.

Which brings me to show,

IV. That the discovering to a people their errors and wickedness is designed
to humble and reform them. This is spoken of as being the express end and
design of bringing the children of Israel into the wilderness, and leading them
there forty years, it was to humble them and prove them, that they might know
what there was in their hearts, and whether they would keep his commandments or
no. God did it not merely to bring out such a deformed character to view, as
they exhibit under their trials; but that being brought forth, they might see
their own wickedness and deformity, and be humbled and repent of this their
great wickedness and reform their lives, by keeping his commandments for the
future. And this is the end and design of God in bringing us into this
wilderness of trouble and confusion, that we may know what there is in our
hearts, that being brought out to public view, we and others may see what a
wicked people we are, and that we may be deeply humbled and abased before God
on the same account, repent and reform. It Is not because God delights in
bringing such a deformed character to view; no, for it is more odious and
irksome to him, for he hates all the workers of iniquity, and he is of purer
eyes than to behold evil, and cannot look on iniquity. Hab. 1.13. A vicious
character is like a noisome stench in his nostrils; and therefore when God
brings such a character into view, it is that we may see the deformity and
vileness of it, and that we may be humbled under it, repent and reform.
Therefore let us be sollicitous to get a clear view of our manifold guilt, and
to be deeply humbled on the account of our own sins, and the manifold high
handed abominations that are daily committed in this distinguished land of
light and liberty: That there is so much of a disposition in the midst of us to
oppress one another, while the land is wading in blood to oppose and resist
this wickedness in British administration. Oh, let us see the deformity of this
vice through the bloody spectacles of those parliamentary acts, that declare that
they have a right to tax the American States, and to give laws to us in all
cases whatsoever; and in consequence of such a claim have sent their bloody
troops to butcher us, till we are reduced to such a cruel yoke of tyranny and
oppression: Methinks this shocking scene of oppression is enough to give you to
see the deformity of this vice, and to make you flee from it as a monster that
devours without pity! And if you do not see it in this horrid picture, look
into hell -- and there see Dives roaring in the fire of hell for a drop of
water to cool his tormented tongue, for denying the crumbs that he had to spare
from his own table, to a poor, perishing Lazarus! Methinks if people would look
a little upon this oppressive wretch in hell, weltering and gasping for a drop
of water, who the other day, could swim in wine and all the delicacies of life,
and was for pulling down his barns and building greater to stow his grain in: I
say, if they would look a little at him, methinks it would cure them of their
oppressive disposition, and open their stores and their hearts to the poor and
needy, lest as they have refused to show mercy, so mercy should be denied to
them another day. In short, any vice viewed in its deformity and destructive
nature and tendency, is enough to shock the hardiest wretch on earth, and make
him fly from it with as great precipitancy as Amnon's brethren did from the
feast of wine, when they saw their brother slain there. 2 Samuel 13.29. Every sin
is of a destructive, deadly nature; and if sin was thus seen and viewed, it
would not be so difficult to dissuade people from it; but they view it through
the devil's spectacles, which makes it to appear more delighting and contenting
than ever it is found to be; and he blinds their minds as to the deformity and
destructive nature of it, so that he may lead them blindfold down to eternal
perdition: Therefore we had need take much pains to bring sinners to a just
view of their sins; for till then they will not be humbled for them, nor repent
and reform. And hence it is that God brings people into some trying situation
to bring their wickedness out to view, that they may know what there is in
their hearts and be humbled for it; and the trials that we have been under in
this land, have brought out a vast deal of wickedness which we should not have
been aware of, if the trial had not betrayed it. And what is the end of this
discovery? Why to humble us, and to bring us to repentance and a general
reformation. Let us then be sensible of the ends of Divine Providence in
permitting such wickedness to break out in the midst of us; it is to humble us
and to give us to see that we have no cause to trust in ourselves, -- in our
own righteousness, which we are very prone to, that disclaiming all confidence
in ourselves, we may trust in him who raises the dead, -- and who will have
mercy on whom he will have mercy.

Several useful inferences might be made from this subject, but I shall confine
myself to one, with which I shall conclude the discourse.

Seeing it is as we have heard, that the wickedness of man has been much the
same through all generations, hence we may infer, that every generation may
rationally expect the like punishments and calamities that have been inflicted
upon generations back. The history of the world is nothing scarcely but a
history of the wickedness and miseries of it. Take the sacred history from the
fall of man till Christ's appearance on earth, till his crucifixion,
resurrection and ascension to glory, and even from the mission of the Holy
Ghost, till the completion of the sacred canon, and what do we find but the
wickedness of man acted forth in a variety of shapes, together with the just
judgments of God pursuing it with a variety of calamities through life, till
death swallows them up in one undistinguished ruin! This is the general,
melancholy account of the human race as fallen! Then have we reason to look
upon it as strange that we see and feel the like distresses and calamities with
the world that has gone before us? Surely no. When we read in sacred or profane
history of the unnatural wars that have arisen among those of the same nation,
people and language, we are ready to be shocked at the horrid scene, and to
marvel at the outrage, cruelty and devastation that they will make of one
another in such a contest! But if God did not restrain the wrath and wickedness
of mankind, they would always be acting over the horrid scene, biting and
devouring one another! And the wickedness of the British nation, I mean of the
governing part of them, has arrived to that pitch, that they are disposed to
act over all that wickedness, cruelty and oppression that Pharaoh and the other
cruel tyrants of the earth have been disposed to practice toward those in
their power: Witness the cruel and unnatural war that they have levied against
us; burning and laying waste many noble towns with a savage barbarity and
wantonness of rage; abusing the prisoners that have fallen into their hands,
with worse than savage barbarity! freezing and starving them to death with a
relentless cruelty! so that the cries of those poor oppressed prisoners have
entered I trust, into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath, and that he has arisen
to avenge their blood upon those inhumane butchers, who have come above 3000
miles to destroy their neighbors that are more righteous than they! This is
the nation that heretofore has been famed for their humanity and generosity to
their enemies, especially when prisoners, that have now sunk into such a degree
of cruelty and barbarism, that they can abuse them after they have surrendered,
cane them, strip them of their clothing, and then drive them like a flock of
sheep into prison, and there freeze and starve them to death! Oh how is the
nation fallen and debased by the most sordid wickedness and inhumanity! and
from once being famed for christianity, their conduct would disgrace the most
barbarous nation on earth! Thus the wickedness of the human heart, without the
restraints of divine grace will act out a part not much inferior in vileness to
that of infernals! But then though I thus inveigh against the cruelty and
wickedness of British administration and their sordid troops; yet I would by no
means intimate that we are innocent, and free from wickedness; no, God has a
righteous controversy with us in this land; and our iniquities have arrived to
that aggravated height, that they have called for these sore calamities that we
feel! and the British nation are the rod of God's anger to scourge and chastise
us for our sins, as the Assyrian monarch was to God's people of old. See Isa.
10.5, 6, 7. Oh Assyrian the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is
mine indignation! I will send him against an hypocritical nation, and against
the people of my wrath will I give him a charge to take the spoil, and to take
the prey and to tread them down as the mire of the streets; howbeit, he means
not so, neither does his heart think so, but it is in his heart to destroy and
cut off nations not a few, etc. Though this haughty tyrant had no design of
executing God's will and the glory of his justice in punishing an hypocritical
people, but only to enlarge his own empire and satisfy his own lusts, by
sacrificing multitudes of people to his own ambition and covetousness; yet God
meant to use him as a rod, and the instrument of his anger to chastise and
correct his sinful, degenerate, backsliding people; and we have reason to
think, (let the designs of the British tyrant be what they will) that God
designs him as the rod of his anger to correct us for the foul sins and
abominations of this highly privileged land! Therefore let us be humble, kiss
the rod and accept the punishment of our sins, -- repent and turn to God by an
universal reformation, -- that God may be entreated for the land, spare his
heritage, and not give it up to a reproach, -- but restore to us our liberties
as at the first, and our privileges as at the beginning. AMEN.


