BY HIS EXCELLENCY George Washington, Esquire GENERAL, and COMMANDER in Chief, of
all the Forces of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA.

PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS several persons, inhabitants of the United States of America,
influenced by inimical motives, intimidated by the threats of the enemy, or
deluded by a Proclamation, issued the 30th of November last by Lord and General
How, styled the King's Commissioners for granting pardons* etc. (now at open
war and invading these States) have been so lost to the interest and welfare of
their country, as to repair to the enemy, sign a declaration of fidelity, and,
in some instances, have been compelled to take oaths of allegiance and to
engage not to take up arms, or encourage others so to do, against the King of
Great Britain. And Whereas it has become necessary to distinguish between the
friends of America and those of Great Britain, inhabitants of these States; and
that every man who receives a protection from and is a subject of any State,
(not being conscientiously scrupulous against bearin^ arms* should stand ready
to defend the same against every hostile invasion. I do therefore in behalf of
the United States, by virtue of the powers committed to me by Congress, hereby
strictly command and require every person, having subscribed such declaration,
taken such oaths, and accepted protection and certificates from Lord or General
How, or any person acting under their authority, forthwith to repair to
Headquarters, or to the quarters of the nearest general officer of the
Continental army or militia, (until further provision can be made by the civil
authority) and there deliver up such protections, certificates, and passports,
and take the oath of allegiance to the United States of America. Nevertheless,
hereby granting full liberty to all such as prefer the interest and protection
of Great Britain to the freedom and happiness of their country, forthwith to
withdraw themselves and families within the enemies lines. And I do hereby
declare that all and every person who may neglect or refuse to comply with this
order within thirty days from the date hereof, will be deemed adherents to the
King of Great Britain, and treated as common enemies of the American States.

Given at HEAD QUARTERS, MORRIS TOWN, January 25th, 1777. GEORGE WASHINGTON
By his EXCELLENCY'S Command*

Robert H. Harrison, Secretary.



(...)DFORD.


