SEVEN RATIONAL SERMONS, WRITTEN BY A LADY.

Modern Books Now Selling by ROBERT BELL, in Third-Street, PHILADELPHIA.
FORDYCE's Sermons to Young Women, 2 vols. -- A Modern Work, fraught with
elegant Language, and the most sublime Sentiment, capable of attracting the
Heart, not only to the love, but to the practice of Virtue, and by this means,
nearly transforming Young Ladies, into beautiful Angels. Bishop Sherlock's
Sermons, 4 vols. Leland the Independent, his Sermons, 4 vols. Burgh's Political
Disquisitions: Containing a curious History of Mankind, and their Manners,
relative to Government, from the virtuous days of Greece, down to the corrupt
times of George the Third of Britain, 3 vols. Leland's History of Ireland, 4
vols. Josephus's History of the Jews, and all his other Works, 4 vols. Sterne's
Works, 5 vols. Dod^^ey's Fables of AEsop, and other Fabulists, with Cuts.
Burton's Fables of AEsop. Brown's Pocket English Dictionary. Blackstone's
Commentaries on the Law, 5 vols. The Younger Clerk's Vade Mecum: or, Complete
Law-Tutor. Being a useful Collection of a great Variety of the most approved
Precedents in the Law, and adapted to almost every Transaction in Life, wherein
an Attention to legal Forms is indispensably necessary. The Young Clerk's
Magazine: or, English Law-Repository: Containing great Variety of the most
useful Precedents of all Sorts of written Instruments, that relate to Public
Business. Robertson's History of Europe, and of Charles the 5th, 2 vols. Home's
Six Sketches on the History of Man. Cullen's Lectures on the Materia Medica.
Buchan's Domestic Medicine: or, Family Physician. Van Swieten's Cures for
Armies, containing seventy two valuable Prescriptions, with Northcote Ranby,
and Jones, on Gunshot Wounds and Fractures.
DRAMATIC PIECES.
Battle of Bunkers-Hill. By a Gentleman of Maryland. Fashionable Lover. By
Cumberland. West-Indian. By Cumberland. Man of Business. By Colman. She Stoops
to Conquer. By Goldsmith. School for Wives. -- Macaroni. Sir Harry Gaylove. By
Miss Marshall. Clandestine Marriage* By Colman and Garrick.
SEVEN RATIONAL SERMONS, ON THE FOLLOWING SUBJECTS, VIZ.

I. Against Covetousness. II. On the Vanity of this Life. III. Against Revenge.
IV. Of Mirth and Grief. V. The Cruelty of Slandering innocent, and defenseless
Women. VI. The Duty of Children. VII. Advantages of Education.
Written in England, by a LADY, the Translatress of Four Select Tales from
MARMONTEL.

When Patriotism and Royalism engage the Wits of the Age, it is no Wonder that
a Woman should take the lower Department, and venture to write Moral Essays.
THE PREFACE. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by ROBERT BELL, in Third-Street.

MDCCLXXVII.

PREFACE.
THE Work which I offer to the Public, being of an extraordinary kind for a
woman's pen, it is necessary to say what gave occasion to it.

About two years since, having a conversation with a clergyman of my
acquaintance concerning preaching in general, he, betwixt jest and earnest,
declared he would preach any sermon which I would write. An agreement was made,
and I sat down to compose.

As I had always looked on persons of a covetous disposition with a mixture of
pity and indignation, and having met with many of a contracted, narrow turn of
mind, and very few who answered my idea of generosity, the text which had
occurred on several occasions, when I could have wished not to have had reason
for it, presented itself now, and I pitched on that as a subject on which I
might express my thoughts.

Some accidental circumstances prevented its being preached: but having once
entered on that kind of writing, I could not help committing to paper some
thoughts which had frequently passed over my mind on the insufficiency of this
life for real happiness, and the uncertainty of all that wore that appearance.
On this occasion I expatiated on the words of Job; a book which I had always
read with admiration and melancholy pleasure.

The Sermon on Revenge is composed of arguments which I had often made use of
to calm the spirit of retaliation, which I have found rising in my breast, on
my having met with unkind treatment where I thought I had not deserved, and had
no reason to expect it.

These three discourses lay by me a long while without my thinking much about
them; till having mentioned to a friend a desire I had of turning to some
public advantage what I had written, he told me the thought was not amiss, but
they were too few to publish alone, and advised me to write four more.

I chose those subjects on which I had most reflected, and on which therefore I
had most to say. The terrible consequences of Slander to defenseless Women, and
the extreme cruelty of the practice against those, who generally labor under
evils sufficient to embitter life without that addition, had often employed my
thoughts; and the equitable admonition of Our Savior, delivered in that
admirable sermon which contained the most perfect rule of life that ever was
given to man, appeared to me a proper text, and therefore constituted the
subject of the fourth essay.

As the usual consequence of having my spirits too much raised has been the
feeling them also too greatly depressed, I had often, on those occasions,
quoted to myself the words of Solomon, which I have now fixed on as a topic for
the fifth essay. I have always entertained the highest notion of filial duty,
which I think is lately grown too little the fashion; and this furnishes me
with matter for another. The seventh was the hint of a friend, who is herself a
mother, and whose partiality to my judgment made her desirous to know if my
opinion coincided with her own in the article of education.

I hope this account will prevent my being accused of vanity in endeavoring to
reform mankind. I really never had such a thought: but if I can be at all
beneficial to that part of it to which I belong, among whom there are some who
will not disdain to take advice from a female writer, I shall esteem myself
happy to be able to conduce to their amusement or improvement. The very young,
whose minds are not yet formed, and who are startled at the idea of reading a
sermon, may, through the novelty of these, be induced to peruse, and may
possibly learn some useful lessons from them.

As a farther apology, let me observe that political disputes now employ the
tongues and pens of almost all degrees of men, as well clergy as laity, so that
they have no time to think of any thing else. The rage of public virtue is so
great, that private virtue is almost forgotten. When patriotism and royalism
engage all the wits of the age, it is no wonder that a Woman should take the
lower department, and venture to write moral essays. The candid will remember
that it is the work of a Woman, and will not be very severe in their criticism;
the censure of others I am not solicitous to deprecate, as I think too highly
of the Public to suppose it can influence their judgment.

SERMON I.
AGAINST COVETOUSNESS.
MATTHEW. xix. 24. I say unto you, it is easier for a camel to go through the
eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of Heaven.
THIS is a hard saying, and might well give occasion to the question put to our
Savior, by his disciples, of, Who then can be saved? However, if we examine a
little farther, I think I shall prove that no impossibility is implied by these
words: in order to this, let us recollect to whom, and on what account, they
were spoken. A young gentleman of large fortune, who had been a strict observer
of the Jewish law, who was conscious of having discharged himself justly in his
dealings with mankind, indeed, one who does not seem to have been deficient in
any point of moral duty, yet found something wanting in himself, and was
sensible he had done nothing which could insure him eternal life. Under this
conviction he applied to our Savior, hoping he might find something in the new
religion which might set his mind at rest with regard to a future state;
flattering himself, perhaps, that the compliance with a few external ceremonies
would secure him everlasting felicity: but how thunderstruck was he, when the
Great Founder of our faith demanded the surrender of all his goods to the poor,
and promised him treasure in heaven, on no other terms than the parting with
what he possessed on earth. But here it may be asked, If the rich man could not
have been a worthy member of Christianity without so great a sacrifice? To
which I answer, that in those early times I think such a sacrifice was
absolutely necessary: our blessed Savior constantly taught his disciples a
contempt for all sublunary riches and honors; he often repeated to them that
his kingdom was not of this world: that if they would be his disciples indeed,
they must submit to poverty and disgrace; must be strangers and pilgrims on
earth, as became the followers of a master who had no place to lay his head,
and who was so poor as not to be able to pay the tribute due unto Caesar
without the assistance of a miracle. Our Lord knew the opposition a docso
contrary to worldly wisdom must naturally meet with: he knew that the
propagators of it would be afflicted, tormented, persecuted, and even suffer
death for his name's sake: "Think not, says he, I am come to send peace on
earth, I am come to send a sword;" for that he knew would be the consequence of
man's perverseness and disobedience. It was incumbent then on men who were to
be subject to the cruelty and malice of the world; who were to sit loose to all
earthly enjoyments, and to be ready to lay down their lives, whenever they were
called for, rather than renounce their faith; to have their minds disengaged
from all lower concerns, and and their hearts fixed upon an incorruptible
treasure, which it was not in the power of any earthly potentate either to
destroy or diminish.

Thus much is, I think, sufficient to prove, that it must have been a great
impediment to the progress of the gospel, if the first preacher of it had been
wealthy: besides which, it is not unreasonable to suppose, that the Son of God,
the Great searcher of hearts, plainly saw that this young man's was too
contracted to entertain the extensive benevolence, and unbounded liberality,
which are the great principles of the christian institution, and without which
religion is no more than a name: he was strictly just; but what merit could he
claim from that? born, as he was, to large possessions, what temptation had he
to injure his neighbor either by violence or fraud? That there are oppressive
rich ones I confess; but they are so far from deserving the title of
Christians, that they are not worthy of that of men, but may be justly looked
on as infernal spirits in human shape, who are suffered for a time to indulge
their evil inclinations, by being the pests of society; but it is to be hoped
such characters are very scarce.

The generality of the world think they have discharged their duty toward
their neighbor, if they have never invaded another's property, and look upon
it they have an undoubted right to keep what they call their own by inheritance
or acquisition to their own use. Unhappy delusion! fatal error! produced by the
love of gold; the man who inherits an affluent fortune, while he sees
multitudes around him pining in want of the necessaries of life, for multitudes
such he must see (unless he wilfully shuts his eyes) ought to look up to heaven
with the utmost gratitude, who has not only placed him above the miseries of
dependence, and receiving obligations, which are too often conferred in such a
manner as to fill the feeling mind with the keenest anguish, though hard
necessity compels the acceptance; but, instead of the painful task of
receiving, assigns to him the pleasing one of b^stowing and imitating his great
Creator in the only thing by which he can become like him, that of being a
father to the fatherless, and wiping away the tear of complaint from the
afflicted widow's eye: but if, like Dives in the parable, his flinty heart is
not to be softened by the distresses of others, let self love at least prevail
on him to act as if it were so; let him remember with dread that exclamation of
our Savior's, "How hardly shall riches enter the kingdom of heaven:" and let
him not suffer that wealth which, properly used, might be his passport to a
blissful eternity, to be an everlasting bar against his entrance: but there are
some men who desire to compromise the matter; and, provided they be allowed to
hoard their treasure, or spend it in selfish gratifications while they ^ive,
would be willing at their deaths to make ample amends, by leaving a large
portion of what they can no longer enjoy to some public charity: by this
pretense they look on themselves as excused from every act of benevolence
during life; but at the hour of death their awakened consciences never fail to
tell them how miserably they have been deceived; and they wish, though then,
alas! such wishes are in vain, that they had some few deeds of real charity to
cover their many faults, and plead for them at the throne of mercy.

Men of acquired fortunes have generally very plausible reasons for not being
generous: we have earned our money with the sweat of our brows, say they,
surely we have a right to enjoy it likewise; the industrious never fail of
success, and indolence is the only parent of want. Though this may be often true,
yet it is far from being a general rule: let the prosperous man abate a little
of his self-sufficiency, and recollect, and he will find that his success has
not been owing merely to his own industry, but has generally been aided by some
lucky chance; some kind assisting friends, guided by providence, has led him
forward, which others of equal merit have not been able to find; let him not
then arrogate too much to himself, nor too severely censure the less fortunate,
or always charge their ill fortune to their ill conduct, but rather let him, as
becomes a man and a Christian, endeavor to alleviate the distresses which the
unkindness of the world; joined to their own errors, may have brought upon
them, to assist them with his advice, his interest, or his purse, as occasion
requires; and raise to cheerful industry, by the prospect of reward, the mind
which frequent disappointment has sunk to inactivity and dejection.

It is to be lamented that persons of high rank, whose fortunes enable them to
relieve the poor and distressed, are so far removed above want themselves, and
so little accustomed to the seeing it in others, that they seldom think of or
feel for it properly; while the man of liberal heart and narrow circumstances
is often wounded by sights of woe, which, as it is utterly out of his power to
alleviate by any thing more than a pitying tear, serves only to give
unnecessary pain, and make him regret the want of ability to do that which,
perhaps, had providence blessed him with, he might have neglected; so seldom do
riches and liberality meet. It is true, there is a kind of fashionable charity
subsisting among us, and it is no uncommon thing to hear that a certain noble
personage has ordered a certain sum of money to be laid out in provisions, and
distributed among the poor: --

This is generally mentioned with great encomiums in the newspapers as a
laudable example for others to follow: That it is truly laudable to provide for
the necessities of the industrious labourer, far be it from me to deny; but
there are a set of unhappy people, whose lot is cast above the lowest sort, and
yet want the comforts which even they enjoy. Ashamed to beg, unable to dig,
these I recommend as proper objects for the rich to exercise their generosity
on: let them seek them in their obscurity, and they will find families whom
they may make happy by sums so inconsiderable as by themselves to be scarcely
missed; they will there find worthy people have been reduced to poverty by
unavoidable and unforeseen misfortunes, and unable to bear up against them for
want of the assistance of friends and money; some who have owed their ruin to
their own goodness of heart, whose generous, unsuspecting natures have been
imposed upon by artful and designing men; such as these who have erred through
excess of virtue, have certainly a claim which no liberal mind can refuse; and
many may be likewise found whose sufferings have been owing to their own
follies; yet sufferings still they are, and they who feel the weight of them
have a right to pity and relief from creatures who are not themselves exempt
from the failings of humanity. Indeed, I know not how to believe there are any
people so void of tenderness and compassion, as to upbraid a man for
indiscretions, at the time he is feeling their dreadful consequences. Can there
be a more pitiable object, than the father of a family who sees his children
around him destitute of support, and must reproach himself as the cause? and
can there be a greater act of generosity than to alleviate such distress, by
putting it in his power to retrieve past errors, and provide for the innocent
sharers of his condition?

May the Almighty Disposer of all events incline the hearts of all who abound
in this world's wealth to such true benevolence; the reflections on such
actions will give comfort at the hour of death, when all worldly riches shall
cease to afford any: and our Blessed Savior has plainly told us, that feeding
the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting the sick, comforting the afflicted,
are the only works that shall stand us in any stead at the great day of
judgment. Now to God the father, etc.

SERMON II.
ON THE VANITY OF THIS LIFE.
JOB xix. 26. For though after this life worms destroy this body, yet in my
flesh shall I see God.
THESE were the words of Job at a time when he seems to have lost all hopes of
earthly happiness, and to have fixed his thoughts only on something beyond the
grave, as appears from many passages in the foregoing chapters; where he, in
the most pathetic terms, laments his forlorn condition. "My face is foul with
weeping, says he; my eye also, by reason of my sorrow, is dim; and on my
eyelids is the shadow of death."

He then enumerates his uncommon misfortunes, till too much dispirited with the
sad recollection to plead any longer against the unjust reproaches of his
friends, he implores their pity, in such a moving though short sentence, that
had they not been the most unfeeling of men, they would have ceased to
persecute him who seemed already but too sensible of having, though he knew not
for what cause, fallen under the displeasure of the Almighty.

He next declares his despair of being otherwise than miserable in this world,
and looks forward to the end of life as the only end of his sorrow. "My breath
is corrupt, says he, my days are extinct, the grave is ready for me:" but
comforts himself with the certain assurance that he shall one day renew his
life, and be made ample amends for his past sufferings, by the everlasting
society of his Redeemer. This is what he means by those words, "I know that my
Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the last day on the earth: and
though, after this life, worms destroy my body, yet in my flesh shall I see God.

In discoursing on this text, I mean, first, to show the folly of looking on
any thing in this world as permanent enough to engage our affections: next, to
prove the certainty of a future state; and, lastly, to conclude with an
exhortation to such a life as will afford us comfort at the approach of
eternity.

Surely, if ever any man had reason to think his happiness fixed on a certain
duration, it was Job, who was born to a princely fortune, of consequence
sufficient to be courted by the nobles of the land, who consulted him as their
oracle, and hung with silent admiration and respect on the eloquence of his
words. The multitude, whose wants his bounteous hand supplied, followed him as
he passed; every tongue blessed him, and every eye melting with gratitude,
expressed the joy which filled the heart.

Blessed with a numerous progeny, he looked forward with the hope of seeing his
days renewed in his children, nor was he unmindful of the Author of all good,
who had bestowed so large a portion of it on him; but expressed his thanks in a
manner that was most pleasing to his God, by admitting others to share it
largely with him: yet, contrary to all expectation, was this great good man
suddenly thrown down from the height of human glory to the lowest depth of
misery: deprived of his children, his fortune, and his health: left destitute
of every comfort; and what made it the more terrible was, that he had no time
to prepare for this sad change, for it happened on a day of feasting, when his
whole family had given a loose to mirth and festivity, without the least
apprehensions of the destruction which so soon fell on them. Such complicated
woe, we should imagine too much for man to sustain, did not this instance of
Job's show us to what height that fortitude, which is supported by a good
conscience, can carry us; for though on the first shock of his calamities he
bursts into some passionate exclamations; and, provoked by the cruelty of his
friends, who under the pretense of comfort and advice (as is too often the
case) insulted his distress, he, with some appearance of resentment, vindicates
his injured reputation against their unkind aspersions: yet with what patient
humility does he resign himself to the Almighty; and, conscious that the
righteous God, whose laws had been the constant rule of his life, would never
totally abandon him, he rejoices in the certainty of meeting with that
tranquillity in another world which had fled from him in this.

But as few, if any, among the sons of men are endowed with virtue such as
Job's, which was proof against the temptations that arise from the greatest
prosperity, as well as the lowest adversity, so I believe none ever met with
such severe trials. Yet are there many, "who (as the author of my text most
emphatically expresses it) die in the bitterness of their souls, and never eat
with pleasure." This may be truly said of those who are always subject to some
cruel bodily infirmities; whose whole life may be properly called a lingering
death, till, wasted with pain they sink into the grave, and their eyes never
see good.

But I will not dwell upon this melancholy representation of man, in a state of
sickness, but consider him as blessed with health and strength; yet among those
there are many who seem born only to misfortune, whose waking hours are spent
in labor, and slumbers broken with anxious solicitude, to obtain a scanty
subsistence, with the additional mortification of seeing their hopes blasted,
their schemes frustrated and others less worthy, though more successful,
preferred to those posts of honor and advantage which ought to have been the
just reward of merit. Add to this, the open dangers, as well as secret snares,
to which our condition in this life makes us liable. From the cruel effects of
malevolence and ill will what man is secure? and one deadly stroke from the
hand of a powerful enemy may crush him beneath the hope of ever rising more.
The unwary and unsuspecting mind is often made the dupe of the crafty and
designing, who, under the disguise of friendship, a profession by which the
uncorrupted heart may easily be deceived, have betrayed it to irremediable ruin.

I will only touch upon one evil more, incident to mankind; I mean the
irreparable loss of friends by death: for ever to part with those who have
shared with us our pleasures and our pains; to whom, as to a second self, we
have confided our most secret thoughts: to recollect pleasing conversations,
embittered with the sad remembrance that they can no more return: to look back
on past scenes, enjoyed with those whose dearest connexions death has
dissolved: to reflect, I say, on those, and with calmness, requires a fortitude
that is more, or an indifference that is less, than human. Philosophy, which
often serves as a pompous name under which to cover the want of feeling, may in
vain pretend to support; but the man whose heart is capable of forming such
tender ties, will find all the aid of religion necessary to sustain him in
these common, yet not on that account, less heavy afflictions.

Since then daily experience convinces us, that it is utterly out of our power
to secure to ourselves the possession of any thing the most dear to us; "since
riches make themselves wings and flee away;" since fame is a bubble which
depends on the caprice of men, who are today loud in our praises, and loading
us with honors, and tomorrow, with equal warmth, endeavoring to cover us
with infamy; let us not lay any stress upon such uncertain goods. What then,
will ye say, did that God, whose chief attribute is mercy, create us only to be
wretched? Did he give us desires after happiness, only to laugh at our vain
search for what can never be found? Are such notions suitable to the idea of a
wise and good being? No surely; let us not for a moment entertain thoughts so
unworthy of the Deity; but let us rest assured, that there will be a time when
all the dispensations of Providence, which now appear so incomprehensible to
our short-sighted though boasted reason, shall be fully cleared, and the
goodness and wisdom of God be made manifest in all his works: then shall all
those who, like Job, have retained their integrity under the pressure of
undeserved calamities, be made companions of their redeemer, and their God, to
all eternity.

Let us then, in order to fit ourselves for such society, divest our minds of
all those turbulent and unruly passions which trouble our repose in this life,
and must infallibly prevent our happiness in another. He who is full of the
inward horrors of envy, hatred, or revenge, can never be partaker of love,
peace, and calm tranquillity with angels, "and the spirits of just men made
perfect:" nor can the voluptuous man, whose soul can rise no higher than
sensual pleasures, be happy in those regions of purity. In like manner must the
miser part with his love of gold, "for no one can serve God and mammon," if he
wishes to be a sharer of that incorruptable treasure, "eternal in the heavens;
where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves can never break
through and steal."

May the Almighty Disposer of all events teach us to prefer a happy eternity to
this short fleeting life; "and may we pass through things temporal, so that we
finally lose not the things eternal," through Jesus Christ our Lord.

SERMON III.
AGAINST REVENGE.
MATTHEW. vi. 15. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your
Father forgive your trespasses.
IT is allowed, even by the greatest enemies of Christianity, that there never
was any system of religion so perfect, so calculated to promote the general
good of society, as that contained in the gospel: all (...) inspire love and
good will (...) none surely can be more conducive (...) happiness than the
precept so often and (...) positively enjoined "of the forgiveness of injuries."

This was a virtue unknown in the Heathen world: the most enlightened among
them, they whose notions came the nearest to Christianity, were so mistaken as
to look on it as a mark of a cowardly and base mind not to revenge an injury.
With them revenge was virtue; a virtue which long experience convinces us the
lowest and vilest of mankind are capable of attaining. Our minds are naturally
led to resent ill usage; and even the Jews, the people chosen of God, to whom
he deigned to reveal his will in a more particular manner than to the rest of
the world, were but very imperfect practitioners of this duty of forgiveness:
nay, we find amongst the best of them some very unjustifiable instances of
revenge; and the most that any one could arrive at was not to return evil for
evil: but the Godlike act of returning good for evil, of blessing our enemy
when he cursed us, of feeding him when hungry, and supplying him with drink
when dry, was too great a mastery over the passions for human nature,
unassisted, ever to arrive at.

Nor would (I may venture to affirm) the positive command of God himself,
forbidding revenge, have been sufficient to restrain creatures so prone to it,
had not our Blessed Savior condescended so far to our weakness as to be our
companion here on earth, and not only to enjoin this great duty by precept, but
was himself the most perfect pattern of a meek and forgiving spirit that the
world ever saw. Who as the friend of mankind, went about doing good: he
administered to our temporal wants; he healed our infirmities, and recommended
to our practice a religion which, if followed, will as undoubtedly conduce to
our peace and happiness in this state, as it will most assuredly procure it for
us in one eternal. What return did an ungrateful and unfeeling world make to
such invaluable favors?

Why, they fed on his bounty, and then forgot the miraculous hand that had
bestowed it on them: they were healed by his sovereign touch, and then, with a
strange and unheard of baseness, ascribed his power to sorcery and enchantment:
and at length, to crown all, and to carry their hatred as far as possible, they
seized on their benefactor, their Redeemer, and their God; and, with
sacrilegious hands, put him to the most painful and ignominious death: yet, at
the moment that he submitted to their unjust decree, boundless as his power
was, when he could in an instant have commanded fire from heaven to have
destroyed his enemies, he prayed for them to his Father, alleviating their
guilt, by imputing it to their ignorance.

I particularly address myself to those whose nice sensibility has been wounded
by undeserved reproach; those whose delicate feelings have been roused by the
sharp sting of ingratitude, and let them tell me if they do not find their
injuries lessen, and their resentments vanish, in the contemplation of what
their Lord endured for their sakes?

In the day of adversity his most intimate friends and followers forsook him
and fled; and he, who had been distinguished by marks of particular kindness,
and who, but a few hours before, had repeatedly declared he would die with him,
denied even the knowledge of him. None ever had it in their power to display
such striking marks of the virtue of forgiveness, because none ever received so
many and so great injuries, as he who is said "to have been despised and
rejected of his brethren, a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief."

But notwithstanding this great example, which was designed for our imitation,
such is the perverse b^^s of our dispositions, that no command of our Redeemer
is more industriously evaded than that express one of "forgiving others their
trespasses, as we ourselves hope to be forgiven," under a false notion that we
lose our dignity, and suffer our enemy to triumph over us; by neglecting to
revenge an insult, our pride takes the alarm, when otherwise perhaps our enmity
might sleep: but, alas! how unfit are such vindictive spirits to be judges in
their own cause; how likely to aggravate the affronts they have received, and
to apportion their resentments according to the imaginary offense.

It will certainly be allowed that the most just among us are inclinable to
judge well of themselves; and the more merit any one thinks he has, the greater
appears the injury that he thinks has been done him; and when his imagination
is heated by a sense of wrong, I am afraid he will not be quite equitable in
his vengeance. Another reason against pursuing revenge is, that we do not no
where it will stop: for the man who could, unprovoked, do us an injury, will
certainly not be just enough to submit to our punishments, but will take the
first opportunity of returning it; this will call for a second revenge: thus we
shall be engaged in a state of continual hostilities, and, instead of mutual
good offices, our time will be spent in a retaliation of injuries.

It is certainly the interest of every man to use his utmost endeavors to
eradicate this turbulent unruly passion from his breast: for I know not which
to say is the most pitiable object, he who broods over his wrongs, lamenting
his want of power to revenge; or he who pleases himself with the diabolical and
short-lived satisfaction of rendering his enemy as unhappy as himself: but
undoubtedly they may both be said to carry a hell in their bosom.

I am convinced men would want few persuasives to forgiveness, if they righly
considered the imperfection of human nature; how liable we are to mistake the
meaning of words; how apt to be imposed on by a misrepresentation of facts, we
may charge that to design which was the effect of inadvertency; and our being
hurt may be owing perhaps more to the too great nicety of our sensations, than
to any real offense we have received. -- But let us take it in the worst light,
and suppose the blow that has been given to have proceeded from a malignant
heart, yet shall we suffer our enemy to triumph over us, by being able to shake
our souls from a steady adherence to Christian virtue? No, rather let us
imitate our great Master, by pitying the wretch, who, in injuring us, has
offended a Being as just as he is merciful, and who will not fail to punish all
such evil doers.

Vengeance is mine, says the Lord, and I will surely repay:" to him then let
us leave it, nor impiously dare to direct the thunderbolt from his Almighty
Hand, by assuming the right of punishment to ourselves. Nor let the mistaken
pride, which makes us dread the censure of creatures not at all superior to
ourselves, prevail over our good resolutions, and make us act contrary to the
dictates of our own conscience.

True greatness of mind can never consist in revenge, since the basest, the
meanest coward, will pursue it to the utmost: but to forbear revenge, and
forgive your enemy when you have him in your power, is an action which will add
dignity to the highest character, and a victory over the passions, which none
but the truly brave could ever attain.

It is true, there are some cases in which a man is obliged to vindicate his
right, where his fortune or reputation are injuriously attacked. It is so far
from being blameable, that it is really commendable to defend them to the
utmost of our power: but having done that, let all personal malice cease; and
though our adversary should be sullen, and make no concession, yet let not that
impede our forgiveness, but let us remember that we are beings liable to error,
and not insist on that submission and acknowledgement of offense from our
fellow creatures, which is due only to God: that God, who is our common father
and our judge, and who has taught us by the parable of the unmerciful servant
on what terms we may expect mercy.

When we look up to the great source of all perfection, in whose sight the
angels are not pure; and consider our own imperfection, how often we offend,
and how miserable we must be unless he pardons, can we be severe to our
fellow servants, whose weak nature, like our own, is not always proof against
temptation? "Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them who trespass against
us," is the Christian's daily prayer: and it is a mockery of God to offer up
petitions on such terms as we are resolved not to comply with. Let us not
deceive ourselves, and think that a mere outward form, and words of course,
will supply the place of that unfeigned cordial forgiveness which Christ
requires as only available for God's pardoning us: "for so likewise, says he,
shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not
every man his trespasses." He elsewhere enjoins his disciples to intercede with
God for their enemies, before whom it is both impious and dangerous to
dissemble, and from whom no mercy can be expected for those who with feigned
lips ask it for others.

A man who consults his own ease, will certainly never suffer the corrosive
pangs of malignity and hatred to take possession of his breast, instead of the
gentle, pacific frame of mind which, promoting the good of others, ensures
peace and tranquillity to himself in this world, and on which his happiness to
all eternity depends.

It would be vain to urge any more arguments: he who refuses obedience to this
law shuts the gates of heaven against himself; nor aught does it avail him that
the Son of God condescended to be made Man, to live a life of poverty and
affliction, and to die an ignominious and pain^^^ death, since he rejects the
terms of salvation*

From this perverse and wicked turn (...) so hurtful to our own souls, may
(...) whose vengeance is terrible, and whose (...) are infinite, preserve us,
through the (...) intercession of Jesus Christ.

SERMON IV.
OF MIRTH AND GRIEF.
PROVERBS xvii. 13. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful; and the end of
that mirth is heaviness.
IT is not to be supposed that, by these words, the preacher meant to condemn
that innocent cheerfulness which is generally the companion of minds
unacquainted with vice, and its attendant misfortunes. To enjoy the blessings
which heaven bestows upon us, is the best way of (...) gratitude to the giver;
and it is a dishonorable notion of the Deity to suppose him best pleased with
seeing his creatures covered with gloom and melancholy; less acceptable still
to a pure Being must be that immoderate mirth, which shuts out every serious
thought, and too often ends in riot and debauchery.

The royal preacher, who had made pleasure his ultimate aim; whose power and
riches were equal to his wisdom, by which God had distinguished him above all
the kings of the earth: this prince, blessed with every advantage, employed
them all in a search after happiness: he gave a loose to his soul, resolved to
find out that which could yield it the most delight.

After having vainly sought it among the noisy pleasures of the world, he
concludes with a declaration, "that if it was any where to be found, it was in
peaceful joys, and the calm felicity that arises from the consciousness of a
well spent life."

In many places he exclaims against the folly of those who attempt to lose
their cares in loud peals of merriment: "I said of laughter it is mad, and of
mirth, what does it?" Eccles. ii. 2. A question which may be very well asked,
since experience convinces us, that when we fly from ourselves to such a
resource, it is only parting from our anxieties for a moment, to have them
returned afterward with redoubled force.

How often have we found, after an evening past in the utmost festivity, our
spirits exhausted to a great degree, and even still more lowered by a
recollection of the last night's mirth! Nor will indeed always the causes of
our merriment bear a retrospection. Too often the wit which circulates the loud
laugh, owes its poignancy to something which must put modesty to the blush; and
sometimes it shocks goodnature, by turning into ridicule the defects of a
person who is not endowed with a capacity to return the satire. Add to this,
that midnight revels generally incapacitate us for business the next day, and
almost always unfit us for devotion.

But here let it not be understood that I condemn as criminal all assemblies
met with a design of being merry. Recreation is not only desirable, but
necessary: man is a social being, and society was not designed as a snare, but
a comfort to him. A cheerful freedom of conversation softens our natures, and
prevents our falling into moroseness. On the other hand, if cheerfulness
degenerates into licentiousness, it degrades us below humanity.

There have been, perhaps, instances of men who have run into extreme riot,
which their minds did not approve, merely from a fear of the imputation of
ill nature, and a want of complaisance. Goodnature, indeed, I look on as so
essential, that all other virtues without it are of no value: it is the mark of
an open generous soul, and finishes the character of a good (...) Complaisance,
which naturally springs from (...) renders a man a useful member of society, as
well as an amiable companion to his friends: it sweetens conversation, and has
the art of conveying instruction in so pleasing a manner, as never to offend:
but there is a weakness which passes by that name, that makes people incapable
of resisting importunity, however unreasonable, and by that folly they lie
exposed to every temptation: not at all guided by their own reason, they are
governed wholly by example, and blindly conform to the humors of others,
without any settled principle of their own to rule their actions.

This foolish sof^^ess of disposition is so far from deserving the name of
goodnature, or complaisance, that it is owing to a base pusillanimity, which
first enslaves, and, by consequence, at last renders us despicable.

Another reason which I am apt to believe is often laid hold of for running
into this dangerous extreme, is the desire of acting in opposition to those
gloomy mortals who look on every degree of merriment as vicious and immoral;
who proudly arrogate to themselves the right of laying down rules for the
world, and severely censure those who refuse to be guided by them. Though these
men may mean well, and deserve rather pity than anger, yet they are apt to
raise indignation in minds of an opposite turn, and make them give into a
blameable levity, in order show their detestation of the others absurdities.

What imperfect creatures are we that we must thus err on one side or the
other! I have, indeed, heard it alleged by some, in defense of gaiety, that
when the spirits are high, the understanding appears with the greatest luster:
possibly some witticisms may at such times start forth; and often, I am afraid,
in the height of their follies they run into such ridiculous fooleries, as they
blush afterward to reflect on: but suppose I grant, which I readily can, that
men of wit may show themselves to advantage, when they give a loose to their
humor; yet we must allow such humor is dangerous, as a man, elated with
seeing himself admired by his company, is apt to be off his guard, and not to
set proper limits to his tongue.

In short, it may be said, immoderate mirth is only an artifice to avoid
thinking, and is of no real advantage either to body or mind: fills men with
more spirits than it leaves them able to govern; it banishes serious
conversation, and leaves nothing but superficial conceits in the place, which,
by insensible degrees, produce habitual vanity and impertinence, below the
dignity of human nature; and when once you see a man degrade himself into a
buffoon, though you may laugh, yet at the same time you despise him.

I would now particularly address myself to to young people, who cry youth is
the season for mirth, and think they find an excuse in that for every folly
they are guilty of: reflection seldom finds a place in their breasts, and they
spend the best of their days, the time when health and spirits would enable
them to engage in laudable and useful pursuits, in a constant round of
amusements, and a study, if it may be so styled, how to laugh away the morning
of their lives: the noon succeeds, when their serious thoughts are taken up
with the business of this life* the evening comes on, when they wonder that the
hour, which once appeared at such infinite distance, is stolen so soon upon
them; but as serious thoughts will sometimes intrude, however unwelcome, let me
beg my young hearers will not always drive them away by tumult and noise: a
very little consideration will convince them, unless they are lost in
unpardonable indiscretion that tumultuary pleasures leave a sting behind them,
and that those only can bear a future recollection which have been governed by
reason and moderation.

I fear those of rank and fortune, whose example have the most influence on
mankind, do, by their practice, encourage extravagancies of this sort. Bred up
in idleness, their general employment is to contrive to kill time agreeably, as
it is called; but surely these are very ungrateful returns to the Divine
Bounty, which has so liberally provided for their happiness beyond the common
lot of mortals: it is true, they have no hard labor to wear out their bodies
and exhaust their minds; and certainly this ought to be looked on as a
blessing. But are there not ways by which even they may employ their time in a
manner useful to themselves and to others? The prudent management of a
plentiful fortune requirers the owner's attention, perhaps, not less than the
necessary provision for daily maintenance does that of the man in narrow
circumstances.

Some time too ought to be allowed to the duties of hospitality, to entertain
our friends and neighbors in a manner suited to their rank, and our own; and,
upon the whole, we shall find that the gentleman's time may be as fully
employed as his, who labors for his living, with this difference only, that
God has allotted the former the most agreeable way of spending it; and, as the
bounty of heaven has exempted such men from the common cares of life, it is a
duty incumbent on them to endeavor to become useful members of the
commonwealth, as magistrates to apportion a part of their time to the
distribution of justice, for the punishment of vice, and the encouragement of
virtue.

By thus making themselves of consequence to human society, they may always
prevent time from being burdensome to them: and suppose there should be (...)
^ome leisure hours, certainly a person of liberal education can never be at a
loss how to spend it, both with delight and improvement. In order to assure
ourselves that we have no time to spend in riot and excess, we need only
compare the period of our lives with the vast variety of avocations we have to
employ them in.

The term we have to live may generally be called seventy years; and though
some few extend their race beyond that time, much fewer ever arrive at it.
However, let us suppose that to be the stretch of man's life, yet many years
must necessarily be lost in childhood; and the infirmities of age, though not
felt equally in all, will undoubtedly deprive us of some more: add to this, the
necessary portion of hours allotted to the business of eating, sleeping,
dressing, visiting: the management of our families and fortunes call for their
share of our attention:

And is there none to be dedicated to the service of our God? Alas! how little
do the best of us consider what we owe to the Author of our being, and the
Giver of every thing that can make that being desirable! Does he not deserve
from us some return of gratitude? and is not even self-interest concerned in
appropriating a few hours to the consideration of eternity? If we cannot find
time for that most necessary of all duties, we ought rather to regret our
having so little, than trifle away what we have. But I make no doubt every one
is convinced of the truth of what I say; and a little consideration ought to be
sufficient to make us not neglect this important concern.

But as it is necessary for the mind of man to be sometimes relaxed and amused,
I would point out those amusements which appear to be both innocent and
agreeable; among which we may reckon painting and music: painting, where people
are blessed with a genius, is a delightful employment; and music exalts the soul,
and raises it above this world; it inspires the most pleasing devotion, and
anticipates the pleasures of hereafter.

There are few persons of good education who have not a taste for some of the
polite arts, which will ever procure a laudable and pleasing entertainment; but
there are some entertainments which may be enjoyed by every one whose fortune
will allow it; among which none can be more pleasing to a beneficent mind than
that of relieving the pains of the distressed; to wipe away the tear of the
afflicted; to ease the aching heart; to render life desirable to those to whom
it has been burdensome, are pleasures that not only may be called so, at the
time they are performed, but will ever afford pleasure on reflection, which
noise, riot, and excess of mirth can never do.

Among other rational pleasures give me leave to mention one which I cannot
look on as the least; I mean that which arises in the mind from the view of
beautiful rural scenes: here we may survey the stupendous works of the great
Creator, till we lose ourselves in admiration and delight.

This is a pleasure which will never pall; the eye is never tired with gazing
on the beauties of nature; still are they seen with new wonder; still beheld
with fresh delight. On such occasions the soul is naturally led to adore that
Being, whose wisdom and goodness are so evidently displayed before us. Happy
man! who in thus contemplating the Deity can find sublime enjoyment, which the
gay voluptuary can never know, and compared with which all his sensual joys are
worthless.

Such amusements as these may be truly called a foretaste of heaven, and will
fit us for those pure and lasting pleasures; which that we may enjoy through
all eternity, God of his infinite mercy grant, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

SERMON V.
THE CRUELTY OF SLANDERING INNOCENT, AND DEFENSELESS WOMEN.
MATTHEW vii. 1. Judge not, that ye be not judged.
THESE few words carry with them a threat, which it might be imagined would be
sufficient to deter any from too severely censuring the conduct of others. If
we would look into our own actions, and truly examine those for which we must
one day be accountable, we should find very little leisure, as well as
inclination, to inspect those of other people.

If our disposition leads us rather to condemn than approve, we may gratify
that propensity by turning our eyes inward, and not injure another by wounding
his reputation. By this means we may make that beneficial to our own souls,
which would otherwise prove a curse to them and to society. Our self-love will
prevent our passing too severe a censure on our own faults; but those who are
inclinable to censure the failings of others, will rarely err on the favorable
side.

When the censorious tell a story which hurts the character of any one, they
either skip over or very lightly touch on the circumstances which might incline
the hearers to judge heartily, but dwell upon, and, perhaps, too often
exaggerate those which show things in the worst light.

Slanderers may be divided into two classes: the first are they whose
diabolical natures lead them to invent fictions to traduce the character of any
to whom they owe a grudge: the second are those who industriously spread the
scandal which they have heard from others. From the first of these calumniators
what innocence can secure us? What virtue can defend us from the malice of an
enemy who is not restrained by the ties of honor, or checks of conscience? I
fear such wretches are too far gone for any thing I can say to have an effect
upon them; I shall only then desire those who suffer from the undeserved
aspersions of the wicked, to comfort themselves with an assurance that truth
will at length triumph over falsehood, and a constant perseverance in well
doing, will be too hard even for malevolence itself.

The second sort of slanderers which I shall mention, are they whose ears are
ever open to scandal; who are greedy in hearing, and eager in spreading
reports: if the things which such a one relates are not of some consequence,
there will be no pleasure in seeming to know them; this leads him to inflame
every word and circumstance; to aggravate what is blameable; to pervert what is
not so; and misrepresent the most indifferent actions. I am afraid too many
commit this fault, without ever reflecting that they are sinning against their
neighbor in the most essential point in which they can injure him; that they
are robbing him of what is much more precious than all his other possessions:
yet this is really the case; and what makes the injury still more atrocious is,
that it is generally more irreparable than any other.

It is possible to make a man ample amends for any injustice you have been
guilty of, with regard to his money or estate, by restoring fo^^-fold; but it
is not always in the power o^ man who has wounded another's reputation to
restore it whole as before. The evil which has been said of any one is not
easily forgotten, but is often remembered to their disadvantage long after it
has ceased to be talked of.

It may not be an observation quite unworthy of remark, that those people are
usually most severe upon the faults of others, who have least merit themselves
to boast of; their souls not capable of rising to any emulation, find a
satisfaction in levelling the rest of the world to their own pitch: But how
ineffectual as well as detestable a method of covering defects is this? It is
certain never to succeed: the defamer is always sure to have a number of spies
on his own conduct, who will not fail to expose to public view the errors of a
person who makes it his business to point out those of others.

If a man would secure to himself the good will of mankind, it must be by a
quite contrary practice; by at least being neuter, and, if he has not
goodnature enough to palliate, not maliciously aggravate faults. A good word
is an easy obligation; but not to speak ill requires only our silence, which
costs us nothing, says archbishop Tillotson; but it is a melancholy reflection
to think there should be in mankind an uncharitable spirit which finds greater
pleasure in detecting faults, than in commending virtues.

It is sad, but I fear too true, that none are more liable to censure than
those whose great and good qualities might be looked on as a certain defense
against it. The evil minded and envious never fail to find a flaw in those
virtues which they cannot imitate. Those who have deservedly met with applause,
from the discerning and generous, have often been loaded with reproach by the
rash judging and cruel.

I hope I shall not be understood here as laying and discouragement in the way
of those who wish to pursue the paths of virtue: for though a good life cannot
silence calumny, it will at length disarm it, by showing the falseness of
report. The malicious slanderer may, for a time, hurt the good name of another,
by injurious scandal; but hereafter it will be found that he has done the most
material injury to himself, since the severe judgment which he has passed upon
others, will undoubtedly be passed upon himself by an impartial judge, "who
sees not as man sees, but will reward and punish every one according to their
desert."

I will here mention what is seldom taken notice of, but yet is the most
insidious way of ruining reputation; I mean by commendation. By bestowing
lavish praises on slight virtues, the character of candor is cheaply acquired,
and an easy belief gained, when afterward it is made use of to the perfidious
purpose of detraction in matters of real consequence.

The cruelty of this practice can hardly be equalled; and, I am sorry to say
it, is too successfully made use of against the most weak and defenseless part
of the creation; whose characters once sullied can never be washed clean by
floods of tears, or regained by the most faultless conduct: yet surely I may be
pardoned when I say that, among those unhappy females, who by one false step
have for ever forfeited any claim to the world's good opion of their past or
future actions, there are some who, had they not been possessed of the most
amiable qualities that can adorn the mind, would never have fallen.

Tenderness of disposition, attachment, an open unreserved confidence, an
unsuspecting innocence, have been the sources of that fatal error, which has
unfitted them for chaste society, and made them the scorn of those who have
either escaped through want of solicitation, or owed their preservation to the
frigidity of their constitutions, and prudent selfishness of their hearts.

Unhappy women! the same delicacy of sentiment which betrayed you to your ruin,
makes it insupportable to be despised "by each affected she who tells your
story, and blesses her kind stars that she is virtuous." But how often is that
inestimable jewel, a good name, lost merely through suspicion? Let me then warn
all those who are guilty of playing away the reputation of another. "how they
scatter firebrands and death, and say, am I not in sport?"

We ought to look on every one's character as too sacred to be traduced from
suspicion only; appearances are very fallacious, and we are sometimes d^ceived
by the strongest: there may be many private reasons why people are not always
at liberty to discover the true motives of their actions, which, if they did,
might clear them from censure: there is no harm in erring on the good-natured
side; and where two constructions may be made, it is the duty of a Christian to
make the most favorable one. 'The triumph of wit, says the Spectator, is to
subdue your censure, to be quick in seeing faults, and slow in exposing them.'

Indeed it is impossible a noble mind can descend to slander even an enemy; but
it is a certain sign of a mean and abject soul to delight in hearing and
talking scandal. It was an excellent saying of Antoninus, the great emperor and
philosopher, 'No man was ever unhappy for not prying into the actions and
conditions of other men; but that man is necessarily so, who does not observe
himself, and consider his own soul.'

Undoubtedly it is our greatest interest to examine our own hearts: here, I
fancy, the best of us will find so many daily offenses, such a variety of
passions to be kept under, such repeated failures in our duty, that to keep a
proper guard upon ourselves we shall find no leisure to be impertinently and
wickedly censorious in endeavoring to publish the faults of others.

I am afraid it seldom happens that a person who is fond of tale-bearing keeps
strictly to truth: the enlarging on a story, so as to excite the curiousity of
your hearers, fixes their attention, and makes them listen with eagerness,
which is the great point a dealer in scandal has to gain.

I must confess, I know no crime, except murder, that can be of such real bad
consequence as what I have now been treating of; as there is no warding off a
blow which is often given by an unknown hand, and may do us irreparable injury
before we find out from whence it comes: nor is there any sin for which, I
think, can be pleaded so little excuse: other vices have something in view,
from which a self-gratification may be proposed: the ambitious man may
expatiate on the charms of power, the libertine on the delights of sensuality,
and the miser on the enjoyment of wealth; but the slanderer proposes no other
pleasure to himself but that of seeing others wretched: it proceeds from a
corrosive self-tormenting turn of mind, incapable of being either happy itself,
or suffering others to be so.

There is no disposition which our Blessed Savior expresses his disapprobation
of, more than this uncharitable one: he displays his dislike of our exalting
ourselves by degrading our neighbors, in that elegant parable of the Publican
and Pharisee; he condemns the self-sufficiency of him who could see the
smallest mote in his brother's eye, while he was unconscious of a much more
greater obstruction in his own.

And, finally, he assures us, that the same justice we show in our judgment of
our fellow creatures, shall we receive at the hand of our Creator. May this
equitable sentence deter us from cruelly reviling each other, and teach us to
live in that brotherly love and harmony which becomes the Followers of Christ
Jesus.

SERMON VI.
THE DUTY OF CHILDREN TO PARENTS.
EXODUS xx. 12. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in
the land which the Lord thy God gives thee.
THIS is a precept on which I do not remember ever to have heard a sermon,
though it enjoins a duty which I fear we have too often occasion to be reminded
of.

The great law of Nature has implanted in every human breast a disposition to
love and revere those to whom we have been taught, from our earliest infancy,
to look up for every comfort, convenience, and pleasure in life; while that
state of dependency remains, the impression continues in its full force, but
certain it is that it gradually weakens and wears off as we become masters of
ourselves, which made it indispensably necessary, lest we should degenerate
into ingratitude and disobedience, that a positive command should be given;
and, to render this injunction the more forcible, God has annexed to it a
peculiar reward, a number of happy years to those whose filial obedience is
such as is acceptable to the common Father of all: and as he has been pleased
to express his approbation of a steady adherence to this law, by singular marks
of favor, so likewise did he punish the breach of it by exemplary displeasure;
death was the only expiation of this crime.

Nor were the Jews the only nation who looked upon disobedience to parents as
worthy of capital punishment. Even at this day I have heard it confidently
affirmed that, among the Chinese, should a son so far forget himself as to lift
his hand in a hostile manner against his father, not only himself, but his wife
and children would be put to death, his servants and dependents would share the
same fate, the house where he lived would be razed, and the ground sown with
salt, as supposing that there must be the most hopeless depravity of manners in
a community to which such a monster belonged.

Herodotus, in his account of the religion and customs of the Persians, tells
us that they looked on parricide as an impossible thing; and that when any
action happened, which appeared to be like it, the reputed son was considered
as suppositious, and probably owing his birth to adultery: their notion, in
this particular, sufficiently showed in what a heinous light they regarded the
sin of undutifulness in general.

I must confess, when any dispute betwixt parents and children rises high, I am
inclinable to think the latter the aggressors. The anxious solicitude of
parental affection, the daily fatigue which attends the nurture of helpless
infancy, the unwearied application that is requisite for the formation of the
minds of youth, the anxieties which the parent feels for the future welfare of
his offspring, often, perhaps, denying himself conveniences that his children
may have superfluities, are obligations such as can never be acquitted; and, I
own, it has often given me great pain when I have heard it remarked that love
descended: surely such an observation is a reproach to human nature.

Is it possible that paternal tenderness should outweigh filial gratitude? That
a knowledge of long tried friendship, experienced virtues, and the receiving
benefits, which, were we to employ ourselves daily in paying, would still leave
us debtors, should form weaker ties than what proceed chiefly from instinct*
and are fixed even bfore we can judge whether the creature on whom we lavish
our fondness is worthy of it or not.

Strange! that the receiving of favors should less inspire us with sentiments
of love, generosity, and respect, than the conferring them! that the patron or
parent should be less dear to the dependent o^ child, than the dependent or
child to the patron or parent! Yet it is certain, that there are many more
undutiful children than there are unkind parents: the great wisdom of the
Creator has determined there should be few of the latter, in order to the
preservation of mankind; but surely that there should be many of the former is
a disgrace to humanity. The Almighty, our benevolent Father, has, in many
places of sacred writ, denounced the heaviest curses against those who honor
not their parents.

On the contrary, he whose heart is endowed with filial pi^ty, may look up to
heaven with a certain assurance of having his prayers heard, his desires
gratified, and of meeting with that return of duty from his children which he
has shown to his parents. But he who has filled his father's soul with
bitterness, and drawn tears from his mother's eyes, may justly fear a son that
will revenge their wrongs.

The judgments of God can never appear more severely than by making them feel,
in their own persons, the sharp pangs which are occasioned by the ingratitude
of children. I believe it seldom happens but that disobedience is punished this
way; for they who have been forgetful themselves of the great duty owing to
those from whom they drew their birth, will rarely teach it their offspring.

A love of that self which they see renewed in their children, generally makes
them run into a blind fondness, which leaves them the dupes of their own folly;
for those, who, by their example, have learned neither love or esteem, are sure
to turn that unmerited partiality to their own emolument, and despise those
from whom they receive it.

In the earliest ages of the world, men were wont to look on a parent's
blessing as a thing of the greatest consequence to their future happiness, and
to dread his curse as an entail of misery on them and their posterity. Nor were
these hopes and fears without foundation; for we have many instances in ancient
history where God seems to confirm what the father has wished to succeeding
generations: and this must certainly have a good effect on the minds of
children, as they would desire to avoid misery and obtain happiness.

Let us not look on it as superstitious to suppose that such wishes may still
carry weight with them, and that our fulfilling or neglecting our duty to
parents may be rewarded or punished, even in this world. But should that not be
the case, if we have any belief in religion, we may know that it will be so in
another; and surely what lasts to eternity is worth our care. I cannot help
here remarking a species of ingratitude and folly, which is but too common: it
often happens that people in a low station of life are solicitous that their
children shall rise to a higher degree: to affect which, they think no labor
too much; they deny themselves every pleasure, except what proceeeds from
imagination, in anticipating the figure which their young ones shall hereafter
make in the world.

They are indeed, for the most part, much too sanguine in their expectations;
but suppose them quite answered, and that they see their children in a
situation superior to their hopes, yet how often does it happen that the
consequence of their being raised, instead of exciting sentiments of gratitude
and respect toward those who gave up every thing to make them what they are,
is, that they are ashamed of their origninal, and blush to acknowledge their
parents and benefactors; who receive no other return for their kindness than
the being shunned in public, and despised in private.

In this case, the mistaken notions of the parent is no excuse for the base
ingratitude of the child. But there are some who call themselves dutiful, and
perhaps are called so by the world, because they are never deficient in any
outward marks of respect, which cost them nothing, thing, but are very sparing
in administering to their parents necessities. Indeed it is the duty of a man,
if his circumstances will admit of it, never to let a parent know what
necessity is, but to be industrious in finding out their wants, without putting
them to the humbling task of reciting them, and asking that as a favor which
they have a right to demand as a debt.

It is not giving alone, but giving without grudging or the least seeming
reluctance, that can make the gift valuable where so much is owing: not a
murmur, not a complaint should be heard; but the cheerfulness of the
countenance should rather express a sense of receiving than conferring an
obligation. Nor is it sufficient to allow just enough to keep them above want;
to allot a certain sum, and, if we find it not last to the time we expected,
seem to wonder at it, as if we exacted an account where we have no right to
expect any; but, on the contrary, it is our duty to take care that there shall
be always something more than enough: surely there is no reason to fear that a
parent will ever make an ill use of the generosity of his children. But, above
all, there is one thing of which we ought never to be guilty; I mean the
trumpeting to the world our deeds, as if we assumed to ourselves a merit in
making our money subservient to a mere act of duty. If a parent has any
delicacy, it will be terrible to hear from a third person, of the obligations
they are under to their children; to those who owe to them not only their
being, but their health, their education, their all, and without whose
sustaining hand they had now been themselves destitute of support.

I have now done with this branch of my subject, as I look upon it there would
be no end answered farther; since, after all, if a man's own mind does not
incline him to act liberally toward his parents, it will be hardly possible to
instill it into him. But there is another error which people of perhaps real
goodness of heart in other particulars, are apt to fall into; the despising the
want of that genius, politeness, and address, in their parents, which
themselves are possessed off; instead of exerting their abilities to conceal
these defects from the eyes of others, they are the first to expose and
ridicule them, thinking by that means to make their own excellence the more
admired: but surely the display of talents, at the expense of those to whom we
owe most reverence, is a vanity below our pursuit. No one can be exalted by the
degradation of his (...) superior qualities they will appear, and never can
shine forth with greater luster than when they are employed in showing those,
from whom we derive our being, in a respectable light.

I shall conclude this discourse with an exhortation seriously to consider of
the vast debt which is due to parents, of the absolute command of God to
obedience, and the many curses denounced against those who refuse to obey. And
may we deserve the one, and avoid the other, through the merits of Christ
Jesus. AMEN

SERMON VII.
THE ADVANTAGES OF GOOD EDUCATION.
PROVERBS xxii. 6. Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old
he will not depart from it.
HAVING already treated on the subject of the duty owing from children to
parents, I proceed, in the next place, to explain what I think is the real duty
from parents to children, which I look on to be little understood,
notwithstanding the mistaken partiality they too often feel for them.

While they think no expense too much, no pains too great to bestow, in giving
them those showy accomplishments which will distinguish them in the world, they
too often neglect to teach them a true knowledge of themselves, a government of
their passions, and that uniform rectitude of manners, without which all
superficial outward ornaments are vain and empty. Religion is the base on which
all virtue is built; it ought, therefore, to be the business of the educator to
instill into the minds of his pupil an early veneration for the Deity; a fear of
offending that God who is omnipresent, who is of purer eyes than to behold
iniquity, and from whose blessing alone they can ever hope for happiness,
either in this world or the next.

This first foundation carefully laid, is seldom known not to have an influence
through life. Such is the force of habit, that those who have had the advantage
of a religious education are shocked at the first appearances of vice, and very
rarely deviate far from the lessons of virtue which they have learnt in their
infancy.

As the chissel works the rude block, into shape, so education forms the human
soul, which would otherwise be filled with nothing more than a jumble of wild
unconnected ideas, incapable of forming itself into any regular system. If we
enquire into the causes why there are such numbers of people in the world who
seem to have no settled principles of right or wrong, but to be swayed by
interest or passion in every action of their lives, we shall find it chiefly
owing to the wrong bias of their education. Parents are more solicitous that
their children should shine through the brilliancy of their wit, and politeness
of address, than excel in a plain unaffected goodness of heart. In fine, they
wish them rather to talk eloquently than act virtuously. But, good God! of how
little consequence is a flow of words, unless they convey the real dictates of
a mind untainted with folly, and uncorrupted with vice.

It is much to be wished that the honest ear might never be enchanted by false
reasoning, delivered in a graceful manner, and that it might never be in the
power of the wicked to acquire the aid of rhetoric. To prevent which evil the
seeds of religion should be first sown in the infant mind, the best stock on
which to engraft the moral virtues, and without which foundation to inculcate
lessons of morality must be vain. Every the least tendency to vice should be
checked, because if thought on as of little consequence, and so overlooked or
indulged, it soon grows into habit, and habitual faults are very hard to
conquer.

The most useful part of education is to learn and practice our duty toward
God, and toward our neighbor; to be strictly and conscientiously just; and
what is still more, to be liberal without ostentation; to be possessed of that
tender feeling for others sufferings, which, in its several degrees, extends
itself to every animal of creation, from our fellow creatures to the lowest
reptile, are qualities infinitely superior to what commonly embellish people of
the most refined education.

In vain do we heap up riches for our children, if we take no care to inform
them in what manner they should use them: instead of preserving their virtue we
are laying snares for it, by providing them the means of indulging vices, which
a life of labor and industry might have prevented their having leisure to
think of. In the bringing up of children parents ought not to rely entirely on
their own judgments, since their partiality often prevents them from seeing,
and still more often from correcting errors in their offspring, which in their
future lives may be of fatal consequence.

An ancient philosopher being asked, What he thought most proper for children
to learn? answered, That which they ought to do when they grow up. It is
unreasonable to expect an equal improvement in all children; some minds open
very slowly, and require great pains in instructing, and others are so very
barren, that it is working against nature to teach them any thing; if these are
harmless it is sufficient, and to attempt to instill a greater knowledge than to
distinguish right from wrong, is only to do them hurt.

But there are some who display an uncommon understanding, at an age when
nothing is expected from them; the doting parent is so pleased with this early
appearance of wit, and admires his child's lively parts to such a degree as to
leave him almost to his own guidance; who soon becomes sensible of his
consequence, and grows negligent from a persuasion that he has already attained
the height of improvement, by which mistake he generally appears at twenty the
same that he was at ten.

It has often been a matter of dispute, whether public or private tuition is
most eligible; undoubtedly, where a preceptor has only one pupil to attend, he
may study his disposition in such a manner as to let nothing pass unobserved,
which may be either of future advantage or detriment to him: in his frequent
conversations he may convey instruction in the most pleasing manner, if he has
the art of letting it fall naturally in, and losing the name of tutor in that
of friend; when the appearance of the tutor is too rigidly displayed, he is
listened to perhaps with respect, but generally with too great a dislike for
any of his precepts to make an impression on the hearer.

But I think it not impossible, in a great measure, to practice this address,
even where there are numbers; and one advantage there certainly is where there
is a community, that it will create an emulation, a laudable desire to excel.

There are instances of children who will shed tears at being outdone: this
temper; if kept within proper limits, and not suffered to degenerate into envy,
may be a noble incitement to virtue; as that is the most promising disposition
where shame is the greatest punishment that can be inflicted: to such praise
will ever be the greatest reward, and will never lose its end; but will always
be a means of preventing negligence, and a spur to industry in every task they
undertake. There is one method of teaching of which I cannot approve; I mean
severe discipline: I know no mind on which this treatment can have the desired
effect; the generous and open it provokes, the gentle it terrifies, and the
obdurate it hardens.

I look upon it, that there is no greater preservative against the temptations
which best youth, than the being engaged in the attaining of any useful
knowledge: Idleness is the nurse of evil thoughts, and it ought to be the chief
care of parents to engage the young mind in a continual pursuit of some
valuable acquisition, until it has learned wisdom and philosophy sufficient to
regulate its conduct.

An old Greek poet used to say, that education was like the hand and ho^, it
rooted up vice, and planted virtue. It is to be lamented, but is certainly
true, that what is called the best education is, for the most part, the worst:
dancing, music, and French, take up so much time, that there is little left for
more useful studies: thought these are accomplishments that should not be
entirely slighted, yet they ought not to be thought of consequence sufficient
to employ whole years in learning, which is often the case; while the greater
concerns, what would qualify them for amiable members of society, make them
worthy masters and mistresses, and valuable friends, are totally forgotten.

I would not have it here understood as if I thought all the hours of childhood
should be employed in grave exercises: relaxation is undoubtedly necessary both
for the body and mind; to divide their time between learning and amusement, so
that they may ever return to the former with pleasure and alacrity, and study
may never seem irksome to them, is the great art, and what teachers should
chiefly attend to.

Hitherto I have spoken in general terms of both sexes, I shall now confine
myself to the female one, whose education is of great consequence to the world,
and is, I think, in general, sadly mistaken. Boarding schools are the places
where they are usually bred: as I have had frequent opportunities of making
observations on these seminaries of feminine learning, I must confess, I never
saw any whose management I could entirely approve of. They seldom teach any
thing more than external modes, and outward ceremonies; the governess's own
knowledge rarely extending further: and as they are oftener people of a narrow
than a liberal mind, they are generally partial to those children who have most
fortune, or from whom they receive the greatest advantage.

Add to this, that the chief care of them is left to teachers, who are for the
most part, especially the French, extremely ignorant, and from whom they
oftener learn disguise, and little low cunning, than any good qualities. They
are often taught to say their prayers in a language which they don't
understand; and address their God by way of getting by rote a French lesson: to
be able to retain a few phrases in the same tongue, is thought of more
consequence than any thing else, and a conversation in their own is strictly
forbidden: the breach of which command is punished as a great fault. The minds
of girls are much more pliant than the minds of boys, and may, in their
childhood, be molded which way you please: how necessary then is it to give
them a right turn, to instill into their tender nature every principle of virtue
and goodness. Having once inspired them with that universal benevolence, which
is the spirit of Christianity, politeness and complaisance will, in a great
degree, be taught by it; and a few forms, which may be soon acquired, is all
that is wanting to make complete good breeding.

I am far from thinking that women should be taught no kind of literature, or
believing they will make worse mistresses of families for having more learning
than their cookmaid: on the contrary, I think they are the fitter for the
office, as I imagine every man of sense will wish his wife to be not merely a
domestic, but a friend and companion; for which reason I would recommend such
studies as tend to enlarge the understanding, improve the ideas, and entertain
the soul with the beauties of nature and virtue. Economy and housewifery are
necessary branches of female education, and works of ingenuity and fancy may
fill up the leisure hours, both innocently and agreeably: those who have a ta^^
for music ought to be encouraged; but it is ridiculous for one who has neither
voice or ear to throw away that time in forcing nature which might be spent to
more useful purposes.

In fine, the great end of education is to teach us the true knowledge of the
Deity, and through that knowledge to love and adore Him; and, as much as our
finite natures will let us, to imitate the bright example He has set us. Which
that we may all do, God of his infinite mercy grant, through Jesus Christ. AMEN.

FINIS.
CONTENTS.
SERMON I. Against Covetousness. MATTHEW xix. 24. I say unto you, it is easier
for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter
into the kingdom of Heaven. Page Page 9 SERMON II. On the Vanity of this Life.
JOB xix. 26. For though after this life worms destroy this body, yet in my
flesh shall I see God. Page 19 SERMON III. Against Revenge. MATTHEW vi. 15. But
if ye forgive not men their trespasses* neither will your Father forgive your
trespasses. Page 27 SERMON IV. Of Mirth and Grief. PROVERBS xvii. 13. Even in
laughter the heart is sorrowful; and the end of that mirth is heaviness Page 37
SERMON V. The Cruelty of Slandering innocent, and defenseless Women. MATTHEW
vii. 1. Judge not, that ye be not judged. Page 47 SERMON VI. The Duty of
Children to Parents. EXODUS xx. 12. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy
days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee. Page 57 SERMON
VII. The Advantages of good Education. PROVERBS xxii. 6. Train up a child in
the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it. Page 67

