SELECT ESSAYS: ON RAISING AND DRESSING FLAX AND HEMP; AND ON BLEACHING
LINEN-CLOTH: WITH VALUABLE DISSERTATIONS ON OTHER USEFUL SUBJECTS.

SELECT ESSAYS: CONTAINING: The Manner of raising and dressing Flax, and Hemp.
ALSO, The whole Method of Bleaching or Whitening Linen-Cloth. LIKEWISE,
Observations on the Management of Cows and Sheep. The Manner of raising
Radishes, Turnips, Cabbage, and other such Plants. AND an Enquiry, concerning
the materials that may be used in making Paper. WITH, Valuable Dissertations on
other useful Subjects.


Collected from the Dictionary of Arts and Sciences, and from various modern
Authors.

Felix, qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas.

Happy, he who can trace out the Causes of Things.

GEORGIC 2. DAVIDSON'S VIRGIL. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED, BY ROBERT BELL, next Door
to St. PAUL'S CHURCH, in Third-street, Philadelphia. M, DCC, LXXVII.

THE PREFACE.
SEVERAL of the following Essays are translated from a Periodical Work,
published at Paris, under the Title of Journal Oeconomique; the Translation
being undertaken By Doctor TOBIAS SMOLLETT, an Author of great Reputation, at
the desire of the late ARCHIBALD CAMPBELL, Duke of Argyle, and several other
Persons of Taste and Distinction, who thought it might conduce to the
Improvement of Useful Knowledge.

CONTENTS OF THIS PAMPHLET.
I. MEMOIR concerning the cultivation of Flax; by a man of understanding, who
has lived long in Holland. Page. ^ II. The manner of raising and dressing Flax
and Hemp. This Treatise has been, for some years past, warmly commended, by the
Trustees for Manufactures and Improvements in Scotland. Page. 13 III. An
inquiry concerning the materials that may be used in making Paper By Monsieur
Guettard, of the Royal Academy of Sciences, and Physician to his Serene
Highness the Duke of Orleans. Page. 41 IV. Observations on the raising and
dressing of Hemp. Communicated to the American Philosophical Society, by Edward
Antil, Esquire. Page. 76 V. The method of bleaching, or whitening Linen-Cloth.
According to the practice of the bleachers of Holland, England, Scotland, and
Ireland. From the Dictionary of Arts and Sciences, published by a Society of
Gentlemen in Scotland. Page. 87 VI. An account of the Nettle Thread, invented
at Leipsie. Page. 139 VII. Observations upon the Management of Cattle. Page.
143 VIII A remedy against Rottenness in Sheep. Page. 149 IX. Of Cabbage,
Radishes, Turnips, and other such Plants; method for preserving them from the
ravages of the game and insects that feed upon them. Page. 151 X. The method of
cultivating Radishes for Sallad used by the Reverend Fathers Minimes of Passi,
in France. Page. 153 XI. The method of raising Asparagus. Page. 156
At BELL's Book-Store, next Door to St. Paul's-Church, in Third-Street,
Philadelphia, may be had, lately Published:
The BLIND BEGGAR of Bethnal Green. A Dramatic Performance: With several
Instructive and Entertaing Pieces. By ROBERT DODSLEY, Author of the Original
Fables.

The DEATH OF GENERAL MONTGOMERY, in Storming the City of Quebec. A Tragedy.
With an Ode in honor of the Pennsylvania Militia, and the small band of
regular Continental Troops, who sustained the Campaign, in the depth of Winter,
January, 1777, and repulsed the British Forces from the Banks of the Delaware.
By the Author of a Dramatic Piece, on the Battle of Bunker's-Hill. To which are
added, ELEGIAC PIECES, commemorative of distinguished Characters. By different
Gentlemen.

The BATTLE OF BUNKER's-HILL* A Dramatic Piece, of five Acts, in (...) Measure.
By a Gentleman of (...).

The COMPLAINT; or NIGHT-THOUGHTS on Life, Death, and Immortality. By the
Reverend EDWARD YOUNG, L. L. D. To which are added* A POETICAL PARAPHRASE on
part of the Book of Job; and his POEM on the LAST DAY.

PARADISE LOST. A POEM, in Twelve Books. ALSO,

PARADISE REGAINED. A POEM, in Four Books. To which are added, SAMSON
AGONISTES: and Poems on several Occcasions. The Author JOHN MILTON. With the
Life of the Author. By THOMAS NEWTON. D. D. 2 Volumes.

HORAE LYRICAE. Poems chiefly of the Lyric Kind. In Three Books. Sacred First,
To Devotion and Piety. Second, To Virtue, Honor and Friendship. Third, To the
Memory of the Dead. By ISAAC WATTS, D. D.

SELECT FABLES OF AESOP and other Fabulists. In Three Books. Containing, First,
Fables from the Ancients. Second, Fables from the Moderns. Third, Original
Fables newly invented. By ROBERT DODSLEY.

SIX SKETCHES on the HISTORY of MAN. Containing, The Progress of Men as
Individuals. First, The Diversity of Men, and of Languages. Second, Of Food and
Population. Third, Of Property. Fourth, The Origin and Progress of Commerce.
Fifth, The Origin and Progress of Arts. Sixth, The Progress of the Female Sex.
By HENRY HOME, Lord KAIMS.

MEMOIR CONCERNING THE CULTIVATION OF FLAX.
WE here present the public with a complete memoir touching the cultivation of
flax, which will supply what our books of economy have not said, confirm the
good precepts they have given, and improve a great many others. It is written
by an understanding man, who has lived long in Holland; and it is well known,
that flax is a considerable branch of the trade of that country.

The Dutch are, without contradiction, the surest guides we can follow on this
subject. The difficulty is to draw from them the necessary instruction; for
they are in general, jealous of their secrets, which are forbid to be
discovered under severe penalties; above all things, they make a mystery of
there method of preparing flax. Very few people find means to penetrate into
the places where it is managed; and these must not be in the least suspected of
being drawn thither by any other motive than simple curiosity; but no foreign
merchant or manufacturer is ever admitted.

The soil of every country is not fit for flax, which requires fat land: and
too much care cannot be taken in choosing that where we propose to sow this
plant: for upon this depends the quality of the grain, together with the number
and strength of the stalks. In some countries, however, they followed a quite
contrary method, preferring a light and warm soil: true it is, the flax which
this produces, yields a fairer, finer and softer thread; but the harvest is
indifferent, and in these meagre lands, the grain degenerates from the first or
second year. On the contrary, in fat soils that are a little moist, the flax
bears excellent grain, and the stalks are very fine. The Dutch, whose
flourishing trade evinces their dexterity in this particular, sow very little
flax in the province of Holland, because the soil of it is poor; but in Zealand
where the land is extremely fat and moist enough, they reap that which they
employ in their manufactures. The linseed which they rear in that province is
sold dearer, and much more esteemed than that which is brought from the Baltic.

This assertion may seem contradictory to an incontestable fact, which is, that
the Dutch themselves yearly purchase the linseed of Riga: but the solution of
this seeming paradox, is very easy. The Dutch bring linseed from Riga, only for
the use of other countries; and this is not because their own seed degenerates,
but because they have not a sufficient quantity for the foreign demand.

Although I advise people to choose very fat land for their flax, I do not
pretend to say that in these only flax ought to be sown. I maintain nothing
more than that they are the best, and that other lands are only endowed with
degrees of goodness, in proportion to the qualities by which they approach the
nature of those fat lands. And indeed, although I have condemned the use of
light soil, as it may be proper to have fine thread, I shall not at all oppose
the practice of sowing sometimes weak ground with linseed. There will even be
an advantage in cultivating soils of a different nature. We shall have linseed
of our own growth, without being obliged to have recourse to that which the
Dutch bring us from Riga.

After having chosen a suitable piece of ground, we must give it the necessary
preparation before it be sown: and this is the method which is followed in
Flanders and Zealand. To fatten the ground, the Dutch make use of dung, ashes,
and sometimes human ordure: but this last sort is only used in small spots of
ground which has long lain fallow. They, moreover, employ marl, lime, the
cleansings of pools, the raspings of horn; and upon the seacoast, they gather
for the same purpose, the sea-weed, which forms a kind of glue upon the surface
of the waves. These different fatteners, which are preferred according to the
difference of soil, are excellent for flax: being much better than dung: for,
if this last is not sufficiently old and rotten, it raises among the seed a
sort of weeds which grow in great number, and do infinite injury to the flax,
in spite of all the care that can be taken to extirpate them. This
inconvenience is not to be ^^a^ed from the use of marl, lime, sea-weed, and
raspings of horn; and this advantage certainly deserves the entire
consideration of the farmer. Weeds, (and these I call parasites, which grow
contrary to the inclination of the f^rmer) weeds, I say, do abundance of
mischief to all sorts of grain, but to flax in particular. For, they change its
quality, and diminish its quantity.

With regard to the laboring part, in Zealand where the ground is fat, strong
and moist, two different methods are followed. The Zealanders plough the land
thrice, four times, and even oftener, and leave it fallow during a whole
summer; or else they begin by making it bear the seed, and in that case, this
is their method of managing it. After having dunged and tilled it twice, they
sow the seed. The following year they plant it with madder, which remains upon
it for the space of two years, and in the fourth they sow their flax. By these
means they are sure of having a moveable soil; for besides the repetition of
laboring bestowed upon it, before the sowing of the seed in the first year,
besides the fermentation of the dung, and the other labourings which are
sometimes repeated to the number of five times, in order to prepare it for the
madder, they are obliged to be continually at work upon it, in extirpating the
roots of that plant.

Ground thus prepared, one would imagine ought to reward the cares of the
farmer. Nevertheless, the Zealanders themselves prefer the first method; when
they want to have the most plentiful crop of linseed. And indeed the abode of
the madder in the earth, for the space of two years, must greatly diminish the
richness of the soil. The Zealanders follow this last method, for no other
reason than the benefit which accrues to them from the madder: which benefit is
such, that the produce of their land managed in the manner I have described for
four years, being added, is more considerable, than if they had practiced the
first method.

In Flanders, where there is no trade for madder, and where the lands are
extremely strong, especially in the neighborhood of Courtray, the farmers do
not sow flax until after having let the ground lie fallow a whole summer and
winter, and then labored it several times sucessively. In the driest and
highest soils that will bear flax, as that round Antwerp, Ghent and Bruges, the
people think it necessary to labor them three times, and never sow the seed,
until they have let them lie fallow for one summer at least. When the ground is
rendered sufficiently moveable by these different labourings, the farmer's next
care is to give it the last preparation for its receiving the seed. In Zealand
it is disposed into uniform beds separated by small ditches: the beds being
from fifty to sixty feet broad, and the ditches about two or three feet deep,
and a foot and an half broad. This disposition maintains a suitable degree of
moisture in the ground: the breadth and uniformity of the beds keep them in a
condition to retain water, enough to secure them from drought; and the ditches
sunk at proper distances, discharge the superfluity in time of excessive rains.

This method cannot be too much commended: a farmer by putting it in practice,
need not be afraid of sowing linseed in a fat ground, though it is very moist;
for the ditches will not only free the field of that water which might
otherwise ro^ the seed, but will likewise, leave moisture enough for the growth
of the plant. The Flemings are so much persuaded of the necessity there is for
a certain degree of moisture to the flax, that in their light and dry grounds
they make no ditches at all: but usually, make the surface of the field very
even and uniform, that it may the longer retain the rainwater.

The soil being well prepared, we must choose the seed proper to be sown; and
surely, the farmer cannot be too careful in the choice. That which is short,
roundish, firm, oily, heavy, of a shining or clear brown color, is accounted
the best: and the peasants of Zealand are very attentive in examining if all
these different qualities unite in that which he is about to sow. In order to
ascertain its firmness, he takes a large handful and squeezing it until it
pierces between his fingers and thumb, judges of its solidity by the quantity
which is squeezed out by this compression, and by the slow manner in which it
comes out. To know whether it is heavy, he throws an handful into a glass of
water: that which is good soon goes to the bottom; and he rejects that which
swims on the surface. To prove its oiliness, he throws some into the fire; and
when it kindles and sparkles as soon as it touches the coals, he makes no
scruple in employing it. There is besides, another method used in Zealand,
which is to sow some of the seed in little beds of earth; and in a little time,
they see by the effect whether or not it is of the right kind.

All seed in general, soon degenerates, but particularly linseed, let the soil
in which it is produced, be never so strong; for which reason it is proper to
change the seed, and the more often the better. The most common rule followed
on this occasion, is to sow in strong ground, the seed which is gathered from a
light soil, and to commit to a light soil what has been produced in a strong
one. This is certainly a very good rule, when properly understood: for if it is
literally followed, we run the risque of being mistaken. Certain it is, light
grounds yield seed of a very feeble quality, which (...) with any advantage be
employed in the same kind of soil: and a farmer ought never to sow lands of
this nature but with a view to have fine flax: he will always be mistaken when
he expects good seed from it. The rule therefore needs explanation. And here it
is:

Among fat lands, there are some which are more or less so, without losing
their title to that denomination. In order then to have always good seed, we
must sow in strong ground, that which has been produced in ground of the same
kind, though not quite so strong. On the contrary, in ground that is strong, we
must sow seed which has been produced in ground which is still stronger. The
smallest difference in the nature of the soil is sufficient to hinder the seed
from degenerating.

By observing this rule we shall free ourselves of the slavery to which we are
now subject, in using the seed brought from Riga, The disadvantage of receiving
it from the hands of the Dutch, who supply us, is greater than may be imagined.
Besides, that we are not sure they bring the best, we run the risque of having
that which will not agree with our lands: for, we buy it in the dark, without a
possibility of knowing from what kind of soil it has been reaped. Consequently
we run the hazard of sowing our fields with seed produced from the same kind of
ground, in which case, we must necessarily have a very feeble crop: for lands,
though situated at a great distance from one another, may be absolutely of the
same nature.

The quantity of seed sown upon any field, has a great influence upon the crop.
If we sow a smaller quantity than the field is able to bear, the whole will
profit by that deficiency; the stalks will be strong, and the seed excellent.
If the seed be sown thicker, the flax will produce a finer thread; the harvest
will be more plenteous; but the seed will be of an inferior quality. This last
method is practiced by the Dutch, who are in no fear of a scarcity of seed. But
it is the farmers's business to know the nature of his own ground; and he will
be guided by his interest and experience. A strong ground may bear a greater
quantity of seed, without any detriment to the quality of the fruit which it
shall produce. On the other hand, in a ground that is not quite so strong, the
same quantity of seed will rise but indifferently, and produce very little
advantage. The Dutch and Flemings employ about three or four bushels per acre.

Linseed must be sown in mild, dry weather: and may be committed to the ground
in the month of March, if the season be favorable. Being thus early sown, it
will be ripe at the end of June, or in the beginning of July at farthest; and
the farmer will have leisure to manage it in a proper manner. This expedition
will also furnish another advantage. After the harvest of the flax, we may sow
turnips or other things of that nature, which will succeed to admiration, and
usefully occupy the ground, which would produce nothing during the remaining
part of the year, if the season had been more advanced when the flax was ready
to be cut down.

I have seen some farmers in Holland and Flanders, sow grass some days after
the linseed had been committed to the same ground. This herb far from hurting,
facilitates the growth of the other plant. In all probability, the young grass
secures the roots of the flax from the coolness of the rain, and at the same
time shelters it from the heat of the sun. I do not know whether this
explanation of the alliance between these two plants, is just; but it is well
known that flax and hay rise very well together, and that, after having taken
away the first, a very good crop of the last will remain.

There is very little to be said upon the manner of sowing linseed. I shall
only observe, that the sower must follow the ridge in a direct line, throwing
the seed with his right hand, and in returning use the left hand: for it is of
great consequence that the seed should be equally scattered. Some days after,
when it is time that the seed should be buried, they sow the grass-seed, if
they choose they should come up together. Both are covered by the harrow, and
pressed by the roller. As to the weeding, that operation begins, when the blade
is two inches high, and continues until it is five: but it is dangerous to use
the heel of the shoe in crushing the weeds, because thereby the flax is
sometimes damaged.

Some farmers pluck it up before it has arrived at maturity; pretending that
the thread is fairer while the plant is green. But they are mistaken, and lose
their seed without any indemnity; for the flax yields the finest thread, and
that in the largest quantity, when the plant is seasonably pulled: so that the
farmer who anticipates the time of its maturity over and above his seed, loses
one half of the crop. The filaments of this flax, suffers great waste in the
different methods of dressing, and falls almost altogether in h^rds: for what
resists the pond, the sowing press, and the hatchel, is of an inferior quality
to that which would have been produced, had the flax been pulled when ripe.

The Flemings, whose experience may be depended upon, leave it growing as long
as possible, on purpose to have a finer thread; and that they may have it as
ripe as it can be, for their manufactures of linen or lace, they often run the
risque of losing the seed, which easily escapes.

When the flax begins to be yellow, or rather to approach a citron color, it
is usually time to reap it. But in order to be more certain of its maturity,
they pull a few stalks, and take out the seed, which when firm and of a clear
brown color, the flax is ripe. The Dutch wait until the stalks are ready to
open, and even until some of the ripest are actually so: but the best advice I
can give upon this subject, is to delay the harvest of flax as long as
possible, without running too great a risque of losing the seed, which last, as
well as the flax itself, is the better for this delay.

Some farmers have observed, that a kind of mildew falls upon flax that is sown
in light ground, about fifteen days before its maturity; and that this
corrosive dew burns at first the seed, and afterward the stalk. If this
observation be true, those who cultivate flax in a light ground, ought to pay
no regard to the custom of oth^^s, who delay the harvest until the flax be
entirely ripe. In Holland, the flax being pulled, is laid softly upon the
ground in large handfuls, the head of the plant being always turned toward the
south; and several handfuls are put one over another, until the heap is a foot
and an half high. Care must always be taken to lay the heads toward the south:
for the flax being thus disposed, continues to receive from the sun the degree
of maturity it may want, and is secured from the rain, if any should fall. But
this disposition is only observed when the weather is uncertain; for when it is
dry, they content themselves with spreading the flax by handfuls upon the
field, that it may be the sooner ready to be carried off. If the season is
favorable, twelve or fourteen days are sufficient to make it perfectly dry:
but when the weather is wet, they are sometimes obliged to leave the flax in
little heaps, for the space of eighteen or twenty days. In countries exposed to
high winds, this method will not avail. There it is made into bottles that
stand on end, exposed to the sun, in order to be aired and dried. In some
places, the flax is bound and put up without being seeded, and in this manner
it is kept 'till the month of December: by this management however, we run the
risque of losing the seed. But in Holland and Flanders, it is shelled as soon
as the flax is brought from the field. In these countries it is not the farmer
who bestows upon the plant the management necessary for its employment; for as
soon as it is reaped it is delivered to the workman, who dresses it accordingly.

Flax is ea^^ly lodged by the winds and rains, and as it sometimes cannot be
raised again, this accident ruins the hopes of the planter. In order to obviate
this misfortune, some people divide the field in little squares of five feet;
fix a forked stick at every angle, and when the flax begins to grow up, lay
across these sticks, small long poles, which serve as a support to the plant:
but this precaution is attended with expense. Others, instead of poles, use
cords; but these do not so well answer the purpose. When care is taken not to
waste too much seed in sowing, the stalks that rise are strong enough to
support themselves; but then the flax does not yield such a fine thread.

THE MANNER OF RAISING AND DRESSING FLAX, AND HEMP.
The following particulars with regard to the manner of raising, and dressing
FLAX and HEMP, has been for some years past warmly commended, by the Trustees
for Fisheries, Manufactures, and Improvements in SCOTLAND.
Of the choice of the SOIL, and preparing the GROUND for FLAX.
A SKILFUL Flax-raiser always prefers a free open deep loam, and all grounds
that produced the preceding year a good crop of turnip, cabbage, potatoes,
barley, or broad clover; or has been formerly laid down rich, and kept for some
years in pasture.

A clay soil, the second or third crop after being limed, will answer well for
flax; provided, if the ground be still stiff, that it be brought to a proper
mould, by tilling after harvest, to expose it to the winter frosts.

All new grounds produce a strong crop of flax, and pretty free of weeds. When
a great many mole-heaps appear upon new ground, it answers the better for flax
after one tilling.

Flax-seed ought never to be sown on grounds that are either too wet or dry;
but on such as retain a natural moisture: and such grounds as are inclined to
weeds ought to be avoided, unless prepared by a careful summer-fallow.

If the lintseed be sown early, and the flax not allowed to stand for seed, a
crop of turnip may be got after the flax that very year; the second year a crop
of bear or barley may be taken; and the third year, grass-seeds are sometimes
sown along with the lintseed. This is the method mostly practiced in and about
the counties of Lincoln and Somerset, where great quantities of flax and hemp
are every year raised, and where these crops have long been capital articles.
There, old ploughed grounds are never sown with lintseed, unless the soil be
very rich and clean. A certain worm, called in Scotland the Coup-worm, abounds
in new broke up grounds, which greatly hurts every crop but flax. In small
enclosures surrounded with trees or high hedges, the flax, for want of free
air, is subject to fall before it be ripe, and the droppings of rain and dew
from the trees prevent the flax within the reach of the trees from growing to
any perfection.

Of preceding crops, potatoes and hemp are the best preparation for flax. In
the fens of Lincoln, upon proper ground of old tillage, they sow hemp, dunging
well the first year; the second year hemp without dung; the third year flax
without dung; and that same year a crop of turnip eat on the ground by sheep;
the fourth year hemp with a large coat of dung, and so on forever.

If the ground be free and open, it should be but once ploughed, and that as
shallow as possible, not deeper than two inches and an half. It should be laid
flat, reduced to a fine garden-mould by much harrowing, and all stones and sods
should be carried off.

Except a little pigeon's dung for cold or sour ground, no other dung should be
used preparatory for flax, because it produces too many weeds, and throws up
the flax thin and poor upon the stalk.

Before sowing, the bulky clods should be broken, or carried of the ground; and
stones, quickenings, and every other thing that may hinder the growth of the
flax, should be removed.

Of the choice of LINTSEED.
THE brighter in color, and heavier the seed is, so much the better: that
which when bruised appears of a light or yellowish green, and fresh in the
heart, oily and not dry, and smells and tastes sweet, and not fusty, may be
depended upon.

Dutch seed of the preceding year's growth, for the most part, answers best;
but it seldom succeeds if kept another year. It ripens sooner than any other
foreign seed. Philadelphia seed produces fine lint and few bolls, because sown
thick, and answers best in wet cold soils. Riga seed produces coarser lint, and
the greatest quantity of seed. Scots seed, when well winnowed and kept, and
changed from one kind of soil to another, sometimes answers pretty well; but
should be sown thick, as many of its grains are bad, and fail. It springs well,
and its flax is sooner ripe than any other; but its produce afterward is
generally inferior to that from foreign seed.

A kind has been lately imported, called memmel-seed, which looks well, is
short and plump, but seldom grows above eight inches, and on that account ought
not to be sown.

Of sowing LINTSEED.
THE quantity of lintseed sown, should be proportioned to the condition of the
soil; for if the ground be in good heart, and the seed sown thick, the crop
will be in danger of falling before it is ready for pulling. From eleven to
twelve pecks Linlithgow measure of Dutch or Riga seed, is generally sufficient
for one Scots acre; and about ten pecks of Philadelphia seed, which being the
smallest grained, goes farthest. Riga lintseed, and the next year's produce of
it, is preferred in Lincolnshire.

The time for sowing lintseed is from the middle of March to the end of April,
as the ground and season answers; but the earlier the seed is sown, the less
the crop interferes with the corn-harvest.

Late sown lintseed may grow long, but the flax upon the stalk will be thin and
poor.

After sowing, the ground ought to be harrowed till the seed is well covered,
and then (supposing the soil as beforementioned to be free and reduced to a
fine mould) the ground ought to be rolled.

When a farmer sows a large quantity of lintseed, he may find it proper to sow
a part earlier and part latter, that in the future operations of weeding,
pulling, watering, and grassing, the the work may be the easier and more
conveniently gone about.

It ought always to be sown on a dry bed.

Of Weeding FLAX.
IT ought to be weeded when the crop is about four inches long. If longer
deferred, the weeders will so much break and crook the stalks, that they will
never perhaps recover their straightness again; and when the flax grows
crooked, it is more liable to be hurt in the rippling and swingling.

Quickening-grass should not be taken up; for, being strongly rooted, the
pulling of it always loosens a deal of the lint.

If there is an appearance of a settled drought, it is better to defer the
weeding, than by that operation to expose the tender roots of the flax to the
drought.

How soon the weeds are got out, they ought to be carried off the field,
instead of being laid in the furrows, where they often take root again, and at
any rate obstruct the growth of the flax in the furrows.

Of Pulling FLAX.
WHEN the crop grows so short and branchy, as to appear more valuable for seed
than flax, it ought not to be pulled before it be thoroughly ripe; but if it
grows long and not branchy, the seed should be disregarded, and all the
attention given to the flax. In the last case it ought to be pulled after the
bloom has fallen, when the stalk begins to turn yellow, and before the leaves
fall, and the bolls turn hard and sharp-pointed.

When the stalk is small, and carries few bolls, the flax is fine; but the
stalk of coarse flax is gross, rank, branchy, and carries many bolls.

When flax has fallen and lies, such as lies ought to be immediately pulled,
whether it has grown enough or not, as otherwise it will rot altogether.

When parts of the same field grow unequally, so that some parts are ready for
pulling before other parts; only what is ready should be pulled, and the rest
should be suffered to stand till ready.

The flax-raiser ought to be at pains to pull, and keep by itself, each
different kind of lint which he finds in his field; what is both long and fine,
by itself; what is both long and coarse by itself; what is both short and fine,
by itself; what is both short and coarse, by itself; and in like manner every
other kind by itself that is of the same size and quality. If the different
kinds be not thus kept separate, the flax must be much damaged in the watering,
and the other succeeding operations.

What is commonly called under growth, may be neglected as useless.

Few persons that have seen flax pulled, are ignorant of the method of laying
it in handfuls across other: which gives the flax sufficient air, and keeps the
handfuls separate and ready for the rippler.

Of stacking up FLAX during the winter, and Winnowing the Seed.
IF the flax be more valuable than the seed, it ought by no means to be stacked
up; for its own natural juice assists it greatly in the watering: whereas, if
kept long unwatered, it loses that juice, and the harle adheres so much to the
boon, that it requires longer time to water, and even the quality of the flax
becomes thereby harsher and coarser. Besides, the flax stacked up over ye^r, is
in great danger from vermin and other accidents; the water in spring is not so
soft and warm as in harvest; and near a year is thereby lost of the use of the
lint: but if the flax be so short and branchy as to appear most valuable for
seed, it ought, after pulling, to be stooked and dried upon the field, as is
done with corn, then stacked up for winter, rippled in spring, and after
sheeling the seed should be well cleaned from bad seeds, etc.

Of Rippling FLAX.
AFTER pulling, if the flax is to be regarded more than the seed, it should be
allowed to lie some hours upon the ground to dry a little, and so gain some
firmness, to prevent the skin or harle, which is the flax, from rubbing off in
the rippling; an operation which ought by no means to be neglected, as the
bolls, if put into the water along with the flax, breed vermin there, and
otherwise spoil the water. The bolls also prove very inconvenient in the
grassing and breaking.

In Lincolnshire and Ireland, they think that rippling hurts the flax; and
therefore, in place of rippling, they strike the bolls against a stone.

The handfuls for rippling should not be great, as that endangers the lint in
the rippling comb.

After rippling, the flax-raiser will perceive, that he is able to assort each
size and quality of the flax by itself more exactly than he could before.

Of Watering FLAX.
A RUNNING stream wastes the lint, makes it white, and frequently carries it
away. Lochs, by the great quantity and motion of the water, also waste and
whiten the flax, though not so much as running streams. Both rivers and lochs
water the flax quicker than canals.

But all flax ought to be watered in canals, which should be dug in clay
ground if possible, as that soil retains the water best: but if a firm
retentive soil cannot be got, the bottom or sides of the canal, or both the
bottom and sides, may be lined with clay, or instead of lining the sides with
clay, which might fall down, a ditch may be dug without the canal, and filled
with clay, which will prevent both extraneous water from entering, and the
water within from running off.

A canal of forty feet long, six broad and four deep, will generally water the
growth of an acre of flax.

It ought to be filled with fresh soft water from a river or brook, if possible
two or three weeks before the flax is put in, and exposed all that time to the
heat of the sun. The greater way the river or brook has run, the softer, and
therefore the better will the water be. Springs, or short runs from hills, are
too cold, unless the water is allowed to stand long in the canal. Water from
coal or iron, is very bad for flax. A little of the powder of galls thrown into
a glass of water, will immediately discover if it comes from minerals of that
kind, by turning it into a dark color, more or less tinged in proportion to
the quantity of vitriol it contains.

The canal ought not to be under any shade; which, besides keeping the sun from
softening the water, might make part of the canal cooler than other parts, and
so water the flax unequally. The flax-raiser will observe, when the water is
brought to a proper heat, that small plants will be rising quickly in it,
numbers of small insects and reptiles will be generating there, and bubbles of
air rising on the surface. If no such signs appear, the water must not be warm
enough, or is otherwise unfit for flax.

Moss-holes, when neither too deep nor too shallow, frequently answer very well
for watering flax, when the water is proper, as before described.

The proper season for watering flax is, from the end of July to the end of
August.

The advantage of watering flax as soon as possible, after pulling, has been
already mentioned.

The flax being sorted after rippling as before mentioned, should next be put
in beets, never larger than a man can grasp with both his hands, and tied very
slack, with a band of a few stalks. Dried rushes answer exceedingly well for
binding flax, as they do not rot in the water, and may be dried and kept for
use again.

The beets should be put into the canals slope-ways, or half standing upon end,
the root-end uppermost. Upon the crop-ends, when uppermost, there frequently
breeds a deal of vermin, destructive of the flax, which is effectually
prevented by putting the crop end down-most.

The whole flax in the canal ought to be carefully covered from the sun with
divots (or sods;) the grassy side of which should be next the flax, to keep it
clean. If it is not thus covered, the sun will discolor the flax, though quite
covered with water. If the divots are not weighty enough to keep the flax
enirely under water, a few stones may be laid above them. But the flax should
not be pressed to the bottom.

When the flax is sufficiently watered, it feels soft to the grip, and the
harle parts easily with the boon or show, which last is then become brittle,
and looks whitish. When these signs are found, the flax should be taken out of
the water, beet after beet; each gently rinsed in the water, to cleanse it of
the nastiness which has gathered about it in the canal; and as the lint is then
very tender, and the beet slackly tied, it must be carefully and gently handled.

Great care ought to be taken that no part is overdone; and as the coarsest
waters soonest, if different kinds be mixed together, a part will be rotted,
when the rest is not sufficiently watered.

When lint taken out of the canal is not found sufficiently watered, it may be
laid in a heap, for twelve, eighteen, or twenty-four hours, which will have an
effect like more watering; but this operation is nice, and may prove dangerous
in unskilful hands.

After the flax is taken out of the canal, fresh lint should not be put a
second time into it, until the former water be run off, and the canal cleaned,
and supplied with fresh water.

Of grassing FLAX.
SHORT heath is the best field for grassing flax, as, when wet, it fastens to
the heath, and is thereby prevented from being blown away by the wind. The
heath also keeps it a little above the earth, and so exposes it the more
equally to the weather. When such heath is not to be got, links, or clean old
lea-ground is the next best. Long grass-grounds should be avoided, as the grass
growing through the lint frequently spots, tenders, or rots it; and grounds
exposed to violent winds should also be avoided.

The flax, when taken out of the water, must be spread very thin upon the
ground; and being then very tender, it must be gently handled. The thinner it
is spread the better, as it is then the more equally exposed to the weather.
But it ought never to be spread during a heavy shower, as that would wash and
waste the harle too much, which is then excessively tender, but soon after
becomes firm enough to bear the rains, which, with the open air and sunshine,
cleans, softens, and purifies the harle to the degree wanted, and makes it
blister from the boon. In short, after the flax has got a little firmness by
being a few hours spread in dry weather, the more rain and sunshine it gets the
better.

If there be little danger of high winds carrying off the flax, it will be much
the better of being turned about once a-week. If it is not to be turned, it
ought to be very thin spread. The spreading of flax and hemp requires a deal of
ground, and enriches it greatly.

The skilful flax-raiser spreads his first row of flax at the end of the field
opposite to the point from whence the most violent wind commonly comes, placing
the root-ends foremost; he makes the root-ends of every other row overlap the
crop-ends of the former row three or four inches, and binds down the last row
with a rope; by which means the wind does not easily get below the lint to blow
it away: and as the crop-ends are seldom so fully watered as the root-ends, the
aforesaid overlapping has an effect like giving the crop-ends more watering.
Experience only can fully teach a person the signs of flax being sufficiently
grassed: then it is of a clearer color than formerly; the harle is blistered
up, and easily parts with the boon, which is then become very brittle. The
whole should be sufficiently grassed before any of it is lifted; for if a part
be lifted sooner than the rest, that which remains is in great danger from the
winds.

A dry day ought to be taken for taking up the flax; and if there is no
appearance of high wind, it should be loosed from the heath or grass, and left
loose for some hours, to make it thoroughly dry.

As a great quantity of flax can scarcely be all equally watered and grassed,
and as the different qualities will best appear at lifting the flax off the
grass; therefore at that time each different kind should be gathered together,
and kept by itself; that is, all of the same color, length, and quality.

The smaller the beets lint is made up in, the better for drying, and the more
convenient for slacking, housing, etc. and in making up these beets, as in
every other operation upon flax, it is of great consequence that the lint be
laid together as it grew, the root-ends together, and the crop-ends together.

Of keeping FLAX after it is grassed.
NOTHING needs be said here, but that if the flax is to be stacked, it should
be set in an airy place, upon a dry foundation, such as pob-middings, (the
refuse of the Flax) or the like, and well covered from the weather; and if
housed, the floor must be dry, and the house well aired, and water-tight.

Follows an Estimate of the Expense, Produce, and Profit of a Scots acre of
FLAX, -- supposing the season favorable, that no accidental losses happen, and
that the farmer is neither unskilful nor negligent.
A medium crop. A great crop. An extraordinary crop: Ground rent, laboring the
ground, and leading the flax L. 2 10 0 L. 3 10 0 L. 5 0 0 Lintseed from L. 2 to
L. 4 per Hogshead, the medium 3s. 4d. per peck 1 16 8 1 10 0 1 6 8 for 11 pecks
for 9 pecks. for eight pecks. Clodding and sowing 0 2 0 0 2 0 0 2 0 Weeding 0
12 0 0 8 0 nothing. Pulling, rippling, putting in, and covering in the water 0
14 0 0 15 0 1 0 0 Taking out of the water, grassing, and stacking 0 8 0 0 12 0
0 18 0 Breaking, and scutching, at 2s. per stone 3 0 0 4 0 0 6 0 0 for 30
stones. for 40 stones. for 60 stones. Total expense L. 9 2 8 L. 10 17 0 L. 14 6
8 Produce at 10s per stone L. 15 0 0 L. 20 0 0 L. 30 0 0 for 30 stones. for 40
stones. for 60 stones. Lintseed sold for oil at 1s. per peck 0 16 0 0 18 0 1 0
0 The chaff of the bolls is well worth the expense of drying the seed; as it is
good food, boiled and mixed with beer, for horses. Total produce L. 15 16 0 L.
20 18 0 L. 31 0 0 Balance for profit L. 6 14 4 L. 10 1 0 L. 16 13 4

There is nothing stated here as expense of the canal in which the flax is
watered; because that varies much according to the conveniences people have
for making it: and a canal once made requires for after-years only to be
repaired and cleansed.

It is a certain fact, that the greater the crop is, the better is the quality
of the same kind of flax.

The advantage of having both a crop of flax and a crop of turnip the same year
-- or of sowing grass-seeds along with the lintseed -- and of reducing the
ground to a fine garden mould, free of weeds, ought to be attended to.

For Cambrick and fine Lawn.
THE ground must be a rich light soil, rather sandy, but cannot be too rich.

It ought to be ploughed in September, or the beginning of October, first
putting a little hot rotten dung upon it.

Second ploughing in January after a hard frost; and when you intend to sow it,
plough it a third time, or rather hoe it, reducing the clods very fine; but
make no furrows: the land must be made level like a garden; but never work the
land when wet.

The seed should be sown the beginning of April, and about double the quantity
that is generally sown by our farmers; if the land be very rich, it will
require rather more than double.

As soon as sown (if the weather be dry) it will be necessary to roll the
ground.

The lint must be weeded very clean when about three inches high; directly
after which you must set forked sticks, of about one and half inch thick (which
ought to be prepared before) every four or five feet, according to the length
of the poles you are to lay upon them; they should be well fixed in the ground,
the forked part to receive the poles about six or seven inches above the lint;
each row of poles should be two, three, or four feet asunder, according to the
length of the brushwood you are to lay upon them.

The poles ought to be from ten to fifteen feet long, and strong enough to
support the brush across the poles; take the longest brushwood you can get, the
more branchy the better, very thick, filling up the vacancies with smaller
brush, and any of the branches that rise higher than eighteen or twenty inches
ought to be lopt off to make the brush lie as level as possible: any sort of
brush will do except oak, as that tinges the lint.

Your lint must be pulled as soon as the seed is fully formed, which is a few
days after it is out of the bloom before the lint turn yellow.

It must be pulled above the brushwood, and every handful laid upon it as soon
as possible: if it is fine weather, leave it four or five hours in that manner;
then carry it to a screen near a barn, to put it under cover in case of rain;
there it must be spread four or five days, and always put in the barn at night,
or when it appears to rain: the bundles must be opened in in the barn, or made
hollow to prevent it from heating.

These operations must be performed until the lint is perfectly dry, and out of
danger of heating; taking care all the time to keep the roots as even as
possible, and if possible, keep it from rain or wet: if you cannnot prevent it
from being wet, it will be better to leave it on the grass 'till dry; because
when once wet, the putting it under cover before dry will make it turn black; a
thing which must be prevented at all events.

If any of the lint upon the border, or through the piece of ground, be coarser
than another, it must be separated from the rest.

The utmost care must be taken to preserve the lint entire, or unbroke; for
this reason they beat off the seed with a round mell (mallet) or bittle.

The most proper ground is summer fallow, or after potatoes, or lea; if
possible near a wood, to prevent the expense of carrying brush.

As soon as the seed is off, if you intend to water it that season, it must be
tied in bundles about as large as you can grasp with your two hands.

The water proper for it, is a very small rivulet or soft spring free of any
metallic ore, and taking care that no flood of foul water enters your pit;
which must be at least five feet deep, about nine or ten broad at the top, and
seven or eight at the bottom, the length will depend on the quantity of flax
you have to water. A very small stripe of water, when clear, should always be
running in and off from your pit when the lint is in it.

The pit ought to be made three or four months before it be used.

You must drive poles about four inches thick, with a hook inclining downwards,
in this form 7, all along the sides of the pit, about five feet asunder. The
hooks must be level, or rather under the surface of the water. A long pole, the
whole length of the pit, must be fixed into these hooks on each side; and cross
poles put under that, to keep the lint under water; but, the cross poles are
not used till the lint is put in. You must order it so, that all the lint
should be three or four inches under water. You next bring your lint to the
sides of the pit; then put your sheaves head to head, causing each over-lap the
other about one third, and take as many of these as make a bundle of two, or
two and a half feet broad, laying the one above the other, till it is about
four or four and a half feet high; then you tie them together in the middle,
and at each root-end: after this, you wrap your bundle in straw, and lay it in
the water, putting the thin or broad side undermost, taking care that none of
your lint touch the earth; after it is fully pressed under water, put in your
cross poles to keep it under. The bundles ought to lie in the pit a foot
separate from each other. This renders it easy to take out; for, if the bundles
entangle, they will be too heavy to raise.

The time of watering depends so much upon the weather, and softness or
hardness of the water, that it is impossible to fix any certain time. This must
be left to the skill of the farmer. If the flax be intended for spinning yarn
soft and fit for cambrick, it ought to be spread upon short grass for four or
five days before you put it into the water; but if for lawns, lace, or thread,
it is best to dry it outright. In either case, avoid as much as possible to let
it get rain; as much rain blanches and washes out the oil, which is necessary
to preserve the strength.

The great property of this flax is to be fine and long. Thick sowing raises
all plants fine and slender, and when the ground is very rich, it forces them
to a great length. Pulling green prevents that c^^rse hardness which flax has
when let stand till it be full ripe, and gives it the fine silky property. The
brushwood, when the flax springs up, catches it by the middle, prevents it from
lying down and rotting; infallible consequences of sowing thick upon rich
ground. It likewise keeps it straight, moist, and soft at the roots; and by
keeping it warm, and shaded from the sun, greatly promotes its length. The
keeping it from rain, hea^ing, taking proper care of your water, preserves the
color, and prevents these bars in cloth so much complained off by bleachers.



THE MANNER OF DRESSING FLAX. The different methods of that operation.
FOR many ages it was the practice to separate the boon or core from the flax,
which is the bark of the plant, by the following simple hand methods. First,
for breaking the boon; the stalks in small parcels were beat with a mallet; or
more dexterously, the break (See the copper-plate figure 1. and 2.) was used
thus: The flax being held in the left hand across the three under-teeth or
swords of the break (A, fig. 1. and a, fig. 2.), the upper teeth (B, fig. 1.
and b, fig. 2.) were with the right hand quickly and often forced down upon the
flax, which was artfully shifted and turned with the left hand. Next, for
clearing the flax of the broken boon; the workman with his left hand held the
flax over the stock (fig. 3. and 4.) while with his right hand he struck or
threshed the flax with the scutcher (fig. 5.)

These methods of breaking and scutching the flax being slow and very
laborious, a watermill was invented in Scotland about forty years ago, which,
with some late improvements, makes great dispatch, and in skilful and careful
hands gives satisfaction. It has been generally constructed to break the boon
by three dented-rollers, placed one above the other. The middle one of which
being forced quickly round takes the other two along with it, and one end of
the handfuls of the flax being by the workman directed in between the upper and
middle rollers, the flax is immediately drawn in by the rollers; a curved board
or plate of tin behind the rollers directs the flax to return again between the
middle and undermost rollers; -- and thus the operation is repeated until the
boon be sufficiently broke. Great weights of timber or stone at the ends of
levers, press the upper and under-rollers toward the middle one.

The scutching is next carried on by the mill in the following manner: Four
arms, something like the hand-scutchers before described, project from a
perpendicular axle; a box around the axle incloses these projecting scutchers;
and this box is divided among the workmen, each having sufficient room to stand
and handle his flax, which, through slits in the upper part and sides of the
box, they hold in to the stroke of the scutchers; which, moving round
horizontally, strike the flax across or at right angles, and so thresh out or
clear it of the boon.

The breaking of the flax by rollers is scarcely subject to any objection, but
that it is dangerous to workmen not sufficiently on their guard, who sometimes
allow the rollers to take hold of their fingers, and thereby their whole arm is
instantly drawn in: thus many have lost their arms. To avoid this danger, a
break upon the general principles of the hand-break before described, has been
lately adapted to water machinery, and used in place of rollers. The horizontal
stroke of the scutchers was long thought too severe, and wasteful of the flax;
but very careful experiments have discovered that the waste complained of must
be charged to the unskilfulness or negligence of the workmen, as in good hands
the mill carries away nothing but what, if not so scutched off, must be taken
off in the heckling with more loss both of time and flax. But to obviate this
objection of the violence of the horizontal scutchers, an imitation of
hand-scutching has lately been applied to water. The scutchers then project
from an horizontal axle, and move like the arms of a check-reel, striking the
flax neither across nor perpendicularly down, but sloping in upon the parcel
exactly as the flax is struck by the hand scutcher. This sloping stroke is got
by raising the scutching-stock some inches higher than the center of the axle;
and by raising or lowering the stock, over which the flax is held, or screwing
it nearer to or farther from the scutchers, the workman can temper or humor
the stroke almost as he pleases.

A lint-mill with horizontal scutchers upon a perpendicular axle, requires a
house of two stories, the rollers or break being placed in the ground story,
and the scutchers in the l^st above; but a mill with vertical scutchers on an
horizontal axle, requires but one ground story for all the machinery.

Another method of breaking and scutching flax, more expeditious than the old
hand-methods, and more gentle than water mills, has also been lately invented
in Scotland. It is much like the break and scutcher giving the sloping stroke
last described, moved by the foot. The treddle is remarkably long, and the
scutchers are fixed upon the rim of a fly-wheel. The foot-break is also
assisted in its motion by a fly. These foot machines are very useful where
there are no water mills, but they are far inferior to the mills in point of
expedition. --

The next operation that flax undergoes after scutching, is heckling. The
heckle (See the copper-plate figure 6.) is firmly fixed to a bench before the
workman, who strikes the flax upon the teeth of the heckle, and draws it through
the teeth. To persons unacquainted with that kind of work this may seem a very
simple operation; but, in fact, it requires as much practice to acquire the
slight of heckling well, and without wasting the flax, as any other operation
in the whole manufacture of linen. They use coarser and wider teethed heckles,
or finer, according to the quality of the flax; generally putting the flax
through two heckles, a coarser one first, and next through a fine heckle.

FLAX for Cambrick and fine Lawn, Thread and Lace, IS dressed in a manner
somewhat different. It is not skutched so thoroughly as common flax; which from
the skutch proceeds to the heckle, and from that to the spinner: whereas this
fine flax, after a rough skutching, is scraped and cleansed with a blunt knife
upon the workman's-knee covered with his leather apron; from the knife it
proceeds to the spinner, who, with a brush made for the purpose, straights and
dresses each parcel just before she begins to spin it.

THE MANNER OF RAISING AND DRESSING HEMP.
N. B. It scarcely differs from the raising and dressing of FLAX, but in the
following particulars.
HEMP requires a light, free, dry, dusty, and even a sandy warm soil; which if
not naturally rich, must be made so by manure. New broke up ground does not
answer for hemp, producing it thin and poor upon the stalk. Hemp does well to
follow beans. The ground should be ploughed and harrowed three or four times, a
fortnight or three weeks intervening between each time. In some parts of
Lincoln and Holland the soil is naturally so free and rich, that it will
produce hemp constantly year after year without manure. The leaves which fall
off the stalk h^lp to manure the ground. It is frequently sown with a view to
clear the ground of weeds; which it does most effectually, growing fast, and
s^^n checki^g every weed but mugwort, which is picked out with a fork.

It is sown about the first of May; so thin, that about four p^^ks are
sufficient for an English acre; and the ground must then be covered as much as
possible to preserve the seed from the birds, who are very fond of it.

The taper-topped stalk which does not bear the pods, is called the female,
though in fact it is the male, scattering from its bloom a small dust, which
impregnates the pods of the bushy-topped; which last is commonly, though
improperly, called the male or carle hemp.

When hemp is the object of the farmer more than a crop of seed, the whole
should be pulled when the stalk begins to grow yellow, and the earth remaining
about the roots should be beat off to prevent more growth: But if the seed is
wanted in its greatest perfection, the stalks bearing the pods must be pulled
before the upmost pod begins to open; the earth should not be beat off from the
roots; it should be stooked in sheaves upon the field, to dry and win as corn;
and the top of these stooks should be covered with undergrowth, or the like, to
preserve the seed from the birds.

Hemp is sooner watered than flax, and the canals must be deeper.

In keeping the seed, care must be taken to preserve it from rats, mice, and
such like vermin, who are all fond of it.

It is dressed as coarse flax, but is sooner dressed; and its greater length
requires more care, and renders it more troublesome in the handling, especially
in the skutching of it by the water lint-mills with horizontal skutchers, when
it must be folded double. What is too coarse and strong in the stalk for the
hand o^ foot-machines, may be broke and ^eeled by the hand.

An Inquiry concerning the Materials that may be used in making Paper.
By Mr. GUETTARD, of the Royal Academy of Sciences, and Physician to his Serene
Highness the Duke of ORLEANS.
PAPER owes its origin to the necessity that mankind were always under to
communicate their sentiments even when at a distance from one another; and to
the desire of transmitting their thoughts to posterity. Flattered with the
hopes of procuring by these means a kind of immortality, which would indemnify
them for that which nature has refused, they first thought of carving or
painting upon the bark or leaves of trees, the characters which they used. The
natives of America still use the same expedients; and these may be looked upon
as a living proof of what is recorded of the first men of the old world. They
found inconvenience in having books composed of small bits of bark strung upon
twisted leaves, or on one piece of bark or leaves rolled up; and endeavored to
find another matter which might be more commodiously used. The Egyptians, who
were the first people that enjoyed the happiness of a well governed state, were
likewise the first who endeavored to procure this advantage; nevertheless, it
was not (according to Pliny) till the time of Alexander's victories, that they
made this discovery. They fell upon a method of making, from a kind of
dog-grass, a substance which soon became a very considerable and lucrative
branch of trade; and this manufacture was the first thing that deserved the
name of paper. Rome, as much as it was possible, furnished itself with this
paper, and as often as the Gauls could procure it, they gave it the preference
to the birch-bark: but the difficulty of bringing it from such a distant
country as Egypt, weighing too equally against its rare property of taking any
desired form, and of being folded together in sheets, the Gauls and other
nations endeavored in like manner to find the means of supplying it among
themselves. They accordingly found the method of making it with cotton: and
according to Montfaucon, in his essay upon the Egyptian paper, inserted among
those of the academy of the belles lettres, at the end of the ninth or
beginning of the tenth century, this destroyed the Egyptian paper manufacture
through all the east; and this discovery led to that of our paper, which is
made of rags, the era of which, as settled by Montfaucon, in the aforesaid
essay, is in the twelfth century. Yet long before that period, the Chinese
(according to P. du Halde) made it with cotton rags. That author says, in the
article of Chinese paper, that in the 95th year of the Christian era, a
Mandarin of the palace manufactured paper of the bark of different trees, old
rags of silk and hemp that had been used. Be that as it will, as soon as the
rag paper appeared, it ruined the Egyptian paper in the west, as the
cotton-paper had formerly ruined it in the east. We must own however, that the
advantages of paper made of rags, ought not to have been so fatal to that of
Egypt, but on the contrary engaged their manufacturers to bring it to
perfection. Every thing seemed to lead the way. The different kinds of paper
had always been made of plants: and although the birch-bark and the prepared
leaves, were not properly speaking of that species, yet the facility of folding
and rolling, showed a flexibility in the fibers, capable of that preparation
which is given to rags. It may be observed, that these very rags are no other
than fibers of a plant which had suffered a kind of decomposition, which had
not happened to those that they made use of. It was therefore natural to think,
that if they had undergone the same preparation, they would have produced such
a paper, or at least a kind that would have resembled our own.

Let us not seek for matter of reproach against the ancients. Their occasions
for paper were not probably so pressing as ours; since notwithstanding the
quantity of rags which is collected, the price of it sometimes rises so high,
that the manufacturers are desirous of finding other materials for the same
purpose, or compelled to have recourse to expedients which are prohibited by
the regulations touching paper-works, though they always find means to conceal
them from the vigilance of the inspectors. When the rags that are proper for
making white paper, become scarce, they employ those which at other times, are
used for the coarse paper, and prepare them with chalk-water. By this
preparation they consume, and indeed destroy the foreign bodies which are in
these coarse materials, but at the same time decompose the fibers of the rags;
so that there must certainly be a great waste. If we should do no more then,
but find a method for preventing this waste, and procure such materials as the
workmen at such times desire to have, should we not gain a great advantage to
the paper-works? The means that are now prohibited, might be employed after the
prohibition is taken off. This new matter might be used for coarse paper, and
the other enter into the composition of white paper, and of consequence the
price of fine rags would fall, or at least never become excessively dear. In my
opinion, therefore, we ought to have been for a long time, employed in search
of a remedy for those times of dearth, and in preventing the consequences so
naturally drawn from the manner in which we now manufacture our paper. It is
not from the workmen we are to draw such consequences. He himself who makes any
discovery, very rarely perceives all its consequences: the novelty often blinds
us, touching what is already discovered, and makes us despise it, instead of
engaging us to bring it to perfection. It therefore requires men who, together
with a discerning understanding, have a desire to bring the arts to perfection,
and to enable mankind to enjoy them at a small expense.

M. de Reaumur, in an essay published in the year 1719, upon wasps, seems to
perceive these consequences. Wasps build habitations, the outward parts of
which seem to be of paper or strong pasteboard: in such a manner do they
prepare bits of rotten wood, as to make them assume that consistence. M. de
Reaumur took an hint from this observation, touching the perfection of
paper-works. He in his essay explains his own ideas of that substance, and
wishes those who have an opportunity would examine, if it is such as he has
conceived it to be: and this subject he has renewed in the sixth volume of his
history of insects. Seba likewise, in the first volume of his natural history,
has invited the curious to prosecute the same project, in these words. This
country does not seem to want trees fit for making paper, if people would give
themselves the necessary trouble and expense. Alga Marina, for example, which
is composed of long, strong, viscous filaments, might it not be proper for this
purpose, as well as the ma^ts of Moscovy, if they were prepared as the Japonese
make their timber? The curious may at least try the experiment. Whether there
are no people, as Seba demands, who have opportunities of prosecuting this
work, or that every body is averse to go to work, except upon his own plan, I
know not one author who has communicated any thing upon this subject.

P. du Halde, in the first volume of his history of China, pretends that the
Chinese make paper of the second bark of bamboo, of the bark of different
trees, particularly the mulberry, of straw, rue and hemp. Keempfer, in his
voyage to Japan, and after him Seba, in the aforementioned book report that
paper is made in that country of the inner bark of a kind of mulberry-tree. M.
de la Loubaire says, that the Siamese make it of old cotton-cloth, or the bark
of a tree called Toncoe. Flacourt describes the manner in which the inhabitants
of Madagascar make theirs of a kind of mallow, which they call Avo. Finally,
all the travelers to India as well as to America, recount with emphasis, the
advantages drawn from the palm tree for making stuffs, of which, when they are
worn, it would doubtless be easy to make paper. The opportunity which the paper
mills in the neigbourhood of Estampes, which is my native place, seemed to
afford me, of fulfilling the wish of some, and verifying what has been said by
others, touching our trees and plants that are analagous to those mentioned by
the authors above, has induced me to collect several of these plants. After
having surmounted all the difficulties which one always finds among workmen,
when he pretends to introduce any novelty relating to their occupation, I have
at length, succeeded so far as to have tried some experiments, and fla^ter
myself with being able to continue those which I have in view.

Hitherto I have only spoke, as if paper was made of nothing but vegetable
substances, and that no materials could be taken from the animal reign.
Nevertheless, it is doubted whether in China paper is not made of silk. Pere du
Halde says, that they gather the refused cods, when they are unwound in the
silk manufactures, and make paper of them; but, notwithstanding the assertion
of that author, the fact has been always considered as problematic.

I will relate an experiment which may help to explain this question: but
before I describe my success, I believe I had better distinguish the different
plants I have mentioned above, and present them in a methodical manner. By
these means the public will have a botanical history of paper, and see the plan
of the work which I have proposed.

The materials for paper, then, may be divided into two general classes,
namely, vegetable substances, and those that belong to the animal kingdom.

In the great number, I will even venture to say, in the confusion of plants
used for making paper, or of which people suppose it might be made a regular
order may be found. People of different countries have been conducted by a kind
of natural analogy. They have not sought to employ plants that were very
different from those already in use. They have taken them of different classes,
in different kinds, but always in some of those which had been before used,
though probably they were ignorant of that circumstance. In effect, the
greatest part of plants seem to be composed of long, longitudinal fibers,
nearer or closer to one another, and covered with a substance which fills up
the intervals: such are the palmiferous, the gramineous and the liliaceous.

The class of the palmiferi is one of those which have been of most service to
the Indians, Asiatics and Americans, in furnishing them with clothing,
cordage, sails and other utensils; almost every part of these trees, has served
some of those uses, though they do not indifferently take every part of the
same tree. These people have in the palm tree, which they found among them,
chosen what was most susceptible of manufacture. In some they chose the spatha,
which invelops the regimen of fruits before they are ripe, or that which
sustains the young leaves: and in others they employed the down which surrounds
the fruit. The young and tender leaves have been preferred to this wool or
down, which was not considerable in other kinds; and when all these could not
be compared to the bark for goodness and quantity, they made use of this last.
The down of the fruit of the cocoa-nut-tree, the spatha, the leaves and bark
have been used, as several travelers relate. Rumphius, in his history of the
plants of Amboyna, says as much of the calapa: the pinanga, the wild lontarus,
the tetum, the hakum, the wanga, all different kinds of the palm tree, furnish
in their leaves, a thread more or less fine, of which those people make stuffs.
They have even prepared the leaves of the hakun, and soribe, and used them
instead of paper. The advantages which the Indians draw from the palm tree
being already sufficiently important, I shall not probably be blamed for not
having inserted, in the number of these advantages, what is mentioned by Rai
after some authors: he reports, tome 2. page 358. of his history of plants,
that the cocoa-tree contains, in lieu of pith, a quire of paper of fifty or
sixty sheets, on which people may write. This is like that which is found in
the middle of a fruit of Peru, mentioned by Mr. Frezier, author of a voyage to
the South Sea. All this wonderful phenomenon, when reduced to its just value,
is in my opinion, no more than that the pith of the palm tree, and the pulp of
that fruit, may be easily made into sheets in the same manner as that of the
Chinese elder, which is made into those fine artificial flowers that are
brought from that country, or the books made of the roots of a kind of mallow,
which requires no more than to be artfully dried, and cut in leaves. The musa
or banana tree has been employed for the same or such like purposes.

The class of the liliaceous includes the aloes, the yucca: from the aloes is
obtained the thread of pit, known by the use to which it is put. Father du
Tertre, in his natural history of the Antilles, describes the manner in which
that thread is got. Sir Hans Sloane, in his catalogue of the plants of Jamaica,
likewise mentions these aloes. In the number of synonimous names which he
recites, some of them are taken from the use that is made of those plants, and
which I cannot help, for that reason, repeating in this place. The second
species of that author is by Gaspar Bauhin, in his Pinax, p. 20. called the
eleventh species of papyrus, employed for paper. Clusius, in his treatise of
exotic plants, p. 6. mentions a ball of thread made of the bark of a tree,
which, according to Sloane, is this aloes. John Bauhin, tome. I. p. 384, copies
Clusius, and says this thread is very fine and extremely white. The third
species of aloes, according to Sloane, which nevertheless is a true species of
yucca, is known in Luet, p. 645, under the name of an excellent kind of hemp or
flax, which even approaches very near to the fineness of silk.

Seba, ^n the first volume of his work, has given the figure of two leaves of a
plant, which he calls the aquatic bullrush of Surinam, composed of innumerable
threads or fi^aments. This bullrush, says that author, ought to be examined
with regard to its utility.

It was from the gramineous class, as I have already said, that they obtained
materials for the first paper which deserves that name. Michili, in his new
genera of plants, has inserted, in the number of rushes, the plant called by
Gaspar Bauhin, in his Pinax, p. 19. and in his theater of plants, p. 333. the
paper of Syria or Sicily. Is this the species formerly employed in Egypt? The
figure and description of it given by Prosper Alpinus, namely that of
Ves^ingius and the ancients, leave it doubtful whither this last plant be a
rush or not. Prosper Alpinus says it is the paper called beid by the Egyptians.
M. de Jussieu, at whose house people will always find lights in all doubts that
can occur upon these subjects, and who finds pleasure in communicating
instruction, has shown me an Egyptian plant that seems to be a true rush, and
when compared with that of Michili, exhibits no difference.

Dodo considers the flag as a plant proper for paper, and gives it the name of
Papyrus. I have observed above, that Pere du Halde says the Chinese made paper
of straw or the blade of rice. Bamboo is likewise employed in the same country
as a kind of paper; and according to the same author, is the reed-tree of
Gaspar Bauhin, in his Pinax, p. 18.

The birch, which is of the class of cats-tail flowers, was one of the first
trees upon the bark of which people wrote. As the word bark may be deemed
equivocal, it will not be amiss in this place to fix its signification. Are we
to understand by this word bark, that part of trees which covers externally the
trunk and branches? Or is not rather that interior layer, which ought to become
woody, and is called liber? Without all doubt, it must be this inner covering
which we are to understand by the bark of birch; it seems also that in this
sense it ought to be understood in those authors who treat of the different
kinds of paper used by different nations. Most of these writers say, it is the
second bark which is used. Others have only said, that they used the bark; but
the preparations which they describe, plainly show that it was this inner part
which was employed. I should deviate too much from the plan I proposed to
myself in this essay, to mention the methods of this preparation. Rumphiu^
describes two trees with cats-tail flowers, one of which he calls the
domesticum gnemon, and the other gnemon campestre. The inhabitants of Amboyna,
according to that author, obtain a thread from the bark of the boughs, which
they beat a little, and this thread is proper for making nets, which they boil
in a certain infusion, to make them stronger and less apt to rot in the water.
This ought the more carefully to be examined, as the knowledge derived from
such enquiry, may serve to bring to perfection the cordage of ships, as well as
that of which the fishers make their nets.

Here we ought to recall the idea which M. de Reaumur has produced upon the
subject of rotten wood, an idea so much the more happy as it furnishes others
upon abundance of substances easily got: the forests present but too many of
them sometimes. The shops of our carpenters supply us with cuttings which, by
their thinness are in a condition to undergo, in a little time, the necessary
degree of rottenness; for here, as in every other thing, there is a proper
degree which must be laid hold on. When the wood is too rotten, its fibers are
too much divided, they have lost that binding which connects their parts, they
become too earthy, and I believe it would then be difficult, not to say
impossible, to bind them together: therefore, the wasps do not use
indifferently all sorts of rotten wood, but know how to distinguish that which
is proper for their purpose.

The nettle, the mulberry and the hemp are ranked in a class which is called
incomplete, because these plants want the flower, or the calix or the petalae,
or both these parts.

Kempfer, in his catalogue of the plants of Japan, mentions one which in the
Japonese idiom is called white hemp, and to which that author has given the
appellation of the great common nettle, which bears real flowers, and yields
strong thread proper for linen and other works. The same author calls the
mulberry which is employed for paper, the Papyrus, whose fruit resembles that
of the mulberry, and whose bark is made into paper. Seba has given it the name
of the mulberry-tree, which affords paper, and is cultivated at Japan. Pere du
Halde says, tome 2. page 212. that before the mulberry branches, with whose
leaves the Chinese feed their silk worms, are destined to the fire, some people
strip off the thin bark from these branches, and make of it a kind of paper,
which is strong enough to c^ver their ordinary umbrellas, especially when it is
o^led and colored. I do not here join the other plant which the Japonese
employ, because Kempfer leaves it uncertain under what class it ought to be
ranged. He calls it the Papyrus which lies upon the ground, yields milk, has
plated leaves, and a bark proper for making paper. For the same reason I
likewise mention here a tree which Sloane calls the tree with broad, long,
jagged, smooth shining leaves, like those of the laurel, whose interior rind
may be extended into a fine cloth like muslin for ruffles; this tree is
commonly called Lagetto. Tome 2. tab. 168, 169. The people among whom this tree
is found, make clothes of it. It is needless to mention the use of hemp in
making paper, every body knows we use it for that purpose; but hitherto no
paper has been made of hemp, until it had passed through the state of rags. Yet
Pere du Halde reports, that at Nangha, paper is made of hemp beaten and mixed
with lime water, tome 4. page 373. And this confirms me in the notion I
entertained, that the stalks, or what falls upon the form in dressing hemp or
flax, might serve for the same purpose. I shall speak of this below.

The malvaceous species dispute the preference with all the other classes, for
this kind of employment. All the kinds of the mahot yield a sort of thread
proper for cordage. Sloane mentions two mallows, one of which he names the
mallow-tree on the seashore, with round, small, prickly leaves, white below,
which bears a yellow flower, and a bark that may be made into thread. Catalogue
of the Jamaica plants, p. 95. This is one of the mahots of father du Tertre.
The other is mentioned by the name of the mallow-tree with round leaves, a very
large flower of a fine red color, like the flower de lys, and a bark which
yields thread. Ibid. This is another of du Tertre's mahots. It would be
unnecessary to mention the different kinds of cotton which are used in making
paper. I have observed above, that cotton-paper was invented in the east, and
that in China, paper was made of cotton-rags; and indeed these are not
neglected even in our manufactures. Although I have advanced, that people have
never sought after plants that were far removed from those classes which had
been formerly used, I think I ought to except the flax, the linden-tree, and
the thistle.

Linen rags have entered and now enter into the composition of paper: The
workmen, in picking the rags, reject only those which are produced from woollen
stuffs and hides of animals: they pretend that these stuffs cannot be beaten;
but this they say, perhaps, because they are beaten with more difficulty than
those produced from the fibers of plants, the parts of which are more easily
divided. They do not reject the others in those paper-works where coarse gray
paper is made; the business then is to have a very fine paste, and the hair may
be beaten sufficiently, to incorporate with the fibers of other rags, although
they may not be so well bruised.

Veslingius, in his little treatise upon the utility of cultivating plants,
pretends that the down of certain thistles has been used in making stuffs: ex
acantii lanugine demptis spinis, vestes effecerunt, says that author. By the
word acantium we must understand a kind of thistle. The ancients often employed
the word in this signification. The linden-tree was and is used in making
ropes, a circumstance that denotes a flexibility in the fibers of that tree,
capable of undergoing the necessary preparation for making paper.

What Veslingius, whom I have mentioned, has writ concerning the luffa arabum,
which may be considered as a kind of cucumber, ought to induce us to examine
several plants. He says, that the inside of the fruit, when the seeds are taken
out, is no other than a little net which seems to be made of flax; whence he
conjectures it would yield a thread like that which the Ethiopians and Indians,
according to Theophrastus, made of their cotton-apples, and the Arabians,
according to Pliny, of their gourds.

I know no author but Seba who has suspected that paper might be made of
sea-plants, and alga marina. When I read that part, I recollected that I had
been struck with the whiteness which it will assume, bleached no doubt by the
spray of the seawater, by the rains and dews, and losing that glue with which
all the marine plants are covered. Upon the seacoasts the fucus is used for
dunging the vines and circumjacent lands; and I have observed that this, when
transported to the grounds, likewise acquires a certain degree of whiteness,
and, like the alga, preserves its figure, together with a strong consistence:
nothing is so common on the seashore as the fucus, which in some places covers
the coast, and nothing can be more easily collected.

There is another plant which is likewise found on the seashore, but more
commonly in ponds, and the basins of gardens; it is the conferva of Plini, and
in some authors bears a name that seems to promise considerable utility.
Imperatus calls it the sea-flax. Loesel, in his catalogue of the plants in
Prussia, gives it the name of aquatic moss, composed of very fine silky
filaments. I can scarce doubt that some people have attempted to spin this
plant. When it is wet, it has a flexibility that deceives people, and the great
quantity of it found in those places that favor its multiplication, and by
which means the fibers are interwoven in such a manner as to produce a kind of
stuff like coarse camblet, must have more than once induced people to try to
make the plant useful in the ar^s. I know that a great princess, struck with
the quantity and fineness of this plant, was desirous of having it spun; but it
becomes too brittle when out of the water, to be susceptible of this operation.
I shall, in the s^quel, relate the success I had in treating it, with a view to
the paper manufacture.

I thought it necessary to enter into a circumstantial detail of the plants
which have been used in the composition of paper, and those which may be used
for that purpose, in order to give, as I before observed, a botanical history
of that manufacture, and explain the plan of the work which I have laid down:
and by the different classes which I have described, the public sees the plants
of our country which relate to it. At the same time it must be owned, that some
of these classes are not so rich here as in foreign countries. We are
altogether strangers to the class of the palmiferi; but, by way of recompense,
the gramineous class is in greater abundance. The course of some rivers is
retarded by a kind of forest of reeds, rushes and flags; and in some places
nothing is so common as mallows: there is scarce a person among us, who is not
sometimes incommoded by the quantity of nettles and thistles. Cotton is nothing
but a kind of down that surrounds the grain of that plant. I have therefore
included in my project, the down of different plants, such as that of willows
and linagrostis. The grounds planted with willows, are covered at one season
with the fall of the cats-tails of these trees; and some meadows, especially
those that are barren, are full of the linagrostis.

The stalks of hemp and flax are composed of two parts, the filamentous and
that which partakes of the nature of pith. We cannot possibly doubt the utility
of the first, which indeed composes our paper. Nevertheless, this thread is
rejected as useless. It would therefore be a great advantage to render that
part useful, even though the other never could serve any purpose. What
prodigious quantities of materials would be acquired by these means! We know
how much hemp is brought from Berry and Champaign. In the rope-works, and
especially those of the arsenals belonging to our seaports, great resources
will be found; they are now made into tow, which often amounts to such a
quantity, that they are obliged to throw it away, or make use of it as dung for
the beds in their garden; in all the lower Poictiers there is scarce a peasant
who does not reserve a piece of ground for flax seed.

It is not therefore for want of materials that we do not endeavor to procure
a paper which may vie in beauty with our white paper, or at least furnish us
with a kind proper for covers of bundles. Perhaps I may be thought to have
found too many plants susceptible of this operation, and seem inclined to
transform every thing into paper. Although what I have related of foreign
plants may be a prejudice strong enough to inspire a notion of the utility we
may reap from our own plants, I know at the same time, we may be imposed upon
by analogy, which is always deceitful. In other respects, the experiments which
I have made, although far from that perfection to which I wish we could attain,
give reason to hope that one day we may acquire a certain degree of that
perfection. Thinking I ought first of all to examine the stalks of hemp as the
most common materials, and those from which I thought I had reason to expect
some success, I caused them to be steeped in water for a certain time, that
they might acquire a degree of rottenness which would facilitate their
trituration. When they were supposed to be sufficiently rotten they were
beaten; but by a mistake, which by the by, I had endeavored to avoid, these
stalks were beaten with mallows and nettles, which I had ordered to be gathered
and left to rot in a separate place. Yet these different substances
incorporated together: though it must be confessed, that their connection was
not very strong, but, on the contrary, produced a very imperfect tissue. I look
upon this essay, as scarce deserving to be recounted; yet it shows that the
leaves of plants as well as the filaments may unite and incorporate; and that,
if those different parts had been beaten separately, and a proper degree of
trituration bestowed upon each, so as to form a well binding paste, something
better might have been produced. I will even venture to say, this doubtless
would have been the case, having observed what happens in ponds and marshes.
Nature, more tranquil than art, frequently forms a very fine paper of plants
that rot in those watery places. I have found, in some of the pools of water of
the forest of Dourdan, when they have been entirely dried up, masses of a
substance that altogether resembles paper. They were composed of several
laminae or leaves, easily separated from one another. They tore like paper, and
though I could not then determine whether they were formed of rotten leaves, or
only a kind of byssus, it seemed to me, that if any of this last plant entered
its composition, there was likewise in it part of leaves, trees and other
plants. I have not fulfilled the aim which this observation inspired me with;
diverted by a variety of other occupations, I could not bestow upon this work,
the time, attention and necessary precision it required. It was more easy for
me to repeat the experiment upon hemp alone. I therefore put in water to rot,
some very fine hemp well cleaned from the parenchymatous part or pith that
falls from the instrument in dressing it. The paper which it produced, was very
strong, and convinced me that it was very easy to make it of that part of the
hemp which is thrown away in rope-works or other workhouses, where it is
dressed, or employed.

The conviction I reaped from this experiment, touching the hemp, necessarily
influenced my notions concerning cotton, that down, much softer and more
flexible than hemp, must easily undergo the necessary preparation for making
paper. I o^ght indeed to regard the experiment I made upon cotton as
superfluous, after that which I had tried upon hemp; yet as authors, those at
least whom I have read, do not say that cotton-paper was made immediately of
cotton before it had passed through the state of cloth; and Pere du Halde
reports that the Chinese make theirs with cotton-rags, I thought proper to
remove that doubt entirely; because it seemed to me essential that no scruple
should remain with regard to that fact; and the success seemed to influence all
those parts of plants to which we commonly give the name of down. Of this kind
there are several, namely the linagostis, the cats-tail of the willow,
dogs-bane, and trumpet-wood, which, though not so easily spun as cotton, seem
to me susceptible of that consistence which is necessary to the paste or pulp
of which paper is made. The cotton being therefore beaten to a sufficient
degree, produced a smooth, white paper of a strong texture, which promised to
have all the advantages of our own.

I will not however pretend to propose it as an advantage, to make paper of
cotton. The hemp-rag is a material in our possession, which would be altogether
useless if we did not know how to employ it for this purpose; but by knowing,
from this and other experiments, that it is possible to make paper with those
different materials, even though they have not passed through an intermediate
state, we afford a succedaneum to those who are in want of ordinary rags, which
are not so common as people may imagine, in countries remote from great cities.
In some places of our American colonies, cotton is more common than hemp-rag,
which may be the means of making that trade more lucrative and of greater
consequence; but perhaps this is giving views of utility which many other
reasons may render useless: besides, to know whether or not it would be used to
advantage, would require more delicate experiments, and a more minute enquiry
touching the price which that paper would bring, and the profit which is
acquired in the ordinary cotton trade. I have neither made the calculation nor
the experiments that are requisite; all that I am in search of, is the
possibility of the thing: and not its advantages or disadvantages. I proceeded
then to try the other downs, though I have been able only to examine that of
the dogs-bane, called wad; and of the two kinds that are obtained from
thistles, that only with seeds of diverse kinds which are crowned, but not the
kind which the ancients obtained from the leaves which have been mentioned
above. This experiment did not succeed so well as that which I made with
cotton. The paste formed of the down of these plants, was not of such a good
consistence or coherence, as that of the pulp made with cotton: yet, with much
care and precaution it was formed into sheets of paper strong enough to be hung
upon cords to dry, but very easily torn: the parts did not adhere, they not
being sufficiently interwoven and bound together; and without this quality no
paper can be good. So great a difference between these kinds of down, may
appear singular, but this difficulty will be explained by the following
observation. That which is upon wad and thistle, is not properly speaking a
down: but formed of a sort of hair sustained upon the seeds of these plants.
These hairs are commonly called, by botanists, tufts and plumes, because they
form upon the seeds a kind of tuft, and many of them push out branches on the
sides, by which they resemble real plumes, or feathers. Cotton, on the
contrary, is a down that surrounds the grain, without order or regularity,
sticking closely to it, without any constant figure. When this is pulled off,
and the seed wiped clean, we can easily perceive that it issues from small
points, like so many holes. If this operation is performed while the fruit is
young, the threads or hairs are found softer and less dry than when it is
farther advanced; and it is difficult to refuse the notion, particular as it
is, that cotton is no other than a matter which transpires from the seed. When
we know what forms the down of certain thistles, which I have mentioned in the
beginning of this essay, the singularity of the notion vanishes. The leaves and
stalks of thistles are roughened with a quantity of hairs, which are so many
pipes giving issue to a clear limpid liquor, a little viscous and glutinous,
which dries in the air, and assumes a consistence like that of cotton: nay it
really is so to such a degree, that when this down is collected, it is easy to
form a thread of it, between the fingers: such an observation may perhaps
appear very delicate to make, and thence doubtful and hazardous: yet it does
not require so much attention as people may imagine; all that is necessary is,
to procure a microscope with a focus of some inches, to observe the threads and
the kind of wheel in which they are formed: and both these being distinguished,
you may perceive, by the naked eye, all that passes in this operation of
nature. That this may be seen the plainer, you may choose the carduus benedictus
of the Parisians, or that which has the round head covered with down. These
are, in my opinion, more proper than many others of the same class, for proving
this observation. The interior part of the scales that form their head, is
provided with an infinite number of glands that filtrate a liquor like that
which I have mentioned; and this liquor changes in the air, to threads which
form the down that surrounds the heads of those thistles. This will not admit
of a moment's doubt, seeing this thread may be perceived forming under the very
eye: if we will gradually and cautiously separate the scales from one another,
we then have the pleasure to see this matter lengthen and extend like a gum,
rosin or wax, and in a moment change into white threads resembling those of
paper.

Now we perceive the similitude there is between cotton and the wool of
thistles, and the difference between both and the pretended down of those last,
and of wad. The cotton issues from the seeds which it surrounds like the wool
of thistle heads. And both sweat from certain parts, which may be considered as
a kind of glands. On the contrary, what is supposed to be down in the thistle,
consists of parts that are stiff and dry, consequently brittle, easily grouped
into little smooth masses, which are not composed of a quantity of small
fibers, that partly detaching themselves from one another, form in the cotton
and thistle-wool, that softness and flexibility which makes what in these
substances, is commonly called the cottoneous part: a quality which renders
them easiy to mix together, when they are beaten or pounded, in order to form
the paste for paper. Most we therefore entirely reject these downs? No, surely.
Perhaps, in the twinkling of an eye, they may be rendered useful. I know it may
be difficult to catch that point of view, than which nothing requires so much
address in improving the arts; but I shall endeavor, at the end of this essay,
to give some hints on the subject; for it would be very advantageous to find
the means of employing a kind of down which is in such abundance, and costs
nothing but the trouble of gathering it.

I now proceed to another experiment, which, though unscessful, ought to be
related. It was tried upon the alga marina, which Seba exhorts us to examine.
Under this name is comprehended not only that which is used in packing
glass-ware, and wrapping round the bottles of liqueur which come from
M^^pelier, and from thence called the glass-makers weed; I say, not only this
is rega^ded as an alga, but likewise the fucus or varus, which has a better
title to the name; since the glass-makers weed is not properly of that species,
but of the class of dogs-grass. However, I have always mentioned it as an alga,
because it is better kn^wn by that than the name of cyperus. This plant, having
been treated like the others I have mentioned, did not form a pa^te that would
cohere in any shape; for its leaves have but few fibers: they are in some sort
composed of parenchymatous parts, which may be considered as a bundle of small
vesicles, the sphericity of which is an obstacle to that union which must
obtain among the parts of paper. Two spheres can only touch one another in one
point; this is a truth demonstrated in geometry, as well as this other, that
plain surfaces may be in contact through their whole surfaces; a property which
facilitates the intertexture of the parts of cotton and hemp in the composition
of paper, and to which the other is an obstacle. To this I likewise attributed
the little success I had in an experiment which I made with corralloids, a kind
of plant of the class of alga, which abounds in all our woods, and in some
places almost entirely covers the trees and rocks. These plants are in some
measure dissolved by the trituration; and when they were spread in water,
according to the practice of making sheets of paper, they could not be
reunited upon the form. The same thing happened to the conferva of Pliny,
which is also of the same tribe.

It may be considered as a loss to the paper manufacture, that we cannot give a
body to these plants when they are triturated. The whiteness they acquire when
drying, and their prodigious quantity, make us regret this circumstance,
especially if they cannot be employed with success in some other manufacture;
and I can easily conceive what impressions the report of the commissioners of
the academy must have made upon the minds of those who consulted it about the
advantage that might be reaped from a cottoneous matter they had gathered in
the pond of Petz, at the distance of a league and an half from Metz, and was
found to be no other than dried conferva, which did not deserve the attention
that had been bestowed upon it; for they had already founded great hopes on the
discovery relating to the trade of the country.

A substance that might, perhaps, turn out to more advantage, is the cods of
common caterpillars, which, in some years, are in such plenty as almost to
cover the trees. These cods, though not proper for spinning, may, nevertheless,
enter into the composition of paper. The essay which was made, gives room to
hope for the success. In effect, these cods, cleared of the leaves that stuck
to them, being beaten, were easily reduced to a kind of pulp, which being
spread in the water, was without difficulty collected on the form, and made
into sheets of paper that might be brought to a degree of perfection, which it
must be owned they had not: nevertheless, though this paper ought rather to be
ranked with the coarse brown, than with the white fine sort, it gives room to
believe, that it may in time acquire a certain degree of whiteness. Some of the
sheets were whiter than others: nay the same sheet was sometimes whiter in one
part than another: and the business will be to find a remedy for this
inconvenience. One of the best (which, by the bye, I could not employ) is,
without contradiction, to pound the cods in the ordinary mortars of the mills,
or bray them under the cylinder. The quantity of cods gathered by my direction,
was not enough to fill the mill-mortar; so that the workman made use of an
ordinary mortar, which was attended with too defects. The substance was not
beaten uniformly, and the foreign bodies were not discharged. These evils are
prevented in the mill. The pestles are always moved equally, or at least more
equally th^n with the hand of a workman who uses an ordinary mortar; so that
the substance must be more effectually triturated in the mill. Besides, the
mortars of this machine are open on one side, near the bottom: this hole is
covered with a hair-cloth, the interstices of which are large enough to
transmit what has undergone a ^ufficient degree of trituration. Thus the paste
becomes whiter; an advantage we cannot obtain from an ordinary mortar, and
which the silk-paper I made could not have: for, some of the sheets were
sprink^ed with several little black points, occasioned by the excrement of the
caterpillars, which were interwoven with the silk of the cods: and the water
which passes into the mortar of the mill, would have carried off these
excrements Nay, perhaps the silk loses a part that serves no purpose but to
render the paper of a greyer color when it continues mixed in the pulp. This
part is more easily dissolved and disengaged from the paste, by the water that
continually runs through the mortars. The small fragments of leaves that may be
left after the picking will also be beaten with more difficulty in a common
mortar; and the paper will be spoiled by them, as it happened to some sheets of
that which we made. This inconvenience would be avoided by putting the cods in
the mill mortars, where at least, the leaves would be more easily beaten, and
this they might easily be, in the state wherein they appear in the cods. For
the caterpillars have divested them of their parenchymatous parts on which they
feed: and naught remains but the fibers, which, by the network they form,
supported the parenchyma that filled up the interstices. Though these fibers be
like those of a tree, they are at the same time more slender and fi^e, and have
already, by the work of the caterpillars, acquired an elaboration which wants
only a little of our assistance. The beginning of rottenness might suffice. The
preparation given to the rags before they are put under the pestle, is one of
the methods that may be the most useful on this occasion. The rags being
picked, are cut into small pieces, and laid in heaps, where they grow warm, and
acquire a kind of fermentation that gives them a degree of rottenness, which
renders them the more fit for trituration. In the opinion of the workmen, this
preparation is so indispensibly necessary, that when the rags are clean, and
destitute of the grease which is then requisite, they think themselves obliged
to supply this defect. The same method may be taken with cods mixed with
leaves. These leaves, assisted with a little moisture, will heat and rot to a
certain degree, which it is our business to distinguish, that then they may be
beaten as easily as the silk.

It were to be wished that these leaves were not mixed with the silk, whereas
the greatest part of the cods are composed of them. Yet there are some which
consist of pure silk; and are usually found in the angle formed by the union of
two branches. These are no other than threads of silk stretched from one bough
to another, in different ways. The others consisting partly of leaves, are
placed in the middle of leaves, which after the caterpillars have partly
consumed, they bind and unite them together; thus forming larger or smaller
bundles or pods of the ends of little branches. There is no room to doubt that
the silk of other caterpillars might likewise be employed: the cods of pure
silk, and even those that are partly formed of the hair which covers the
caterpillars, are equally proper materials for paper: nor should the cods
belonging to the caterpillars of the pine tree, be rejected.

We ought, however, to be sure that it is possible to make paper of silk: but
is it made of that substance in China? Though it may appear unnecessary to
resolve that question, I will examine the reasons that are advanced to prove
that it is not made of silk. It is usually said, that if the Chinese paper,
which is pretended to be made of silk, was actually composed of that substance,
it would in burning, twist itself different ways, and be shrivelled up like
parchment, which is made of prepared sheep-skin; whereas that paper burns as
equally as that made of the rags of hemp-cloth and linen. These facts cannot be
contradicted; but yet the silk-paper which I made, burned like ordinary paper,
though the cods, which were the chief materials, shrunk up in burning, in the
same manner as parchment. What, therefore, is the cause of this difference? I
believe we must seek for the explanation in the tissue or texture, which is
very different in the paper from what it was in the cod. There the threads are
long, disposed in different manners, so as that one single thread often forms
several folds. The fibers of paper are very short, and though differently
arranged and bound together, the connection is not so strong: it is no longer
one or several threads of a considerable length. It happens then, that when the
cods are burnt, their threads are drawn different ways; those of one surface
draw those of another, and therefore, they must twist and turn sometimes to one
side and sometimes to another. Whereas, the fibers of paper being so short and
connected together only by juxta position, they must act very little, if any
thing at all upon one another, consequently will burn equally. What proves the
justness of this explication, is, that in paper there is sometimes one place
where the silk has not been well beaten, and is still too much interwoven, and
that place always is shrivelled up, in burning. This explanation is (I believe)
sufficient to clear up the question relating to silk-paper; and howsoever the
Chinese paper may be made, I think we ought to be persuaded that it is possible
to make it of silk. Neither ought we to entertain any doubt about the use to
which we might put the stalks of hemp and flax; and I think we have reason to
hope, that one day an advantageous use may be found, for the different kinds of
down, not only of the cotton of which, it is perhaps very singular to have
entertained any suspicion, but also of the thistle, the trumpet-wood, and the
wad, which more than any other would merit an happy success, its paper having a
gloss and silver brilliancy, which might be of some use in many cases. All that
remains, therefore, in order to fulfill our hope of this down as well as of the
others, is to find out some method, perhaps very easy and simple, and perhaps
for that very reason the more difficult to invent. If, for example, when the
materials are ready to be beaten, instead of simple water, we should substitute
a gummy or mucilaginous water like that in which have been boiled the parings
of leather, roots of marshmallows, the great comfrey, or such substances; the
paste by these means would be endued with a kind of glue, which might be an
expedient by means of which the parts would cohere more strongly; perhaps it
would be sufficient to prepare in this manner the water of the tub in which the
paste is diluted when it comes from under the pestle. If notwithstanding this
preparation, the paste should not have body enough, perhaps by substituting
compression in the room of immersion, which is the ordinary method of forming
the sheets of paper, we should be able to render the parts of the paste more
coherent; and I imagine this is the method which must be taken with that
cottoneous substance that owes its origin to the conferva of Pliny. The heaps
formed by the reunion of the different feet of this plant, are already of a
certain thickness, and not easily torn; so that in extending the paste made of
this plant, we might give what thickness we would, to every sheet, and the
compression would afterward do the rest. It might be found impracticable to
make sheets as thin as those of ordinary paper: but even, if we could do no
more than make pasteboard, it would be an advantage which we ought not to
neglect; but on the contrary, prosecute with care. Such examinations have
always constituted my desires, since I thought of making experiments upon
paper. I have not been able hitherto, to accomplish my scheme; but
nevertheless, I have reason to hope I shall one day see it accomplished. I have
the advantage of belonging to his serene highness the Duke of Orleans, to whom
I have the honor of explaining my notions, and who has permitted me to
prosecute, under his eye, the experiments which I have projected, believing
that they may be of some advantage to the public: an advantage which is the
principal object of that great Prince's thoughts, even in his amusements.

OBSERVATIONS on the raising and dressing of HEMP; communicated to the AMERICAN
PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, by EDWARD ANTIL, Esquire.
HEMP is one of the most profitable productions the earth furnishes in northern
climates; as it employs a great number of poor people in a very advantageous
manner, if its manufacture be carried on properly: It may also furnish a ready
remittance to the mother country, and become a reciprocal advantage to both;
and therefore it becomes worthy of the serious attention of the different
Legislatures of the northern colonies, of every trading man, and of every man,
who truly loves his country.

But as the people of America do not appear, from their present management, to
be acquainted with the best and most profitable method of cultivating and
managing this valuable plant, I beg leave to inform them of some things that
may be of advantage to them.

Whoever would raise Hemp properly and to advantage, should set aside two
pieces of ground, of such dimensions each, as he shall be able to cultivate
every year, and sow the one whilst he is manuring and preparing the other for
the succeeding year's crop; the higher and drier the ground the better,
provided it be well dunged and made strong and mellow; the ground should not be
too sloping, lest the good soil be washed away with hard rains; if it droops
toward the south, so that it may have the full influence of the sun, it will be
an advantage; low, rich, warm, dry grounds will also produce good hemp; but wet
land, though never so rich, will by no means do. The ground being prepared and
made very mellow; I now come to that part which must be particularly and
exactly attended to, since the success of the crop greatly depends upon it.
Sometime in May, the ground being moist and in a vegetating state, but by no
means (...), it must be well ploughed, the furrows clo^^ and even, the soil
lying light and mellow; it must be sowed very even with two bushels of seed
upon one acre; a man with an iron tooth harrow follows the sower, and harrows
in the seed with two horses without any balks, for the less the ground be
trampled the better; if harrowing one way be not sufficient to cover the seed,
though it would be best if that could be done, it must be cross harrowed. The
ground being moist as I said before, but by no means wet so as to clod, which
would ruin the crop, the seed will all start and come up together, which is a
sure sign of a good crop, and nothing after that, but too much wet, will hurt
it: for Hemp thus come up bids defiance to weeds and grass of every kind; its
growth is so quick and it so effectually shades the ground, that nothing below
can rise or show its head, and it so preserves all the moisture below, that the
hotter and dryer the weather the faster it grows. Whereas if the seed be sown,
when the ground is dry, the seed that lies deepest where the moisture is, will
come up first, and these will shade and starve those that come after, by which
means the first comers will be too large, and the last will be much too small,
so that the crop will be greatly damaged every way: So much depends upon this
one circumstance of sowing the seed when the ground is moist and fit to receive
it. The crop thus rightly managed will stand as thick as very good wheat, and
be from four to six feet high, according to the strength of the ground; and the
(...) will not be thicker than a good wheat straw; by this means the Hemp will
be the finer, it will yield the greater quantity, and it may be plucked from
the ground like flax, which will be a very great saving: But if it be sowed
thin, that is one bushel to an acre, which is the common practice, it grows
large, the Hemp is harsh and coarse, and then it must be cut with hooks, which
occasions great waste, for four or five inches just above ground is left by way
of stubble, which contains the best and heaviest part of the Hemp.

When the Hemp has got its growth, and is fit to be plucked, which you will
know by the under leaves of the carle, or he Hemp, turning yellow and falling
off, the sooner it is pulled the better: It must then be bound up with straw
bands, in single band sheaves, rather small than large, and each sheaf must be
bound in two places; and the sooner it is carried to the water to rot the
better: Water rotted Hemp, if it be rightly managed, is every way better than
that which is rotted on the ground; there is less waste in it, when it comes to
be dressed; it looks brighter and fairer to the eye; it is esteemed to be
stronger and more durable, and it always fetches a better price; besides it is
much sooner done, and it is rotted more even and alike, and with greater
certainty and exactness. Many people in America are acquainted with the method
of rotting Hemp in water, but as many more are not yet acquainted with it, I
shall for their information set down the method of doing it. Hemp may be rotted
in stagnated or standing water, such as ponds, pools, or broad deep ditches,
and in such water it is generally four or five days and nights a rotting, and
sometimes longer, according to the heat or coolness of the weather; it may also
be rotted in running water as in a brook or river; and in such water three or
four days and nights are sufficient, according to the weather; to know whether
the Hemp be rotted enough in either case, take a middling handful, out of the
middle row, and try with both your hands to snap it asunder, if it breaks easy
it is rotted enough, but if it yet appears pretty strong, it is not, and must
lie longer, till it breaks with ease, and then it must be taken out and dried
as soon as possible; in handling the sheaves, take hold of the bands, and set
them up an end against a fence, if one be near, or lay them down upon the
grass, for the water to drain off, and then unbind them carefully, open and
spread them to dry thoroughly; then bind them up again and house them in a dry
tight place: the reason of handling the Hemp in this careful manner is, that
when it is well rotted, whilst it is wet the lint comes off with the least
touch, therefore if it be handled roughly, or if while it is wet it be th^own
into a cart and carried to a distance to be unbound and dried, it would be
greatly hurt, and the owner would receive great damage by it, but when it is
dry, it is handled with safety.

If the Hemp be rotted in a brook or running water, the sheaves must be laid
across the stream, for if they be laid down lengthways with the stream, the
current of the water will wash away the lint, and ruin the Hemp. It must be
laid down heads and points, two, four, or six thick, according to the depth of
the water and the quantity of Hemp; if the bottom of the river be sand, gravel
or mud, three good strong stakes must be driven down at each end, above and
below, and three long strong poles must be laid on the Hemp and fastened well
to the stakes, in such manner as to force down the Hemp under water, where it
remains till it be rotted enough: though if a muddy stream could be avoided it
would be best, because it is apt to foul and stain the Hemp. If the bottom of
the stream be rocky or stony, so that stakes cannot be drove down to secure the
Hemp under water and from floating away, then a rough wall must be made at the
lower end of the Hemp, and along the side, to keep it in, and strong poles or
rails must be laid upon the top of the Hemp and pretty heavy stones upon them
so as to sink the Hemp under water, where it must lie 'till it be rotted enough.

What Hemp is intended for seed, should be sowed on a piece of ground by
itself, which must be made very rich and strong; it must be sowed in ridges six
feet wide, and the seed must be of the largest and best sort and sown very
thin, at the rate of a peck upon an acre, or rather six quarts: for the thinner
it is sown the more it branches, and the more seed it bears; it should be sown
sometime the middle of April, and then the seed will not be ripe, till sometime
after the other Hemp is done with. If you have no convenient place to sow your
seed Hemp by itself; then sow a border of six feet wide along the north and
west sides of your Hemp field; the reason of sowing your seed Hemp in such
narrow ridges or borders is that, when the carle or he Hemp is ripe, and has
shed its sarina on the simble or female Hemp, by which the seed is impregnated,
and the leaves of the carle hemp fall off and the stem grows yellow, you may
easily step in along the sides and pull up the carle Hemp without hurting the
female, which now begins to branch out, and looks of a deep green color and
very flourishing, and when the seeds begin to ripen, which is known by their
falling out of their sockets, you may all along both sides bend down the plants
and shake out the seed upon a cloth laid on the ground, for as they ripen they
scatter upon being shaken by a hard wind, or otherwise; then it must be
watched, and the fowls and yellow-birds kept from it, for they are immoderately
fond of the seed; as the first ripe seeds are the fullest and best, they are
worthy of some pains to save them: and the best way to do that is, to bend down
the plants all along, on each side of the border or ridge, as is said above,
and shake them over a cloth spread on the ground to receive the seed; if one
side of the plant be rooted out of the ground by forcing it down to shake out
the seed, there will be no damage, for the seed that remains will ripen
notwithstanding; and the plant must thus be shaken every two or three days,
'till all the seed be ripe and thus saved; and this is much better than pulling
up the plants by the roots, and shaking them on a barn floor, and then setting
them up against a fence or the side of the barn, for the seed to ripen, and
shaking them morning and evening on the barn floor; for by this method, which
is the common practice, one third of the seed at least never comes to maturity.

It is well known to every farmer, that in the three bread colonies at least,
the spring and summer seasons are of late years become very dry, so that a crop
of flax is become very precarious, scarcely one year in seven producing a good
one. This is a constant complaint in the mouth of every husbandman: Now Hemp
does not require half the rain that flax does; this is a circumstance that is
well worth the notice and attention of every farmer; and therefore by his
raising Hemp in the manner before directed, and by preparing it in the best
manner for spinning and weaving into good cloth, he can with greater certainty
supply all the necessary uses of his family; and by selling the overplus, he
can purchase such things as his wife and daughters may think convenient on
extraordinary occasions. This however need not hinder him from raising some
flax every year: But I think that it is more for his interest to fix his chief
dependence upon his crop of Hemp, as that is more sure, and every way more
profitable, the general run of seasons considered. And let him not be disgusted
and think that I am about to persuade him, his wife and daughters to wear
oznabrigs, for I can assure him that I have seen dowlas, which is made of Hemp,
worth five and six shillings the yard, which no farmer need be ashamed to wear.

I shall now endeavor to instruct the honest husbandman in a few easy rules,
for preparing his Hemp, which he has raised and managed in the manner before
directed.

Know then, that the best preparation of Hemp for the manufacturing of cloth is
to render it as soft and as fine as possible, without lessening its strength,
and the easiest and cheapest way of doing that, is certainly the best. This is
to be found out by a variety of trials and experiments; but 'till a better way
be discovered, which I hope will not be long first, and with which I should be
greatly pleased, take the following method, which is the best I have yet been
able to discover.

If you have a large wide kettle, that will take in your Hemp at full length,
it will be the better; but if your kettle be small, then you must double your
Hemp, but without twisting, only the small ends of every hand must be twisted a
little, to keep them whole and from tangling; then first of all lay some smooth
sticks down in the bottom of the kettle, so as to lie across one another, three
or four layers, according to the bigness and deepness of your kettle; this is
to keep the Hemp from touching the liquor; then pour some lie of middling
strength, half as strong as what you make soap of, gently into the kettle, so
much as not to rise up to the top of the sticks, they being kept down to the
bottom; then lay in the Hemp, each layer crossing the other so that the steem
may rise up through the whole body of the Hemp, which done, cover your kettle
as close as you can, and hang it over a very gentle fire, and keep it simmering
or stewing, but not boiling, so as to raise a good steem for six or eight
hours; then take it off, and let it stand covered till it be cool enough to
handle; then take out the Hemp, and wring it very carefully as dry as you well
can, and hang it up out of the way of the wind, either in your garret or in
your barn, shutting the doors, and there let it remain, turning it now and then
till it be perfectly dry; then pack it up in some close dry place, till you
want to use it; but you will do well to visit it now and then, least any part
of it might be damp and rot. You must know, that wind and air weaken and rot
Hemp, flax and thread very much. Then at your leisure, twist up some of the
hands, as many as you intend for present use as hard as you can, and with a
smart round smooth hand beetle, on a smooth stone, beat and pound each hand by
itself all over very well, turning it round from side to side* 'till every part
be well bruised; you then untwist it, and hatchel it, first through a coarse and
then through a fine hatchel: and remember that hatcheling must be performed in
the same manner as a man would comb a fine head of hair, he begins at the ends
below, and as that untangles, he rises higher, 'till at last he reaches up to
the crown of his head. The first tow makes good ropes for the use of the
plantation, the second tow will make very good oznabrigs or coarse sheeting;
and the Hemp itself will make excellent linen. The same method of steeming
softens flax very much.

THE METHOD OF BLEACHING LINEN-CLOTH.
THE art of bleaching, or whitening linen-cloth, thread, etc. is conducted in
the following manner by the Bleachers of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

After the cloth has been sorted into parcels of an equal fineness, as near as
can be judged, they are latched, linked, and then steeped. Steeping is the
first operation which the cloth undergoes, and is performed in this manner.

The linens are folded up, each piece distinct, and laid in a large wooden
vessel; into which is thrown, blood-warm, a sufficient quantity of water, or
equal parts of water and lie, which has been used to ^hite cloth only, or water
with rye-meal or bran mixed with it, 'till the whole is thoroughly wet, and the
liquor rises over all. Then a cover of wood is laid over the cloth, and that
cover is secured with a post betwixt the boards and the joisting, to prevent
the cloth from rising during the fermentation which ensues. About six hours
after the cloth has been steeped in warm water, and about twelve in cold,
bubbles of air arise, a pellicle is formed on the surface of the liquor, and
the cloth swells when it is not pressed down. This intestine motion continues
from thirty-six to forty eight hours, according to the warmth of the weather;
about which time the pellicle or scum begins to fall to the bottom. Before this
precipitation happens, the cloth must be taken out; and and the proper time for
taking it out, is when no more air-bubbles arise. This is allowed to be the
justest guide by the most experienced bleachers.

The cloth is then taken out, well ^insed, disposed regularly by the selvage,
and washed in the put-mill to carry off the loose dust. After this it is spread
on the field to dry: When thoroughly dried, it is ready for bucking; which is
the second operation.

Bucking, or the application of salts, is performed in this manner. The first
or mother lie, is made in a copper, which we shall suppose, for example, when
full, holds 170 Scots gallons of water. The copper is filled three fourths full
of water, which is brought to boil: just when it begins, the following
proportion of ashes is put into it, viz. 30 lb. of blue, and as much white
pearl-ashes; 200 lb. of Marcoft ashes, (or, if they have not these, about 300
lb. of Cashub); 300 lb. of Muscovy, or blanch ashes; the three last ought to be
well pounded. This liquor is allowed to boil for a quarter of an hour, stirring
the ashes from the bottom very often; after which the fire is taken away. The
liquor must stand till it has settled, which takes at least six hours, and then
it is fit for use.

Out of their first, or mother-lye, the second, or that used in bucking, is
made in this manner. Into another copper, holding, for example, 40 Scots
gallons, are put 38 gallons of water, 2 lb. soft soap, and 2 gallons of
mother-lye; or, for cheapness, in place of the soap, when they have lie which
has been used to white linen, called white-linen lie, they take 14 gallons of
it, leaving out an equal quantity of water. This is called bucking-lye.

After the linens are taken up from the field dry, they are set in the vat or
cave, as their large vessel is called, in rows, endwise, that they may be
equally wet by the lie; which, made blood-warm, is now thrown on them, and the
cloth is afterward squeezed down by a man with wooden shoes. Each row
undergoes the same operation, until the vessel is full, or all the cloth in it.
At first the lie is put on milk-warm, and, after standing a little time on the
cloth, it is again let off by a cock into the bucking copper, heated to a
greater degree, and then put on the cloth again. This course is repeated for
six or seven hours, and the degree of heat gradually increased, till it is, at
the last turn or two, thrown on boiling hot. The cloth remains after this for
three or four hours in the lie; after which the lie is let off, thrown away, or
used in the first buckings, and the cloth goes on to another operation.

It is then carried out, generally early in the morning, spread on the grass,
pinned, corded down, exposed to the sun and air, and watered for the first six
hours, so often, that it never is allowed to dry. Afterward it is allowed to
lie till dry spots appear before it is watered. After seven at night it gets no
more water, unless it be a very drying night. Next day, in the morning and
forenoon, it is watered twice or thrice if the day be very dry; but if the
weather be not drying, it gets no water: After which it is taken up dry if the
green be clean; if not, it is rinsed, mill-washed, and laid out to dry again,
to become fit for bucking.

This alternate course of bucking and watering, is performed for the most part,
from ten to sixteen times, or more, before the linen is fit for souring;
gradually increasing the strength of the lie from the first to the middle
bucking, and from that gradually decreasing it till the souring begins. The
lies in the middle buckings are generally about a third stronger than the first
and last.

Souring, or the application of acids to cloth, is the fourth operation. It is
difficult to say when this operation should commence, and depends mostly on the
skill and experience of the bleacher. When the cloth has an equal color, and
is mostly freed from the sprat, or outer bark of the lint, it is then thought
^it for souring; which is performed in the following manner. Into a large vat
or vessel is poured such a quantity of butter milk or sour milk, as will
sufficiently wet the first row of cloth; which is tied up in loose folds, and
pressed down by two or three men barefooted. If the milk is thick, about an
eighth of water is added to it; if thin, no water. Sours made with bran, or
rye-meal and water, are often used instead of milk, and used milk-warm. Over
the first row of cloth a quantity of milk and water is thrown, to be imbibed by
the second; and so it is continued till the linen to be soured is sufficiently
wet, and the liquor rises over the whole. The cloth is then kept down by covers
filled with holes, and secured with a post fixed to the joist, that it may not
rise. Some hours after the cloth has been in the sour, air-bubbles arise, a
white scum is found on the surface, and an intestine motion goes on in the
liquor. In warm weather it appears sooner, is stronger, and ends sooner, than
in cold weather. Just before this fermentation, which lasts five or six days,
is finished, at which time the scum falls down, the cloth should be taken out,
rinsed, mill-washed; and delivered to the women to be washed with soap and
water.

Washing with soap and water, is the fifth operation; and is performed thus.
Two women are placed opposite at each tub, which is made of very thick staves,
so that the edges, which slope inwards, are about four inches in thickness. A
small vessel full of warm water is placed in each tub. The cloth is folded so
that the selvage may be first rubbed with soap and warm water length-ways, till
it is sufficiently impregnated with it. In this manner all the parcel is rubbed
with soap, and afterward carried to be bucked.

The lie now used has no soap in it, except what it gets from the cloth; and is
equal in strength to the strongest formerly used, or rather stronger, because
the cloth is now put in wet. From the former operation these lies are gradually
made stronger, till the cloth seems of an uniform white, nor any darkness or
brown color appears in its ground. After this, the lie is more speedily
weakened than it was increased; so that the last which the cloth gets, is
weaker than any it got before.

But the management of sours is different; for they are used strongest at
first, and decreased so in strength, that the last sour, considering the cloth
is then always taken up wet, may be reckoned to contain three fourths of water.

From the bucking it goes to the watering, as formerly, observing only to
overlap the selvages, and tie it down with cords, that it may not tear; then it
returns to the sour, milling, washing, bucking, and watering again. These
operations succeed one another alternately till the cloth is whitened; at which
time it is blued, starched, and dried.

This is the method used in the whitening fine cloths. The following is the
method used in the whitening of coarse cloths.

Having sorted the cloths, according to their quality, they are steeped in the
same manner as the fine, rinsed, washed in the mill, and dried before boiling.

In this process, boiling supplies the place of bucking, as it takes less time,
and consequently is thought cheapest. It is done in the following manner: 200
lb. cashub ashes, 100 lb. white Muscovy, and 30 lb. pearl-ashes, boiled in 105
Scots gallons of water for a quarter of an hour, as in the process for the fine
cloth, makes the mother or first lie. The cloth-boiler is then to be filled two
thirds full with water and mother lie, about nine parts of the former to one of
the latter; so that the lie used for boiling the coarse cloth, is about a third
weaker than that used in bucking the fine. Such a quantity of cloth is put into
the foregoing quantity of lie, when cold, as can be well covered by it. The lie
is brought gradually to the boil, and kept boiling for two hours; the cloth
being fixed down all the time, that it does not rise above the liquor. The
cloth is then taken out, spread on the field, and watered, as mentioned before
in the fine cloth.

As the salts of the lie are not exhausted by this boiling, the same is
continued to be used all that day, adding, at each boiling, so much of the
mother-lye as will bring it to the same strength as at first. The lie by
boiling loses in quantity somewhat betwixt a third and a fourth; and they
reckon that in strength it loses about a half, because they find in practice,
that adding to it half its former strength in fresh lie, has the same effect on
cloth. Therefore some fresh lie, containing a fourth part of the water, and the
half of the strength of the first lie, makes the second boiler equal in
strength to the first. To the third boiler they add somewhat more than the
former proportion, an^ go on still increasing, gradually to the fourth and
fifth, which is as much as can be done in a day. The boiler is then cleaned,
and next day they begin with fresh lie. These additions of fresh lie ought
always to be made by the master-bleacher, as it requires judgment to to bring
succeeding lies to the same strength as the first.

When the cloth comes to get the second boiling, the lie should be a little
stronger, about a thirtieth part, and the deficiencies made up in the same
proportion. For six or seven boilings, or fewer, if the cloth be thin, the lie
is increased in this way, and then gradually diminished till the cloth is fit
for souring. The whitest cloth ought always to be boiled first, that it may not
be hurt by what goes before.

In this process, if the cloth cannot be got dry for boiling, business does not
stop as in the fine; for after the coarse has dreeped on racks made for the
purpose, it is boiled, making the lie strong in proportion to the water in the
cloth.

The common method of souring coarse linen is, to mix some warm water and bran
in the vat, then put a layer of cloth, then more bran, water, and cloth; and so
on, till the cave is full. The whole is tramped with men's feet, and fixed as in
the former process. A thousand yards of cloth, yard-broad, require betwixt four
and six pecks of bran. The cloth generally lies about three nights and two days
in the sour. Others prepare their sour twenty-four hours before, by mixing the
bran with warm water in a separate vessel; and before pouring it on the cloth,
they dilute it with a sufficient quantity of water. After the cloth is taken
from the sour, it ought to be well washed and rinsed again. It is then given to
men to be well soaped on a table, and afterward rubbed betwixt the rubbing
boards. When it comes from them, it should be well milled, and warm water
poured on it all the time, if convenience will allow of it. Two or three of
these rubbings are sufficient, and the cloth very seldom requires more.

The lie, after the souring begins, is decreased in strength by degrees; and
three boilings after that are commonly sufficient to finish the cloth.
Afterward it is starched, blued, dried, and beettled in a machine made for
that purpose, which supplies the place of a calender, and is preferred by many
to it.

This method used in the bleaching of our coarse cloths, is very like that
practiced in Ireland for both fine and coarse. The only material difference is,
that there the bleachers use no other ashes but the kelp or cashub. A lie is
drawn from the former by cold water, which disolves the salts, and not the
sulphurous particles of the kelp ashes. This lie is used till the cloth is
half whitened, and then they lay aside the kelp-lye for one made of cashub
ashes.

In the preceding history of bleaching we may observe, that it naturally
divides itself into several different branches or parts, all tending to give
linen the degree of whiteness required. How they effectuate, that comes next to
be considered.

The general process of bleeching divides itself into these different parts. 1.
Steeping and milling. 2. Bucking and boiling. 3. Alternate watering and drying.
4. Souring. 5. Rubbing with soap and warm water, starching and bluing. We shall
treat of these different parts in their order.

STEEPING.
GREEN linen, in the different changes which it has undergone before it arrives
at that state, contracts a great foulness. This is chiefly communicated to it
by the dressing composed of tallow and sown, which is a kind of flummery made
of bran, flour, or oat-meal seeds. The first thing to be done in the
bleachfield is to take off all that filth which is foreign to the flax, would
blunt the future action of the salts, and might, in unskilful hands, be fixed
in the cloth. This is the design of steeping.

To accomplish this end, the cloth is laid to steep in blood-warm water. A
smaller degree of heat would not dissolve the dressing so soon; and the greater
might coagulate and fix, in the body of the linen, those particles which we
design to carry off. In a few hours the dressing made use in weaving is
dissolved, mixed with the water; and, as it had acquired some degree of
acidity, before application, it becomes a species of ferment. Each ferment
promotes its own particular species of fermentation, or intestine motion; the
putrid ferment sets in motion the putrefactive fermentation: the vinous ferment
gives rise to the vinous fermentation; and the acid ferment to the acetuous
fermentation. That there is a real fermentation going on in steeping, one must
be soon convinced, who attends to the air-bubles which immediately begin to
arise, to the scum which gathers on the surface, and to the intestine motion
and swelling of the whole liquor. That it must be the acetous fermentation,
appears from this, that the vegetable particles, already in part soured, must
first undergo this process.

The effect of all fermentations is to set the liquor in motion; to raise in it
a degree of heat; and to emit air-bubbles, which, by carrying up some of the
light oleaginous particles along with them, produce a scum. But as the dressing
is in small quantity in proportion to the water, these effects are gentle and
slow. The acid salts are no sooner separated, by the acetous fermentation, from
the absorbent earth, which made them not perceptible to the tongue in their
former state, than they are united to the oily particles of the tallow, which
likewise adhere superficially, dissolve them, and render them, in some degree,
missible with water. In this state they are soon washed off by the intestine
motion of the liquor. The consequence of this operation is, that the cloth
comes out f^eed in a great measure from its superficial dirt; and more pliant
and soft than what it was.

Whenever this intestine motion is pretty much abated, and before the scum
subsides, bleachers take out their cloth. The scum* when no more air-bubbles
rise to support it, separates, and falls down; and would again communicate to
the cloth great part of the filth. But a longer stay would be attended with a
much greater disadvantage. The putrid follows close upon the acetous
fermentation: When the latter ends, the former begins. Were this to take place,
in any considerable degree, it would render the cloth black and tender.
Bleachers cannot be too careful in this article.

The first question that arises to be determined on these principles is, What
is the properest liquor for steeping cloth? Those used by bleachers are plain
water; white-linen lie and water, equal parts; and rye-meal or bran, mixed with
water. They always make use of lie when they have it.

After steeping, the cloth is carried to the putstock-mill, to be freed of all
its loose foulness. There can be nothing contrived so effectual to answer the
purpose as this mill. Its motion is easy, regular, and safe. While it presses
gently, it turns the cloth; which is continually washed with a stream of water.
Care must be taken that no water be detained in the folds of the linen,
otherwise that part may be damaged.

BUCKING AND BOILING.
THIS is the most important operation of the whole process, and deserves a
thorough examination. Its design is to loosen, and carry off, by the help of
alkaline lixives or lies, that particular substance in cloth, which is the
cause of its brown color.

All ashes used in lie, the pearl excepted, ought to be well pounded, before
they are put into the copper; for the Marcoft and Cashub are very hard, and
with some difficulty yield their salts. As these two last contain a very
considerable proportion of a real sulphurous matter, which must in some degree
tinge white cloth; and as this is dissolved much more by boiling, than by the
inferior degrees of heat, while the salts may be as well extracted by the
latter. The water should never be brought to boil, and should be continued for
some time longer under that degree of heat. The pearl-ashes should never be put
in till near the end, as they are easily dissolved in water.

If the salts were always of an equal strength, ^^e same quantities would make
a lie equally strong; but they are not. Salts of the same name differ very much
from one another. The Muscovy ashes are turning weaker every day, as every
bleacher must have observed, till at last they turn quite effete. A decoction
from them when new must differ very much from one when they have been long
kept. Hence a necessity of some exact criterion to discover when lies are of an
equal strength. The taste cannot serve, as that is so variable, cannot be
described to another, and is blunted by repeated trials. The proof-ball will
serve the purpose of the bleachfield sufficiently; and, by discovering the
specific gravity, will show the quantity of alkaline salts dissolved. But it
cannot show the dangerous qualities of these salts; for the less caustic and
less heavy this liquor is, the more dangerous and corrosive it may be for the
cloth.

The third lie, which they draw from these materials by an infusion of cold
water, in which the taste of lime is discoverable, appears plainly to be more
dangerous than the first. The second lie, which they extract from the same
ashes, and which is reckoned about a third in strength, when compared to the
first, must be of the same nature; nor should it be used without an addition of
pearl-ashes, which will correct it.

It is taken from a general rule, That the solution of any body in its
menstruum is equally diffused through the whole liquor. The bleachers depending
on this, use equal quantities of the top and bottom of their lie, when once
clear and settled; taking it for granted, that there is an equal quantity of
salts in equal quantities of the lie. But if there is not, the mistake may be
of fatal consequence, as the lie may be in some places stronger than what the
cloth can with safety bear. That general law of solution must have taken its
rise from particular experiments, and not from reasoning. Whether a sufficient
number of experiments have been tried to ascertain this point, and to establish
an undoubted general rule, may be called in question.

"But, says Dr Home, when I had discovered that lime makes part of the
dissolved substance, and reflected how long its grosser parts will continue
suspended in water, there appeared stronger reasons for suspecting that this
rule, though it may be pretty general, does not take place here; at least it is
worth the pursuit of experiment.

"I weighed at the bleachfield a piece of glass in some cold lie, after it had
been boiled, stood for two days, and about the fourth part of it had been used.
The glass weighed three drams, one and a half grains in the lie, and three
drachms, seven and a half grains in river water. The same glass weighed in the
same lie, when almost all used, two grains less than it had done before. This
shows, that the last of the lie contained a third more of the dissolved body;
and, consequently, was a third stronger than the first of the lie.

"As this might, perhaps, be owing to a continuation of the solution of the
salts, I repeated the experiment in a different way.

"I took from the surface some of the lie, after the salts were dissolved, and
the liquor was become clear. At the same time I immersed a bottle, fixed to a
long stick, so near the bottom, as not to raise the ashes there, and* by
pulling out the cork by a string, filled the bottle full of the lie near the
bottom. The glass weighed in river water three drachms, thirty eight and a half
grains; in the lie taken from the surface, three drachms, thirty four and a
half grains; and the lie taken from the bottom, three drachms, thirty one and a
half grains. This experiment shows, that the lie at the bottom was, in this
case, three fourths stronger then the lie at the surface.

"At other times when I tried the same experiment, I found no difference in the
specific gravity; and therefore, I leave it as a question yet doubtful, though
deserving to be ascertained by those who have an opportunity of doing it. As
the lie stands continually on the ashes, there can be no doubt but what is used
last must be stronger than the first. I would therefore, recommend, to general
practice, the method used by Mr John Christie, who draws off the lie, after it
has settled, into a second receptacle, and leaves the ashes behind. By this
means it never can turn stronger; and he has it in his power to mix the top and
bottom, which cannot be done so long ^s it stand on the ashes."

Having considered the lie, let us next inquire how it acts. On this enquiry
depends almost the whole theory of bleaching, as its action on cloth is, at
least in this country, absolutely necessary. It is found by experiment, that
one effect they have on cloth, is, the diminishing of its weight; and that
their whitening power is, generally, in proportion to their weakening power.
Hence arises a probability' that these lies act by removing somewhat from the
cloth, and that the loss of this substance is the cause of whiteness. This
appears yet plainer, when the bucking, which lasts from Saturday night to
Monday morning is attended to.

There are various and different opinions with regard to the operation of these
salts: That they act by altering the external texture of the cloth, or by
separating the mucilaginous parts from the rest, or by extracting the oil which
is laid up in the cells of the plant. The last is the general opinion, or
rather conjecture, for none of them deserves any better name; but may we
venture to affirm, that it is so without any better title to pre-eminence, than
what the others have. Alkaline salts dissolve oils, therefore these salts
dissolve the cellular oil of the cloth, is all the foundation which this theory
has to rest on; too slight, when unsupported by experiment, to be relied on.

Dr Home endeavors to settle this question by the following experiments and
observations.

"Wax, says he, is whitened by being exposed to the influence of the sun, air,
and moisture. A discovery of the changes made on it by bleaching, may throw a
light upon the question.

"Six drachms of wax were sliced down, exposed on a south window, Sept. 10. and
watered. That day being clear and warm, bleached the wax more than all the
following. It seemed to me to whiten quicker when it had no water thrown on it,
than when it had. Sept. 15. it was very white, and one dram three grains
lighter. Three and a half drachms of this bleached wax, and as much of
unbleached, taken from the same piece, were made into two candles of the same
length and thickness, having cotton wicks of the same kind. The bleached candle
burned one hour thirty three minutes; the unbleached three minutes longer. The
former run down four times, the latter never. The former had an obscure light
and dull flame; the latter had a clear pleasant one, of a blue color at the
bottom. The former when burning seemed to have its wick thicker, and its flame
nearer the wax than the latter. The former was brittle, the latter not It
plainly appears from these facts, that the unbleached wax was more inflammable
than the bleached; and that the latter had lost so much of an inflammable
substance as it had lost in weight; and consequently the substance lost in
bleaching of wax is the oily part.

"As I had not an opportunity of repeating the former experiment, I do not look
on it as entirely conclusive; for it is possible that some of the dust, flying
about in the air, might have mixed with the bleached wax, and so have rendered
it less inflammable. Nor do I think the analogical reasoning from wax to linen
without objections. Let us try then if we cannot procure the substance
extracted from the cloth, show it to the eye, and examine its different
properties. The proper place to find it, is in a lie already used, and fully
impregnated with these coloring particles.

"I got in the bleachfield some lie, which had been used all that day for
boiling coarse linen, which was tolerably white, and had been twice boiled
before. There could be no dressing remaining in these webs. No soap had ever
touched that parcel; nor do they mix soap with the lie used for coarse cloth.
Some of this impregnated lie was evaporated, and left a dark-colored matter
behind. This substance felt oily betwixt the fingers, but would not lather in
water as soap does. It deflagrated with nitre in fusion, and afforded a
tincture to spirit of wine. By this experiment the salts seem to have an oily
inflammable substance joined with them.

"Could we separate this coloring substance from these salts, and exhibit it
by itself, so that it might become the object of experiment, the question would
be soon decided. Here chemistry lends us its assistance. Whatever has a
stronger affinity or attraction to the salts with which it is joined, than this
substance has, must set it at liberty, and make it visible. Acids attract
alkaline salt from all other bodies; and therefore will serve our purpose.

"Into a quantity of the impregnated lie mentioned in the former experiment, I
poured in oil of vitriol. Some bubbles of air arose, an intestine motion was to
be perceived, and the liquor changed its color from a dark to a turbid white.
It curdled like a solution of soap, and a scum soon gathered on the surface,
about half an inch in thickness, the deepness of the liquor not being above six
inches. What was below was now pretty clear. A great deal of the same matter
lay in the bottom; and I observed, that the substance on the surface was
precipitated, and showed itself heavier than water, when the particles of air,
attached to it in great plenty, were dispelled by heat, This substance was in
color darker than the cloth which had been boiled in it.

"I procured a considerable quantity of it by s^imming it off. When I tried to
mix it with water, it always fell to the bottom. When dried by the air, it
diminished very much in its size, and turned as black as a coal. In this state
it deflagrated strongly with nitre in fusion; gave a strong tincture to spirit
of wine; and when put on a red hot iron, burnt very slowly, as if it contained
a heavy ponderous oil; and left some earth behind.

"From the inflammability of this substance, its rejecting of water, and
dissolving in spirit of wine, we discover its oleaginous nature; but from its
great specific gravity we see that it differs very much from the expressed or
cellular oil of vegetables; and yet more from their mucilage. That it dissolves
in spirit of wine, is not a certain argument of its differing from expressed
oils; because these, when joined to alkaline salts, and recovered again by
acids; become soluble in spirit of wine. The quantity of earthy powder left
behind after burning, shows that it contains many of the solid particles of the
flax. The substance extracted from cloth by alkaline lies appears then to be a
composition of a heavy oil, and the solid earthy particles of the flax.

"In what manner these salts act so as to dissolve the oils, and detach the
solid particles, is uncertain; but we see evidently how much cloth must be
weakened by an improper use of them, as we find the solid particles themselves
are separated."

It is necessary that cloth should be dry before bucking, that the salts may
enter into the body of the cloth along with the water; for they will not enter
in such quantity, if it be wet; and by acting too powerfully on the external
threads, may endanger them.

The degree of heat is a very material circumstance in this operation. As the
action of the salts is always in proportion to the heat, it would appear more
proper to begin with a boiling heat, by which a great deal of time and labor
might be saved. The reason why this method is not followed, appears to be this.
If any vegetable, or vegetable substance is to be softened, and to have its
juices extracted, it is found more proper to give it gentle degrees of heat at
first, and to advance gradually, than to plunge it all at once in boiling
water. This last degree of heat is so strong, that when applied at once to a
vegetable, it hardens, instead of softening its texture. Dried vegetables are
immediately put into boiling water by cooks, that these substances may preserve
their green color, which is only to be done by hindering them from turning too
soft. Boiling water has the same effect on animal substances; for if salt beef
is put into it, the water is kept from getting at the salts, from the outside
of the beef being hardened.

But when we consider, how much of an oily substance there is in the cloth,
especially at first, which will for some time keep off the water, and how the
twisting of the threads, and closeness of the texture, hinders the water from
penetrating, we shall find, that if boiling water were put on it at once, the
cloth might be liable, in several parts, to a dry heat, which would be much
worse than a wet one. That the lies have not access to all parts of the cloth,
at first, appears plainly from this, that when it has lain, after the first
bucking, till all the lies are washed out, it is as black, in some parts as
when it was steeped. This must be owing to the discharge of the coloring
particles from those places to which the lie has access, and to their remaining
where it has not.

It would seem advisable, then, in the first bucking or two, when the cloth is
foul, to use the lie considerably below the boiling point; that by this soaking
or maceration, the foulness may be entirely discharged, and the cloth quite
opened for the speedy reception of the boiling lie in the buckings which follow.

The lies should likewise be weakest in the first buckings, because then they
act only on the more external parts; whereas, when the cloth is more opened,
and the field of action is increased, the active powers ought to be so too. For
this reason they are at the strongest after some sourings.

The only thing that now remains to be considered, is, the management of the
coarse cloth, where boiling is substituted in place of bucking. This species of
linen cannot afford the time and labor necessary for the latter operation; and
therefore they must undergo a shorter, and more active method. As the heat
continues longer at the degree of boiling, the lies used to the coarse cloth
must be weaker than those used to the fine. There is not so much danger from
heat in the coarse as in the fine cloth, because the former is of a more open
texture, and will allow the lie to penetrate more speedily. In the closer
kinds, however, the first application of the salts should be made without a
boiling heat.

ALTERNATE WATERING and DRYING.
AFTER the cloth has been bucked, it is carried out to the field, and
frequently watered for the first six hours. For if during that time, when it is
strongly impregnated with salts, it is allowed to dry, the salts approaching
closer together, and, assisted by a greater degree of heat, increasing always
in proportion to the dryness of the cloth, act with greater force, and destroy
its very texture.

After this time, dry spots are allowed to appear before it gets any water. In
this state it profits most, as the latter part of the evaporation comes from
the more internal parts of the cloth, and will carry away most from those
parts. The bleaching of the wax, in a preceding experiment, helps to confirm
this: for it seemed to whiten most when the last particles of water were going
off.

This continual evaporation from the surface of the cloth shows, that the
design of the operation is to carry off somewhat remaining after the former
process of bucking. This appears likewise from a fact known to all bleachers,
that the upper-side of cloth, where the evaporation is strongest, attains to a
greater degree of whiteness than the under-side. But it is placed beyond all
doubt by experiment, which shows, that cloth turns much lighter by being
exposed to the influence of the sun, air, and winds, even though the salts have
been washed out of it.

What, then, is this substance? As we have discovered in the former section,
that the whitening, in the operation of bucking, depends on the extracting or
loosening the heavy oil, and solid particles of the flax; it appears highly
probable, that the effects of watering, and exposition to the sun, air, and
winds, are produced by the evaporation of the same substance, joined to the
salts, with which composite body the cloth is impregnated when exposed on the
field. That these salts are in a great measure carried off or destroyed,
appears from the clothes being allowed to dry without any danger, after the
evaporation has gone on for some time. "If we can show says Dr. Home, that oils
and salts, when joined together, are capable of being exhaled, in this manner,
by the heat of the atmosphere, we shall reduce this question to a very great
degree of certainty.

"Sept. 10. I exposed, in a south-west window, half an oz. of Castile soap,
sliced down and watered. Sept. 14. when well dried, it weighed but 3 dr. 6 gr.
Sept. 22. it weighed 2 dr. 2 gr. Sept. 24. it weighed 1 dr. 50 gr. It then
seemed a very little whiter; but was much more mucilaginous in its taste, and
had no degree of saltness, which it had before.

"It appears from this experiment, that soap is so v^latile, when watered and
exposed to air not very warm, that it loses above half its weight in fourteen
days. The same must happen to the saponaceous substance, formed from the
conjunction of the alkaline salts, heavy oil, and earthy particles of the flax.
The whole design, then, of this operation, which, by way of pre-eminence, gets
the name of bleaching, is to carry off, by the evaporation of water, whatever
has been loosened by the former process of bucking.

"Against this doctrine there may be brought two objections, seemingly of great
weight. It is a general opinion among bleachers, that linen whitens quicker in
March and April, than in any other months: But as the evaporation cannot be so
great at that time, as when the sun has a greater heat; hence the whitening of
cloth is not in proportion to the degree of evaporation; and therefore the
former cannot be owing to the latter. This objection vanishes, when we
consider, that the cloth which comes first into the bleachfield, in the spring,
is closely attended, having no other to interfere with it for some time; and,
as it is the whitest, gets, in the after buckings, the first of the lie; while
the second parcel is often bucked with what has been used to the first. Were
the fact true, on which the objection is founded, this would be a sufficient
answer to the objection. But it appears not to be true, from an observation of
Mr. John Christie, That cloth laid down in the beginning of June, and finished
in September, takes generally less work, and undergoes fewer operations, than
what is laid down in March, and finished in June.

"The other objection is, That cloth dries much faster in windy weather than in
calm sunshine; but it does not bleach so fast. This would seem to show, that
the sun has some particular influence independent on evaporation. In answer to
this objection, let it be considered, that it is not the evaporation from the
surface, but from the more internal parts that is of benefit to the cloth. Now,
this latter evaporation must be much stronger in sunshine than in windy
weather, on account of the heat of the sun, which will make the cloth more
open; while the coldness of windy weather must shut it up, so that the
evaporation will all be from the surface. Clear sunshine, with a very little
wind, is observed to be the best weather for bleaching; a convincing proof that
this reasoning is just.

"It would seem to follow as a corollary from this reasoning, that the number
of waterings should in general be in proportion to the strength of the lie; for
the stronger the lie is, the more there is to be evaporated; and the greater
the danger, in case the cloth should be allowed to dry. But there is an
exception to this general rule, arising from the consideration of another
circumstance. It is observed, that cloth, when brown dries sooner than when it
becomes whiter, arising from the closeness and oiliness which it then has, not
allowing the water a free passage. Perhaps that color may retain a greater
degree of heat, and in that way assist a very little. Cloth therefore, after
the first buckings, must be more carefully watered than after the last.

"It follows likewise from this reasoning, that the soil of the bleachfield
should be g^avelly or sandy, that the water may pass quickly through it, and
that the heat may be increased by the reflection of the soil: for the success
of this operation depends on the mutual action of heat and evaporation. It is
likewise necessary that the water should be light, soft, and free from mud or
dirt, which, not being able to rise along with the water, must remain behind.
When there (...) much of this, it becomes necessary to rins^ the cloth in
water, and then give it a milling, to take out the dirt; else it would be fixed
in the cloth by the following buckings, as it is not soluble by the lie.

"This operation has more attributed to it by bleachers than it can justly
claim. The cloth appears even to the eye, to whiten under these alternate
waterings and dryings; and these naturally get the honor of it, when it more
properly belongs to the former operation. Here lies the fallacy. Alkaline salts
give a very high color to the decoctions, or infusion of vegetables. This is
probably owing to the solution of the oleaginous coloring particles of the
plant; which particles being opened and separated by the salts, occupy a
greater space, and give a deep color to the liquor. The cloth participates of
the liquor and color. Hence bleachers always judge of the goodness of the
bucking by the deepness of its color. The rule, in general, is good. I
observe, that in those buckings which continue from Saturday night to Monday
morning, the cloth has always the deepest color. When that cloth has been
exposed some hours to the influence of the air, these coloring particles,
which are but loosely attached to it, are evaporated, and the linen appears of
a brighter color. This operation does no more than complete what the former
had almost finished. If its own merit were thoroughly known, there would be no
occasion to attribute that of another operation to it. Thread, and open cloths,
such as diaper, may be reduced to a great degree of whiteness, after one
bucking, by it alone. No cloth, as would appear, can attain to a bright
whiteness without it.

"Since the only advantage of watering is the removal of the salts, and what
they have dissolved, might we not effectuate this by some cheaper, and more
certain method? For it occupies many hands; and must depend altogether on the
uncertainty of the weather; so that, in the beginning of the season, the
bleacher is often obliged to repeat his buckings without bleaching. We might
take out the alkaline salts by acids; but then the other substance would be
left alone in the cloth, nor would any washing be able to remove it.
Mill-washing appears a more probable method of taking out both salts and oils;
and it would seem that this might, in a great measure, supply the place of
watering; but upon trial it does not succeed. Two parcels of linen were managed
equally in every other respect, except in this, that one was watered, and
exposed to the influence of the air, and the other was only mill-washed. This
method was followed until they were fit for souring. The cloth which had been
mill-washed, had a remarkable green color, and did not recover the bright
color of the pieces managed in the common way, until it had been treated like
them for a fortnight. The green color was certainly owing to a precipitation
of the sulphurous particles, with which the lie is impregnated, upon the
surface of the cloth; owing to the salts being washed off more speedily than
the sulphur, to which they are united in the lie. The attachment betwixt these
two bodies we know is very loose, and the separation easily made. Evaporation
then a^one is sufficient to carry off these sulphurous particles."

SOURING.
IT is well known to all chemists, that alkaline salts are convertible, by
different methods, into absorbent earths* frequent solution in water, and
evaporation of it again, is one of these. This transmutation then of these
salts, which are not volatilised or washed away, must be continually going on
in the cloth under these alternate w^terings and dryings of the former process;
not much indeed after the first two or three buckings; because the salts, not
having entered deep into the cloth, are easily washed off, or evaporated. But
when they penetrate into the very composition of the last and minutest fibers,
of which the first vessels are made, they find greater difficulty of escaping
again, and must be more subject to this transmutation. But if we consider the
bleaching ashes as a composition of lime and alkaline salts, we must discover a
fresh fund for the deposition of this absorbent earth. The common caustic, a
composition of this very kind, soon converts itself, if exposed to the open
air, into a harmless earthy powder.

Frequent buckings and bleachings load the cloth with this substance. It
becomes then necessary to take it out. No washing can do that, because earth is
not soluble in water, Nothing but acids can remove it. These are attracted by
the absorbent earth, join themselves to it, and compose a kind of neutral
imperfect salt, which is soluble in water; and therefore easily washed out of
the cloth. The acid liquors commonly used are butter-milk, which is reckoned
the best, sour milk, infusions of bran, rye-meal, etc. kept for some days till
they sour. Sour whey is thought to give the cloth a yellow color.

The linen ought to be dried before it is put in the sour, that the acid
particles may penetrate, along with the watery, through the whole. A few hours
after it has been there, air bubbles arise, the liquor swells, and a thick scum
is formed; manifest signs of a fermentation. The following experiment, says Dr.
Home, shows the degree of heat which attends it.

"May 25. I put a thermometer of Fahrenheit's into some butter-milk, of which
the bleachers were composing their sours, and which stood in a vat adjoining to
another, where the milk was the same, and the souring process had been going on
for two days. After the thermometer had been twenty minutes in the butter-milk,
the mercury stood at 64 degrees. In the souring vat it rose to 68 degrees. An
increase of 4 degrees shows a pretty brisk intestine motion.

"To what are all these effects owing? To the acetous fermentation going on in
those vegetable liquors, whose acids, extricating themselves, produce heat,
intestine motion, and air-bubbles. As the change is slow, the process takes
five or six days before it is finished. During this time the acid particles are
continually uniting themselves to the absorbent earth in the cloth. That this
fermentation goes on in the liquor alone, appears from this consideration, that
the same effects, viz. air-bubbles and scum are to be seen in the butter-milk
alone. The only effect then it has is, by the small degree of heat, and
intestine motion which attend it, to assist the junction of the acid and
absorbent particles. We shall presently see, that this process may be carried
on, to as great advantage, without any fermentation; and therefore it appears
not absolutely necessary.

"When these absorbent particles are fully saturated, the remaining acids may
unite with, and have some small effect in extracting the coloring particles.
This appears from the two following experiments.

"Sept. 20. A piece of cloth which had been steeped, weighing forty one grains
and a half, was put into a half-pound of butter milk, whigged, and well soured,
by a mixture of water, and by boiling. Sept. 24. When taken out, and washed in
water, it appeared a very little whiter. The mineral acids, as will appear
afterward, whiten cloth, even though they are very much diluted.

"Just before the acetous fermentation is finished, the cloth should be taken
out; otherwise the scum will fall down, and lodge in the cloth, and the
putrefaction which then begins will weaken it. This appears from the following
experiment.

"Sept. 16. A piece of cloth, weighing forty two grains, was laid in
butter-milk unwhigged. Nov. 15. The milk had a putrifi^d smell. The cloth was a
little whiter, but very tender; and weighed* when well washed in warm water and
dried, forty grains."

All the sours made of bran, rye-meal, etc. ought to be prepared before use;
for by this means so much time will be saved. Besides, when the water is poured
upon the cloth, and bran, as is done in the management of coarse cloth, the
linen is not in a better situation than if it had been taken up wet from the
field; and by this means the acid particles cannot penetrate so deep. Again,
this method of mixing the bran with the cloth, may be attended with yet worse
consequences. All vegetable substances, when much pressed, fall into the
putrescent, and not the acetous fermentation. This often happens to the bran
pressed betwixt the different layers on the linen, which must weaken the cloth.
Hence, all sours should be prepared before the cloth is steeped in them; and
none of the bran or meal should be mixed with the cloth.

The sours are used strongest at first, and gradually weakened till the cloth
has attained to its whiteness. In the first sourings, there is more of the
earthy matter in the cloth, from the many buckings it has undergone, than what
there can be afterward. As the quantity of this matter decreases, so should
the strength of the sour. There is not, however, the least danger, at any time,
from too strong a sour.

What is most wanted in this operation is a more expeditious and cheaper method
of obtaining the same end. As it takes five or six days, it retards the
whitening of the cloth considerably; and as bleachers are obliged to send for
milk to a great distance, it b^c^mes very dear. This last consideration makes
them keep it so long, that, when used, it can have no good effect; perhaps it
may have a bad one.

There is one consideration that may lead us to shorten the time. It is
observed that the souring process is sooner finished in warm than in cold
weather. Heat quickens the fermentation, by aiding the intestine motion. The
va^s therefore should not be buried in the ground, as they always are, which
must keep them cold; there should rather be pipes along the walls of the room,
to give it that degree of heat, which, on trial, may be found to answer best,
There are few days in summer so hot as is necessary; and the beginning and end
of the season is by much too cold. That this is no ideal scheme, the following
fact is a sufficient proof. There are two vats in Salton bleachfield, adjoining
to a partition wall, at the back of which there is a kitchen fire. In these
vats the souring process is finished in three days, whereas its lasts five or
six days in the others placed round the same room.

This improvement, though it shortens the time of souring a very little, yet is
no remedy against the scarcity and dearness of milk sours. Such a liquor as
would serve our purpose, must be found either among the vegetable acids, which
have no further fermentation to undergo, or among the mineral acids. The former
are a large class, and contain within themselves many different species; such
as the acid juice of several plants, vinegars made of fermented liquors, and
acid salts, called tartars. But there is one objection against these vegetable
acids: They all contain, along with the acid, a great quantity of oily
particles, which would not fa^l to discolor the cloth. Besides the demand of
the bleachfields would raise their price too high.

The mineral acids have neither of these objections, they are exceedingly
cheap, and contain no oil. "I will freely own, says Dr. Home, that at first I
had no great opinion of success from the mineral, from two reasons; their want
of all fermentation, which I then looked on as necessary; and their extreme
corrosiveness. But the experience of two different summers, in two different
bleachfields, has convinced me, that they will answer all the purposes of the
milk and bran sours; nay, in several respects, be much preferable to them. I
have seen many pieces of fine cloth, which had no other sours but those of
vitriol; and were as white and strong as those bleached in the common way. I
have cut several webs through the middle, and bleached one half with milk, and
the other with vitriol; gave both the same number of operations, and the latter
were as white and strong as the former."

The method in which it has been hitherto used is this. The proportion of the
oil of vitriol to the water, with which it is diluted, is half an ounce, or at
most three quarters, to a gallon of water. As the milk-sours are diminished in
strength, so ought the vitriol-sours. The whole quantity of the (...) of
vitriol to be used, may be first mixed with a small quantity of water, then
added to the whole quantity of water, and well mixed together. The water should
be milk-warm; by which means the acid particles will penetrate further, and
operate sooner. The cloth should then be put dry into the liquor.

It is observed that this sour performs its task much sooner than those of milk
and bran; so that Mr. John Christie, in making the trial, used to lay the
milk-sours twenty four hours before the vitriol. Five hours will do as much
with this sour, as five days with the common sort. But the cloth can receive no
harm in allowing it to remain for some days in the sour; but rather, on the
contrary, an advantage. The cloth is then taken out, well rinsed, and
mill-washed in the ordinary way.

The liquor, while the cloth lies in this s^ur, is less acid the second day
than the first, less the third than the second, and so diminishes by degrees.
At first it is clear, but by degrees a mucilaginous substance is observed to
float in it, when put into a glass. This foulness increases every day. This
substance, extracted by the acid, is the same with what is extracted by the
alkaline salts, and blunts the acidity of the former, as it does the
alkalescency of the latter. Hence the liquor loses by degrees its acidity. But
as the acid salts do not unite so equally with oily substances as the alkaline
do, the liquor is not so uniformly tinged in the former as in the latter case,
and the mucous substance presents itself floating in it.

It is observed, that, in the first souring, which is the strongest, the
liquor, which was a pretty strong acid before the cloth was ^ut in, immediately
afterward becomes quite vapid; a proof how very soon it performs its task. But
in the following operations, as the linen advances in whiteness, the acidy
continues much longer; so that in the last operations the liquor loses very
little of its acidity. This happens although the first buckings, after the
first sourings, are increased in strength, while the sours are diminished.
There are two causes to which this is owing. The texture of the cloth is now so
opened, that although the lies are strong* the alkaline salts and absorbent
earth are easily washed out; and the oily particles are, in a great measure,
removed which help to blunt the acidity of the liquor.

Two objections are made against the use of vitriol-sours. One is, that the
process of souring with milk is performed by a fermentation; and, as there is
no fermentation in the vitriol-sours, they cannot serve the purpose so well:
The other, that they may hurt the texture of the cloth. The answer to the
former objection is very short; that the vitriol sours operate successfully
without a fermentation, as experience shows; and therefore in them a
fermentation is not necessary.

As to the latter objection, that oil of vitriol, being a very corrosive body,
may hurt the cloth; that will vanish likewise, when it is considered how much
the vitriol is diluted with water, that the liquor is not stronger than
vinegar, and that it may be safely taken into the human body.

That it may be used with safety, much stronger than what is necessary in the
bleachfield, appears from the following experiment with regard to the stamping
of linen. After the linen is boiled in a lie of ashes, it is bleached for some
time. After this, in order to make it receive the color, it is steeped in a
sour of water and oil of vitriol, about fifteen times stronger than that made
use of in the bleachfield; for, to 100 gallons of water are added two and a
half of oil of vitriol. Into this quantity of liquor, made so warm as the hand
can just be held in it, is put seven pieces of 28 yards each. The linen remains
in it about two hours, and comes out remarkably whiter. The fine cloth often
undergoes this operation twice. Nor is there any danger if the oil of vitriol
is well mixed with the water. (...) if the two are not well mixed together, and
the oil of vitriol remains in some parts undiluted, the cloth is corroded into
holes.

Let us now take a view of the advantages which the vitriol-sours must have
over the milk. The latter is full of oily particles, some of which must be left
in the cloth: But the case is worse when the scum is allowed to precipitate
upon the cloth. The former is liable to neither of these objections.

The common sours hasten very fast to corruption; and if, from want of proper
care, they ever arrive at that state, must damage the cloth very much. As the
milk is kept very l^ng, it is often corrupted before it is used; ^^d without
acting as a sour, has all the bad effects of putrefaction. The vitriol-sours
are not subject to putrefaction.

The m^^k takes five days to perform its task, but the vitriol-sours do it in
as many hours; nay, perhaps as many minutes. Their junction with the absorbent
particles in the cloth must be immediate, whenever these acid particles enter
with the water. An unanswerable proof that the fact is so, arises from the
circumstances which happen when the cloth is first steeped in the vitriol-sour;
the cloth has no sooner imbibed the acid liquor than it looses all acidity, and
becomes immediately vapid. This effect of vitriol sours must be of great
advantage in the bleachfield, as the bleachers are at present hindered from
enjoying the season by the tediousness of the souring process. The whole round
of operations takes seven days; to answer which they must have seven parcels,
which are often mixing together, and causing mistakes. As three days, at most,
will be sufficient for all the operations when vitriol-sours are used, there
will be no more than three parcels. The cloth will be kept a shorter time in
the bleachfield, and arrive sooner at market.

The milk-sours are very dear, and often difficult to be got; but the vitriol
are cheap may be easily procured, and at any time.

There is yet another advantage in the use of vitriol, and that is its power of
whitening cloth. Even in this diluted state, its whitening power is very
considerable. We have already seen, that it removes the same coloring
particles, which the alkaline lies do. What of it then remains, after the
alkaline and absorbent particles are neutralized in the cloth, must act on
these coloring particles, and help to whiten the cloth. That this is really
the case, appears from the following fact. Mr. Chrystie being obliged to choose
twenty of the whitest pieces out of a hundred, five of the twenty were taken
out of seven pieces which were bleached with vitriol.

From both experience and reason, it appears, that it would be for the
advantage of our linen manufacture to use vitriol in place of milk-sours.

HAND RUBBING with Soap and Warm Water, RUBBING-BOARDS, STARCHING and BLUEING.
AFTER the cloth comes from the sour^ng, it should be well washed in the
washing mill, to take off all the acid particles which adhere to its surface.
All acids decompose soap, by separating the alkaline salts and oily parts from
one another. Were this to happen on the surface of the cloth, the oil would
remain; nor would the washing-mill afterward be able to carry it off.

From the washing-mill the fine cloth is carried to be rubbed by women's hands,
with soap and water. As the liquors, which are generally employed for souring,
are impregnated with oily particles, many of these must lodge in the cloth, and
remain, notwithstanding the preceding milling. It is probable, that all the
heavy oils are not evaporated by bleaching. Hence it becomes necessary to apply
soap and warm water, which unite with, dissolve, and carry them off. It is
observed, that if the cloth, when it is pretty white, gets too much soap, the
following bleaching is apt to make it yellow; on that account they often wring
out the soap.

It is a matter worth inquiring into, whether hard or soft soap is best for
cloth. Most bleachers agree, that hard soap is apt to leave a yellowness in the
cloth. It is said, that the use of hard soap is discharged in Holland. As there
must be a considerable quantity of sea salt in this kind, which is not in the
soft, and as this salt appears prejudicial to cloth, the soft soap ought to be
preferred.

The management of the coarse cloth is very different, in this operation, from
fine. Instead of being rubbed with hands, which would be too expensive, it is
laid on a table, run over with soap, and then put betwixt the rubbing-boards,
which have ridges and grooves from one side to another, like teeth. These
boards have small ledges to keep in the soap and water, which saves the cloth.
They are moved by hands, or a water-wheel, which is more equal and cheaper. The
cloth is drawn, by degrees, through the boards, by men who attend; or, which is
more equal and cheaper, the same water-wheel moves two rollers, with ridge and
groove, so that the former enters the latter, and, by a gentle motion round
their own axis, pull the cloth gradually through the boards.

This mill was invented in Ireland, about thirty years ago. The Irish bleachers
use it for their fi^e, as well as coarse cloth. These rubbing boards were
discharged, some years ago, in Ireland, by the trustees for the manufactures of
that country, convinced from long experience of their bad effects. But as
proper care was not taken to instruct the bleachers by degrees in a safer
method, they continued in the old, made a party, and kept poss^ssi^n of the
rubbing boards. There were considerable improvements made in them in this
country; such as the addition of the l^dges, to keep the cloth moist; and of
the rollers, which pull the cloth more gradually than men's hands. These
improvements were first made in Salton bleachfield.

The obj^ctions against these rubbing-boards, are unanswerable. By rubbing on
such an unequal surface, the solid fibrous part of the cloth is wore; by which
means it is much thinned, and in a great measure weakened before it comes to
the market. As a proof of this, if the water which comes from the cloth in the
rubbing boards be examined, it will be found full of cottony fibrous matter.
These boards give the cloth a cottony surface, so that it does not keep long
clean. Again, they flatten the threads, and take away all that roundness and
firmness, which is the distinguishing property of cloth bleached in the Dutch
method.

For these reasons they must be very prejudicial to fine cloth, and should
never be used in bleaching it. As they seem to be, in some measure, necessary
to l^ssen the expense of bleaching course linen, they ought never to be used
above twice or thrice at most. They might be rendered much more s^fe, by lining
their insides with some soft elastic substance, that will not wear the cloth so
much as the wooden teeth do. Mr. Chrystie at Perth has lined his boards with
short hair for some years past, and finds that it answers very well.

After the course linen has undergone a rubbing, it should be immediately
milled for an hour, and warm wa^er poured now and then on it to make it lather.
This milling has very good effects; for it cleans the cloth of all the dirt and
filth which the rubbing-boards have loosened, and which, at the next boiling,
would discolor the cloth. Besides, it is observed, that it makes the cloth
less cottony, and more firm, than when whitened by rubbing alone.

The last operation is that of starching and blueing. It often happens, that
the cloth, when exposed to the weather to be dried after this operation, gets
rain; which un^oes all again, and forces the bleacher to a new expense. To
remedy this inconvenience, Mr. Chrystie, some years ago, invented the
dry-house, where the cloth may be dried, after th^s operation, in any weather.
This invention meets with universal approbation.

A METHOD OF BLEACHING SAFELY WITH LIME.
Dr. H^me has found, by repeated trials, that alk^^^ne s^lts added to lime,
diminish its power of weakening and corroding cloth; and that in proportion to
the quantity of these salts added to the lime. This composition, as it is not
so dangerous as lime alone, so it is not so expeditious in whitening. When
equal parts of each are used, the whitening power is strong, and the weakening
power not very considerable; so that they might be used with safety to bleach
cloth, in the proportion of one part of lime to four of pure alkaline salts.
This fully accounts for an observation made by all bleachers, That the
blea^hing salts, when mixed together, operate sa^er and better than when used
separately. For the corrosive power of the Muscovy, Marcoft, and Cashub ashes
is corrected by the pearl ashes, and the whitening quality of the latter is
increased by that of the former.

There is not a more corroding substance, with regard to animals, than alkaline
salts and lime joined together, especially when fused in the fire. This is the
composition of the common caustic. But lime, and limewater alone, preserve
animal substances in a sound entire state. It appears then surprising, that
salts and lime should be found so little destructive of cloth, when lime, or
lime water alon^, destroys it so remarkably. But that this a fact, is made
evident by many experiments, and has been practiced both with success and
safety, by a bleacher who gives the following account of his method of
bleaching with lime.

"First, says he, I steep the cloth in warm water for twenty-four hours; then
clean it in a washing-mill, of all the dressing, or sown, as the vulgar term
it. Afterward I buck the cloth with cow dung and water, and bleach it with
this for three days; then clean it again, and boil it with a lie made of Cashub
ashes. A pound to each piece of eighteen or twenty yards long is sufficient.
This I do twice, as no lime ought to be given to cloth before it is a full
third whitened; as it by no means advances the whitening of the cloth, but, on
the contrary, protracts it: For, instead of loosening the oil and dirt in the
cloth, when brown, it rather fixes them; just as when fine cloth is bucked with
over-warm lies in the first buckings. Lime is by no means fit for discharging
the oil in the cloth, but for cleaning it of the dead part commonly called
sprat. The cloth, being cleaned, is laid upon a dreeper. It must not be drier
before bucking with lime, otherwise it will take in more than can be got out
again before the next application: For as I have observed already, that lime is
only fit for discharging the dead part, bucking thus wet make it rest on the
outside of the cloth. I take a lippy of the finest and richest powdered lime
that can be got, of the brightest white color, as poor lime does more hurt
than good, to thirty pieces of the above length; and make a cold lie of it, by
stirring and pouring water off the lime, until all be dissolved, but the dross,
which is thrown away: Then I add a little soap, which makes the lie have the
nearest resemblance to milk that breaks in boiling, of any thing I can think
of: For this soap blunts the hotness of the lime. Then I take the cloth, and
dip it in the lime-lye, and that moment out again, and lay it on a dreeper
until it be bucked; then put it on the field, watering it carefully; for if
allowed to dry, it is much damaged. This is done always in the morning: As it
cannot be done at night, in regard of the hot quality of the lime, which soon
heats the cloth, and tenders it. If a hot sunshine follows, it has great
effect; for lime is just like all other materials for bleaching, that have more
or less effect according as the weather is good or bad. I take it up the second
day after bucking, and give it ^ little milling, or hand-bleaching, or
bettling, commonly called knocking; and lay it on the field again, watering it
carefully as before. The effect is more visible the second than the first day.
As all cloth when limed should have a great deal of work, otherwise more than
half the effect is lost; and not only that, but a great deal of labor and
pains is requisite to take the lime out of the cloth again; it must never be
exposed on the Sabbath day, but carefully kept wet always while used in in this
way. Thus bucking for three or four times at most, is sufficient for any cloth,
except that made of flax pulled either over-green, or which grows in a droughty
season, or perhaps not so well heckled as it should be. This sort occasions
great trouble and expense to the bleacher. But the most effectual and
expeditious way I ever found for this kind, was, after boiling, to take a
little of the warm lie, and mix a very small quantity of lime with it, and draw
the cloth through that as hot as possible, and put it on the field directly,
watering it carefully. This will clean it of the sprat surprisingly. Then I
boil it with pearl ashes, and give it the last boil with soap.

"There are innumerable mistakes in the use of lime committed by the vulgar,
who are ignorant of its quality and effects. They know only this in general,
that it is a thing which whitens cloth cheap, and is easy purchased; therefore
they will use it. Some of them begin whitening of their cloth with it, which I
have already observed to be wrong, and given reasons for it, and continue it
until the cloth is bleached; give it a boil or two at most, and then wash it up
while the gross body of the lime is in the substance of the cloth. This makes
limed cloth easily distinguishable from unlimed, as the former has a yellowish
color, and is full of a powder. Besides, as lime is of a very hot corroding
nature, it must by degrees weaken the cloth. The bad effects of this substance
do not end here. When the cloth is put on board, it contracts a dampness, which
not only makes it yellow, and lose any thing of color it has, but directly
rots it. And although it should escape this, which it is possible it may, by a
quick and speedy passage; yet whenever it is put in any warehouse, it will meet
with moisture there especially if the winter-season should come on before it is
disposed or made use of. These I take to be the principal reasons for so much
complaint in bleaching with this material."

The whole art and safety in using the lime, according to this method, depends
on the junction of the alkaline salts, during the bucking, to the particles of
lime which were on the surface of the cloth.

An Account of the NETTLE THREAD invented at LEIPSIC.
ALTHOUGH we are told, in some books upon plants, that thread may be made of
nettles, as of hemp or flax, the hint is so simply and superficially conveyed,
that every person who reads it, will consider the scheme as one of those vain
speculations which never can be reduced to practice, with any appearance of
advantage, Is it not, therefore, without reason, that we flatter ourselves with
the hope of interesting the attention of the public, when we give it to
understand, that a weaver of stuffs, silks and velvet, at Leipsic, had made the
first successful experiment upon nettles.

This plant is divided into three kinds, the great, stinging, common nettle,
Urtica urens maxima, the little Greek nettle, Urtica urens minor, and the Roman
or male nettle, Urtico Romana. It is the first of these that is used for this
purpose.

The great nettle pushes out stalks to the height of three feet, and sometimes
more* square, channelled, round, covered with a stinging hair, branchy,
clothed with leaves, two of which are opposed to each other, being oblong,
broad, pointed, indented in their edges, furnished with stinging and burning
hairs, attached to pretty long tails. It grows every where in great plenty,
especially in uncultivated sandy places, about hedges and ditches, along walls,
and even in gardens.

It is distinguished into male and female; and the common people are mistaken
in this plant as well as in hemp and flax, calling the female, male, and the
male female. But the botanists who conform themselves to nature, without
confounding the species of things, call that which bears flowers, the male
nettle, and that which bears seed, the female. The flowers spring at the summit
of the stalk and branches, in the hollow between the stem of the leaf and the
stalk, disposed in branches, each composed of several stamina, supported by a
calix of four green leaves, and leave no seed behind them. The seed is oval,
flat and brownish, contained in pointed capsulae. The nettle flourishes in
June, and the seed is ripe in July and August. Its leaves fade at the approach
of winter; but its stalk, which resists the rigor of that season, pushes out
new leaves in the spring. In fine, the color of the stalk and leaves is not
always green, but varies, and is called red nettle, yellow nettle, and
party-colored nettle.

The manufacturer whom we have mentioned, having read in Robinson, that he had
made ropes and even stuff of nettle, was tempted, if possible, to verify the
fact; and a great quantity of the stalks still green, though half withered,
being gathered, he dried them over his stove, and when the moisture was
entirely exhausted, bruised them so as to be able to separate the wood from the
bark: by this operation he procured a kind of green hards, which was rubbed and
prepared like flax. This new matter being spun, he obtained a greenish brown
thread, very uniform and clear, something resembling worsted. The manufacturer
afterward boiled this thread, when it yielded a greenish juice, and became
more white, uniform and strong; so that, by continuing the preparation, it is
to be hoped an excellent thread may be made, and consequently a strong and
lasting cloth.

We are informed that the experiments are still continued; and that they have
all the reason in the world to hope, that by observing the precise time of the
nettle's being ripe, by steeping and preparing it exactly in the same manner,
with hemp and flax, they will acquire a perfect knowledge of the nature and
properties of the thread which is produced, and which may be employed to
advantage, not only by rope-makers, but even by weavers, in making fine stuffs.

For the inventer being a man in easy circumstances, not at all jealous of the
secret, but capable, by his condition, to give weight to his conjectures,
believes that nettle may be wrought like cotton, and produce cloth a great deal
more strong, soft, warm, white, and of a better pile and more uniform
consistence: in this case it would be of great advantage to the public, which
would be no longer under the necessity of going to buy cotton in foreign
countries. But granting that it never can be brought to the perfection of
cotton, it might certainly be substituted in its room, upon many occasions, and
at least produce a very strong and serviceable thread; as the stalks are long,
and the fibers, in like manner, long, clear and firm. This consideration alone
is sufficient to prompt mankind to renew the experiment, advance the discovery,
and even bring it to perfection. The essay which we have communicated, ought to
be considered as the first moment after the birth of an art which wants nothing
but the industry of man for its growth and formation. The Prussian blue, which
now produces a considerable traffic, had not such favorable beginnings; for
every thing is favorable on the side of nettles, which rise every where, the
worst ground being good enough for their production: with a little cultivation,
they might be procured in vast abundance; and these advantages are certainly
worth purchasing, at the expense of some care and trouble.

OBSERVATIONS upon the MANAGEMENT of CATTLE.
WE do not pretend, in this article, to give a detail of the method of managing
cattle: we propose only to make some remarks upon points which we have observed
too commonly neglected. For this purpose we cannot dispense with censuring a
general fault of all those whose fortunes are under a mediocrity; for people of
these circumstances, finding it impracticable to make large profits, reject
disdainfully the small advantages continually in their power; mistaking the
chagrin of envy, and the languor of indolence for marks of the elevation of
their spirit, and of the nobleness of their sentiments. In vain, the wise man
informs them, that whoever neglects small profits will decay day by day: in
vain reason dictates, that from a small stock they must be contented with small
gain; but that a great number of small profits, which it is easy to multiply by
labor, become in a short time an object of consideration. Although experience
confirms these truths daily, by the decay or prosperity of some one of their
neighbors; they shut their eyes to the true causes of these events, and impute
them to those that are suggested by malice and indolence.

From the care of cattle result the most speedy, the most abundant and most
lawful advantages. There are but too many avaricious monopolists in the
country, who hoarding up the corn they cannot use, with a view to profit by
some future bad crop, pave the way for a general scarcity, which, whenever it
afflicts the nation, they endeavor to prolong. But this wickedness cannot be
practiced with cattle. Whoever shall persist in keeping more of them than he
can maintain, would expose himself to inevitable ruin, by starving his cattle,
and he would be very soon obliged to get rid of them. There can be no objection
against him whose stock is in proportion to his pasture: he contributes toward
the public good, by multiplying the species, by procuring plentiful crops, with
the manure he provides for the ground, and by lowering as much as lies in his
power, the price of the most necessary commodities, by the abundance he brings
to market.

We must not however imagine, that in order to derive a considerable advantage
from cattle, it suffices to have a great number, and to give them the necessary
fodder: there are many other circumstances to be attended to, without which it
would be in vain to flatter ourselves with the expectation of riches. In
limiting the subject to horned cattle, we shall observe, that they are often
kept in too narrow stables, from whence many inconveniences arise. Sometimes
being provoked, they fight and wound one another. The most voracious st^^ve
their neighbors, from whom they carry off all the fodder within their reach;
and the injured cows decay insensibly, become languid, or give little milk. In
the summer the heat incommodes them, a circumstance which makes them grow lea^,
and diminishes the quantity of their milk. Care, then, must be taken, that they
have room in their stable, that they be cool in summer, and warm in winter. At
all seasons let them be dry, for that is a material point. Even in summer,
humidity is disagreeable to them, and in winter it chills them. To prevent this
double inconvenience, it is proper to pave the stables with a gentle descent,
and to dig a sewer to collect all the water. By this means the cattle will ly^
always dry, and the dung will run no risque of growing sour. Horned cattle
contract a habit, sometimes, of licking one another; and that hurts them to
such a degree, that a butcher who perceives it, will give less money for them
than for others. They are cured of this trick by rubbing the places they have
licked with cow dung, the bitterness of which prevents them from re-attempting
it.

The desire of profiting by the milk of the cow, is often the cause of the
calf's being too early weaned. A month or two more, in fine, the time required
by nature, would strengthen it in its youth: it would grow more successfully,
and in time, fetch a profit with good interest. But this is scarce done any
where. No sooner is it believed that it may subsist without the mother's milk,
than the farmer thinks he gains a great deal by weaning it: ill-fed, and
infirm, it grows at best to be a sorry bull, or feeble bullock, from which
little profit can be derived, and much less service.

The principal source of this abuse arises from ignorance, and want of
reflection. People either do not know, or do not reflect, that the vital-fire
enclosed in the heart of a newborn animal, must be augmented; that it attracts
and is nourished by that contained in the milk; that this vital fire, weak at
first, would scarce have power to separate the auxiliary fire from the milky
particles with which it is incorporated, if milk was a less delicate substance
than nature has formed it for this first service; but in proportion as the
vital fire acquires force, the milk grows thick, because its grosser particles
are destined for forming and consolidating the body of the animal. When the
vital fire is arrived at such a degree, as to be superior to the succors which
the milk can afford, nature excites the animal to seek a more solid
nourishment, and then, but not till then, is the time of weaning it. For, by
anticipating that time, they run the risque of leaving the animal imperfect in
its interior parts: the aliment which is administered, being above its
strength, it cannot perform a perfect digestion, and the nourishment it
receives, is so much the less, as in all natural bodies, the strongest juices,
and most efficacious qualities, are always comprehended; and as it were,
imprisoned in the hardest particles. Hence it happens, that a sickly animal
does not derive from the same food, so much nourishment as an animal in health.
In effect, the vital heat, too much employed, in resisting the attacks of the
corrupted humors, has not force enough to extract from the aliment, the
necessary auxiliary fire, which is concealed in its bosom. Besides, the food
being but ill dissolved, passes to excrement, producing only a meagre
inefficacious dung.

As therefore, we may be assured, by weaning a half too early, that it will
remain infirm, and of small value; in like manner by leaving it with the
mother, as long as its constitution requires, we may expect it will become
strong and vigorous, and by following this method, we can hardly fail of
raising a breed of cattle, that will redound both to the honor and profit of
the farmer.

Young calves are apt to be attacked by insects, which disturb and torment
them, while at the same time they prevent their fattening. In order to preserve
them from these insects, and even cure them when they are hurt, it will be
proper to prepare an ointment of melted hogs-greese and mercury, which must be
kneaded till they are well mixed together. Spread this ointment upon a linen
cloth, then wrap it up in three folds, stitch it for a collar to the calves,
and it will not only cure them, but likewise disperse the insects.

There is no better nourishment for the young animals, than vetches soaked in
water, till they swell; but observe to steep no more than will serve them for
once, because when they remain a long time in moisture, they are apt to grow
sour, and so would do them more harm than good.

We shall not insist upon the advantages attending the breeding of young
cattle, whatever trouble it may cost; because there is no prudent countryman
who is not fully persuaded of them. To buy what he may have (...) his own
growth; is to a farmer no (...) a dissipation; because the land (...) no money,
which is only to be obtained with commodities, and very often the pu^chase of
some goods destroys all the profit r^sulting from the sale of others. It o^ght,
therefore, to be an inviolable maxim, especially with those of narrow
circumstances, to spare no pains in improving their stock, not making small
estimation of what has cost them no money, but frugal as if they had bought it.
By this means, if we except great accidents, which can never be foreseen nor
prevented, they will find wealth flow upon them annually, though slowly, and
lay the foundation of a solid fortune.

A REMEDY against ROTTENNESS in SHEEP.
EVERY body knows what delicate creatures sheep are, and that among the
distempers to which they are subject, their livers and lungs are usually
attacked when they feed in moist places, or upon rotten fodder. As dry
pasturage, which alone agrees with them, is not to be found in all places; and
in wet years, it is very often difficult to dry the hay before it is laid in,
so that it heats in the hay-^oft, and rots: an inconvenience which in time of
continual rains, is incident to all other kinds of forage, it is inconceivable
how many sheep are incommoded, and even perish. It is surprising, as this
distemper is so universal, that often in a whole district there is not one
sound sheep; and the consequences are so fatal, that the breeder is under the
necessity of renewing his flock continually; this being the case, I say, it is
surprising that none of our books upon farming, have furnished us a remedy to
prevent such misfortunes. We will now communicate one which, we are assured is
very efficacious if employed at first in the beginning of spring.

Take a pound of wormwood, or absynthium grafted, the same quantity of Spanish
radish, powder and keep them in a box for use. It were to be wished, he had
told us what the grafted wormwood is, and how it differs from the great and
little absynthium, which are the only kinds commonly known; perhaps it is
procured by some particular cultivation.

When there is occasion to use this powder, take two ounces of it, for an
hundred sheep; mix them with four ounces of bruised juniper berries, and two or
three small measures (each containing about two pints) of oat-misling. The
misling of oats, is a mixture of one third of oats, with two thirds of peace and
vetches, which is sown in march, on slight grounds, for forage to the castle:
add to this mixture, a small handful of salt, and the half quantity of the
whole, of ordinary wormwood powdered.

This composition is thrown into the sheep trouges, every week, especially, in
the month of March, about Whitsunday, and in the end of June. Thus, the sheep
will be preserved from the distemper, or at least, it will not make great
havoc among them.

Of CABBAGE, RADISHES, TURNIPS, and other such Plants; Methods for preserving
them from the ravages of the game, and the insects that feed upon them.
PLANTS cultivated in the open field, where there is a great deal of game, are
liable to be consumed, especially by hares; so that the husbandman or gardener
is obliged to replant his ground three or four times: this is a very great
misfortune in those places where a great deal of cabbage is planted; and a
great many methods have been used to prevent it, though without success: but this
that we are going to prescribe, may be tried with great safety, seeing every
time it has been employed, it has always produced the desired effect.

The misfortune must be prevented at the time of planting. For an acre of
ground take two ounces of assa soetida, such as is sold by the apotheca^y or
druggist; put it into a small pot full of dung juice, and boil it, until the
whole is dissolved; then empty this decoction into a shallow tub, and add a
pint or two of dung juice, stir it well, with a piece of wood, and carry it
into the field for use.

All the plants, before they are put into the earth, must be steeped in this
composition, in the following manner: A person must be expressly employed in
preparing them for being planted. Take as many of them as you can clasp in both
hands, and dip them in the prepared matter, so as that each plant shall be
moistened in every part. This being done, lay them in heaps upon the ground,
and sprinkle a little earth upon the roots Distribute the plants thus
moistened, to the planter, who must immediately set them i^ the holes prepared
for that purpose; the^ press the earth against the plant with a piec^ of wood
made for that use, and continue so to the end.

All those who shall have occasion to use this remedy, may be assured that no
game will touch these plants; but, on the contrary, avoid them with great
abhorrence and precipitation. Yet, the plants which are either not at all or
not sufficiently sprinkled, will soon be discovered and eaten by the hares; so
that the place must be replanted. There is no danger of the plant's contracting
any bad scent from this preparation; for the sun and air will purify it in time.

As for catterpill^rs, and other insects which bite the young cabbage plants,
radishes, etc. they may be prevented very easily, by the following remedy --
Take a pail of dung-water, and infuse into it, Of Assa^oetida 6 dwt. Woad 3
dwt. Garlic 3 dwt. Laurel berries bruised 3 dwt. Leaves or tops of elder, one
handful. Carline, white Cameleon, or Thistle-root, one handful.


Let the whole digest for three days and three nights. When you have occasion
to use this composition, take a whisp of rye-straw, and dipping it in the pail,
sprinkle the small plants that are infected by those insects, which will soon
perish or forsake the place.

To this remedy we will add another, which is infall^ble against the
caterpillars in cabbage. Sow with hemp all the borders of the ground where you
mean to plant your cabbage, and you will see with surprise, that although the
neighborhood is infected with caterpillars, the space enclosed by the hemp,
will be perfectly free; not one of the vermin will approach it.

Method of raising RADISHES for SALLAD* used by the Rev. Fathers MINIMES of
PA^SI.
THAT which the botanists call horse radish, and range in the class of turnips
of Rapa, is a plant so wholesome and agreeable* that gardeners study to have
them at all seasons; but, notwithstanding all the pains they take, those only
succeed which come up in the spring and autumn. The winter-radishes are
insipid, and those of summer, strong and disagreeable; equally influenced and
injured by the frost and by the heat of the sun; they are used in perfection
only during a small part of the year; and the Fathers Minimes of Passi,
commonly called the good men, are the only persons who have found means to have
them good at all times; with this difference, however, that their production is
much more slow in winter than in summer.

These fathers, out of their uncommon generosity, and with a view to the public
advantage, have communicated to us, the secret of cultivating them, that we may
impart it to the public in our journal. -- It was from them that the Revd.
Fathers Penitents of Piepus, had the same receipt, which they now practice with
success.

Take a quantity of the ordinary horseradish seed, steep it in river-water,
for the space of four and twenty hours; then put the whole wet as it is, in a
little linen bag, well secured with pack-thread: but if you have steeped a
great quantity of the seed, it must be divided into several bags: expose the
bag or bags to the heat of the sun, for about four and twenty hours. At the
expiration of which, the seed will have begun to shoot, and you must sow it
like any other grain, in land well exposed to the sun. Prepare two tubs of such
dimensions, as that the one will exactly cover the other; these may be easily
procured, by sawing a cask into two equal parts -- These two tubs will serve
for the winter; for, in summer, one will be sufficient for each kind of earth
that is to be sown. For which reason, it must be previously marked with the
tub, that you may not sow more seed than the other tub will cover.

Immediately after the seed is sown, it must be covered with a tub, and at the
end of three days, you will find your Radishes as large as small Civet, of a
white color, having at their extremity two small, round, yellow or reddish
leaves about the earth, and ready to be cut or plucked for sallad. These are of
a much more delicate taste than the ordinary Radishes, which are always eaten
with salt.

By taking these precautions, you may have them in the most severe frosts.
After having steeped the seed in lukewarm water, and exposed it to the sun (as
we have already observed) or in a warm place, so as that it shall shoot; warm
two tubs, fill one of them with earth well smoaked, there sow your seed, and
cover it with the other tub, You must take care to water it always with
lukewarm water, and to carry the two tubs exactly placed over one another, and
well joined, into a cellar, or some warm place under ground: at the end of
fifteen days, you may gather your sallad.

The Reverend Fathers Minimes, were the first who found out this method of
cultivating horse radish: and it is to be hoped, that as they are of a quality
superior to all others, the utility of them will not be confined to the
pleasures of the table; but, that medicine which employs the ordinary kind of
Radish, on a great many occasions, will reap much more considerable advadtage
from this preparation.

OF RAISING ASPARAGUS.
ASPARAGUS is acknowledged, of all sorts of pul^e, to be the most wholesome, at
the same time that it is one of the most delicate. They who cultivate them,
unanimously agree, that, in order to have them large, they must be cut the
fourth year only; and that they lose their relish when by a forced ^eat they
are produced before their season. Nevertheless, a lover of gardening, and of
asparagus in particular, has communicated to us a memorial, wherein those two
points are formally contradicted. His method is to cut the tops in the spring
of the first year; and the reason is, that the root, of consequence, receiving
the nourishment of the juices, which it must have furnished to the top,
spreads, gathers strength, and is in a condition of putting forth much stronger
tops the following years. He adds, that to deny this fact, is to be ignorant,
or pretend to be ignorant of all the principles of vegetation, which inform us,
that the deeper and more extensive the roots are, the finer and more vigorous
will the plant be produced from these roots. And these principles are so well
established, that he knows, he says, several farmers who mow their wheat when
green, that the roots becoming stronger, may put forth a greater number of
stalks, longer ears, and larger grains.

With regard to the forced asparagus, he admits, that these raised in winter,
are much inferior to those that come in the ordinary season; but he affirms,
that by hastening them a month or six weeks only, there is no danger of their
losing their fine relish. He observes, that asparagus makes an exception from
all the productions of the earth, which receive from the air and sun, the
flavor that constitutes their principal merit. What th^se gain by being
exposed to the fresh air, and the heat of the sun, asparagus loses; and for a
proof of this assertion, he appeals to common experience, by which we find,
that the longer asparagus is left standing, after appearing above ground, the
more the relish is diminished. It is the earth heated with dung, that gives the
flavor: the delicate juices evaporate in the air, and the sun renders the
Asparagus hard and tough. Wherefore, as soon as the frosts are over, and a
fermentation begins in the surface of the earth; asparagus, which abhors cold,
as well as heat, sprouts successfully, possessed of all the flavor which the
soil, where it is planted, is able to communicate: it dreads nothing but the
prejudices with which people are too easily blinded, and which contradicting
experience, extinguish in the gardener, the desire of perfecting his art, and
deter him from submitting to a labor, from which he is likely to reap but
small advantage.

We shall not relate here in what manner he heats the ground: it is the same
method as taught in all books of gardening, for raising asparagus in winter,
with this difference, however, that whereas others perform that operation
before, he never commences it, till after the frosts. If the reasons given by
this lover of agriculture, are as solid as they appear, we hope that those,
whose experience (the only mistress to be relied upon in this subject,)
confirms them, will communicate their success to the public, that every body
may learn how to procure as early as possible, and of the best kind, a pulse so
justly coveted in all families; a pulse which of all kitchen plants, most
certainly is accompanied with the greatest advantages, according to the
expression of a modern author, a real master of the art of useful gardening,
and the best of any who have treated that subject. The school of kitchen
gardening, which he has lately published, renders it needless to give in our
journal, the instructive memorials we have in our possession, concerning that
favorite part of agriculture; and we are resolved from henceforth, to touch no
more that subject, unless we have remarks or additions to make, better or equal
at least, in merit to the excellent definitions and principles of agriculture,
which that author has so learnedly and amply explained, in the forementioned
work.

This is a rule which we propose to follow in matters of agriculture, as
likewise never to republish in our journal what has been already communicated
to the public in our language, except in certain cases, and that in particular
which we have now already mentioned, of observations, criticisms, or additions.
This method we look upon as the most simple and most likely to satisfy the
curious, without multiplying memorials, the repetition of which would only
obscure the subject, and tire the reader. We may, therefore boldly presume, if
our essays ar^ neither extensive nor numerous, that they will at least have the
merit with considerate persons, of improving their knowledge, and conducting
them some steps in the road of utility.

THE END.
At BELL's Book Store in Third Street PHILADELPHIA, may be had: Great variety
of new and old Books in the Arts and Sciences; Likewise, Hebrew, Greek, Latin,
English, and French Classics; With History, Divinity, Law, Plays, Novels, and
Instructive Entertainment. Among which are,
1 CHAMBER'S Dictionary of Arts and Sciences, 2 vols. 2 Johnson's large
Dictionary of the Eng. Language, 2 vol. 3 Chambaud's French and English
Dictionary. 4 Boyer's Royal French and English Dictionary. 5 Smollett's History
of England, 4 vols. large Quarto. 6 Rapin's History of England, 2 vols. 7
Macaulay's History of England, 3 vols. 8 Milton's and Bacon's History of
England, 3 vols. 9 Stackhouse's History of the Bible, 2 vols. 10 Poole's
Annotations on the Bible, 2 vols. 11 Whitby on the New Testament, 2 vols. 12
Burkit on the New Testament. 13 Lock on St. Paul's Epistles. 14 Lock on Human
Understanding. 15 Mansfield's Law Reports, by Burrows, 3 vols. 16 Lord
Raymond's Reports, 3 vols. 17 Jacob's Dictionary of the Law, 2 vols. 18 Wood's
Institutes of the Law. 19 Blackstone's Commentaries on the Law, 5 vols. 20
Justice of the Peace, by various Authors. 21 Hedericus, Scapula, and Grant's
Greek Lexicons. 22 Gouldman's Cole's and Young's Lat. and Eng Dictionarie^. 23
Bailey's, Dyche's, and Martin's English Dictionaries. 24 The Spectator, 8 vols.
gilt. 25 Plutarch's Lives, 6 vols. 26 Shakespeare's Works, 8 vols. 27 Sully's
Memoirs, 5 vols. 28 Rollin's Ancient History, 10 vols. 29 Nature Displayed, 7
vols. 30 Lord Chesterfield's Letters, 4 vols. 31 Lives of Great Men by the
British Plutarch. 12 vols 32 Congreve's Works, 2 vols. 33 Garrick's Works, 3
vols. 34 Modern Miscellaneous Plays, 2 vols. 35 The Beauties of Nature and Art
Displayed, 14 vols. 36 Rollin's Belles Lettres, 4 vols. 37 Sterne's Works, 5
vols. 38 Hervey's Works, 7 vols. 39 Moliere's Works* 6 vols. 40 The World, by
Adam Fitz-Adam, 6 vols.
N. B. Books for Books are given in Exchange, or Ready Money for Old Books, by
ROBERT BELL, at his Book Store, next Door to St. Paul's Church, in
Third-Street, PHILADELPHIA.


