Repent and be converted: A SERMON Preached at a Meeting of the People called
QUAKERS 1768. ALSO THE HEADS of a SERMON, Preached at Horsleydown MEETING,
(...) the close of a visit to Friends Families in that Quarter, the 19th of the
Eleventh Month, 1769.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED, and SOLD by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Market-street, between
Second and Third-streets. M, DCC, LXXVIII.

A SERMON.
THERE is a passage in Sacred Writ, which has been revived in my remembrance
during the silence of this meeting, and the train of reflections which it
excited, has sealed instruction to my mind, and furnished me with renewed cause
of humiliation and gratitude; "Men and Brethren, what shall we do to be saved?"

Every person who seriously believes in the existence of a God, in a future
state, and in the awful doctrine of rewards and punishments, cannot be
indifferent respecting what may be his lot, when he shall be dispossessed of
this frail Tabernacle of clay which he now inhabits, and which is approaching
to the period of its dissolution; it cannot be a matter of indifference to him,
whether he shall finally receive the irrevocable sentence of "go ye cursed into
the regions of irremediable misery;" or come ye blessed of my Father, inherit
the Kingdom prepared for the righteous, enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord,
and into thy masters rest. This concern has prompted many to enquire what is
essentially necessary for them to believe and practice in order to render them
the proper objects of divine complacence and furnish them with a well grounded
hope of a glorious and happy immortality. Many of the honest and sincere of
every Nation under Heaven, have formed different ideas of the requisites to
salvation, and of course have (...) as different measures to accomplish that
desirable end. It is not my present business, to particularize any of those
various systems of Faith, which are adopted by any party amongst mankind; it is
not to controvert matters, in which sincere men of the various denominations
most surely believe; but rather to recommend them always to stand open to
conviction, and (...) attention to those rules of conduct, which appear to
(...) most agreeable to the will of Heaven. I shall therefore address myself to
those, in whatever religious society they are found, whose honest inquiries
have not yet been attended with sufficient conviction, or led them clearly to
perceive what are the terms on which their future happiness depends, and who
are therefore looking one upon another, whilst this important question is
found, at least in their hearts if not in their mouths Men and Brethren what
shall we do to be saved?

I shall not presume arrogantly to dictate to any respecting matters of so
important a concern as that of the salvation of the Soul; every Man should
exercise those talents with which the Father of lights has endued him, in a
close and sincere attention to the voice of the internal Teacher, and in the
discovery of those truths both practical and speculative which have an
immediate relation to the happiness of a Being circumstanced as he is. I shall
simply propose those things which from my own experience as an individual
appear to me worthy of God for their Author, and worthy of Man's most serious
attention. It is an indisputable truth that we made not ourselves: We are thine
offspring, thou have made us and not we ourselves, says the prophet in his
appeal to God. The matter which forms the universe, the vehicles which the soul
informs, and the intellectual powers and faculties we possess, derived their
being from the eternal maintain of all power and intelligence, whom we
characterize by the awful names of Jah, Jehovah and God. It is also clear to me
that we were brought into existence with the benevolent design of finally
sustaining the confluent dignities of Glory, Honor, Immortality and eternal
Life; the Lord Almighty has in unspeakable mercy promised, that after we have
endured a season of probation on earth, a conflict with our passions excited by
numerous causes, and a fight of afflictions, we should finally receive a
glorious reward, a perpetuity of unmixed felicity in the unknown regions of
eternity. But this desirable and excellent end is not to be effected, by what
is generally called fate, the laws of necessity, or the arbitrary will and
power of the Author of our existence. God has constituted us free and
intelligent beings, and endued us with faculties capable of apprehending and
practicing those duties which he makes the condition of our final acceptance
with him he offers, but does not impose, happiness on his creatures; he shows
us the spiritual Canaan, he gives us power to possess it, but does not compel
us to enter into it; good and evil are clearly set before us, but our election
is not constrained to either; the sovereign of the universe is no respecter of
persons, for of one blood he made all nations that dwell on the face of the
earth; they stand in the same relation to the universal Father, Shepherd and
Bishop of Souls, who tenderly invites the whole race of Mankind to inherit the
Joy of his Salvation. To this doctrine the holy Apostle bore an ample and
explicit testimony: Of a truth, said he, I perceive that God is no respecter of
persons, but in every nation those who fear him and work righteousness shall be
accepted of him. -- If ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if through the
spirit ye mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. This is a proposition
that relates to every individual in the vast community of Mankind, however
circumstanced, whether bond or free, or in whatever climate he resides.

All this indeed may be acknowledged both by those within and without the
audience of my voice, who are yet in doubt what they shall do to be saved with
an everlasting salvation; they want to be intormed of the precise ideas that
should be affixed to the conditions contained in the text, though perhaps they
readily apprehend the terms life and death imply future happiness and misery. I
shall therefore attempt according to the ability I am endued with, to give you
my thoughts on the important subject in question at this time. To "live after
the flesh" is to live in the gratification of our animal appetites and
passions, beyond the bounds of reason, temperance and sobriety, which as it
frequently introduces numerous disorders into the animal system, and aggravates
the infirmities to which these corruptible bodies are incident, so it affects
the good of society, and renders unfit for those contemplations and that
felicity which is adapted to the dignity of rational and immortal spirits,
beings whom God in his wisdom has made a little (and perhaps but a little)
lower than the Angels, and who would crown them with a superior glory, honor
and happiness than that which animal gratifications can confer on their deluded
votaries. Whilst we are in the body we must expect to find those appetites,
affections and passions which belong to our nature; but these are to be
restricted within the bounds of virtue, and attended to in proportion to our
exigencies and necessities, of which the divine principle which God has
graciously implanted in our hearts ought to determine.

This principle of intelligence although called by a variety of names in the
different professions amongst Men, is the same in nature throughout all
Mankind. It is the spirit in Man that gives a right understanding; it is the
light that more or less enlightens every Man; it is the word of God in the
heart; the word of faith which the Apostle preached to the Gentiles; it is the
Grace that has appeared to all Men, teaching them to deny ungodliness and the
worlds justs, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world;
and finally it is the supreme reason, the law of truth and rectitude, the test
of virtue and vice, which God himself has erected in the hearts of all Men;
and happy are those who hear and obey it in all things.

I would not be understood to mean that this principle of which I am speaking
is designed to instruct us in all truths which the human mind may attempt to
investigate, or to give a clear insight into those numerous speculative
subjects, which have, not only unprofitably employed mankind and diverted their
attention from more substantial objects, but which have perplexed and divided
them from generation to generation; but by the exercise of it we may apprehend
those truths that belong to us, and have an essential relation to the important
end of our existence; of which truths the Father of spirits has enabled us to
judge; this is implied by the question which our Lord himself proposed to a
people misled by the traditions of their fathers, and who had taken for
doctrine the commandments of men, yea and why judge ye not for yourselves, what
is right?

Various are our obligations and duties, religious, relative and social,
arising trom our various connections, natural and divine: The relation we stand
in to the Author of our being is that of Children; filial fear, obedience and
worship is therefore our indispensible duty to him, in our conduct at all
times, throughout our whole lives. The relation which our fellow creatures
stand in to us is that of brethren, children of the same universal Father, and
formed for the same glorious and happy and; justice, charity and brotherly
kindness are therefore our indispensable obligations unto mankind. There are
also various accidental relations, such as father, governor, master, servant
and numerous others, all which have their corespondent duties. Thus far perhaps
the persons whom I immediately address at this time may concur with me in
sentiment, but they as well as I, are perhaps conscious of having failed in
numerous instances of discharging their religious duties to God and their
social duties to mankind. We have all sinned and fallen short of the glory of
God! we have multiplied our transgressions without number! and our iniquities
rise before us as a thick cloud! which obscures the brightness of that eternal
Sun of righteousness, which would otherwise illuminate our understandings with
its mavelous light. Who, therefore, (says the illuminated penitent soul)
shall deliver us from the body of this death? who shall take from us the weight
of our sins under which we groan incessantly? who shall save us from the wrath
to come? "Men and Brethren what shall we do to be saved?" The condition of our
reconciliation and redemption are very clearly expressed in the sacred oracles
of truth; the placability of the divine nature is repeatedly asserted; he is
represented to us in the adorable character of a God of mercy, long suffering
and of unspeakable kindness; as a Being ready to blot out our transgressions
from the celestial register, on our sincere repentance, and to remember them no
more.

This important and interesting doctrine was typified under the Law, spoken of
by the Prophets, and gloriously asserted by the Son of God, who is our Mediator
with the Father, and the hope of our future Glory. In his character was
displayed to Mankind, in the most eminent and striking manner, the provident
care, mercy and goodness of God toward the whole rational creation; who like
sheep have gone astray from the universal shepherd and bishop of Souls, who
have widely wandered from the paths of purity and holiness, which are ways of
pleasantness and peace; that path of the just Man, which (like the luminous orb
as it arises in our hemisphere) shines with increasing refulgency, splendor
and brightness, till it arrives at the meridian altitude of a gloriously
perfect day! This path leads all who steadily pursue its direction, by degrees
of experience, through the wilderness of this world to the grand and ultimate
end of our Creation, to that complete fruition of bliss that is figuratively
represented to us by a City that has foundations, whose builder and maker God
is; a City whose Walls are salvation, and whose Gates are eternal praise; a
City that has no need of the elementary light of Sun, Moon and Stars, "for the
Lord God and the Lamb are the light thereof" a City where God reigns
triumphantly amongst his saints, and is to them an inexhaustible fountain of
light and felicity; there the weary pilgrim finds an end of all his anxiety and
labor, and receives the reward of his faith, the fruition of his hopes, even
the salvation of his Soul.

The important message which Christ had in commission from his Father and our
Father, from his God and our God, was, that he compassionated his Creatures,
encompassed with the distresses which their sins had brought upon them, that he
willed not their everlasting separation from him the source of happiness, that
he was willing they should be reconciled to him; he therefore called upon them
to Repent and be converted that their sins might be forgiven them, and that
they might finally enter into his rest. This was the interesting doctrine which
the Savior of Man promulgated, and happy are those who hear and obey it.
Repent and be converted that your sins may be forgiven you. It is not the
assent of the lip and of the tongue to the glorious truths of the Gospel; but a
surrender of the will and affections, a renovation of heart, and conformity to
the divine Image, which can alone gain us admission into the New Jerusalem, the
City of God.

If we take an impartial survey of our past lives, review our frequent
revoltings, and compare our conduct with the convictions we have often received
of right and wrong, virtue and vice, there is scarcely a Soul present but must
feel some degree of remorse, some degree of repentance for the turpitude of his
morals, and his want of love, obedience and gratitude to so gracious a Father,
who has encompassed us with blessings, and preserved us by his providence from
the earliest period of our lives to the present hour; we must (I say again)
upon serious retrospection, possess some degree of repentance; but unhappily
for us the impressions that are made on our minds by such a review of our
actions, are frequently erased by the influence which a variety of creaturely
objects are suffered to have upon us, and like the early dew they soon pass
away. Those who have been cleansed in some degree by the water of contrition,
are often desiled again by the repetition of that iniquity which in the moments
of their humiliation they had determined to renounce and forsake, they are
again caught in the snare of their lusts, and captivated by those objects which
have a tendency to alienate their affections from the supreme good. Thus when
the force of conviction again sounds the awakning alarm, they are ready to
query with surprise and anxiety what is to be done in this afflictive dilemma
to which our inconstancy to our virtuous resolutions has reduced us? shall we
despair of that divine mercy we have so often abused of that goodness we have
so long trifled with? God forbid! rather prostrate your Souls at the Throne of
Grace, and humbly implore the continued mercy of the universal parent, as a
Father pitieth his Children, so he pitieth them that fear him; he knows our
frame, he remembereth that we are but dust; beseech him therefore to send forth
help from his holy sanctuary, that you may be strengthened to renew and keep
your Covenants with him; refrain from the commission or evil, and wait on him
in the silence of all flesh; since it has pleased him again to enlighten your
darkness, and thus to give you to see yourselves as you are seen of him; he may
also be pleased to inflame your hearts with that celestial fire which purges
away all the intellectual since and dross, that prevents the ascent of the Soul
godward, and renders it an unsit habitation for his holiness to dwell in. As
our backslidings have frequently corrected us and covered our minds with
anxiety, let our future conduct directed by his Grace, atone for what is
passed, and by a conversation ordered aright, let us glority our Father who is
in Heaven.

I feel at this season the influence (in degree) of that celestial Charity
which breathes through Immanuel to the whole creation of God, wishing salvation
to every Soul that inhabits the earth; in which I entreat you (as a being
subject to the same infirmities which you sometimes unavailably deplore) repent
and be converted; repentance you have frequently experienced, but too little I
fear of that essential conversion which the Gospel of Jesus proposes, it is
highly probable that some persons present have seen the necessity of that
renovation of heart and reformation of manners intended by conversion, but
urged by the powerful prevalency of their lusts, would if possible find some
other remedy for a wounded conscience, than that which the simplicity of the
Gospel requires, as a necessary prelude to the favor of God; like the young
Man in the Gospel, they have been animated with a desire to be enrolled amongst
the disciples of Jesus, who are called Heirs of God and Coheirs with Christ of
that inheritance which is incorruptable and full of Giory; they have asked
counsel of the wonderful counselor, addresling him with this important
question, what good thing shall I do, that I may inherit eternal life? yet when
the unchangable terms of salvation have been proposed, when they have been
'told that they must part with all their Idols, they have gone away sorrowful,
the terms have appeared too hard for them to comply with; and like Naaman who
wanted to be cured of his Leprosy, and was staggered at the thought of taking
so long a journey as the Prophet directed, are crying out are not Abana and
Pharphar rivers of Damascus better than all the waters of Israel, may I not
wash in them and be clean? thus numbers amongst Mankind are striving to elude
the measures which the Gospel of Jesus enjoins, and are substituting others in
their stead, which are better adapted to sooth the carnal mind, and prevent
that mortification which human nature shrinks from.

Man is desirous to possess the crown of eternal life, but not to bear the
Cross; he would indeed reign with Christ, but not suffer with him; he would
accompany him to the mount of transfiguration, but not to Golgotha; he would be
his attendant at his Glorification, but not in the awful scene of his
Humiliation.

Diverse have wandered as from mountain to mountain and from hill to hill,
seeking for the living in the Sepulchers of the Dead, they have sometimes
adpoted one creed, and sometimes another, practiced external ordinances, and
complied with empty forms, addressing themselves frequently to guides as blind
and impotent as themselves with this awful enquiry Men and Brethren what shall
we do to be saved? "I say again, "repent and be converted," for this is the
only way to find salvation to your Souls; no external ceremonies, no verbal
confessions, nor any change of opinions merely, can accomplish this repentance
and conversion, and afford you the consequent reward of a glorious
immortallity, this important work of salvation must be effected in man, by the
powerful operation of the Holy Ghost, which is a consuming fire to the adverse
part in Man, to the corrupt and perverse will, which would not that Christ
should reign in his Kingdom, and that God should be all in all. It is the
Baptism of fire (of which John's was but a type) which discriminating the pure
from the impure, gathers the Wheat into the Garner but consumes the chaff with
unquenchable burnings.

In the world there are many voices which correspond not with the voice of
Christ, the only Shepherd of Souls (whom we ought to hear and obey in all
things) but are the voices of those who preach for hire and divine for Money;
who look for their gain from their respective quarters; and as to such conscien
ous Men who cannot put into their mouths, they are ready to make war against
them; these have found it for their worldly interest to lead the deluded people
from, rather than to Christ, that glorious High Priest of the Christian
Religion; they have attempted to render that mysterious which the Holy Ghost
has left clear, and to perplex the understandings of Mankind with vain
metaphysical speculations, without making them either wiser or better. This
class of Men whose God is their belly, and whose Glory is their shame, have
indeed proved physicians of no real value; instead of laying the Axe to the
root of the corrupt Tree, they have only attempted to lop off some of its
branches; they have prescribed emolients, where the most searching (...) were
expedient; and healing the wound of the daughter of Zion deceitfully have
lulled multitudes into a fatal security, flattering them with hopes which it is
to be feared will finally end in disappointment. There are others who assum-the
Office of Ministers, the purity of whose intentions my Charity will not permit
me to doubt, who like a Man that attempts to answer a question before he has
fully heard it, have too precipitately embarked in the important work of
instructing Souls relative to the affairs of salvation; these are like Ephraim
a Cake not turned, are not yet instructed in the way of God perfectly, and
whilst they are teaching others, had need themselves to be taught, what are the
first principles of the Oracles of God; they have run on the Lord's errand
unsent, and therefore have not essentially profited the people; they have taken
upon them to guide those who are inquiring what they shall do to be saved, and
have led them indeed from the confines of Egypt, but leave them (undirected to
the spiritual Moses) to wander in uncertainty and to compass a mountain of
doubts in the wilderness. May he Lord Almighty in his mercy gather these who
are wandering as sheep without a Shepherd, and lead them in o the sacred
enclosure of his fold, into eternal safety.

Let it not be thought from any thing I have said, that I look upon all those
who appear girded with the linen Ephod, of other Christian societies, either as
Impostors, or the deluded votaries of Antichrist; I freely declare, that I
doubt not but many of them have had a dispensation of the Gospel committed to
them, and although they may be bias'd by the prejudice of education and the
traditions of their Fathers, yet the root of the matter seems to be in them;
and I esteem these (in whatever society they are found or in whatever vestments
they are clothed) as my Brethren in the fellowship of the everlasting Gospel
of Christ; yet I cannot direct the searcher after truth who is pensively
enquiring what he shall do to be saved, to the Ministry of any Man; but would
rather recommend him to the immediate teaching of the word nigh in the heart,
even the spirit of God; this is the only infallible teacher, the primary
adequate rule of faith and practice, and will lead those who attend to its
dictates into the peaceable paths of safety and of truth. Ye need not (says the
holy Apostle to the Church formerly) that any Man teach you, save as this
anointing teaches, which is truth and no lie; cease therefore from Man whose
breath is in his nostrils, and whose existence is but a vapor, for wherein is
he to be accounted of? as a fallible being he is liable to frequent deceptions,
and therefore liable to deceive; whereas the spirit of God cannot be deceived,
neither will it deceive any Soul that yields itself to its Government and obeys
its dictates.

O ye penitent Prodigals! my Soul earnestly longs for your restoration to the
mercy and favor of God! ye who are reduced by your wanderings in the
wilderness of this world to a state of extreme poverty, to the want of that
bread that comes down from the celestial Regions above, which alone can nourish
the Soul up unto eternal Life! ye who are attempting to satisfy the cravings of
an immortal spirit with the spiritless husks and shells of an empty profession
of Religion! look toward your Father from whom you have revolted; remember
that in his House there is bread enough and to spare; there your Souls may be
replenished with ever enduring substance: Return, O House of Israel! and seek
the face of your everlasting friend and Father! he has in unspeakable kindness
declared that he will be found of those who seek him in sincerity of heart, and
that as many as knock at the Gate of mercy for an entrance, shall be admitted
to his presence, and receive the remission of their Sins.

The humble address which the Prodigal made to his Father (in that excellent
parable given us by Christ) the Father's return to it, and the manner of his
reception into favor, is exceedingly expressive of the becoming, penitence of
the one and the mercy of the other; I have sinned against Heaven and in thy
sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me therefore as one of
thy hired Servants. The injured parent compassionates his distress, takes the
Prodigal in his arms, owns him for his Son; orders the fatted Calf to be
killed, and rebukes the envy of his elder Brother with, this my Son was dead
but is alive again, was lost but is found! O the height and depth! of the
goodness and mercy of God! look unto him all ye ends of the earth and be ye
saved.

Before I conclude, I find it in my Heart to address another class in this
Meeting, a class who have earnestly sought and happily found him of whom Moses
and the Prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth the Immanuel, which being
interpreted is, God with us; you who once were scattered as sheep without a
shepherd, on the barren mountains and desolate hills of an empty profession,
but the Great Shepherd of Souls has gathered you within the sacred Enclosure
of his Sheepfold, and you are under the peculiar protection of the Lord
Almighty, you has he plucked as brands out of the burning, and redeemed to
himself with the saving strength of his right Arm; may you ever remember his
unutterable mercy, and dedicate the remaining moments of life to the honor of
his Name. My Soul salutes you in the endeared affection of the Gospel of peace,
and wishes your establishment in Righteousness, that you may abide in holy
patience the fiery trial of your faith throughout the days of your Pilgrimage
on earth, and become as fixed pillars in the celestial building, the house of
God, that shall go no more out.

If ye abide in the word of faith by which ye have been taught, the malice of
Men nor Devils, nor all the united powers of darkness, shall be able to pluck
you out of the hand of him, who is your Judge, your King your Protector, your
Father and your everlasting Friend When the earth shall be wrapped together as a
scroll, and the Sun and Moon be darkened, when every Constellation of the
Heavens sinks into everlasting obscurity, and the Elements of this world shall
melt with fervent heat; you will possess an habitation within the superior
regions of a new Heaven and a new Earth, where the Lord your Righteousness
dwells.

Many of pretended wise, learned and prudent who have sought to climb up some
other way, rather than to enter by Christ, who is the door (by the conditions
which he has proposed) into the sheepfold, may pity you as fools, or ridicule
you as enthusiasts, count your lives madness, and your end to be without
honor, but they will one day be astonished at the strangeness of your
Salvation, when they see to their confusion that you are finally numbered
amongst the Children of God, and that the lot of your Inheritance is amongst
the Saints. In the World you are to expect tribulations of various kinds; pain,
sickness, temptations and disappointments invade the breast of the most
righteous and temperate amongst Men; the cup of mixture (more or less
impregnated with the wormwood and the gall) is the lot of all Men, designed
doubtless to affect a valueable purpose, by him who afflicts not willingly, nor
without a righteous and benevolent cause, the Children of Men; as the Heavens
are higher than the Earth so are the ways of Almighty Wisdom higher than our
ways, and his thoughts than our thoughts! We see a little, and but a very
little of the amazing universal plan of his Government over rational and
immortal spirits. It lies beyond the reach of the most exalted human faculties
to comprehend his wisdom, throughout the righteous administration of his
Providence, which is unsearchable! It is our duty as frail dependant beings to
meet every dispensation of his Providence with that resignation of spirit,
which incessantly breathes the humble language of "not my will O Lord! but
thine, be done in all things!" Under the evils which we feel and which our
prudence could not prevent, let us (...) implore divine aid to endure them with
patience, than to pray that they may be removed from us; least like ignorant
Children we should seek to avoid that portion from our Heavenly Father's Hand,
which he graciously designed to remove or prevent a greater evil. This is not
the place of your rest, but a state of probation, a painful pilgrimage, a Land
of pits and snares, through which lies a narrow Path to the regions of eternal
Peace.

The Soul by reason of its connection, with the body, enclosed within the walls
of flesh, cannot extend its views and employ its faculties on divine objects,
without frequent interruption; but when the days of its captivity are
accomplished, it will be capable of a more glorious expansion in the Kingdom of
Immortallity, and (if bearing the inscription of Holiness) will be put in
possession of that Joy which is unspeakable and full of Glory. Therefore in all
those calunities to which we are subject in the house of our pilgrimage, we
have a place of refuge to flee to, where safety is alone to be four is though
indeed we must feel in degred as Men, yet (...) may possess the patience,
resignation and holy (...) of Christians, who are looking for a better Country,
a more excellent Inheritance in that City whose Inhabitant cannot say "I am
Sick."

Be ye therefore steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as ye know than your labor shall not be in vain. Be ye in your
several stations in the Church, and the world, as way-marks to the honest
inquirers who are asking their way to Zion, and from a true sense of their
condition are crying out "what shall we do to be saved?" show forth by your
example of Charity, Sobriety, Temperance and Holiness of Life, that you are
redeemed from the spirit of the world, that lies in wickedness; be not
captivated by its trisling amusements, nor insanred by its lying vanities, but
retain the fear of the Lord which will keep the heart clean, and prove a source
of surest consolation when all things else will be unavailing! let the purity
of your lives demonstrate that you are attentive to things more excellent,
things that are permanent and eternal, essentially relating to the salvation of
the Soul! by this means you will become the consecrated Temples of the Holy
Ghost, and be a means of leading others in the way of Righteousness!

Finally, my Brethren, farewell! I commend you to God, the Shepherd of Israel,
and to the word of his Grace; this is alone able to build us up in the most
holy faith, to direct our feet in the way of Righteousness and Peace; and
finally to put us in possession of a glorious Inheritance amongst the saints,
that will never fade away.

THE HEADS OF A SERMON
PREACHED at Horsleydown MEETING. upon the close of a visit to Friends Families
in that QUARTER, the 19th of the Eleventh MONTH, 1769.
A SOLEMN summons which the Almighty gave through his Prophet Joel, to a People
whom he had known above all the families of the Earth, (at a time when they had
revolted and departed in Heart from him) has been revived in my mind; with an
apprehension that the same authority requires the republication of it in this
day, to a People likewise highly favored of him; and who have in like manner
departed from their first love.

Blow the Trumphet in Zion -- sanctify a fast -- call a solemn assembly --
gather the People -- sanctify the Congregation -- assemble the Elders -- gather
the Children and those that suck the breast -- let the Bridegroom go forth of
his chamber, and the Bride out of her closet -- let the Priests, the Ministers
of the Lord, weep between the Porch and the Altar; let them say, spare thy
People O Lord! and give not thy heritage to reproach, that the Heathen should
rule over them! wherefore should they say amongst the People, where is their
God? then will the Lord be jealous over his Land and pity his People.

As I am about to conclude (perhaps finally conclude) my labors amongst you in
this Quarter; I would query with some, with many that are present, whether they
have not heard intelligibly the sound of the Trumpet, calling them with a
degree of certainty, to arise and prepare themselves for the Battle. My
Brethren and Sisters, amongst whom I have been constrained in the overflowings
of the Fathers Love, to labor in a private capacity, breaking (I hope I may
say) a little bread from house to house -- the everlasting Gospel has been
preached amongst you with all the force of pathetic energy, with all the
tenderness of divine compassion; let it not be ineffectual! The Gospel message
has been delivered with such indubitable clearness, that your judgments have
been convinced, you have assented to "the Truth as it is in Jesus;" suffer not
the impressions it has made on your minds to be speedily erased. Far, very far,
be it from me to think highly of myself, to exalt the Officer, the Minister. I
would not that you should hold any Man's person in high estimation. I am deeply
sensible that to me belongs "blushing confusion of face," but I magnify mine
office, and the power of him who has seen meet to employ me therein; I would
endeavor to exalt in your view the adorable goodness and condescension of the
great Author of all mercies, in that he has caused the Trumpet to be renewedly
sounded in your borders; hear its important message with suitable attention;
let it rouse and prepare all the ranks in the Armies of our Israel, to engage
in the glorious Cause of our God. Let the Daughter of our Zion arise from the
bed of Indolence; from the lethargic stupor of a fatal forgetfulness; from all
the deadning benumbing gratifications of sensuality, and shake herself from the
dust of the earth, that she may come up to the help of him who has called her
with an high and holy calling. The Trumpet is blown in her streets, the alarm
has been heard by all, Oh! let not its language be rendered unintelligible by
the multiplicity of trivial things that too much absorb the minds of many.

I am fully persuaded that the gracious Visitation of humbling melting
goodness, has been afresh extended to individuals present, in (I had almost
said) a very memorable manner; nor will I recall the expression, for if it is
not treasured up in your remembrance now, for your prosit and advantage, it
will be memorable in that awful approaching period, when every neglected mercy
will appear deeply engraven, as a dread Handwriting on the wall, against us.
Let me therefore tenderly entreat you, with all the warmth of unutterable
affection, as a Brother, as a fellow Pilgrim, through the vicissitudes of time
to the unmixed Joys of a happy eternity, that you will no longer neglect the
offers of Mercy, or turn a deaf ear to the reproofs of Instruction. I feel my
mind covered with that boundless Love, that wishes, that ardently desires, you
may indeed be wise for yourselves: For although I may be deficient in many
qualifications of a Gospel Minister, I am not wanting in that pure
disinterested Love, which seeks not yours but you. Blow the trumpet in Zion;
sanctify a Fast. If we were but enough attentive to the sound of the Trumpet,
we should see the absolute necessity of this sanctified fast; a fast from every
of those delusive pleasures, those slavish attatchments, that render the mind
insensible of Good. Call a solemn Assembly. This branch of the summons (may
some say) belongs only to a few, and we have no share in the duty it enjoins. I
confess I am of another opinion: I think every Individual has a share in the
Instruction couched in it. "Call a solemn Assembly." Oh! you active ones, stop
a while in your swift carreer; make a solemn pause; stand collected from every
object that can gratify or delight the sensual part; labor diligently to
assemble all the powers and faculties of your Souls, that they may be
sanctified by him who gave them. I believe there is no useless, dead, unactive
member in the Church of God; and those that can thus assemble the collected
attention of a redeemed mind, devoted to do the divine will, have an undoubted
right from the highest Authority to call an holy convocation. We can do nothing
against the Truth but for the Truth, was the language of some formerly, who had
indeed sanctified an acceptable Fast. I much desire that those who perhaps
cannot be so active in promoting this glorious Cause amongst the Sons of Men,
as some who are called into more eminent stations in the Church, may by a
circumspect care over all their words and actions, see that they do nothing
against the Truth. "Call a solemn assembly; gather the People." How scattered
are many of the members of this Quarter! scattered indeed as sheep without a
shepherd! dispersed up and down in the dark vale of insensibility and
self-forgetfulness! many upon the barren Mountains of an empty profession;
(...) to all sense of religious fellowship; unacquainted with that holy union
in which is the bond of Peace! How many are the Gallios I have met with amongst
you, who (a as! it may be said) care for none of these things! Oh you Elders!
who are or might have been as Pillars in the Lords House; you delegated
Shepherds, who might have adorned the first ranks in the armies of our Israel,
if you had not sat down and taken up a rest short of those glorious abodes,
which are prepared for them that steadily persevere in the line of divine
appointment -- to you the call is, "Gather the People."

"Am I my Brothers keeper!" let it suffice for me that I look to myself, and
that my own Family is in tolerable order, is a language that too much prevails.
But Oh! that you had the Cause of God more at heart that you were more engaged
to gather the People that you might with a Fatherly care overlook those whose
minds at present resemble the barren desert, the uncultivated wilderness; that
you might comfort and encourage them that tread the gloomy scenes of an adverse
allotment, as it were cut off from every Joy, and alive to each painful
sensibility; how would it comfort many of these, if an experienced friend was
now and then to drop into their families, and at times speak a word, in the
opening of divine wisdom, suitable to their several states: I believe it would
be a great means of gathering the People. Why should your care be circumscribed
within the narrow limits of your own Families (although they should certainly be
well regulated) but you might be more extensively serviceable, if thus engaged
in the care of the Household of God. I am persuaded that the divine wing would
be over you, and a Blessing would attend your labors. It Is not a time for us
to dwell unconcerned in our ceiled Houses, when the House of God lies waste. We
have, many of us, the same tender connections as you; I myself have the same
endearing attachments as some of you, the same ties of domestic Love, and
perhaps as deeply sensible of all their force, as some of you; not less
attentive to every relative and social duty, than some of you; my Nature is not
harsh, my Principles much less so; yet I am made willing to leave all, to come
and labor with you; if so be I might be instrumental to rouse any to a more
ardorous pursuit of their everlasting Interest; and I can freely acknowledge,
with humble thankfulness, that I never more fully experienced my Peace to slow
as a River; never could with greater Joy say return Oh! my Soul to the place of
thy rest, for the Lord thy God has dealt bountifully with thee, than when I
have been thus engaged in extensive private labors; visiting the sick;
reviving the sorrowful; encouraging the disconsolate; strengthening the weak;
watching over and carefully admonishing the giddy incautious Youth; and I doubt
not but you would have the reward of Peace in your own bosoms, if as heads of
the society you were more often thus employed in endeavoring to gather the
People.

"Sanctify the Congregation; assemble the Elders." I have been deeply concerned
to see some of the Elders so deficient in filling the line of divine
appointment. If they were more frequently engaged to assemble under the holy
influence of that power in which they should move, they would many of them be
commanded to "blow the Trumpet in Zion;" but I know of no state harder to speak
to or more difficult to reach, than that of an Elder whose mind is overgrown by
the earthly nature; Oh! Earth, Earth, Earth! hear the word of the Lord. I don't
recollect any other instance in sacred writ, where attention is demanded in a
similar manner; "Oh! Earth, Earth, Earth!" thus thrice repeated, plainly
signifying the great difficulty there is in reaching to those, who are as it
were buried in the earth, whose minds are fixed in it.

"Gather the Children." You that have the rising Youth under your care, let me
call upon you, let me entreat you to "gather the Children;" gather them from
all the bewitching enticing allurements of the world, gather their attention to
that of God in their own minds. Oh! how have I secretly mourned to see the poor
Children so sorrowfully neglected; so uninstructed; so much estranged to that
holy divine principle, which would so exceedingly beautify and enrich them! but
alas! how few Parents are rightly qualified to teach their Children the law of
divine love; to instill into their tender minds proper sentiments, to cultivate
upon them those impressions that would be of everlasting advantage; and if the
Children, when the gracious visitation of the Father of mercies moves upon
their hearts, warming and animating them with the Love of Virtue, raising the
secret sigh, and begetting desires after Heaven and Holiness: I say if the
Children should then ask the negligent parent; what is this secret something
which I feel; this principle which impresses my mind with the love of Virtue?
what is it? what value shall I set upon it? How then can you give them suitable
instruction? you cannot teach them obedience to its sacred dictates, when your
own example speaks a language quite opposite: Oh! why should the Sea Monster be
brought against you the Sea Monster draws forth the breast to her Young but
the Daughter of my People is become cruel! but the Daughter of my People is
become cruel as the Ostrich in the Wilderness that leaves her Eggs in the Sand
to be hatched by the beams of the Sun, and considers not that the Foot of the
Passenger may crush them! the Daughter of my People has left her tender
Offspring to the uncertainty of being accidentally benefited, or I should
rather say, to the Mercy of God, unasked, unsought, exposed to all the dangers
of a dreary Wilderness, unaided unassisted by the Care of a natural Parent! The
Tongue of the sucking Child cleaves to roof of its Mouth for thirst! the
Children ask Bread and there is none in many Families to break it, they want to
be nourished by the sincere Milk of the word, but alas! the Daughter of my
People is become cruel! Oh! you Parents, you delegated Shepherds, what account
will you have to render when the Lord of the whole Earth arises to make
inquisiton for Blood!

Bear with me my beloved Friends; flattery and smooth tales may please Fools,
but they will not please him whom I desire to serve in the Gospel of his Son.
All that is within me is moved, while I thus earnestly expostulate with you on
behalf of the dear Children; suffer me to entreat you, for God's sake, for your
own Souls sake, for the sake of the Cause of Truth, "Gather the Children, and
those that suck the breast;" those that are filling themselves with the Worlds
consolation, with the intoxicating pleasures and amusements of a degenerate
age; wean them from these delights; gather them to the knowledge of themselves,
to a sense of the Mercies that are offered them by the great Author of Mercies
ancient and new. While thy Servant was busied hither and thither the Man made
his escape, was the vain excuse of the Officer to whose custody a certain
Captive was committed with this charge, take care of this Man till I come, and
if thou let him go, thy life shall go for his life. No plea of other
engagements, nor even the want of ability to discharge our duty toward our
Offspring will stand us in any stead; if, when the Almighty queries with us
What have thou done with those Lambs I left under thy care in the wilderness,
those tender Offsprings I gave thee in charge! we have through neglect, through
unwatchfulness suffered him or her to go, but we shall most certainly, stand
accountable for his or her Life. I said want of ability, because I assuredly
believe, that want of ability will be so far from a palliation of our Crime,
that it will rather increase our condemnation; can we plead want of ability to
him who is always ready to furnish us with it, if we are but willing to receive
it at his Hand!

I am of opinion respecting many of our Youth, that if they had been properly
instructed, and carefully watched over, if they could have seen the beauty of
Holiness shine in the example of their Parents, they would not have gone out so
widely as they have. Oh you Parents of both sexes, an important trust is
reposed in you; example your Childern in the practice of Piety; example speaks
louder, much louder, than precept; its influence is far more extensive. And
while on the one hand you are excited to a faithful discharge of your duty
toward them, by the certain hope of a glorious reward; so on the other hand,
the powerful ties of natural affection, the warm solicitude for the happiness
of those you love, must stir up to diligence in the work and service appointed
you.

"Gather the Children." If after your attentive care has been employed, for
their preservation; if after by the forceable voice of example, you have called
them to the perfecting of holiness in the fear of God, they will go, they will
turn aside into the byways and crooked paths of sin and iniquity, they must
stand by their own choice; you have redeemed your Souls, and will be found in
your lots at the end of time, a ponderous Crown awaits you, you will close your
eyes, and open them to the boundless fruition of unmixt Joy, in a happy
eternity.

We do sometimes with sorrow observe, the unwearied labors of a Parents love,
bestowed without the desired effect; it is mournful to see Children pierce with
bitterness and anxiety the breast that has been their support in their
infantile years; to fill that eye with sorrow, that has dropped over them the
tear of maternal fondness! it is a cruel thing for a Child to mingle Gall and
Wormwood, in the cup of a Parent descending to the Grave; let us be assured
that their own portion of Gall and Wormwood will be doubly increased thereby,
in the solemn hour of just Retribution! But, Oh beloved Youth! I earnestly
desire that you may never thus widely deviate from the paths of rectitude; it is
on you the hope of the present age must shortly devolve; may you wisely choose
an early submission to the holy discipline of the Cross of Christ, that you may
come up as an Army for God. Consider the uncertainty of your stay here;
consider the important business of Life; and let the love of every unprofitable
delight, be swallowed up in the arduous pursuit of Glory, Honor, Immortality
and Eternal Life. We are daily instructed by the powerful eloquent language of
Mortality; Death invades all ranks, snatches those of all ages from the busy
stage of life, she that was yesterday surrounded with nuptial Joys, must
tomorrow be confined within the cold enclosure of the silent Grave. Let the
Bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the Bride out of her Closet; let the
young, the joyous, those that are in the bloom of life, leave every thing that
tends to retard their progress toward the City of the Saints solemnity; let
them relinquish their most exalted satisfactions, rather than neglect to lay
hold on the Joys of God's Salvation; which are unutterably more desirable, than
all the sin-pleasing gratifications that this World can bestow.

Let the Priests the Ministers of the Lord weep between the Porch and the
Altar; this should not be confined to those only whose mouths may be opened
publicly amongst you, for it belongs to all those who Preach to others by the
regularity of a Godly life and conversation; although we are favored with a
living ministry of divine appointment, who dare not fill the ears of Men with a
repetition of unfelt Truths, nor amuse them with the unprofitable productions
of of an empty mind, but are concerned to discharge themselves faithfully as
stewards of the mysteries of God yet let them be joined by all those that mourn
for the desolation of Zion; by all that wish Peace within her Walls and
prosperity within her Palaces. Let us weep between the Porch and the Altar,
saying Spare thy People O Lord! and give not thy Heritage to reproach, that the
Heathen should rule over them! wherefore should they say among the People,
where is their God? If we are thus unitedly engaged on behalf of our Israel it
may be that the Lord will again "be jealous over his land" with an holy
jealousy, for I cannot think that a People whom he has raised by his own
invincible power, and so signally placed his name amongst, were ever designed
to be only the transcient Glory of a couple of centuries; I am still revived by
a secret Hope of better times, when our Zion shall again put on her beautiful
Garments; and in her, and with her, shall arise Judges as at the first, and
Counselors and Lawgivers as at the beginning; let us weep between the Porch
and the Altar; let us interceed for the People that the land may yet be spared!
the gracious ear of our Heavenly Father is still open to the supplications of
his Children, and I believe he will yet be jealous over his Land and pity his
People. The time approaches when the great dasher in pieces will more and more
come up amongst us, and may all who are broken by him, wait to be healed by the
arising of his Love; I shall not live to see it, but I live in the Faith, and I
believe I shall die in the Faith, that the Lord of Hosts will yet beautify the
place of his Feet, that our Zion will yet become an Eternal excellency, and
Jerusalem the praise of the whole Earth!

Let us weep between the Porch and the Altar with unwearied intercession, for
the Lord will yet be jealous over his Land and pity his People. The bowels of
adorable Compassion yet yearn over his Children, with all the tenderness of a
Fathers Love, How shall I give thee up O Ephraim? How shall I make thee as
Admah and set thee as Zeboam? How shall I cut thee off from being a People
before me? by this moving and pathetic language would the Great Father of the
Universe induce you to return to the Arms of everlasting Mercy! And if we who
are placed as Watchmen in Zion faithfully discharge the trust reposed in us, we
shall be made Instrumental in gathering the scattered and dispersed Sheep, from
the East and from the West, from the North, and from the South, to the great
Shepherd, to the one Sheepfold; and finally obtain an admitance into those
glorious Mansions where the morning Stars join in Singing Hallelujahs! and
where all the Sons of God forever shout for Joy.

Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only God! be Honor and
Praise for ever and ever.

FINIS.

