Mr. WEBSTER'S ELECTION-SERMON.

MAY 28, 1777.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE HONORABLE COUNCIL, AND THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES, OF THE STATE of the MASSACHUSETTS BAY, IN NEW ENGLAND.

AT BOSTON, MAY 28, 1777.

BEING THE ANNIVERSARY FOR THE ELECTION OF THE HONORABLE COUNCIL.

BY SAMUEL WEBSTER, A. M. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN SALISBURY.

"Let GOD arise, let his Enemies he scattered: Let them also that hate him flee
before him."

"As smoke is driven away, so drive them away: As wax melts before the fire,
so let the wicked perish at the presence of GOD."

"But let the righteous be glad: Let them rejoice before GOD, yea let them
exceedingly rejoice"

PSALM LXVIII. beginning. BOSTON: PRINTED BY EDES and GILL, IN QUEEN STREET.

M,DCC,LXXVII.

STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS BAY. In the House of REPRESENTATIVES, May 28, 1777.
ON Motion, Ordered, That Mr. Simpson, Capt. Greenleaf, Capt. Howard, Mr.
Jeffries and Mr. Wendell, be a Committee to wait on the Reverend Mr. WEBSTER,
and return him the Thanks of the House for his SERMON preached before the
General Assembly this Day: And desire a Copy for the Press.

A true Extract from the Minutes.

Attest. SAMUEL FREEMAN, Clerk.

AN ELECTION-SERMON.
I CONGRATULATE the General Assembly of this State, this day convened in the
city of their ancient solemnities; -- I congratulate this capital, whom the
Lord has delivered out of the hands of the enemy; -- I congratulate this
respectable audience, on the liberty of meeting here again, with safety on this
important anniversary, to acknowledge the Lord God of our fathers, and to seek
his direction and blessing on our political affairs to be this day transacted.

And with the divine leave and assistance, shall discourse to you on those
words of holy writ, which you may find in the XLV Chapter of EZEKIEL, part of
the 8th, together with the 9th verse.

-- And my princes shall no more oppress my people. And the rest of the land
shall they give to the house of Israel, according to their tribes.

Thus says the Lord God, let it suffice you O princes of Israel: remove
violence and spoil, and execute judgment and justice; take away your exactions
from my people, says the Lord God.

IT IS happy, that we have in the holy scriptures divine directions to regulate
the conduct of all ranks: nothing less than the authority of God can do this,
to any purpose.

But, when God speaks, before whom prince and peasant stand upon a parr,
methinks, all, from the lowest to the highest, must listen with a sacred
veneration!

Indeed, as God does not now direct his voice immediately to us, we must not
counterfeit it, and say -- the Lord says -- when the Lord has not spoken. But
yet, in similar circumstances, we may, by analogy, take the ancient voice of
God, as directed to us. This is the use we are to make of a great part of the
old testament.

Let us keep this in mind and, I trust, we shall find that we are not
unconcerned in the words now read to you.

They were spoken at a time when there was a general corruption of manners;
princes and people conspiring to provoke God to anger, and to bring down his
judgments.

And, if we look over the prophets, we shall find that the rulers were
peculiarly guilty: the princes were become mighty oppressors: and, when foreign
enemies attacked them, unnaturally joined, and conspired their ruin! This was a
crime of the highest nature! For, nothing can be more aggravated than for the
shepherds to mislead and butcher the flock they were set to defend and feed!
And the guardians of the public interests, to turn traitors and assassins to
them that raised them to their high places.!

To the princes and rulers, therefore, who were too big to hear any other, the
God of Heaven speaks in my text, and some preceding and following verses.

Ordering, that the rulers should have a reasonable portion laid out round
their cities, by the side of the portion of the priests, which was laid out by
measure. And then that the rest of the land, as in the text, should be divided
among the people as their inheritance.

And then, says God -- my princes shall no more oppress. That is -- Thus prince
and people shall know their own, and enjoy their own: And the princes shall
make no more encroachments upon the people's rights or possessions; which are
as sacred as theirs.

Thus says the Lord, Let it suffice you O princes of Israel: remove violence
and spoil, and execute judgment and justice, take away your exactions from my
people, says the Lord God.

As if he had said -- Who is he that will not hear, when the Lord of heaven
speaks? It concerns all the princes and rulers of the world to listen, for God,
God, I say, speaks! It is enough O princes and rulers and more than enough,
that ye have done already, in oppressing and abusing those whom you were bound
by every tie to protect and make happy! Cease your violence then, make no more
spoil upon my people! But let judgment and justice be impartially executed,
that all may have the benefit of it: and put an end to your extravagant
exactions: and henceforth, let taxes and tribute be required only in proportion
to the necessity of the public affairs, and not to support your own luxury or
defend your unrighteous claims!

Now, from this, rulers may learn something what is the will of God concerning
them; and the people somewhat of their duty to them. And all may be led to
mourn over the mighty oppressions of the earth, and to pray and hope for
deliverance in God's time.

Let me therefore beg the attention of this honorable audience, while, in the
fear of God, and with a due respect to my numerous superiors, I discourse in
the following manner.

First. Consider, very briefly the duty of princes and rulers to the people.

2dly. The duty of people to their rulers.

3dly. Take a brief view of the oppressions of the rulers of the world.

4thly. Enquire, how it comes to pass that such multitudes of mankind suffer
themselves to be thus grievously oppressed, by a few of their fellow men.

5thly. Consider, how contrary this is to the will of God.

6thly. Just hint to the people at some things, which seem to me most likely to
guard against tyranny in their rulers.

And finally, consider, a moment, the happiness of mankind when oppressors
shall cease, and they who rule over men shall be just, ruling in the fear of
God.

1. Then, I shall very briefly consider the duty of princes and rulers to the
people.

Now as to old-fashioned rulers hackney'd to the ways of the world, the voice
from heaven cries to them to oppress no more. It cries most solemnly in my
text. But as such rulers hear neither God nor man, we have no immediate
business with them! And God grant we never may.

It Is other kind of magistrates with whom we have to do; chosen by the people
(as all lawful magistrates are) to defend them against those ravening wolves,
which have been devouring them.

And, their duty is to exert themselves in watching over and defending them,
with unwearied diligence; lest they give the people room to say, that power is
to be trusted with no body, and so are put out of conceit of all government,
and run into anarchy and confusion.

In the first place, (where the constitution is dissolved) their duty is (with
the assent of the people) to frame the most just and equitable constitution;
calculated, in the best manner which human wisdom can devise, to answer the
great and only design of government, the security of the lives, liberty and
property of the people.

For, though, where the magistrates and people are generally virtuous, the
people may be tolerably happy under almost any constitution, or indeed without
any. Yet, as the world is, a good constitution is by no means to be
disregarded; but is the first foundation to be laid for the happiness of the
people; and of great importance.

2. The making and establishing of good laws, is another important duty of
theirs.

And it is a rare happiness indeed when they have it in their power to begin
all anew, and revise and correct the whole code, and fix every thing on the
stable basis of perfect equity.

And, here -- Let no man make a (...) which in the exercise of virtue, he would
not willingly submit to.

3. Wise and virtuous men must in the next place be appointed to every
important office, that the laws may be faithfully and impartially executed.

Without this, all the laws in the world will answer no good end: but
government will be despised, and vice and disorder reign and rage. Under the
best constitution, the wicked will walk on every side, when the vilest men are
exalted. Let me therefore conjure by all that is sacred those who have these
appointments in their hands, never, never* to let this be seen in our land!
These hints must suffice at present. And I proceed,

II. As briefly, To consider the duty of people to their rulers.

It seemed meet to mention the duty of rulers (...), because the duty of the
people results from their honest discharge of it. And, if the rulers grossly
neglect their duty, so as to sail of answering the end of their institution,
especially if they play the tyrant and destroy what they were appointed to
preserve, common sense teaches, and we all agree, that they forfeit all
obedience and respect.

The renowned and excellent emperor Trajan ordered that the very prayers for
him, should be conditional -- if he observes the laws -- if he govern as he
ought -- if he make the people happy. The light of nature taught him this.

And yet, we ought to consider magistrates as men, and make allowance for human
frailties and mistakes. And therefore, if they mean honestly and in any
tolerable measure answer the end of their advancement, especially if they
discharge their duty, wisely and faithfully, the people's duty to them cannot
be dispensed with, any more than other duties, on pain of eternal damnation.

In such cases they are bound not only by fear of wrath, but for conscience
sake. For such an ordinance of man is God's ordinance also.

But, depend upon it, no government is God's ordinance, but that which is for
the good of mankind: it would be the grossest reflection on the divine goodness
to suppose it! Nay, I think, but little short of blasphemy!

But, to good rulers the people owe --

1. Honor and respect. It Is absurd to suppose the people should choose those to
lead and defend them, who are not thought worthy of these by the electors! How
absurd then to deny it!

2. Obedience. For the people to choose men to be rulers and call them so; and
not readily obey them, when acting in character, is to make themselves
contemptible.

3. Tribute, is due, in order to their honorable support, and to carry on the
great affairs of government.

As no man goes a warfare at his own charges, so it is absurd to expect
magistrates to devote themselves to the public, without an adequate reward for
their important service.

And, at some seasons, when all lies at stake, it is impossible but taxes and
tribute must run high. And, when necessary, they should be readily paid, unless
they outrun all the benefit, which can hardly be, where property, liberty and
life, are all at stake together! To talk of expense in such a case, is to
dream. For 'till it be determined whether we have any thing or not, what is
expense to us?

4. Another duty of the people is to defend their magistrates, in time of
danger, against all attempts of bloody men.

In times of danger, like the present, whether we consider it or not, they, and
all others, who go foremost, are peculiar marks of the enemies vengeance: and
therefore every man in whose cause they act, is bound in honor and conscience
to stand by and defend them.

And, how shocking a crime, how disgraceful to humanity, would it be to desert
them, (the most honorable President of our Congress, and our incomparable
General, for example) and leave them to fall a sacrifice to the fury of the
enemy! Should we be capable of such meanness, we should never deserve to have
another friend? But I proceed

III. To take a brief view of the oppressions of the rulers of the world.

To pretend to give a particular history of this, would be almost the same
thing as to give the history of the world, from Cain to Nimrod, and from him to
Nebuchadnezzar, and from him to Alexander, and from him to Julius Caesar, and
from Julius to George!

Nor could any, who have the common feelings of humanity, bear the tragical
story, without growing almost stiff with horror! For, it is almost one
continued scene of cruelty, blood and slaughter!

Those who have never felt the weight of these oppressions, nor entered much
into the history of them, can form no idea of them!

Men are, to their shame, in general, too much tyrants to one another. I wish
the present day were not, to the grief of all good men, too much a witness of
this, while we are all suffering together unparrallel'd oppressions from the
common Enemy!

But, vile as these things are, they are all as nothing compared with what has
been done by the great oppressors of the earth, who were entrusted with power
by the people to defend them from the little oppressors. The sword of justice
was put into their hands, but behold they soon turned it into a sword of
oppression; and made their little singer thicker than all their loins of whom
the people were afraid.

And so, in a multitude of instances, the remedy has proved unspeakably worse
than the disease!

The business of all in power is to defend the lives, liberties and property of
the people: And they have no other business: And yet every one of these have
the great tyrants of the world invaded! they have not only robbed and spoiled,
them of their property by their violent exactions and by engaging them in
needless wars, to gratify their own lust, ambition and avarice! but at length
rose to such a pitch of arrogance, as to claim the people and all they had as
their property, to be disposed of at their pleasure, as if all the people were
made for them and not they for the people!

One would think this was tyranny and slaverly complete! -- And yet they have
gone further still. -- Being intoxicated with power, they have sometimes
butchered the poor people like roaring lions and raging bears, and far beyond!
They have done what these never did! They have burnt Towns and Cities, and
depopulated Countries; which they were bound to protect: And tortured those
from whom they received their power and support; and torn out their entrails
with hellish cruelty, from whom came their crowns and diadems, their purple
raiment and their suptuous fare!

Were it not a day in which all the man must be summoned up in every soul --
who could refrain from tears?

It would be easy, if the time would permit, to exemplify all these several
kinds of oppression, a thousand times over, in the civil history of the world.
But I shall confine myself to a few hints from the sacred History, that most
sure word.

See then the spirit of a tyrant in the haughty message of Ben^adad to the king
of Israel. (1 Kings, 20.) Thy silver and thy gold is mine, thy wives also and
thy children, even the goodliest, are mine. I will send my servants. -- and
whatsoever is pleasant in thine eyes, they shall take away! One would think
this was Lucifer son of the morning!

Look also into Egypt and see how the tyrant oppressed the poor Israelites,
whose ancestors had saved the land! But all was forgotten, and they were made
the vilest slaves and drudges! and their very groans and petitions (like ours)
became crimes; and increased instead of lightning their burdens! Till at
length, shocking to think of, every male child was ordered to be murdered as
soon as born! And they had no deliverance, till Heaven heard their cry and took
vengeance on their oppressors!

Another instance you have in the book of Esther: Where Haman the haughty
favorite and prime minister to Ahasuerus, being offended at one honest Jew,
for want of a little ceremony or homage; in his rage, procured a decree of the
easy monarch, to make a general massacre of his whole nation: which, because of
a stupid custom in that empire, never to repeal a royal edict, was hardly
prevented being put in execution! Who can think of it without horror!

And what a monster was Nahash the Ammonite, (See I Sam. xi.) who, when the men
of Jabesh Gilend offered to submit to him upon terms -- scorning all terms --
answered -- On this condition will I make covenant with you, that I may thrust
out all your right eyes.

Can human nature be thus debased?
(Was this a man or a beast?)
The kings of Babylon furnish us with another complicated instance from
Nebuchadnezzar to their fall; at which hell is represented as moved at their
coming -- and saying -- Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that
did shake Kingdoms? That made the world a wilderness, and destroyed the cities
thereof? And the whole earth is represented as at rest and quiet when he was
dead, and as breaking forth into singing. (See Isaiah xiv.) where this great
oppressor, this Lucifer son of the morning is most livelily painted out, and in
a manner that might well make every Tyrant on earth tremble!

Another awful instance, (and the last I shall mention) is that of the cruel
and bloody Herod, ( Mat. ii.) who murdered all the little innocents of
Bethlehem and the coasts adjacent, in a fit of jealousy and rage! which seems
to be the utmost that human nature is capable of! ^ut I must forbear -- and
proceed,

IV. To consider, a moment, how it comes to pass, that such multitudes of
mankind suffer themselves to be thus grievously oppressed by a few of their
fellow-men.

That so many millions of men all over the world should be brought into bondage
to one or to a few; and kept under it after they have endured every insult,
abuse and torment, which man can inflict; if the fact was not notorious, would
seem absolutely incredible!

No man denies but that originally all were equally free. Men did not purchase
their freedom, nor was it the grant of kings, nor from charter, covenant, or
compact, nor in any proper sense from man: But from God. They were born free.

But, behold, sin reigned and disturbed the peace of men: And then tyrants
presently began to reign also: Like our clothing they are the mark of lost
innocence. The people trusting too much power in the hands of some to defend
them, they presently used it to oppress them.

So long as men were virtuous, they either had no rulers, or chose the wise and
good. But either these degenerated, being intoxicated with too much power; or
the people were governed by their lusts in choosing, and chose bad men: And
then what wonder that these proved tyrants and governed by their lusts.

To trace this a little more particularly.

Gross ignorance and sloth in the people must lay the foundation. Ignorance is
as much the mother of slavery as of popish devotion.

If the body of the people become so ignorant as not to know the bounds of the
magistrates lawful authority or their own just rights, how easily may the
prerogative be stretched, and the people's rights invaded!

Or, if, when the magistrates are chosen, they are too sluggish to attend the
choice, or keep no careful watch over those that are in power, or, through
inexcuseable indolence, will not exert themselves till it is too late; who can
wonder at this evil's creeping in?

Again. All intemperance and debauchery lead to this. For they soon eat out the
heart, the strength, the courage of a people; and so prepare them to fall a
prey to those who will invade their rights.

Covetousness also, it is certain, has had, and still has, a great hand in this
great evil.

Some choose a tyrant because they want posts under him, in which they may
share with him in ease and luxury. Or they are directly bribed to put those
into authority who buy them, because they design to sell them again. And when
the people are so covetous and venal as to sell themselves first, how can they
wonder if they are put to sale again by those who bought them? When therefore
this kind of bribery becomes common, if we had not so many examples in the
history of the world to prove it, our reason would teach us that slavery and
ruin must be at the door.

Further, this great evil is partly owing to the craft and subtilty used by
those in power.

Power, especially overgrown power, whets the ambition and sets all the wits
to work to enlarge it. And therefore encroachments on the people's liberties
are not generally made all at once, but so gradually as hardly to be perceived
by the less watchful; and all plaistered over, it may be, with such plausible
pretenses, that before they are aware of the snare, they are taken and cannot
disintangle themselves.

These, these, no doubt are the roots of this great evil; not to mention
conquests made by force upon an inoffensive people, which, I am clear gives no
right: but yet against which there is at present no remedy but force.

But, it may be asked -- Why don't the multitude rise and shake off the yoke,
when they find it intolerable? The answer is easy --

Tyrants always support themselves with standing armies! And if possible the
people are disarmed, or besure the militia neglected and kept low, and the
chief ruler at the head of all the military force. And, when it is come to
this, it is extremely difficult for them to unite in sufficient bodies to
effect their deliverance. But, if they would unite, nothing, nothing, could
stand before them. So that in a word the want of union, the want of union, is
the ruin of the world. For want of this those noble spirits who would risque
all to be free, are forced to sit down in chains!

When therefore we see in a manner, the whole world, except these American
States, groaning under the most abject slavery, with so few successful attempts
to deliver themselves, how stupid must we be, if we do not exert ourselves to
the utmost to save ourselves from falling into this remediless estate, this
bottomless gulf of misery.

But I must not enlarge. But proceed,

V. To consider, how contrary this is to the will of God.

Now a little attention to the nature of God, and to his revealed will may
fully satisfy us that it is the abominable thing which his soul hates.

It may suffice to consider his holiness and goodness. Can his holiness
possibly approve of oppression and murders, which are the grossest sins of men?
Can it see millions and millions butchered by these bloody men without
indignation? Impossible!

And as to his goodness, who will undertake to reconcile the approbation of
human misery and butchery with this divine perfection? There is none good, but
one; says Christ, and that is God: And yet no man of common benevolence can
think of this without abhorrence! How then must our heavenly Father abhor it!
And, revelation abundantly confirms it.

When God gave a model of government to his favorite people, he contrived it,
with exquisite art, to guard against tyranny and oppression; and laid the most
perfect foundation, which was ever laid, for real and perpetual freedom. This,
I think, must be clear to every judicious eye who shall take a thoro' view of
it, which I have not now time for.

But one thing I would just mention, which, so far as I know, is peculiar to
that divine model of government -- And that is -- That by forbidding usury and
even interest upon money lent to the poor, and appointing the year of Jubilee,
when both servants and lands were to be released, slavery was directly
prevented, and remotely all tyranny and oppression.

And, had not it been for the Jews madness in insisting to have their wise and
happy government changed into a monarchy, I am persuaded, the world would have
seen more of the excellency of that divine constitution by the fruits.

I need only add, that no sin is spoken of with more detestation, from one end
of the bible to the other, than oppression, or more awfully threatened. And
wicked rulers are compared to fierce and ravenous beasts, or to bulls of
Bashan, roaring lions and raging bears, etc. (See Amos iv. I. and Prove. xxviii.
15, 16.) So that I need not enlarge, but proceed,

VI. Just to hint to the people at some things which seem to me most likely to
guard against tyranny in their rulers.

Now if I may, without presumption, show my opinion, in a matter so much above
me. I would say --

1. Let the people by all means encourage schools and colleges, and all the
means of learning and knowledge, if they would guard against slavery. For a
wise, a knowing and a learned people, are the least likely of any in the world
to be enslaved.

2. Let them do all in their power to suppress vice and promote religion and
virtue. For, besides their natural efficacy, I am persuaded no people were ever
yet given up by God to slavery, till they had first given themselves up to
wickedness.

3. Let only men of integrity be entrusted by you with any power. I think power
is much safer in their hands than in men of greater abilities, but who are
wanting in this assential point.

4. Let not too much power be trusted in the hands of any. It may hurt them,
and then they may hurt the public. Or if it seem necessary in some critical
time (like the present) to lodge great power in some hand or hands, let it be
for a limited time, and the power renewed annually, if there is occasion.

5. Let elections of the Legislators be frequent; and let bribery and
corruption be guarded against to the utmost. Methinks, those who are guilty of
these should be forever rendered incapable of any place of power or trust; and
this by a fundamental law of the constitution.

6. Let the militia be kept under the best regulation, and be made respectable.
This will be a great security a great many ways.

7. Let standing armies be only for necessity and for a limited time. For, when
corrupted, they have been the ruin of many a country's liberty.

8. Let these armies never be put under the absolute power of any magistrate in
time of peace, so as to act in any cause, till that cause is approved by the
senate and people.

9. Let monopolies, and all kinds and degrees of oppression be carefully
guarded against. They are dangerous to the peace of a people, and they are
dangerous to their liberties! I am mistaken if the present time does not prove
it.

10. Let a careful watch be kept, and if any is found grossly and notoriously
exceeding the limits of his power, methinks, it should be a standing invariable
rule never to trust him with any power more.

Finally, Let the powers and prerogatives of the rulers and the rights and
privileges of the people, be determined with as much precision as possible,
that all may know their limits. And where there is any dispute, let nothing be
done, till it is settled by the people, who are the fountain of power.

But I forbear, and submit these hints -- which I only offer to consideration,
as a friend to liberty and to mankind. And I hasten,

Lastly, To consider a moment the happiness of mankind, when oppressors shall
cease, and they who rule over men are just, ruling in the fear of God.

That such an happy day should come to his people, seems to be promised by God,
in the Text. And it seems promised to the world in many passages, (which I have
not now time to mention.) And, who that sees the present melancholy state of
the world, but must wish and pray and even long for the glorious day. For, then
the most perfect models of government will be adopted, when, I doubt not, more
regard will be had to the spirit of the divine model given to Israel than ever
yet has been. And then a just and equitable body of laws will be framed, which
can oppress no man, except by accident: which laws (with great deference to
those before whom I speak) at least the fundamental ones, methinks, should by
all means be plain and concise as possible; or they cannot in reason be binding
on the body of the people: for they cannot know them.

Again. The wisest and best men will be appointed to fill every department: and
so none will hurt or destroy; violence and oppression will cease; their
officers will be peace and their exactors righteousness. And so justice and
judgment will run down the streets as a river in an uninterrupted course, and
righteousness be as the waves of the sea, successive and perpetual.

And, then, O happy day, every man will enjoy the freedom of a man, eat the
fruit of his labor, and lie down and rise up and walk by the way, and have
none to disturb him or make him afraid. In a word, the people will feel
themselves happy, and so cannot fail to honor their rulers, and pay them
tribute, and discharge their whole duty to them. For a people made happy by
their rulers, can never, I believe, be raised into a general tumult against
them, or grossly neglect their duty to them.

But, the time would fail me to expatiate; and if you live to see this glorious
day, you will not want to have it described.

I shall conclude with some Addresses.

And, I. To the General Assembly, this day convened.

Honored civil Fathers,

We rejoice that we yet see our rulers, at a time when our enemies prophesied
we should be all anarchy and confusion. And that we see no cause to address you
in the language of the text: But may without flattery say, we see the day when
(human frailties excepted.) our officers are peace and our exactors
righteousness: And we rejoice in the government over us.

There are those, I am sensible, who still keep up their claim of authority
over us, under whom we suffered such unexampled oppressions and miseries as
made their yoke intolerable! And they are still like the roaring lion and
raging bear!

The words of my text might with great propriety be sounded in their ears. Thus
says the Lord, Let it suffice you, O princes, remove violence and spoil, and
execute judgment and justice, take away your axactions from my people, says
the Lord God.

But alas, alas, they are deaf to the united voice of this oppressed land --
They are deaf to the voice of God himself. -- And therefore the united voice of
the land has said -- What portion have we in the King of the Isles? What
inheritance in the land of our fore fathers? See to thine own house, O thou
great oppressor!

And to you now, O our civil Fathers, we look under God, to defend us against
their bloody designs. We blush and mourn that any are so sottish and abandoned,
as to counteract you in your endeavors to save the land! who seem to desire to
return back to Egypt and to bondage, and to be ready to take their butchers
for their guardians, and their murderers for their protectors!

But, these notwithstanding, the union is glorious; and one would think the
unheard of barbarity of the enemy must bid fair to make it more complete.

Be not therefore dismayed; but do your utmost, we entreat you, to defend the
land, and restore it is tranquillity: And, in a word, to make the people wise,
virtuous and happy: And, assuredly, all generations will then rise up and call
you blessed.

And as to the affairs of this day, suffer me to entreat every one concerned,
to consider the great importance of a wise and good choice at this crisis of
our affairs; and therefore do nothing by partiality, but in the fear of God,
and with a single eye to his glory and the best service of this bleeding land!
But, what am I saying? When we are all embarked in one common cause, and that
the most important that ever any people were engaged in, and all lies at stake,
sure we may spare our words and leave this matter with all safety in your hand
-- you cannot be wanting. Forgive me that I have spoken. Wishing you therefore,
and the Honorable Council to be elected, the divine presence, direction and
blessing this day and evermore, with all due respect, I take my leave of you.
But may we meet at last in a better world, where the wicked cease from
troubling and the weary are at rest!

2. Let me address myself, in a few words, to this Capital.

Your past distressed situation, your almost miraculous preservation and
deliverance, extorts this from me, out of the usual mode.

Search, I pray you, and see wherefore it was that the Lord has dealt thus
with you.

I know indeed, that your forwardness in the public cause was what provoked the
enemy: But see, I beseech you what it was that provoked God to suffer it. And
amend what is amiss.

And be very thankful to God for so wonderful a deliverance, and render unto
him according to the mighty benefits received.

Upon the whole, adopt I pray you the language of Ezra, ( Ezra ix. 13, 14) And
after all that is come upon us -- seeing that thou our God have punished us
less than our iniquities deserve, and have given us such deliverance as this,
should we again break thy commandments, -- would thou not be angry with us
till thou had consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping.

Our earnest wish and prayer is, that this capital may ever lead in all virtue,
and be preserved and blessed, and made in all respects the glory of this land.

Finally. Let me in a few words address this whole people.

O my brethren, God's judgments are now abroad in all the land, and he justly
expects that we learn righteousness: How melancholy is it that we see no more
of it! Many are sighing and crying for the abominations which are yet found in
the midst of us; and particularly for the private oppressions of it.

Nothing is, nothing can be, more unseemly than to oppress one another, while
we are all groaning under public oppressions of the enemy, and crying to God
and man for help! Banish it, banish it, from the land, I pray you. On my knees
would I gladly beg this of you, could I hope thereby to prevail.

And let there be no strife. I pray you, between town and country, for we are
all brethren, members of one body. And neither can say -- I have no need of you.

Blessed be God, there is a sufficiency in the land, of the necessaries of
life; and if somebody is not wanting, all the poor may be supplied. And as to
many, if not most, foreign articles of great importance, there is undoubtedly a
considerable supply. How then comes it to pass, that such mutual jealousies
should arise, as to make an artificial scarcity where we all know there is
none? For Gods sake, don't let us counterfeit a scarcity lest he bring a real
one! But, let town and country open their Stores and their hands, and, to the
utmost of their power, supply each other; for the continuance of this strife
will be very dishonorable to both, and be very hurtful, if not ruinous, to the
common cause!

A little condescension and goodnature, on both sides, would easily set all to
rights. And they who go foremost in rectifying this matter, will be the most
honorable, let who would begin it.

And, as all depends upon the divine presence and blessing, let us do our
utmost to engage them by earnest prayer and supplication; yea and by turning
every one from his evil way and from the violence that is in his hands (as the
king of Nineveh well expressed it) who knows but the Lord will think upon us
for good, that we perish not? Yea more, I doubt not, that upon this the Lord
will be with us and maintain our righteous cause, against an ungodly nation.

We have seen abundance of the goodness of God already, amidst all our
calamities. And our enemies have been many a time disappointed, and fretted,
and gnashed their teeth. Give God the glory of all his salvations.

And let the counsel of the Lord be acceptable to the land: And let them wholly
break off their sins by righteousness, and their iniquities by showing mercy to
the poor; and I have no doubt it will be the restoring and lengthning out of
our tranquillity; yea, and that our land, will, ere long, become an asylum, or
place of refuge, to all the persecuted sons of Liberty, in every part of the
globe, and be filled with wise and happy men, and become the joy, if not envy,
of all the earth.

And, that it may be so, in God's time, Let me entreat you devoutly to join
with me in a prayer for our land, taken from a divine model, in the 83 d psalm:
The spirit of which, and every principal thought, I have carefully transferred
to ourselves, only varying the names and a few other things peculiar to them: A
prayer which points out so many particulars in our case this day; that it might
almost seem to have been prophetically composed for us.

O thou supreme Jehovah, who rulest in Heaven and earth, and can at all times
do thy pleasure, even with a words speaking.

Appear now for us, we earnestly beseech thee, in this day of our distress,
when invaded by a cruel and blood-thirsty enemy; who are come with a design to
reduce us to slavery or desolation.

They are thine enemies in this thing as well as ours, being come in a most
unrighteous cause, without any provocation to justify this outrage.

And yet they make a noise and a tumult like the waves of the sea on which they
come; and proudly boast that they are come with strength enough to crush us:
And they even mock our dependence on thee to save us!

Keep not thou silence, hold not thy peace, sit not still, O God, and see us
perish; but arise for our help; and let thy all-powerful word defend us; that
the proud may know that they are but men, and that God is with us, against whom
they have no power.

We know they have had long consultations against us, and laid their plan with
all the depth of subtilty and crafty wisdom, against this thy people, whom thou
have so long and so wonderfully defended, as an hidden treasure, or as the
apple of thine eye.

They have said -- If they will not be our servants and bond men, and suffer us
to do what we please with them, -- Come, let us gather a mighty force from all
nations, far and near, who will lend us aid, and let us burn their towns and
cities, and make their land a desolation!

And, behold, they are even now leagued together, even many nations, besides
our furious brethren the Britons, who are principals in this war; and have
begun the most desperate attacks upon us in various parts of the land. And,
unless God mercifully interpose and prevent it, nothing but blood and slaughter
are to be expected.

And, notwithstanding all our warlike preparations, we dare not depend on an
arm of flesh to save us! O that the battle might be the Lords and not ours!

To this end therefore we pray --

Awake, O Lord, for our help, and come and save us! Awake, O Lord, as in
ancient times! Do unto them, O Lord, if it be thy will, as thou did unto the
Midianites and their confederates, and to Sisera and to Jabin, when they
unjustly and without provocation, invaded thy people: And make their lords and
nobles and great commanders, like Oreb and Zeeb, and like Zeba and Zalmunna.

Though these angry brethren profess to worship the same God with us, yet,
because it is in somewhat of a different mode, they seem to have said -- Come
let us take the houses of God in possession, accordingly they have vented a
peculiar spite against the houses of God; defaced and defiled thy holy and
beautiful sanctuaries, where our fathers worshipped thee, turning them into
houses of merchandise and receptacles for beasts; and some of them, they have
torn in pieces and burned with fire!!

What holy indignation ought to arise in our breasts on this occasion! And will
not God also be angry at such barbarous profanity and impiety? Surely thou will
not hold them guiltless, who thus mock thee, and bid defiance to heaven as well
as to us!

Therefore we humbly pray -- That thou will hedge up their way and not suffer
them to proceed and prosper. But, put them to flight speedily, if it be thine
holy will, and make them run as fast as a wheel downwards, or as stubble or
chaff is driven before a furious whirlwind: And, as the fire consumes the wood,
and sometimes lays waste whole forests on the mountains, so let them be laid
waste and consumed, if they obstinately persist in their bloody designs against
us.

Lord, raise a dreadful tempest to affright them, and let thy tremendous storms
make them quake with fear; and pursue them with thine arrows, till they are
either destroyed, or brought to see that God is with us of a truth and fights
for us, and so return to their own lands, covered with shame and confusion; and
humble themselves before thee, and seek to appease thine anger, by a bitter
repentance for their murderous designs! And let them have neither credit nor
courage, to come out any more against us.

That so all the nations seeing thy mighty power and thy mavelous works, may
no more call themselves supreme; but know and acknowledge, that thou art God
alone, the only Supreme Governor among men, doing whatever pleases thee.

And so let thy glorious name be magnified in all the earth till time shall be
no more! And, let all the people say, AMEN and AMEN!


