AN ORATION DELIVERED MARCH 5th, 1778.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED MARCH 5th, 1778, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF
THE TOWN OF BOSTON: TO COMMEMORATE THE BLOODY TRAGEDY OF THE FIFTH OF MARCH,
1770.

BY JONATHAN WILLIAMS AUSTIN, Esquire

-- Multaque rubentia Caede
Lubrica Saxa madent, nulli sua profuit Aetas.
LUCAN, Lib. 2. -- Hic ubi barbarus hostis,
Ut fera plus valiant legibus arma facit.
OVID DE PONTO. Quis cladem illius noctis, quis funera fando
Explicet? Aut possit laccorymis aequare labores?
Plurima perque vias sternuntur inertia passim
Corpora
VIRGIL ^d AENEID. BOSTON; Printed by B. EDES, and T. and J. FLEET. M, DCC,
LXXVIII.

AT a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of Boston,
duly qualified and legally warned, in public Town-Meeting assembled at
Faneuil-Hall March Fifth, A. D. 1778. Voted, That the

Hon. Samuel Adams, Esquire Mr. Joseph Barrel, Ellis Gray, Esquire Samuel Barrett, Esquire
Hon. John Pitts, Esquire Mr. Elias Parkman, and Joseph Greenleaf, Esquire
Be, and hereby are appointed a Committee to wait upon Jonathan Williams
Austin, Esquire and in the Name of the Town, to thank him for the spirited and
elegant Oration, delivered by him at their Request, in Commemoration of the
horrid Massacre, perpetrated on the Evening of the Fifth of March, 1770, by a
Party of Soldiers of the XXIXth Regiment, under the Command of Capt. Thomas
Preston; and to request of him a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest. WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

Gentlemen,
I AM very willing, under your Patronage, to publish my Sentiments, hoping they
will be read with the same Candor that attended the Delivery.

JONATHAN WILLIAMS AUSTIN.
Boston, 9th March, 1778.
AN ORATION.
MY FRIENDS, AND FELLOW CITIZENS,
TO weep over the tomb of the patriot -- to drop a tear to the memory of those
unfortunate citizens, who fell the first sacrifices to tyranny and usurpation
is noble, generous and humane. Such are the sentiments that influence you, my
countrymen, or why through successive periods, with heartfelt sensations, have
you attended this solemn anniversary, and paid this sad tribute to the memory
of your slaughtered brethren. Nor is the circle contracted -- The most amiable
part of the creation share the grief, and, soft pity beaming in their
countenances, like the daughters of Israel, annually lament the fate of others,
and weep over the miseries of their country. Judges 11th, 3^, 40.
Come then, my friends, let us enter the solitary courts of death, and perhaps
an hour spent in such reflections, may afford as solid improvement as nature in
her gayest scenes.

To commemorate the deaths of those men who fell unhappy victims to brutal
violence -- To show the dangerous tendency of standing armies in populous
cities in time of peace, the origin of this fatal catastrophe -- to trace its
connection and effects, as they have been, and are now displayed, in different
parts of America, I take to be the design of this day's solemnity.

It appears to me needless to enter into the nature and ends of civil
government, and to evince that standing armies are a solecism in such a
constitution. Such sentiments are founded in nature, and have for ages, under
different forms, and different meridians, been fully displayed by men who knew
the rights of nature and mankind. The names of LOCK, SYDNEY and HAMPDEN have
long been illustrious, and my countrymen are too well acquainted with their
writings, not to venerate their memories. Nor can I forget the same sentiments
which have charmed you from the lips of men, who have spoke before me on the
same occasion, whose characters will be ever dear, and the exertions of whose
patriotism and virtue exhibited in the most critical situations, posterity will
ever wonder at and revere.

In short, to confirm this point by logical conclusions must be an useless
misspense of time. Even a crown lawyer, whose sentiments are not always
friendly to the rights of mankind will tell us, In a land of liberty, it is
extremely dangerous to make a distinct order of the profession of arms. In
absolute monarchies this is indeed necessary for the safety of the prince, and
arises from the main principle of their constitution, which is, governing by
fear: but in free states, the profession of a soldier, taken singly and merely
as a profession, is justly an object of jealousy. The laws therefore, and
constitution of these kingdoms, know no such thing as a perpetual, standing
soldier. Blackstone's Commentaries, Vol. 1st. Page 407.


Arguments existing in theory, however the mind may be captivated, do not
always convince, and consequences traced from the same source are seldom
interesting. But when we find the apprehensions of the greatest and best of
mankind, who actuated by a principle of benevolence, felt for the common
interests, fully displayed in awful and tremendous effects, we then start from
our lethargy, and like the sensitive plant, shrink from approaching danger!
such is the case with respect to the subject before us. Philosophers and
statesmen have shown how dangerous standing armies must be in a free state, and
every page in the volume of mankind confirms the melancholy account.

Speculative writers may indeed tell us, that the seeds of dissolution exist in
every body politic -- that like the body natural it must decay and die -- and
that the same causes which brought the empires of Belus and Cyrus to
destruction will sap every other government on earth. See Beilz^rius by M.
Maimontall.
For my own part I am no fatalist, and nil desperandum pro republica, is to me
a much preferable, and more generous motto. And instead of enumerating their
many vices and corruptions as the original cause, I think a little acquaintance
with history will inform us, that they are not merely the original cause, but
consequences resulting from the fatal measure, we are considering. In absolute
monarchies, where the military is the principal engine of government, we are
not to look for a confirmation of this argument. But in republics, till the
introduction of a soldiery distinct from the citizens, we find them as remote
from corruption, luxury, and the other black catalogue of vices as any human
system can attain to. But when standing troops were introduced, they
immediately followed. Depravity of manners -- a dislike to virtue and manly
sentiment -- effeminacy, and those grosser vices, too indelicate to be
mentioned in this place, stalked like demons through their cities. Witness, ye
republics, that were once great and illustrious, but are now no more! witness O
Boston! for ye were too well acquainted with the melancholy truth!

We will now confirm the sentiment by a brief inspection into some parts of
history.

The Greeks were a republic that in a short fright of years, exhibited the most
glorious spectacle, that ever appeared to mankind; and, as one observes, the
age they lived in, seemed to be the golden period of human nature. In every
branch of war or peace, in every species of science they excelled, and were at
once feared, admired and venerated by the other nations of the world. Yet this
heroic confederacy was originally reduced from this glorious superiority by the
arts of one man. Pisistratus.
Under the idea of a guard, from an inconsiderable number of attendants, he
increased to that stretch of power as proved the fatal stab to the vitals of
his country. The bank thus broken down, the tide swelled toorapid to be
stemmed, and virtue, freedom and the laws all fell a sacrifice.

Similar was the situation of the Romans. Although not so universally
distinguished as the Greeks yet from the expulsion of their kings, to the time
of Marius, they evinced to what a prodigious greatness mankind may arrive when
actuated by the principles of liberty, virtue and honor. Influenced by such
motives, no wonder their actions were conformable; and while the most rigid
inflexibility presided at home, the Roman eagle slew to the remotest corner of
the globe.

Can we then suppose when we view the characters which appeared on the stage at
this period -- when we consider how remote they were from those vices which
have been prevalent in powerful monarchies, and how carefully they watched the
sacred altar of freedom, that they themselves must remain a standing monument
of the consequences of this fatal measure. Such is the case. Marius in new
modelling the legions, and replacing the citizens who served in them with
foreign mercenaries laid the horrid foundation. The door was now open for one
too powerful citizen after another, until Casar, losing every check, and
laughing at the impotent anathemas of the senate, with the distant legions
marched to Rome, and formed a new era in their history. From this period wear
charmed no more with illustrious actions, and the last remains of dignity, sunk
in the Roman world. So true is it, that when a people lose their liberty, they
at once become fit subjects of every thing base and infamous.

We have thus far produced instances of the fatal effects of armies thus kept
up, which have ended in the utter subversion of the laws and government of two
of the most memorable republics in ancient story. We will now shift the scene,
and while we show their dangerous tendency in states of a more modern date, we
will exhibit an illustrious example through what scenes of danger, hardships
and blood the determined spirit of honor, and attachment to freedom will carry
a people.

Previous to mentioning the situation of the united provinces, I must remark
how very similar their circumstances were to ours. We shall ever find it an
unalterable maxim of princes, who in time of peace keep up a standing force,
however they may call them the protectors of law, the end is to subvert those
laws and render the constitution useless. Such was the mode of conduct of
Phillip the second of Spain, to the low countries, and such the procedure of a
similar character, George the third, of Britain, influenced by as despicable a
minstry. The former, as sir William Temple observes, "thinking it not agreeing
with his greatness," (an army being now in the bowels of their country) "to
consider their discontents, or be limited by their ancient forms of
government," proceeds to despise the one and overturn the other. New courts
judicatory were appointed, new offices established depending absolutely on the
king. Sir Will. Temple's Observations on the United Provinces, Page 21, 23.


What was the consequence? -- could it be supposed a generous people would sit
down tamely, and kiss the rod that lashed them? a different mode of conduct
ensued. The duke of Alva was sent with a powerful army, the very forcible plea
of tyrants, and the most shocking cruelties were committed. Here let humanity
spread her veil, nor let the tender breast heave with anguish at such scenes.
But shocking as they are, they flow as naturally from this cursed engine of
oppression, as beams of light from the sun. For as the same sensible writer
observes, So great antipathy ever appears between citizens and soldiers; while
one pretends to be safe under laws, which the other pretends shall be subject
to his sword and his will.

But terrible as the many executions of their most illustrious patriots
appeared to them, while the land was drenched in its richest blood; -- however
affecting the sight of confiscations, imprisonments, and the numberless
cruelties that attended them, they were not daunted. That God who hates
oppression, and delights in the happiness of his creation, inspired them with
sentiments, that carried them through innumerable hardships, till after having
expended immense treasures and blood for better than threescore years they laid
the foundation of a rich, free and flourishing people: Providence hereby giving
an instructive lesson to posterity in every age, who are contending for all
that is dear and sacred, to pursue the glorious object undaunted; knowing that
as liberty is a plant transplanted from the gardens of heaven, its divine
parent will still cherish it, and in spite of opposition it will flourish, it
will live forever.

Such, my friends, have been the methods used by enterprising men, in former
ages, to carry into effect their ambitious designs, and found their greatness
on the ruins of their country. But in our day, these measures have become
systematical. They are in fact part of the constitution. To take a view of the
different powers in Europe, and compare them with the state of ancient
republics, under great and wise legislators, who seemed to be raised up for the
benefit of the age they lived in, and the admiration of posterity, we must drop
the tear of sensibility at the contrast. Where is the kingdom that does not
groan under the calamities of military tyranny? -- let us pause a while on the
most eminent of them.

In the large Empire of Russia, the effects are glaring. Even the shadow of
Liberty has evanished. Of so great importance is the Military, that a
recruiting Officer can go through their Villages, and pitch upon the ablest of
the Inhabitants as he would choose his Cattle. And even a Father has been
imprisoned in his own house, for the escape of a Child, while by order of the
Officer, his own Sons have been his goalers. Vid. Guthrie's Grammar.


Perhaps there is no Nation in any part of the world, more happy than France,
in every luxury of life. But amid this profusion of plenty, the Farmer exhibits
the most wretched spectacle in nature. Supported by the gleanings of the field,
the fruits of his labor go to the subsistence of the Soldiery. Thus dispirited
and depressed, he contents himself with the refuge of his ground, while after
his greatest exertions, another will reap the fruits of his honest industry.
The most obdurate breast must melt at such scenes, and execrate the effects of
standing Armies.

Look into the situation of Poland. Under the direction of that great Man, John
Sobieslci.
famous for his victories against the Turks, they were brave and virtuous, and
proved the bulwark of Christendom. But under the Saxon line, this spirit, not
suiting their plan of government, was awed by Electoral troops, and totally
decayed. The consequences are now severely experienced by them, and while in
this depressed State they are an object of desire to Turks and Russians, their
Country is a scene of bloodshed and misery.

It is needless to mention England, or the idle farce of an annual Act of
Parliament, for the support of standing Troops, which is nothing but an insult
on the sense of that Nation. The more virtuous among them, if the flame of
liberty has not entirely expired, easily see through the guise, and in the
death of Allen and others, wantonly butchered by a mercenary Soldiery, can too
clearly read the fate of themselves and posterity.

The melancholy part of this subject must give pain to every humane breast.
This is natural. But these scenes more directly affect other nations; and
however we may pity the unhappy sufferers, there is a kind of pleasure we feel
that we ourselves are not immediately interested. And would to God, it had ever
remained so. O my Country! with what heartfelt satisfaction, should I rejoice,
if oppression had never stretched her baleful wings to this once happy clime!
That that liberty which an illustrious set of Men, of whom the world was not
worthy, purchased at so dear a rate, might have descended unimpaired to latest
posterity. But is this the case? Has this scourge of mankind, standing Armies,
never interrupted our prosperity? -- If so, why is this Desk hung with the
sable covering of Death! Why am I surrounded by so many of my fellow-citizens,
who listen to the tale of woe! Yes, my Countrymen, we ourselves are deeply
interested; and this same engine of oppression, which has thrown mighty
Republics from their foundations, has attempted and still continues to spread
the same horrid consequences in America. And in its usual mode of conduct, has
been attended with every species of cruelty, some of them unheard of before;
but which your firmness, under God, has hitherto, and I pray ever may surmount.

The shocking scene of that dreadful night, the fatal effects of which we are
still weeping over, is beyond description. No one perhaps, if it is taken in
every view, that was not a spectator, can conceive it. When I consider the many
insults, abuses and violences, this unhappy Town was exposed to for months
previous to this melancholy tragedy -- and when the tumult of contrary passions
was thus naturally excited, to see a brutal soldiery, scattering promiscuous
death through a defenseless unarmed multitude, till yonder street was crimsoned
with the blood of its Citizens, while a tender Mother, frantic with grief,
pours forth the anguish of her heart over a beloved son, now incapable of any
returns of gratitude, all this exhibits a scene, which the distressed heart may
painfully feel, but which the tongue cannot express. Let the breast then still
continue to beat. These, my friends, are virtuous, generous feelings, and do
honor to humanity. May we ever retain them. May this Institution, sacred to the
memory of our murdered Brethren, be ever carefully preserved. Yes, ye injured
Shades! We will still weep over you, and if any thing can be more soothing, WE
WILL REVENGE YOU.

This glaring specimen of cruelty roused the Citizens, and in convincing colors
displayed the effects of standing Armies in time of peace. But however our
exertions were then successful, however the storm subsided, it was but
temporary. While the Scales of Justice were held in palsied hands, and the most
shocking barbarities were the highest merit, an additional force only was
necessary. That arriving, the mask was thrown off, and a still greater scene of
carnage and destruction, opened in our adjacent villages.

But such proceedings, however alarming at that period, were soon lost in more
dreadful and distressing operations. The Heights of Charlestown too awfully
convinced us of the melancholy truth, and posterity, while with tears of
compassion, they ponder the transactions of that day, must execrate the causes
which produced them. In any situation, the relicts of slaughtered Citizens are
objects of pity, and the sympathizing spectator will ever drop a tear over
them. But there may be instances, when the lesser streams of affection, are
absorbed in a still greater sea of woe. Such are the sentiments that must
strike every breast, when we reflect, ILLUSTRIOUS WARREN! on thy death -- A
death, which whole hecatombs of slaughtered enemies, strowed around thy Corpse,
can never repay. Here, Ye minions of power! Ye who are dead to the calls of
honor and public virtue, are willing to wade to Station, through the blood of
your Brethren, here behold a Spectacle that must harrow your inmost soul. You,
my Countrymen, with the most pleasing sensations, have attentively listened,
while, like us, he was weeping over the unhappy fate of others. You have
kindled into rage, while he has set before you the dangerous nature and
consequences of standing Armies, and prophetically pointed out to you still
greater events. How affecting! That he who could lament the fate of others,
must be himself deplored; -- and that he, who could so feelingly paint the
effects of this horrid measure, must himself fall one of the first sacrifices
to it!

But it is not sufficient to drop a transient tear to the memory of departed
Heroes, or to pay an Eulogy to their characters. The happiness of such Men,
who, after having expired in the arms of Liberty and Virtue, are now sharing
the highest degree of felicity, cannot be increased by our praises: No, my
friends, the best way to express our affection for such great and good Men, is
to rouse and revenge them. To hurl still fiercer bolts of vengeance on an
inhuman Soldiery, who instead of affording the last honors, sacred to the dead,
and which a generous Enemy will ever regard, -- after grinning with hellish
pleasure on the mangled Corpse, which alive could strike terror into their
boldest heart, lodged it in a promiscuous grave; that since they could not
prevent his name and reputation being immortal, his Remains might be hid
forever. -- O Britain! Thou have, and shall still weep tears of blood for this!

Are not such Instances, my Countrymen, very convincing proofs of the fatal
effects of standing Armies, in time of peace. In such a period they originated,
and from the fifth of March 1770, through every degree of violence and
barbarity, to the present day, it is but one connected scene.

After such exhibitions of cruelty and carnage, what can we suppose too brutal,
too infamous for such an army? Can we wonder to see our houses in flames? Our
altars rased to the ground, or converted to a much more horrid use, than the
Jewish temple? It possible they have even exceeded; and the armies of Britain
seem to be held up as a standing evidence, how far the spirit of tyranny and
oppression can operate.

We shudder when the faithful page of history opens to our view the conduct of
armies, flushed with victories, sacking towns, burning villages, and
perpetrating murders, with all the other dreadful concomitants. But if we look
into the conduct of the British army in the Jersies, and some part of the State
of New York, we shall find instances of all these crimes, and perhaps in some
places instances even beyond them. To see the third City in a neighboring
State, wantonly consumed by an enemy, who not having spirit or ability, to meet
us in the field, descend to these little mean methods of exciting error -- To
see the ravages in the Jersies, and the garden of America that wantonly
defaced, -- Does not the blood beat high! -- Do we not press forward to
exterminate such Barbarians from the face of the earth! -- But to mention still
greater scenes of cruelty -- Does not the ear tingle, when it hears the shrieks
of helpless Virgins, dreadful victims to lust and barbarity; while the gray
hairs and expressive groans of an aged parent, witness to his daughter's shame,
plead in vain. Can any thing swell this complicated scene of woe? It can
receive addition. These monsters exceed even the most barbarous nations. With
them the ashes of the dead have ever been sacred. But under the patronage of a
British Tyrant and his General, souffing the tainted gale, they have ransacked
the silent repositories, and the remains of one that was once amiable and
captivating, flung about as food for the birds of the air. Delauncey's Form.
O God where is thy vengeance! O Virtue, Honor, Religion, Humanity, where,
where are ye fled!

These, my Countrymen, are not the flights of fancy, not the dictates of
imagination. They are solid, though very affecting realities. Can we then wish
a reunion with such a people? Can we ever familiarly shake hands with a
nation, who leaping every barrier, are thus wantonly sporting with our
distresses, and bathing themselves in the blood of our countrymen? May America
never retain such mean dastardly sentiments! For my own part, if I may be
indulged, I would entreat, I would conjure, every one, who as a parent feels
for the welfare of his posterity, to imitate the example of the renowned
Carthagenian. (...) about nine years old, was soothing with childish caresses
his Father Hamil^^^ to take him along with him to Spain, whither, after
finishing the war in Africa, be war now about to transport his troops. and was
sacrificing for success in that expedition, he was led by his Father to the
altar, and with his hand on the victim, was bound by this solemn oath, That as
soon as he should have it in his power he would declare himself an enemy to the
Roman People. Livy, b. 21. chapter 1.
Lead your sons, ye fathers, not to the altar of Paganism, and under the
tutelage of some unknown Deity, but to the sacred altar of Freedom; and while
the guardian God of America is witness to the solemn obligation, MAKE THEM
SWEAR that they never will be friends to a Power, who are thus sacrificing
their dearest privileges. Ring in their young ears the dreadful tale of
murders, rapes and massacres. Paint to them the conduct of Britain, as
displayed in her arms in different parts of America, till their young breasts
glow with ardor, and thus early ^^ching the flame of patriotism, they may,
through life, pursue undaunted so glorious an object. Pleased with such an
invocation, the shades of our Fathers, will rejoice over their posterity, and
the Angels of love and purity will look down delighted.

No one, I think, can suppose these thoughts proceed from rage or passion. They
are the cool dictates of my heart. I love my Country; her distresses affect me;
nor from this moment do I ever wish a reconciliation with a Power, whose
prosperity must be founded on my utter destruction.

I have now, my Countrymen, endeavored to exhibit the fatal effects of standing
armies in time of peace; not from abstract reasoning, but as they exist in
fact, and now prevail in our distressed land. Here I would remark, that it is
standing armies in time of peace, and the consequences thence resulting, that
we are now deprecating. Armies in defense of our Country, unjustly invaded, are
necessary, and in the highest sense justifiable. We, my friends, attacked by an
arbritary tyrant, under the sanction of a force, the effects of which, we have
attempted to illustrate, have been obliged to make the last solemn appeal. And
I cannot but feel a pleasing kind of transport, when I see America, undaunted
by the many trying scenes, that have attended her, still baffling the efforts
of the most formidable power in Europe, and exhibiting an instance, unknown in
history. To see an army of veterans, who had fought and conquered in different
quarters of the globe -- headed by a General tutored in the field of War,
illustrious by former victories, and flushed with repeated successes,
threatening, with all the pomp of expression, to spread havoc, desolation and
ruin around him; to see such a Soldiery and such a General, yielding to an
hardy race of men, new to the field of war; while on the one hand it exalts the
character of the latter, convincingly proves the folly of those, who, under
pretense of having a body of troops, bred to war, and ever ready for action,
adopt this dangerous system, in subversion of every principle of lawful
government. Here, if after having depictured scenes of so distressing a nature,
it may not appear too descending, I could not forbear smiling at the British
General and his Troops, who not willing to reflect on their present humiliating
condition, affect the air of arrogant superiority. But Americans have learnt
them, that Men, fighting on the principles of Freedom and Honor, despise the
examples that have been set them by an Enemy; -- and though, in the field, they
can brave every danger in defense of those principles, to a vanquished enemy
they know how to be generous: -- But that this is a generosity not weak and
unmeaning, but founded on just sentiments, and if wantonly preformed upon, will
never interfere with that national justice, which ever ought, and lately has
been properly exerted.

But while, with the warmest gratitude to Heaven, we view our late successes,
and are at a loss to express our acknowledgment to the ILLUSTRIOUS HERO, who
was the instrument, and whose Name, to remotest ages, will be ever dear to
these New England States, let us not forget our situation. There is an Army,
and a very powerful one, still existing in the Heart of America. Methinks the
Reputation of past Successes should animate every inhabitant of America to fly
to Arms; and by one general Exertion utterly expel this last, this only
remaining power of Great Britain on the Continent. Ye, to whom the sacred, the
important System of Government is committed -- Ye Men of Sense and Virtue -- Ye
Patriots, who feel an affection for your Country and Posterity, let me conjure
you to seize the present opportunity, happier than we could ever have expected,
and which once omitted may never be again in our power.

I would not pretend to insinuate, that this is the only point which ought to
be under immediate consideration, by a wise People or their Delegates. But this
I will venture to affirm, that unless this is the governing sentiment, in every
deliberation, every other thing is superfluous. Let us then rise superior to
every private local attachment. As we are embarked on one broad bottom of
universal Freedom, let us attend to this most pressing occasion; an occasion
providentially offered for future Security and Happiness, If a royal army, though
weak in its number, can thus insult us unpunished, the most slender imagination
can easily foresee what must be the effects of a still greater force. I wish
that the present generation, I wish that posterity may not feelingly reproach
our inactivity.

Shall the frequent Calls of our EXALTED GENERAL, who seems to have been raised
up by Heaven, to show to what an height Humanity may soar; who generously
sacrificing affluence and domestic case, wishes to share with you in every
danger and distress, shall his frequent calls be in vain? -- Remember, my
Countrymen, the eyes of the Good and Great, in every Clime, are upon the
present contest. Liberty, disgusted at scenes of cruelty and oppression, has
lest her ancient altars, and is now hovering to fix her last residence in
America. Our exertions have hitherto been great and successful. Let not the
ashes of WARREN, MONTGOMERY, and the illustrious Roll of Heroes who died for
Freedom, reproach our inactivity and want of spirit, in not completing this
grand Superstructure; the Pillars of which have been cemented with the richest
Blood of America. May that same Ardor, which has rendered America famous, still
continue, and looking forward to those happy days of Liberty and Peace, which,
our Posterity shall enjoy, let us exult at the thought, that future
Generations, while they reap the glorious Fruits of our Struggles, will rise up
and call us Blessed.

FINIS.

