SOME NECESSARY REMARKS ON THE EDUCATION OF THE YOUTH in the COUNTRY-PARTS of
this, and the neighboring GOVERNMENTS.
THAT the religious and civil education of our young people is an affair of the
greatest importance, as it not only concerns the happiness of individuals, but
the welfare and prosperity of Society, all are ready to acknowledge; but when
we cast our eyes over the country and consider the little attention and pains
employed therein, we must allow that people either do not speak as they think,
or that what they mean by education, is something else than to qualify their
children to be useful and serviceable in life; and to fit them for eternal
happiness. If the boy be designed for any of the learned professions, inquiry
is made for a master to teach him Latin; but if he be only designed for the
common offices of life, it is thought sufficient that he be taught to read and
write, with a little arithmetic, and that often but very imperfectly; no
matter by whom, but the cheaper the better. Thus it happens that persons, every
way, unqualified, both in learning and morals, are, for the sake of having it
done cheaper, entrusted with the education of children; by which means, the
youth are deprived of learning, and instead of improving in virtue, which ought
to be the main design of instruction, rather become proficients in vice. For,
it is an undoubted truth, confirmed by fatal experience, that children catch
the vices of those with whom they converse, and that impressions made on their
tender minds are deep and lasting. The love we owe to God our great and good
Creator, good will to men, a strict regard to truth; a government of their
appetites and passions, should be, as much as possible, enforced on the youth
The chief aim of instruction pointed out by the Gospel and enforced by the wise
men of every age and nation was the amendment of the heart: The Lacedaemonians
and Persians accounted ingratitude a crime, whoever was ever capable of
forgetting a benefit was looked upon as the enemy of mankind.


If we really wish to see our children grow up in virtue and knowledge, and
qualified to be useful members of Society, the means must be procured, to which
it is to be hoped, that those who have not, as well as those who have children,
would cheerfully contribute, without regard to any immediate advantage, they
are to reap; virtuous persons qualified for so weighty an employment must be
sought for: And in order that this may be done upon a lasting bottom, where the
establishment of a School is necessary, a fund should be raised, which through
the divine blessing, by donations, legacies, etc. may become a lasting
settlement; a lot of ground should be provided, sufficient for a garden,
orchard, grass for a cow, etc. a house, stables, etc. erected thereon: There
are few neighbourhoods, but may, in money from the rich, and materials and
labor from others, contribute so much as will answer this charge; such a
settlement, with a reasonable Salary, will be an encouragement to a sober
person, with a family, who will be likely to spend his life in the service;
such an one, from the experience he will gain, will be much more likely to
answer the good end proposed, than such transient persons as are often
employed. Indeed the illjudged custom which has generally prevailed with the
country people, of hiring a single person, on account of cheapness, and for the
sake of boarding him, amongst themselves, is attended with many inconveniences.
These are frequently persons of no stability, and little principle, who engage
in that service, for a present maintenance, which they are ready to quit, when
ever something more agreeable to their interest or humor offers; so that, they
have as little desire as opportunity, of gaining that necessary experience,
which, nothing will so effectually give, as a serious and steady practice.

It is a most absurd piece of thrift, for the sake of adding 40, or 50 pounds
to a child's fortune, to deprive him of the benefit of a proper education, for
only to consider it in the light of prudence, the child, if well instructed,
will readily save or gain that much more; and, if taught wherein true happiness
consists, he will never repine at the want of that small sum; but to a person
unprincipled in virtue, or corrupted with evil habits, what is 40 or 50 pounds
more or less? Nay, does not daily experience show us that the greatest wealth
often answers little or no other purpose, than to adminster to folly, luxury,
and debauchery; to inflame the passions of the youth, and give a wider range to
their licentiousness.

And, in order that this necessary service should be managed to the best
advantage, a number of persons the best qualified, and able to attend the
service, should be chosen, to take upon them the care and oversight of the
School; to advise and assist the master; and to be especially careful, that the
children of the poor be encouraged to attend, and be admitted, free of cost.
And the masters and overseers are exhorted, and entreated, not to repine or
grudge any labor they may bestow in this good service, beyond what has been
usual; but remember, they are promoting the purposes of our good Creator, whose
will is the happiness of his creatures, who is able and willing to repay even a
cup of cold water given in his name; and the comfort it will in future afford
them to reflect, that they have in some measure, been the happy instruments in
laying the foundation for making the youth serviceable and happy here, and of
promoting their eternal happiness hereafter.

The following advices are submitted to the consideration of those overseers
and Tutors who may be appointed to the care of such Schools.

1st. That in teaching English, particular care should be taken to make
children spell correctly, by exercising them, frequently, in that necessary
branch of their learning.

2d. That endeavors be used to make the Scholars read with proper emphasis and
punctuation, to which purpose it will be also necessary, besides the Bible to
make use of Historical and Religious Authors, of which the School ought to be
furnished with proper setts.

3d. That such parts of Grammar as are applicable to the English tongue, be
taught those boys who are fit for it, in order to make them write properly, but
that they be as little as possible, perplexed with such nice distinctions, as
have no foundation in the nature of our language.

4th. That the Master as often as is convenient make a practice of dictating,
to such Scholars who write tolerably well, some sentence out of some good
Author which they are to write after him; then the Master carefully correct it,
making such Grammatick and Orthographic remarks as are necessary: This the
Scholar must write over in his Book, which being again reviewed by the Master
and the remaining omissions noted, may be copied in the neatest manner on the
opposite page. Some modern Grammarians also propose, that the Tutors give their
scholars some portion of History, etc. expressed in false Orthography, Grammar,
etc. which they with the help of a Dictionary and some general Grammatic Rules
must make out as correct as they can, which after being submitted to the
Tutor's Remarks and Correction, should be neatly copied over in their writing
Books. These methods if carefully pursued will much help their diction; improve
their spelling; teach them to copy correctly; and in some measure supply the
want of Classical Learning

5th. That in writing care be taken to promote a strong free hand, which will
be of most common use, and from which all other hands may be easily formed. And
that the Master be particularly careful to make the pupils sit in right
positions at their writing and that they hold their pen properly, on this their
perfection in writing very much depends.

6th. That in teaching Arithmetic it be recommended to the master to give in
the first place the most plain and practical rules; leaving those that are
abstruce and not generally necessary, to boys of the brightest genius, or
leisure.

7th. That a small, but very plain set of Merchants Account Books, viz. a Day
Book, or Journal and Ledger be provided, just sufficient to make the Scholars
acquainted with the nature of the most plain entries of Debtor and Creditor;
that they not only be made to copy these, in a neat and correct manner, but
that the master use his best endeavors that they be made to understand the
reason of what they are doing.

8th. That no latin be attempted to be taught, unless a School should be
erected solety for that purpose: The teaching that language, in an English
School, infallibly consuming more of the masters time, than can be spared from
his other business; and the few Latin-Scholars must be very indifferently
attended

9th. That some method be thought of for limiting the number of scholars, so
that the master be not over-prest, in some seasons of the year; and that the
poor be properly considered.

That such Rules, or Orders as may be thought necessary, be provided and set up
in some public place in the School; and that the master be enjoined to require
strict obedience to every one of them.

The following Rules of conduct to scholars extracted, from those used in some
of the schools in Philadelphia, are proposed to the consideration of overseers,
and tutors, to be improved and added to, as their experience and situation may
make necessary.

1st. Fail not to be at school precisely at the time appointed; unless good
reason can be assigned to the master.

2d. Be always silent at your studies, so that your voices be not heard, unless
when saying your lessons, or speaking to your master: Hold no discourse with
your school-fellows, during the time of study, unless to ask something relating
to your learning and then in a low voice.

3d. Make all your speeches to your master with due respect; observing
cheerfully his directions, according to your abilities.

4th. Behave yourselves always in a gentle, obliging manner, to your
school-fellows; tenderly affectionate, never provoking one another; contending
nor complaining about frivolous matters; but courteously use kind expressions
one toward the other; observing to make some grateful return for any little
kindness received.

5th. Be not forward to divulge any thing passed in school, nor to mock, or
jeer your school fellows for being corrected; it is unkind, and may happen to
be your own case.

6th. Never tell a lie, or use artful evasions, nor defraud any person, by word
or deed: Swear not at all; nor use the name of God irreverently, or in vain:
Mock not the aged, the lame, deformed or insane. Throw no sticks, stones, dirt,
snowballs, or any other thing at any person, or creature: Revile no person; nor
utter any indecent expressions: Never return any injury or affront; but
forgive, agreeable to the positive injunction given us in the Lord's prayer, To
forgive as we desire to be forgiven, and the Apostle's advice. That we forgive
one another, even as God, for Christ's sake, has forgiven us; but in all things
to the best of your power, behave in a modest, civil, and complaisant manner to
all.

At Home. Before you rise from your beds, observe to look up to your Creator,
offering a mental petition to Him for help and protection, during the course of
the day.

Observe, cheerfully, and readily, to comply with your parent's commands;
always addressing them with honor and respect, remembering the blessing
annexed, in the third commandment, to the duty of honoring your Parents.

Treat your Brothers and Sisters with affection and good manners; and, in like
manner, behave to the meanest Servant; with kindness using the word please,
etc. where proper; that your good example may induce them so to behave to you:
Join not in their idle talk or jesting; but choose the company of persons,
whose conversation is most improving in the best things.

Be not forward to sit down at table before your elders; when seated be not
eager to fall to your victuals, like the brute beast; but first make a solemn
pause, endeavoring to retire in your minds, in thankfulness to the supreme
giver of them. Don't offer to carve or ask for yourselves, but wait till you are
served; find no fault with your food; but having eaten moderately, rise from
table, without noise, unless desired to stay.

At places of Worship, Observe to be present at the times appointed, entering
the place soberly, so as not to disturb the meditations of those that are met:
Sit in a decent composure of body and mind, putting up your petitions to your
heavenly Father, with an humble reverend disposition; requesting to be enabled
to offer him spiritual and acceptable worship. When worship is over rise not up
in a hurry, nor be impatient to be gone, but respectfully pass along without
pressing, and return decently home.


