Serious Reflections affectionately recommended to the Well-disposed of every
Religious Denomination, particularly those who Mourn and Lament on account of
the Calamities which attend us; and the insensibility that so generally
prevails.
IF People had never seen War kindled in a Country and between neighboring
Nations, they could hardly believe that men would be so inattentive to the
dictates of Reason, the tender feelings of humanity and the more sublime nature
and precepts of the Gospel, Mat. v. 44. Love your Enemies, bless them that
curse you: do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully
use you and persecute you: that ye may be the Children of your Father which is
in Heaven
as deliberately to engage in battle for the destruction of each other. That
loaded as men are with their own frailties and miseries, they should
industriously labor to increase them and contrive new ways for the ruin and
slaughter one of another. They have but a short and uncertain time to live, a
work of the greatest importance to perform, Philip. ii 12. Work out your (...)
Salvation with (...).
and yet will not suffer those awful moments to pass away in peace. Wars, says
an ancient Father, are Spectacles by which the devil does cruelly sport with
Mankind. And Bishop Tailor well observes. That as contrary as cruelty is to
mercy; tyranny to charity, so is War and Bloodshed to the Meekness and
Gentleness of the Christian Religion. The apostle James has clearly answered
the question with respect to the occasion of War chap. iv. 1. From whence come
Wars and Fightings amongst you? come they not hence even of your lusts? How
extreme then must be that corruption which produces so desperate an effect. It
is now several years since the hand of God has been lifted up in Judgment;
great distress and sufferings have and still do attend us; multitudes of our
Fellow-men have been hurried into eternity, and yet the People do not appear
humbled nor careful to inquire into the true cause. Sinners are chastised, and
yet remain unconverted. Let us look no where else but in ourselves for the
cause of our miseries; our Sins are our greatest Enemies and draw upon us all
the rest. We fight against those we esteem our Foes, and instead of laboring
to overcome our sins, we basely, yield to their temptations,

It is the Sighing and Supplications of the contrite hearted which God will
hear, and when his anger is passed over, He will remember his former mercies.
Let us, beloved Brethren, not forget our profession as Christians: nor the
blessing promised by Christ to the Peacemakers, Mat. v. 9. Blessed are the
Peacemakers; for they shall be called the Children of God.
but let all sincerely address our common Father for ability to pray, not for
the destruction of our Enemies, who are still our Brethren, the Purchase of our
blessed Redeemer's blood; but for an agreement with them. Not in order to
indulge our passions in the Gain and Delights of this vain World, and forget
that we are called to be as Pilgrims and Strangers in it; but that we may be
more composed and better fitted for the kingdom of God; that in the
dispensations of his good pleasure he may grant us such a Peace, as may prove
to the consolation of the Church, as well as the Nation, and be on earth an
image of the tranquillity of Heaven. Our Savior enjoins us to pray to our
Father, Mat vi. 10. Thy will be done on Earth, as it is done in Heaven --
forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our Debtors.


A B

AN eminent servant of GOD, who had known deliverance from the dark powers, and
experimentally felt the powers of the world to come, a few hours before his
death, expressed himself in the following words: There is a spirit which I
feel, that delights to do no evil, nor to revenge any wrong, but delights to
endure all things, in hopes to enjoy its own in the end; its hope is to outlive
all wrath and contention, and to weary out all exaltation and cruelty or
whatsoever is of a nature contrary to itself; it sees to the end of all
temptations; as it bears no evil itself, so it conceives none in thought to any
other; for its ground and spring is the mercies and forgiveness of God; its
crown is meekness; its life is everlasting love unfeigned, and takes its
kingdom with entreaty, and not with contention, and keeps it by lowliness of
mind; in God alone it can rejoice, though none else regard it, or can own its
life; it is conceived in sorrow, and brought forth without any to pity it, nor
does it murmur at grief and oppression; it never rejoiceth but through
sufferings, for with the world's joy it is murdered. I found it alone, being
forsaken: I have fellowship therein with those that lived in (...) and desolate
places of the earth, who through (...).


