SIX POLITICAL DISCOURSES FOUNDED ON THE SCRIPTURE.

BY HUGH MONTGOMERY BRACKENRIDGE.

War, fierce war shall break their forces;
Nerves of tory men shall fail,
Seeing How, with altered courses,
Bending to the western gale.
LANCASTER: PRINTED BY FRANCIS BAILEY.

PREFACE.
LET not the word scripture, in the title page, prevent that general attention
to these discourses which they might otherwise receive. I know it is natural
for us to be cautious in looking into any thing that borders on religion, lest
we should meet with some sly insinuation like a bayonet-point to dart upon the
conscience.

For this reason, in the very patibulo, or entrance, I am careful to assure my
countrymen, that these discourses are what they pretend to be, of a nature
chiefly political.

They were written at different times, since the opening of the last campaign
in Pennsylvania, and were intended for the military. The three first were
delivered on some occasions.

If they shall now more generally serve the great cause in which we are
engaged, it will be an ample recompense for the time spent in transcribing them
for publication

THE AUTHOR.

DISCOURSE
I. THE bloody Vestiges of Tyranny. Woe unto them, for they have gone in the
way of Cain. Jude i, 11. II. The Nature and the Artifice of Toryism. -- And ran
greedily after the error of Balaam, for reward. Jude i, 11. III. The Fate of
Tyranny, and Toryism. -- And perished in the gainsaying of Core. Jude i, 11.
IV. The Agency of Heaven, in the Cause of Liberty. And there was war in heaven.
Rev. xii, 7. V. The Blasphemy of Gasconade and Self-Dependence in a certain
General. And there was given unto him a mouth, speaking great things and
blasphemies. Rev. xiii, 5. VI. The great Wrath of the Tyrant, and the Cause of
it. Having great wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time. Rev.
xii, 12.
THE BLOODY VESTIGES OF TYRANNY.
Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain --

Jude, i, 11.
IT is very usual in any language, when we mean to draw a character to the
highest point, to compare it with one already known, and confessedly eminent in
virtue, or in vice. This is the ground, of the expression in this place, woe
unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain --

Cain, we know, was a bloody-minded man. The fierceness of his nature, did very
early show itself, in great vehemence of passion, and in the sullen gloom of a
reserved countenance. He was very wroth, and his countenance was fallen. No
wonder, for he was indeed a very bloody man. He shed the first blood that ever
crimsoned the earth. He bathed his hands in a brother's blood. These two
circumstances of his guilt, place him first, in the line of murderers. He is so
infamously famous, that when we mean to say of any one, that he is fierce and
savage to a high degree, we may strike off his character at once, by saying, he
has gone in the way of Cain.

I shall not detain you, with a longer introduction, but proceed to say,

I. What it is to go in the way of Cain.

II. Who are they, who have most eminently, gone in the way of Cain.

Lastly, conclude with something in the spirit of these words -- Woe unto them,
for they have gone in the way of Cain.

I. What it is to go in the way of Cain. It is to give indulgence, in the least
unlawful measure, to the anger and resentment of the breast; for whosoever hates
his brother, is a murderer. The evil principles of envy, malice, and ambition,
like so many younger Cains, lurk within the breast, and wait only for an
opportunity to show themselves in action. The evil principles of envy, and
ambition, lead to murder; for they seek to end in the death of those, who stand
in the way of the proposed rise, and strike not readily to their superior
greatness. Hence it is, that the tyrant makes war upon his own, or the
neighboring nation, because they refuse to live precariously by his bounty,
and to hold their property, liberty, and life, entirely at his disposal. It is
the nature of the wicked heart of man, to desire absolute dominion. Let a
wicked man be made a magistrate, and he will desire to be supreme in office;
and if supreme by the appointment of his countrymen, he will aspire to
unrestrained authority; and in order to acquire despotic rule, he will not
hesitate to shed the blood of kinsmen, friends and fellow-citizens. This is to
go in the way of Cain -- To shed blood like him, and to take the same character
upon the earth -- But I am to say,

II. Who are they who have most eminently gone in the way of Cain. I need not
tell you, that such is the degeneracy of human nature, that we all, some time
or other, have gone lengths in the way of Cain. The rich man hates him that is
richer than himself, because he is unwilling that any one should be equal or
superior to him, in the same line of eminence. The learned for the same reason,
hates him that is more learned still, and the candidate for office, hates the
brother candidate. A temper of this cast, is not so rare, as men unattentive to
themselves and to others, may suppose it. What man is there among us, who is
not conscious to himself, of having too much indulged the passion of resentment
against a brother, from some improper cause and principle? What man is there
among us who has not found in himself a sentiment of some revenge against a
brother, because he had not submitted to him in a dispute in conversation, or
in a competition for a magistracy, or place of public trust and appointment of
some kind or other? Every man has his ambition, and in the frustration of this
particular hope, by the competition of a rival, he is vulnerable. The lady
envies dress, precedence, and degrees of honor in the sphere peculiar to
herself. The gentleman is troubled at the mention of superior fame, in wealth,
wit, learning, or honor in some other way. Envy, malice, hatred and revenge
may be found in some degree, at some time or other, in almost every breast. We
have therefore all proceeded frequently too much, in the way of Cain. -- But,

Who are they who have most eminently gone, in the way of Cain? From the day
that Cain slew Abel, to the present hour, there have been many, who have gone
in the same path of blood, concerning whom history is silent. One half the
wickedness mankind is buried in oblivion. From the day of Cain to the deluge,
we have particularly, the name but of one man, who shed human blood. Lamech, by
his own confession, slew a man to his wounding, and a young man to his hurt;
and with such circumstance of aggravation, that in his own judgment, he had
deserved a punishment seventy-fold greater than the punishment of Cain. In this
long period we have the name but of Lamech on record, though, no doubt, there
were many more who shed the blood of man. The earth at this time was filled
with violence -- with contention, with havoc, with war and bloodshed in every
place. Many an unjust tyrant sought dominion, and obtained it by the death of
thousands. Such was the scene of things before the flood: But by and by, the
sacred history, more and more unfolds itself, and we begin to see many, very
many, to take the character of Cain upon the earth. Nimrod first began to be a
mighty one; that is, as we may conjecture, one who first at the head of a small
band made himself famous, but shortly dared to usurp dominion over others, that
were not willing to allow it. But as we have nothing more explicit concerning
him, I pass him by, and come down to a more remarkable personage, even Pharaoh
king of Egypt, who went with hasty steps, and to a great length in the way of
Cain. I might say a great deal of this bloody man, and set in high colors, the
complexion of his crime, who to the slavery of the father, added the infant
son's death. But I leave this instance in my view, and likewise all that
happened to the chosen people, under the tyrants, that made war upon them,
after their settlement in the promised land. I leave behind me the cruelty of
many of their own kings, and in particular the bloody tragedy of Ahab, who took
the life of Naboth, for the sake of the poor man's vineyard, upon which he had
fixed his covetous desire. I leave behind me the inroad of the Syrians, and all
that the Chaldean monarch did, when he transplanted the ten tribes from their
own land, to a distant country. I come down to profane history, and there I
likewise leave behind me, all that is told us of the mighty captains and
conquerers of ancient time -- the Alexanders -- the Caesar's -- the Jengischans
-- the Tamarlanes. I leave behind me, all that is related of the Hun, the
Vandal, or the Goth, and all the cruel, persecuting, bloody princes, and people
in more modern times, when Europe floated as one sea of blood. I pass them by,
and hasten on, for I have an object of greater wickedness in view -- an object
of such accomplished fraud, perfidy, and murder, that every one heretofore
mentioned, is lost and disappears. I mean him of England -- the fierce, cruel,
unrelenting, and bloody king of Britain. What has this tyrant done? What has he
not done?

He meditated with himself in cold blood, and before he had the least
foundation of resentment, the enslaving of this rising country. He could view
without a tear, and without one check of conscience, this early land, bound in
the chains of servitude, which he forged for it. This was the prospect, which
he had painted to his own imagination. It was this which he endeavored to
accomplish, by the insiduous, and as he hoped insensible gradation of a slow
approach, in bribery, and flattering promises to vain persons, and then by
distant acts of parliament, that did not seem immediately to involve the loss
of freedom, but did by sure steps lead to (...) Those that are most skilful in
the art of po^^oning, make use of a slow bane, which wastes the system
gradually, and is not discernable in its operation, from a natural disease.
Such was the first attempt of the king of Britain. But when it failed him to
accomplish our destruction by this, which might be called a sap, with what
composure did did he determine with himself, to drench with slaughter, and
imbrue the continent in blood. With what continued and unbroken obstinacy, has
he persevered in the design. Let the streets of Boston, and the bloody fifth of
March, be witness of his cruelty, when several lovely and unresisting youths
fell by the hands of the bloody Preston, who acted the savage pleasure, of his
still more savage master. Let the streets that were wet with this blood, and
drank it not, for the blood ran down upon the stones. -- Let the streets that
were wet, and ran down with this blood, speak loud of it, and cry to heaven for
a day of vengeance. Let the town of Boston be witness to their cruelty. -- The
town of Boston with the cries of infants, and the groans of distressed mothers,
detained from their relatives and husbands, by the perfidy of Gage, in
violation of his plighted faith. Let the heights of Boston, naked of the sister
town, which stood upon them, be witness of the cruelty of Britain. Let these
call to mind, and show the graves of the brave men, who fell fighting
gallantly, for the noble cause of freedom. Let these be witness to the tyranny,
and at the same time, some part of the punishment of Britain; for the heroes
saw themselves revenged, and slept not in death, until fifteen hundred of the
foe, lay vanquished on the soil. Let the heights of Canada, and the environs of
Quebec, call to mind, and publish the bloody vestiges of tyranny, in that
unhappy country. Like the heights of Gilboa, let them be ever recollected, for
there the blood of a Montgomery flowed upon the plain. Like the blood of Abel,
it shall cry from the hostile ground, and God shall require it of the George of
England, as he required the like blood of Cain, saying, where is my Montgomery,
who once drew his sword in thy defense, before these very walls -- who
continued faithful, until the hand of tyranny was stretched to destroy? From
the heights of Canada, to the distant barrier of Fort Sullivan, let the
intermediate states, give in remembrance, to remotest times, what they have
suffered, from the Hessian ravisher, and from the inroad of the cruel
Englishman, wasting their plantations. Let the Jersey state be witness to their
vestiges. Let the blood of Hasler, on the plain of Princeton, cry aloud to God
for a day of retribution. Let the fourteen wounds of Mercer, with the
bayonet-point, on the same victorious eminence, open their dumb mouths afresh,
and cry aloud for justice.

But omitting those who fell in the field of battle, let the unhappy prisoners
of the states declare what they have suffered from the tyrant. -- Let the
prisoners of Fort Washington, relate the hunger, cold, and every shape of
misery to which they were consigned. Sick, emaciated, dying, let them tell, if
by their last breath, they can give some faint account of it, How for many days
they tasted not food, until sharp famine began to prey upon their vitals, and
destroy the love of life. -- How for many months they were detained, in the
wintry and inclement season of the year, comfortless, in cold rooms, and
without fire, until the blood of the body lost its motion in the veins. Let
them tell the quality and pernicious taste, of that unwholesome food, which was
served to them, and intended for their death. This let those who suffered
speak; but we can testify, what was the appearance and lamentable state, of the
meagre, faint and heart-dejected few, who for a time survived the usage, and at
length to save some pretense of an exchange, were dismissed from the fangs of
such barbarity. We saw them -- oh spectacle of horror and commiseration! the
legs swollen, and from the ancle to the knee, of an equal shape -- the belly
contracted to the ribs -- the eye sunk, and hid within the head -- the visage
narrow -- the cheeks fallen to the bone -- the voice shrill, feeble, and not to
be distinctly heard -- the dress ragged and scarcely hanging on the body. Ask
one of these, what became of his companion, whom we see not? He died the first
week partly with hunger and partly with the cold. He recommended his wife, and
infant children, to God, and his death to be revenged by his country. What
became of another whom we see not? He died the second week on board the ships,
by the badness, and, as we suppose, poison of the food, which was served to us.
He hoped that the God of heaven and the freemen of his country would call the
tyrant to account for this. What became of another known to us, but whom we see
not now amongst you? He died the third, the fourth, the fifth, or the sixth
week of our captivity. He, with twenty more, was found dead, one morning,
amongst our feet. They had perished with cold, being without covering in the
night. Many, very many perished every day. The carriage for the dead, came,
every morning, to the door. From twenty-five or twenty-seven hundred, we are
now reduced to twelve, and of the twelve hundred that were suffered to depart,
not perhaps one hundred worn out with sickness, which cold and famine had
produced, are now alive.

Thus we see, great has been the cruelty of this infernal tyrant; but to add to
this, let the prisoners taken by his pirates on the sea, be witness of his
horrid depredation. Let the prisoners sent by him to India, and the burning
islands of the east, be witness of his inhumanity. There has he purposed to
send -- There has he sent our brethren and our fellow soldiers in the common
cause. There has he sent them, distant far, and hopeless from their native
land, to antichristian settlements and paganish domains. There has he sent our
countrymen, beyond those settlements, and solitary streams, at which the
captive Hebrew sat, and hung his harp upon the willow-tree; for music suited
not in such distress. There many a poor American may sit this day, forlorn, and
deeply melancholy, in a distant clime. There may they sit, far on the Cape of
Comorin, or on the Malabar or Coromandel shore, looking westward over the main,
to the setting sun, where their native country lies. There may they sit and
look in vain; for the tyrant has sentenced them, though fairly prisoners in
war, to this unpitied state. This has he done, and this has he purposed to
do, while we have treated those of the enemy, who by the chance of war, have
fallen into our hands, with every exercise of tenderness, compassion, and
humanity. This we have done, but as for them, they have gone in the way of Cain.

This has come more immediately in later instances before our eyes. Their sad
cruelties are now transacted on our own plains. They have landed -- they have
traveled through a part of the adjacent country -- they have burned
dwelling-houses -- they have destroyed provision and the means of life -- they
have tortured for money, those whom they suspected of possessing it -- they
have driven the peaceful inhabitants from their places of abode -- they have
violated the chastity of women who fell into their hands -- they are bending on
and breathing slaughter to the whole state. Pennsylvania.
They meditate destruction, at the risk of their own lives. It is their
determination to destroy or to perish. Rather than suffer us to live, they will
cease to live themselves. Can any thing be more diabolical -- more strongly
marked infernal -- more in the spirit of the firstborn Cain?

I conclude, with something in the spirit of the words; woe unto them, for they
have gone in the way of Cain. In the language of a soldier, too often and very
iniquitously used, it might be said damn them; but such expression is not to be
commended. Let our resentment be levelled against their practice, and let our
execution be stayed on their bodies, but let us spare the soul. Let us wish
them spiritual happiness; but let every thought and exercise of mind draw forth
it self against their conduct. Let us endeavor to conceive with strength the
baseness of their crime; and let us speak to others what we have conceived, so
that we may fix the detestation of it beyond a possibility to be erased This is
laudable, for a just and honest indignation against any vice or evil practice,
is an evidence of virtue. This is necessary, for we are too apt to lose our
hatred of evil, from a familiarity and acquaintance with it. Hence it is that
they who are once enslaved, do very seldom exert themselves, to shake off the
bondage. It is in this as it is said to be in the charm of a serpent -- We fall
in love with that which ought to be the object of our hate, as it is the
instrument of our destruction. It is therefore necessary to beget, increase,
and keep alive an aversion from it -- To inkindle our resentment, not by curses
and indecent language, but by sensible remonstrances to our selves and with
each other. Let it be woven in our daily conversation; woe unto them for they
have intended to enslave us -- They have intended to subjugate us to their
empire -- To make us hewers of wood, and drawers of water, and in every base
employment, vassals to their despotic power. By this they have intended to
prevent the growth of every art and science in this country; for without
freedom, learning shall decay and no art can flourish. In the destruction of
our freedom, they have intended the eradication of every private virtue; for
when the soul is unbraced and enervated by the poison of a base subjection,
nothing generous or noble can be expected from it. It is a sentiment as old as
the poet Homer -- For Jove decreed it certain, that the day
Which makes a man a slave, takes half his worth away.


Woe unto them, for they have rejected the frequency and humility of our
petitions. They have rejected them with a fierce disdain. They have been deaf
to all entreaty, and the softest words of soft expostulation. They have
pursued, without remorse, the dire intention to destroy us. They have pursued
it in a cruel manner. They have wared with a rage unknown to civilized nations.
They have mangled the bodies of our heroes, on the field of battle. They have
defaced our colleges, and schools of learning. They have burned houses of
religious worship. They have stabbed, and shed the blood of an unarmed and
supplicating clergyman. This they have done to persons of the same language and
religion with themselves. Woe unto them, for they have shed a brothers blood.
They have gone in the way of Cain.

Let us be careful to recollect, and commemorate their conduct. Let every class
of men join to execrate the tyrant, and the tyranny; and to rank the George of
England with the Cains, and the murderers of Mankind. Let fathers teach their
sons the degenerate nature, and the name of Englishmen. let mothers still with
this the children on the breast, and make the name a bugbear. In thought, in
word, let indignation have a place; but chiefly in our actions, let strong
resentment show itself. Let the aged father send his son to battle, with
cheerfulness and resignation. Let the wife permit her husband, and perplex him
not with womanish exclamation, or with tears. Let the soldier in the field, and
to such I principally address myself -- Let the soldier in the field behave
with fortitude. Let him forget the effeminacy of a tender and luxurious life.
Let him summon up the blood -- give indignation to the visage, and let the
spirit of resentment flash from the enraged eye. Let him, in obedience to his
orders, show himself steady -- in execution of them prompt -- in every
enterprise undaunted. Let the arm be stretched with vigor, and give full
revenge its scope. Duty, honor, and the love of virtue calls to battle. A
bleeding and a ravaged country calls to battle. The wounded soldier, and the
dying hero calls to battle. The voice of the brigades At Brandywine.
so lately injured by superior numbers, calls to battle. The happiness and
glory of the rising generations calls to battle. Let every man give audience to
the voice. Let every man become a soldier. Let every soldier acquit himself as
valiant. Let him determine victory or death. Let him be of the mind to fight
from hill to hill, from vale to vale, and on every plain, until the enemy is
driven back, and forced to depart -- until the tyrant shall give up his claim,
and be obliged to confess, that free men, that Americans are not to be subdued.

THE NATURE AND THE ARTIFICE OF TORYISM.
-- And ran greedily after the error of Balaam, for reward.

Jude i, 11.
ONE remarkable character, recorded in the sacred history, is that of Cain, who
through envy of the accepted sacrifice, shed his brother's blood. Another, not a
whit behind him, in malignity of disposition, is Balaam, the son of Beor, who
loved the wages of unrighteousness. If it may be said of the fierce tyrant and
his bloody soldiery, that they have gone in the way of Cain; with no less
propriety, it may be said of a certain class amongst ourselves, that they have
ran greedily after the error of Balaam, for reward.

This will abundantly appear, if we consider in a few words,

1. What was the error of Balaam.

2. Who are they who have ran most greedily, according to the same error.

Lastly, what is the reward, which they have in view, as the ground of this
pernicious conduct.

1. What was the error of Balaam? In order to illustrate this, it will be
necessary to say a little of his birth, education, character and story. We have
reason to believe he was of the family of Shem; for he was of Aram so called,
as is most probable, from Aram, the son of Shem, who first settled in that
country. If so, he was collaterally related to the Israelites; for these, by
Abraham, the patriarch, were descended from Arphaxad, who was likewise the son
of Shem. Uz was the eldest son of Aram, and gave name to a district of country,
washed by the Euphrates, and bordering upon Aram. Job lived in the land of Uz,
and was probably of his posterity. Job and Balaam, therefore, may have been
related in some degrees of consanguinity. They lived, it is probable, nearly
about the same period; for Moses, a few years before this time, is supposed to
have written the book of Job. The country of Midian, where Moses kept the flock
of Jethro, is not so far distant from the land of Uz, where Job lived, but that
he might be well acquainted with the sufferings of this good man, which for the
support of the Hebrews in affliction, he may have drawn up in dramatic
narrative, as we now have it in the sacred canon.

Be these particulars as they may, with respect to the family of Balaam, the
matter is more certain relative to his education. He was brought up, no doubt,
in the knowledge of the true God; for the church was continued in the family of
Shem; and though from him it spread itself principally in the line of Abraham,
yet the other branches were not left wholly destitute of saving light. Job had
the kowledge of the true God, and the ceremonies of his worship pure and
unmixed with the superstition of the neighboring nations. He was acquainted
with the sacred history, by tradition, as is most probable, from Adam, Seth,
Noah and the other aged fathers of antiquity. This appears from that
expression: "If I have hid my iniquity in my bosom, or covered my transgression
like Adam." Balaam, who, as we have said, was co-temporary with Job, enjoyed
the same opportunities of information, handed down in the same family. The
knowledge of the true God was not yet wholly lost in that eastern country. It
was not wholly lost, many ages after, at the coming of our Savior; for it was
from Mesopotamia, a district bordering to this, and touching the Euphrates,
that the wise men came, who had seen his star in the east -- The very star of
which Balaam had prophesied, as about to arise out of Juda. This star was
prefigurative of the Messiah; and it argues some knowledge of Christ about to
come, that these men paid attention to it.

With regard to the particular character of this so celebrated and
extraordinary person, there is a great variety of judgments and conjectures.
Some suppose him to have been a necromancer, and that by his skill in magic he
was able to do wonders. They think it probable that he had some smaller devil,
or familiar spirit, to wait upon him, and acquaint him with contingencies; so
that it was no great difficulty for him, to prognosticate the fate and issue of
any undertaking. I am of opinion that were it even so, that he had formed an
intimacy with the devil, yet it would have availed him very little toward the
knowledge of a future circumstance; for I am disposed to believe that satan
cannot see an inch before his nose into futurity, more than other people. It is
therefore to me undoubtedly established, that Balaam was a prophet of the true
God, and had his inspiration from the source that knows time, and chance, and
all things. Yet I do not mean to say that he was a good and pious person. The
contrary, is for himself, unhappy man! but too plainly evident; for though his
language was sometimes that of orthodox religion, yet his conduct was, in many
places, very much its opposite. These words are very good, and savor of
devotion. "I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord to do less or more;" yet it
is evident from the particulars of his story, that it was not because the love
and fear of God restrained him, but because in this case he was denied the gift
and spirit of prophesy.

His story is as follows. The fame of one so eminent and singular in the world,
had penetrated to the neighboring countries. He had, in several instances
foretold the good or bad about to come to individuals, and so was thought of by
the multitude, as one who must have had some hand in the good or bad which had
befallen agreeable to his prediction. The notion of a spell, a charm, or a
enchantment, is of very early origin. The king of Moab had heard of him and of
his power in this capacity; and as he was at that time exceedingly uneasy by
reason of the Israelitish nation, which in their journey through the
wilderness, had encamped upon his border, he casts about for some expedient to
support himself against them. He bethinks him of the prophet who was said to
have some admirable power upon the estates of men, and on the human mind and
body. He sends a deputation of his wisest princes, in company with the senators
of Midian. The embassy was flattering, and the message not less so, for says
the prince "I wot that he whom thou blessedst, is blessed; and he whom thou
cursedst, is cursed." Yet notwithstanding this insinuating language, and the
promise of a rich reward, the prophet is obliged to confess that they solicit
him in vain; for that it was not in his power to do them any service. An
embassy more honorable, waits on him a second time. His answer is of equal
import; but withal he bids them stay with him that night; and in the morning he
should more distinctly know, what he could do for them. No doubt, he was very
earnest in his supplication, that it might be granted him, to do the king this
favor. The hope of the preferment, and reward in hard money, for he would take
no other, was a great incentive to his importunity. We may believe, he prayed
by his bedside, more heartily, this evening, for the gold, than he had prayed,
at any other time, for grace. "If the men come to call thee, rise up and go
with them." The hasty prophet catches at the appearance of permission; and does
not wait, agreeable to the divine command, until the men had come to call him.
He is up betimes, and has his ass saddled at the door, and is ready to set out
upon his journey, probably before the strangers had got out of bed. It was on
account of this such haste and forwardness to go, that the anger of the Lord
was so greatly kindled; and the ass opening her mouth miraculously in the way,
forbade his madness. I do not mean to give you circumstancially the whole
particulars of this incident. It will be equally unnecessary to dwell upon the
rite and ceremony of his offering sacrifice, which, it is possible, had
something magical and necromantic in it; for it is said on one occasion, that
he went not to seek enchantments, as at other times; that is to offer
sacrifice, with seven altars, and seven victims on every altar; or with other
rites which he had used before. Let it be sufficient to observe, that he seems
to have had some hope, by this means to prevail with God to put a (...) his
mouth, against this people; for it is elsewhere said, "I would not hearken to
Balaam."

What this wicked person could not do, as a prophet commissioned by God, he
endeavors to accomplish by human artifice and stratagem. He gives advice. The
Jewish people, by the courtesy and arts of Midianitish women, are drawn in to
sin. For this, as it was sagaciously expected by Balaam, who had obtained some
knowledge of their law; the wrath of God came upon them, and there fell in one
day, twenty and four thousand. After Balaam had offered sacrifice, it appears
that he returned to his home. From thence, it is evident that he came again,
with a view, most probably, to give farther counsel and assistance; for in the
slaughter of the Midianites, he is found among them, and cut to pieces by the
sword.

Thus we see what was the error of Balaam. It was covetousness. It was the
basest avarice. For the sake of a small increase of wealth, by the favor of a
heathen prince, he was disposed in his heart, to pronounce a curse on the
people whom God had peculiarly chosen -- a people who had done him no injury,
and with whom he had no quarrel -- a people of the same origin, and of the same
religion with himself. He was disposed in his heart to pronounce a curse on
this people, though he knew them to have lately suffered from severest bondage;
and to have waded through a thousand difficulties, in emerging from this
bondage. They had braved the threats of Pharaoh. They had encountered the
solitude and famine of the desert. They had penetrated through the wilderness.
They had waged war with savage kings. They had overcome them; and were now
advancing on, to take possession of that country, which was originally their
right, and which God had laid out for their inheritance. He was disposed in his
heart, to pronounce a curse on this people; and if he did not actually,
pronounce it, it was because God prevented him, and turned his curse into a
blessing. He is forced to cry out, in the language of prophetic vision, "Surely
there is no enchantment against Jacob; nor is there any divination against
Israel" -- Against Israel, whose camp was then in view; and whose tents were
spread along the valleys. This was the error of Balaam. I come to say,

II. Who are they who have ran most greedily, after or according to the same
error. I might show that all are naturally too much of such ungodly
disposition. I might prove it plain, that many who call themselves protestants
and good whigs, are greatly Balaamites at heart. They consult their own vain
appetite for wealth and honor, more than the will of the most high, and the
general good of men. How else is it, that we hear of so much squabbling for
election among competitors for trust and office? How else is it, that many who
have been advanced to honor, civil and military, do sometimes threaten
resignation, from a chagrin, because of inattention to their judgment; or from
a pique and jealousy of rank and place. This might be ground of declamation;
but I mean in this discourse to point out those who have been most greedily the
followers of Balaam. Dull as I am, like the ass that spoke out in the way, I
would, forbid the madness of this people.

It will not be possible to recount every instance of such abandoned
wickedness, from sacred and profane history. It may suffice to select one more
remarkable from scripture, and so come down to recent characters, well known
and amply distinguished among ourselves. You will recollect the story of the
Edomite, who drew his sword against the priests of Nob, to gratify the malice
of the angry Saul. It is probable he apprehended them to be a vile set of
Presbyterians. Be this as it will, he drew his sword against them; and from the
same motive with that which operated on Balaam. -- A desire of favor and
reward from a base prince. He dared to wage war with heaven, in order to obtain
the favor of an earthly master. He ran in the error of Balaam.

From the story of the Edomite, let me call your attention to a certain class
of men, amongst ourselves, who have ran greedily, after or according to the
same error. This people have been long known by the name of Tories -- A name
originally applied in Ireland, to robbers on the highway -- afterward to the
passive-obedient and non-resistant men in England, who had taken part with the
second Charles. For as the robber on the highway takes a purse from the unwary
and unarmed traveller; so the abettors of the tyrant endeavored to rob the
nation of its liberty, a more invaluable blessing. The loss of liberty includes
the loss of property, nay a right to life itself, and all that is dear to the
human heart. Such villains were therefore properly enough denominated Tories.
The writers of the past age have given us amply an account of them; but what
need we consult writers for what they have said upon the subject, since there
are such originals amongst ourselves; and we have it in our power to draw from
real life the portrait of many base persons, who have acted in the same
abandoned character. Let us endeavor to review their conduct.

At the commencement of the dispute between Great Britain and the colonies,
they made use of every art to irritate the minds of Englishmen against us. They
represented us as a troublesome and restless people, who were continually
harassing government with our rebellious councils and cabals -- As a rich and
luxurious people, that were in the mean time unwilling to contribute our
proportion, to the support of government. When the declaration had been made,
and the tax was laid upon us, which gave rise to the first remonstrances, they
endeavored, by every art and soft surmise, to sooth us into a lethargic
indolence. The lenity, the mildness, the good intentions of the king were at
one time the subject of their declamation. At another time we had them
perpetually harangueing on the military strength and resistless empire of Great
Britain. To oppose her arms was chimerical; for in the end we must be forced to
submit. Our only way, was to petition very humbly, and by no means to iritate
his Majesty, by seeming to put ourselves in the least posture of defense. When
every petition had been rejected with disdain, and resistance was determined,
what arts did they not make use of to divide our Councils and determinations?
It was a Presbyterian quarrel, and by no means that of the whole continent. The
inhabitants of Boston, doubtless, had it now in contemplation to give
themselves a king, and commence the tyrants of America. Should they unhappily
accomplish this, the hanging of the Quakers must ensue, and the unreserved
destruction of every other denomination of the people called Christians.

When language of this nature became suspicious, and was noted as a mark of
Toryism, a new cant of villainy and nonsense was of necessity adopted. We might
unite -- we might wage war -- but by no means think of independence. A measure
of this nature would be madness; for such were the resources of Great Britain,
that she must devour us, at least in one short campaign. Base and shallow
headed men! not to see that the very reason urged against independence, was of
equal weight against our lifting arms at all. If we had not a prospect of
success, why did we make resistance? And if in our first resistance we had a
prospect of success, how should a state of independent empire take that
prospect from us?

When the declaration of an independent government, through absolute necessity,
had taken place; it gave to many, some plausible pretense of receding from the
association of their countrymen. Many halfway gentlemen, who had endeavored
to steer a middle course, took hold of this occasion, to retire; and plead it
in excuse for that enmity against the common measures, which they had hitherto
entertained in their hearts, but thought not proper to declare. We thank them
for it. We had been heretofore perplexed with them in our committees and
assemblies, pretending friendship; and under this mask stabbing the best
interests of their country. Some of them had placed themselves in the very
councils of the empire; and were plotting mischief, in the bosom of the
Congress. Galloway.


Since their retirement from what we may call public business in this way, they
have not remained idle. They have ceased not to circulate reports, unfavourable
to the state of our affairs. One while the New England men who had been first
in the debate were cowardly, and not to be depended on in battle. At another
time the paper currency in circulation was so great, and of consequence the
debt of the empire so immense, that we could not hope, at any future period, to
be delivered from it. Such base calumnies, and such vain fears were
industriously spread by those, who in the mean time, were retained in the
capacity of spies to our unnatural and cruel enemies. What was there said
amongst us which was not told to the British foe? What was there done which was
not communicated to them? From within our very walls they have held a
correspondence with the forces of the tyrant. They have given them intelligence
of our preparations to oppose them. They have suggested them advice, how, and
where to invade us. They have been guides to our unnatural foes, in their
inroad through the country. They have joined with them in the plunder of the
inhabitans. They have enlisted under the standard of the tyrant, and have drawn
the sword against us.

Thus invariably, from the first of our distress, by secret fraud, or open
violence, they have endeavored our destructon. They have spoken, those of them
who had the understanding to express a word, if by any means they might retard
our measures. They have written, those of them who had the ability to write,
with a view to injure our exertions, and destroy our unanimity. They have
acted, those of them who had the courage to appear in arms, if by any means
they might fasten down that slavery, which they, inglorious mortals, must, in
consequence of our subjugation, be compelled to bear in common with us. What by
speeches full of fear, and cowardice, under the mark of friendship and of
prudent thought, amongst ourselves: what by counsel and advice suggested to our
enemies; and what by assistance openly afforded to them, they have wrought us
much injury. They have ran, after the error of Balaam -- They have ran greedily
-- They have ran with a certain voraciousness of appetite. They have had it in
their hearts to devour men of the same origin, language, and religion with
themselves.

Their ancestors, equally with ours, had experienced the fierce rage of
tyranny, under the Stewart family, on the throne of England. They had fled from
the tyranny of Britain, to seek for shelter in the woods, and more hospitable
deserts of America. Here, we their offspring, had been born, and brought up
together. Here, we had lived friendly, and sociably, many years, in the same
town, in the same village, or by the banks of the same native river. Their
property with ours was equally invaded by the tyrant. The circumstances of our
suffering made the cause common. This, one would have hoped, might have
softened them to some warm thought of sincere affection. There is a certain
tenderness of the spirit in distress, which melts the soul of fellow sufferers
to sympathy, and expels the least idea of envy, or resentment, from the breast.
The greatest enemies on board a vessel, and perishing from land, would cease
from variance, and be friendly to each other. The wildest Indian, in the woods
of North America, attacked by the common enemy, would league himself, and give
assistance to his brothers. The fiercest beast familiarized with a playful
puppy, that trusts itself to his society, would not devour, or prey upon it.
But these men have out-savaged the Indian, and out-tygered the fiercest beast
that roams upon the mountain. They have forgot the fathers of which we are
descended. They remember not the town, or village, in which we drew our breath
together. They call not to mind the school at which we had our common
education. They have thrown aside the tender name of country. They have
rejected the idea of kinsmen and acquaintance. They have bid defiance to the
laws of God, and to all that is held sacred amongst men. They have cursed the
cause in which we are engaged. They have cursed the measures necessary for our
safety. They have ran in the error of Balaam. They have ran, for the same hope
of a base reward. I am to say,

III. What is the reward which they have in view, as the ground of this
pernicious conduct? The favor of the tyrant, is, undoubtedly, the object which
plays upon their fancy. They promise to themselves great felicity, in the
gladsome rays of his royal countenance. In his proclamations from his generals,
and in his speeches from the throne, he will vouchsafe them the heart-chearing
appelation of my loyal subjects. When the war is ended, and each has acted
faithfully his part, he will send for them, and hold them out his hand to kiss,
at St. James's, in Old England. He will give some of them commissions, and
admit them to the honor of serving him, in some capacity about the park, or in
the palace yard. One more eminent among the rest, he may constitute his butler;
and another, he may graciously advance to the office of chief baker. Those of
them, whom he cannot stow away in this manner, he will provide for, in America.
He will give them posts in government. He will reward them for their villainy,
with a number of the best houses, in some of our chief cities. He shall satisfy
their cravings, with two or three of the forfeited plantations. Some of the
more active and leading men amongst them, he will present, with ten or fifteen
thousand acres; and constitute them lords of some little manor, on the banks
of the Delaware or Schuylkil. He will create them dukes, and earls, and
baronets. He will promote them to very great honor, and he will do whatsoever
they shall say unto him. This is what they have in view, as the ground of their
pernicious conduct. Avarice, not conscience, is at the bottom of their work.
Avarice has corroded, and eat out the soul of every tory. The soul of each is
become degenerate, and, for every good purpose, useless. It is like a sword
rusted in the scabbard, and cannot be drawn forth to any thing generous or
noble. It is like the worm in the grave, and feeds upon the marrow bones of men.

If then, to be a tory is so wicked and detestable a character, let us be
careful to avoid that which has the least appearance, or resemblance of it. Who
is there among us disposed to hold back, when properly called upon to draw his
sword in our defense? That man is a tory, though not in the same degree with
him who draws the sword against us. Non-resistance to the tyrant, is a species
of submission. Who is there among us, who by unnecessary hesitation to comply
with the injunctions of the legislature of his state, weakens the hands of
government, and hinders the course of public order? That man is a tory though
he know it not, and may not confess it. Who is there among us, who by a busy
competition at election, consults his own vain ambition, and obtains by
flattery, and fair speeches, that place to which a person better qualified,
might have been otherwise appointed? That man is a tory, and ought to be ranked
with them. Who is there among us, who by envious and ill-grounded stories,
against those in office, endeavors to obstruct the proper course and success
of the common measures? That man has something of the tory in him.

If there is any man among us, who claims the reputation of a true whig, let
him cultivate such general philanthropy, and benevolence of spirit, that he
shall easily prefer the good of the whole, to his particular honor and
preferment. That Spartan was a true whig, who having stood candidate at an
election, and finding himself out-voted by three hundred of his fellow
citizens, came home contentedly; and told his little family, with pleasure,
that he was glad to find, there were three hundred men in Sparta, better than
himself.

But in the last place; if toryism is so much to be dreaded, and so much to be
abhorred, let us strain every nerve to disappoint its purposes, and eradicate
it from the continent. What? Shall the day come when a base tory shall say to
the honest husbandman, begone -- this field is mine: the king has given me a
title to it. What? Shall he call that field his own, which is yet wet with the
noble blood of your countrymen? Shall he possess that very soil where your
father, or your brother, has contended bravely, and perhaps lost his life?
Shall he triumph, and lead his evening dance, on the very ground where the hero
fell? May God avert such misfortune; and under his almighty providence, may our
best endeavors be exerted, to prevent the dire and unhallowed curse. May we
use the means, in the usual course of providence, conducive to this end --
Skill in the senator -- Valor in the soldier, and a soul of prayer, throughout
the continent, in every breast.

THE FATE OF TYRANNY AND TORYISM.
-- And perished in the gainsaying of Core.

Jude i, 11.
THESE words constitute the last branch of the sentence, in which, to the
characters already mentioned, is added that of Core, who is equally reprobated
in his memory, and handed down as a warning to succeeding times. With a
reference to him, it is said, proverbially, of men vicious in their lives, and
unhappy in their end, that they have perished in the gainsaying of Core.

That I may apply this to the purpose, which I have in view, I shall consider,

I. What was the gainsaying of Core.

II. Who are they, whose language, and proceeding, has been in the same style
and character.

III. What ground we have to hope, that they shall likewise perish in it.

I. What was the gainsaying of Core. In the Hebrew language, the name is
written Korah; but our translators, in this place, have elegantly changed the
initial letter; and have given the word an English termination, so that we read
it Core. The story of this wicked and unhappy man, you will recollect, from the
sacred book; for he was at the head of that abandoned company, who rose in
opposition, to the line of order established, in the sacerdotal office. Aaron,
at this time, was the high priest; and Moses, in the capacity of chief judge,
was vested with the civil government. Moses was himself of the tribe of Levi,
and Aaron's younger brother; and so doubly qualified as the second priest; and
as the chief judge of the Jewish nation. The priestly office was by hereditary
and successive right, in his father's family; but his authority in the civil
line, was of God's supreme and immediate appointment. Hence we see the nature
of the crime of Core. It was an opposition to the will of God, in the persons
of those who had been constituted by him. Envy was at the bottom of the
wickedness of Cain, and avarice was the ruling motive with the son of Beor; but
the ambition of a vain heart, seems to have actuated Core. For being himself of
the tribe of Levi, though by a younger brother, he had some pretensions to the
priesthood; or at least such influence among the people, as flattered him with
the hope of easily obtaining an equal share in the administration of affairs.
With this delusive object in his view, we find him at the head of the
abovementioned conspiracy, addressing these words to Moses and to Aaron. "Ye
take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy, every one of
them, and the Lord is among them. Wherefore then lift ye up yourselves above
the congregation of the Lord!" At these words Moses falls upon his face; and
afterward, with unexampled moderation, makes reply to this malicious language.
He takes it not upon him, to assert his long established authority, confirmed
by so many miracles, and countenanced by the presence of the divine Shekinah,
in the tabernacle. He rather meekly refers it to God, from whom he had derived
his authority, to annul, or to authenticate, and so decide between them. He
appoints tomorrow for the day of trial. "And it shall be that he whom the Lord
shall choose, he shall be holy; you take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi."
After this, at different times, Moses seems again to have spoken to them; and
this in the softest and most tender language. "Hear, I pray you, ye sons of
Levi, seems it but a small thing unto you, that the God of Israel has
separated you, from the congregation, to bring you near to himself, to do the
service of the tabernacle, and to stand before the congregation, to minister
unto them? He has brought thee near to him, and all thy brethren, the sons of
Levi with thee; and seek ye the priesthood also? For which cause thou and all
thy company are gathered together against the Lord, and what is Aaron that ye
murmur against him."

These words having had no effect upon their minds; he sends for them, as it
would seem, to his own tent; and there would willingly have talked the matter
over, and have heard their grievances in private. For knowing the judgment
about to fall on them, from God, he was compassionately sorry for them, and
desirous by every method in his power, to prevent them bringing matters to a
trial which must be so fatal to themselves. "Moses sent to call Dathan and
Abiram, the sons of Eliab, who said we will not come up." It is therefore no
wonder, that we find, Moses, though perhaps for the first time, on his own
account, was very wroth, and said unto the Lord, "Respect not thou their
offering; I have not taken an ass from them; neither have I hurt one of them."

Thus you see what was the obstinacy of these ambitious men. The word used in
our text, might have been translated obstinacy. It is elsewhere, if I remember
properly, rendered contradiction. Christ is said to have endured such
contradiction of sinners -- that is obstinacy and perverseness of disposition.
They had, no doubt, promised themselves a place of greater trust in government;
and it was with this delusive object in their view, that they rejected all
entreaty, and would listen to no accommodation. I am to say,

II. Who are they, whose language and proceeding, has been in the same state
and character. That the worthies may be introduced with proper ceremony, I ask
your patience to premise a few particulars. In the Jewish theocracy, the
legislature was commissioned by God; and the evidence or seal of his
commission, was the spirit of prophecy, or the power of working miracles. In
other nations where God has not vouchsafed such immediate interposition, the
consent of the governed, is that which gives to any one, a right to empire and
authority. Thus the choice and approbation of the people comes in the room of
the divine appointment, or, in other words, is expressive of it. This may be
the foundation of that very common maxim -- The voice of the people, is the
voice of God. Now let it be observed, that by this authority, I mean the
general voice of a free people, fit persons had been chosen and appointed to
enact laws, and regulate an empire in America. To this empire we owe obedience,
and profess submission. The council of this empire, the continental Congress
takes the place of Moses, in the Jewish legislature. Those, therefore, who
attempt to subvert such constitution and appointment, and this in order that
they themselves may have the rule over us, which is the aim of our British
enemies, act in the same line of conduct, with Core and his associates.

It will be evident, if you give me leave to ask -- what lawful ground have
they on which to build authority? A divine commission they have not, for
otherwise, what prophesy of theirs has been accomplished, or what miracle has
been performed by them? Our consent they cannot plead; for we reject their
government, and hate it, as we ought to hate sin, which is the bane of human
nature, and the poison of the soul. The claim of these men is groundless; yet
they have persisted in the prosecution of it with very great obstinacy.

On the contrary our conduct with respect to them, has been that of mildness
and the softest moderation. Our congress, in the manner of the Jewish
legislature, have reasoned and expostulated with them. Seems it to you a
small thing, gentlemen, that we have been willing to acknowledge the king of
Great Britain, the arbiter of peace and war, and with the same authority over
us, in other cases, as is consistent with the constitution of a free society.
-- That we have so long submitted peaceably to such restrictions, in the
article of commerce, as throws the balance of our trade so greatly in your
favor. -- That we have proposed to contribute handsomely toward the support
of government, provided you repeal the inequitable acts of parliament, and give
us peace and liberty? Seems this to you a small thing, but seek ye our
freedom also? This was our language to the king of Britain, in our petitions
and remonstronces presented to him: When these had been rejected with disdain,
we earnestly desired to talk the matter over with him, by some commissioners
appointed for that purpose. The answer was, we will not come over.

In the cloudy list of Core's unhappy followers, I must place another class of
men -- The tories. I am not untaught to know, that every tyrant is a tory, and
every tory is a tyrant; but I use the word as in conversation it is used, to
signify those amongst ourselves, who are our enemies. Perhaps it might be well
to leave the word entirely to these, and for the future when we mean to speak
both of the British and American passive-obedient and non-resistant loyalists,
to denominate them Corites.

The language of the tory, with relation to the measures of their countrymen,
and more especially the establishment of an independent empire, has a great
resemblance to the language of Core's audacious company. Moses had said,
"Seems it to you a small thing that the God of heaven has set you up so high
already, in the honorable service of the tabernacle, and seek ye the
priesthood also? These were honest words and intended to recover in their
minds, some sense of gratitude to God, for the honor he had already put upon
them; but observe with what ungenerous affectation of severe wit and irony, do
they, villainously make reply. Yes Moses; there is a piece of conduct very
small, we readily allow; but apprehend, that if you take a little time to think
upon it, you will find it with yourself; not with us. "It is a small thing,
that thou have brought us up out of a land that flows with milk and honey, to
kill us in the wilderness, except thou make thyself altogether a prince over
us. Moreover thou have not brought us into a land that flows with milk and
honey, and given us inheritance of fields and vineyards. Will thou put out the
eyes of these men? The strain of this language, is the very strain and dialect
of toryism. Is it not enough ye patriotic whigs, that you have so gloriously
deprived us of ease, quiet, and abundant plenty, which had poured in upon us,
in connection with the mother country; but must we be obliged to submit also to
your tyrannic government? Moreover, this independency so late set up, has not
such milk and honey flowing with it, as you had made us to conceive. Is it not
enough that you have caused us, in our manner of subsistence, to be unhappy at
the present time; but will ye altogether take our life away?

Moses, who was a very meek man, and much resembling our general Washington, as
I conceive it, was very wroth at the words of Core. May not I who am far behind
them both, in patience, take the liberty to wax a little wroth, at the language
of such unmanly and provoking tory. What you villain -- do you call that state
which we have quitted, a state of happiness? Do you call subjection milk, and
vassalage honey? Do you prefer garlic and cucumbers to manna? Do you ignobly,
and unspiritedly choose the slavery, and domestic servitude of Britain, before
the sweets of liberty, even at the present time, without salt? Does it not
enter to your mind, that we are yet but in the wilderness; and if our quails
are not so highly seasoned, yet we may solace ourselves, that we are free, and
that by and by, it shall be better with us? Do you not perceive that we are
bending brightly to Canaan? Do you not pay attention to the spies who have seen
the land, and have brought a good account of it? Every one that has a soul in
him, has seen the happiness of a state of independence, and has brought a
good account of it. Are you the only one that cannot look beyond the present
case, to a more blissful period? Are you the only one that cannot at any time,
amidst our present suffering, with brilliant fancy, and imagination, anticipate
those ages of renown and plenty when fleets shall visit us from every coast of
Europe? Are you the only one singularly blind, that cannot contemplate, and
hail yourself in congratulation, to those days of sweet serenity, and
far-extended commerce, when navies from America shall cross the wide Atlantic
and pacific oceans, and bring the silks of every country, and the fruits of
every island, at first market, to our own shores?

These days are not far off, though many a tory should not live to see it. The
murmuring of the Israelites, was death to many of them; and it were matter of
astonishment, if speedy execution did not overtake the constantly-complaining
tory of America, and cut him off from those the nobler Calebs of our day, who
steadily pursue the land in view, and so shall be admitted to it. I shall not
give any farther vent to my resentment, or take up longer time, in
expostulation, with the tory; but go on to say what ground we have to hope,
that as the tory and the tyrant -- under one name the Corite, has obstinately
persisted in his gainsaying; so he shall likewise perish in it. The fate of the
tyrant, and the tory, is the same. Like the snakes in the fabled head of
Tisiphone, they are so entwisted, and entwined together, that one stroke shall
be destruction to them both. If Britain fails in her attempt upon us, the hope
and vain ambition of the tory, is likewise blasted with her. That Britain shall
be disappointed in her aim to subjugate the continent, I argue from the
following principles.

1. The injustice of her cause. I admit it as a truth declared in the word of
God, and justified by experience; that the wicked does not always, in this
life, meet with the retribution due to his iniquity. There is another state, in
which, as individuals, we shall again exist, and be accountable. But this is
not the case, with regard to bodies politic, of whom it shall no more be heard,
as the French, the Spanish, or the English nation. It must be therefore in this
life, that every people shall be judged, and suffer accordingly, the demerit of
that wickedness, which as a nation they have perpetrated. Besides; an
individual in society, may have redress by common laws of government; but in a
contest between nations, the appeal is made to God; and his it then becomes, to
settle the award of justice. In the present contest with Great Britain, the
appeal has been made religiously to God. It has been made to him, with tears,
with fasting, and with supplication. We have therefore ground to hope that he
will signally appear for our deliverance. To this I add,

2. The usual course of providence in cases of this nature. If we revolve the
history of mankind, we shall scarcely meet with any instance of a young and
rising empire given up to be destroyed, by an old and decayed nation. The
reverse is usually the case, in the rise, and fall of every state. A young and
growing people, with great simplicity of life, and manners, are attacked by
some haughty and ambitious neighbor. They suffer much, at first, from the
invasion; but at length repel the inroad, and make reprisals on the enemy. The
Assyrian empire rose by such degrees, and flourished in the world, till making
war upon the Persian, it was cut to pieces by it. The Persian empire had
likewise its progression, and advance to eminence; but fell at length before
the Macedonian, and the states of Greece, whom in their infancy, it had
invaded. The Grecian empire fell before the Roman. The Roman had its round of
greatness; and in its turn, gave way to a number of the smaller, and
surrounding nations, to whom, it had been many years a terror.

I might show a similar course, and revolution, in the empire of the Saracens,
which has been overthrown by that of Turcoman. I might show it to be the
circle, in the smaller states of Europe, since the age of Charlemagne. The fate
of Burgundy is a striking and particular instance. This dukedom, which was once
so opulent, and powerful, has become, by an unjust attack upon the Switzers,
so ruined and entirely bankrupt, that we hear no longer of it, but as a
province of the French monarchy. Such has been the course of providence in
bringing forth, and putting down the empires of the world. Who then can
reasonably suppose it probable, that North America, a young and rising people,
is so near her exit as to wealth and happiness, while Britain that has already
lived a life of empire, should still survive and be immortal? That it cannot
be, I argue,

3. The great unnatural impropriety, that states already past the age of
infancy, and vastly larger in extent of territory, should still depend upon a
realm, which once they called their own, and be directed by her. If we cast our
eye upon the works of God around us, we shall observe a certain fitness and
proportion illustrative of that which equally has a place in all the ways of
providence, in the direction of the affairs of men. What satellite is larger
than its planet? What branch of any tree is larger than the tree? Or is there
any bird that does not leave her youg when they are taught to fly as swiftly as
herself? It is not natural that states, with such extent of territory, and
which in a few years, at the usual rate of population, must be superior to
Great Britain in the number of inhabitants, should still continue subject to an
island, which in the map of the world is but a spot, scarcely to be
distinguished in the Geography. It is not natural, that states, in full
maturity of growth compared with infancy, should still continue in subjection
to an empire, whom, some two hundred years ago, they called their parent. That
it cannot be, I mention,

4. The great improbability, in the usual course of things, that Britain should
be able to reduce us. It would be a miracle in the common reason, and nature of
events, if a country, at such a distance, and of no greater compass than Great
Britain, could send a body of troops, able to cope with and subdue the standing
army, and militia of this continent. It is true, we read in history, of very
powerful kingdoms subdued by a band of robbers, that came upon them like an
inundation; but we must take notice of a circumstance in our case compleaty
different. These men were not only more warlike than the people whom they had
invaded; but they had migrated from their own country, with the whole strength
and numbers of their nation. This was the conduct of the Normans who subdued
England. Now unless the tyrant of Great Britain, should in like manner evacuate
his own territory, and find ships to carry him, three thousand miles, with his
eight or ten millions, across the ocean, he could not hope to effectuate his
purpose. Nay he must find vessels to transport them all at the same time;
otherwise the first freight would be wasted and destroyed, before he could
bring the rest to reinforce them.

Besides in the case of ancient, or of more modern conquerors of kingdoms, it
is to be observed; that the nation, overpowered by them, had been divided and
at variance amongst themselves; so that they could not bring their whole
strength to act against the tyrant who invaded them. The tyrant on the other
hand, by taking part with one or the other of the parties, and making use of
their assistance, at length obtained an easy conquest over both. This was the
case in the East India settlements, where the natives effeminate, unwarlike,
undisciplined, and what is more, at variance amongst themselves, became an easy
prey to the rapacious Englishman. Not so the states of North America, which are
harmoniously confederated, and shall stand or fall together. To this may be
added,

5. The growing strength and power of full resistance from America. The heroes
that we loose in battle, are every day replaced, in thrice the number, by young
and rising soldiers, that come successively to manhood. Our numbers, after all
our battles, are now undoubtedly superior to what we reckoned at the beginning
of the contest. We have at a moderate computation, thirty thousand in their
seventeenth year, at this particular time, upon the continent, that shall the
next campaign be fit for action. The slaughter must be great indeed, if the
whole, or even half of them, the next campaign shall fall in battle. Yet if one
half should fall, a new recruit, the following year, of more than thirty
thousand, shall add themselves, to those remaining; and thus, our numbers,
which increase continually, shall make our opposition certain, and at last
victorious.

The strength of our resistance is increased farther, in the love of military
duty, and improved skill in measures of defense against the foe, or in attack
upon them. The present war was not by any means a thing of choice. We engaged
in it with reluctance. We were dragged to it. Nothing but the strong law of
self-preservation, could have persuaded men to leave the quiet scenes of
agriculture, for the noise and danger of the camp. Nothing but the dire
necessity of a resistance, could have made them willing to exchange the plow,
and pruning hook, for the musket and the sword. We were without the love, and
without the skill of war.

In the love of war we are sufficiently advanced. It is happy, since we must
fight the tyrant, that we love to fight him. Our soldiers are enamoured of
marches, and what by others may be called fatigue. They pant ardently for
constant and severe encounter with the enemy. The complaint with us, by and by,
shall be, what it was with the King of Prussia, in the last war in Europe. It
was not that he wanted soldiers, but that he wanted farmers; for all ranks and
classes, of his people were so smitten with a love of military life, and
enterprise, that there were not sufficient left at home to cultivate the ground.

In the skill of war we have greatly and rapidly improved. I do not think I
shall be chargeable with giving cause of just offense to any public military
character, by saying, that we have now subalterns in our army, more capable of
office and command, than many of our generals at the commencement of this
debate. What instances of genius, and what specimens of military science, may
we not expect in future actions? I am persuaded, that if the war continues but
a few years longer, America shall be the school of valor and experience; and
volunteers of highest rank and fortune, shall flock from every court and state
of Europe, as many have already done, to serve amongst us. These arguments are
nervous; and I brace them with another quite as good, which is,

6. The growing hatred and resentment, every day conceived against the tyrant.
The name of Englishmen will shortly be as much abhorred by us, as was that of
the Genoese among the Corsicans, when, according to the account of Boswell,
mothers stilled with this, the children on the breast, and said proverbially,
there comes a Genoese. I will give you to the Genoese. This circumstance, is as
a wall of iron, to their inroad. Men will do much before they yield obedience
to those whom they hate extremely. More violent pressure, should the tyrant be
in a capacity to bring it on us, will give rise to more violent exertion: And
should it come to a decisive point, upon the very border of defeat and
subjugation; the spirit of resentment kindled in us, would naturally produce
such efforts of despair, as could not be resisted by him. I close these
arguments with one, which may be taken a posteriore, as the Schools would say,
that is,

7. From a survey of the face of measures which have had place, on either side,
in this illustrious contest. A good Physician, well acquainted with the system
of the human body, can tell the symptoms of disorder, or the state of health,
by feeling gently on the pulse of any patient; but every one can judge with
some degree of certainty, by looking on the countenance, and there examining
the bloom, or paleness of complexion, as signs of health, or sickness. Just so
it is exceeding obvious, and to be read as written very legibly in the conduct
of the tyrant, that he shall be unsuccessful; and, at the same time, in
characters as plain, in that of the Americans, that they are to be victorious.
The tyrant has made use of every wicked art to bring about his purpose.
Conscious of his weakness, of himself, to cope with us, he has invited slaves,
and savages, to his assistance. In the person of the General who first
sustained our opposition, he is chargeable with disingenuity, and breach of
promise, relative to the blockade of Boston. In the person of him, at the head
of the campaign, against us; he has been guilty of a mean reserve, in settling
the cartel, for the exchange of prisoners. He has treated with inhunanity, the
prisoners fallen into his hands, He has mangled the wounded, and refused
quarter on the field of battle. He has acted basely, in so many cases, that men
hereafter reading the transactions of this period, shall naturally exclaim,
before they hear the consequence -- this man does not deserve to be successful.
On the other hand, the conduct of the Americans, has been so fair, so
gentlemanly, that it is to me a presage of the happiness intended for them; and
men in future ages reading their behavior in this illustrious contest, when
they shall hear the truth in promises, the candor in negotiation, the
fortitude in suffering, and disastrous cases; the valor, and heroic ardour in
the day of battle; and to cast a glory on the rest, the treatment of the
wounded, and the prisoners, they must declare, before they come to the result,
and close of it; these men deserve to be victorious. And why deserve to be
victorious; but that God has given them honesty, and in the truth, and wisdom
of their measures, has laid the foundation of that policy, and empire, which
he is about to establish on this continent. You will observe in nature, and in
every useful work of art, a certain correspondency between the parts, so that
the cause shall have a likeness to the effect, and from the ground work of a
building, you may guess the superstructue. Thus from the earlier parts of any
enterprise, may be obtained, some distant apprehension of that event which is
to be the consequence. The confederacy of these united states has been so
singular -- The wisdom of their measures so remarkable, as gives a proper
bottom to a mighty empire. But on the contrary, the tyrant has been deceived in
every information. He has acted most impolitic in many cases. His wisdom has
been turned to foolishness. His councils have been so broken, so jarring, and
disjointed, that it seems to be of God, to baffle his unrighteous undertaking.
To this purpose is the sentence -- whom God means to ruin, he first strikes
with madness.

I come to close the subject, by observing; that as Great Britain shall be
disappointed in her measures; those unhappy things in human shape, denominated
tories, are of all men most miserable. They cannot hope to taste that
happiness, which they have so sanguinely expected. They must give up the
buildings in the city, and the pleasant seats upon the river bank, which fancy
had so generously laid out for them. They must forego their native country,
which they have deserted and so basely labored to destroy. That the King of
England shall send for them, and reward their villainy, with royal bounty and
munificence is not so very clear; but it is most certain that they shall be
sent to make a trial, and wait upon him for it. There shall they wander and
walk about with other hungry dependents, and shadows consequent on these, until
he shall graciously be pleased to take notice of them. They shall wait long and
at last be disappointed; for I venture to affirm, that the king of England
apprehends that they have already, had a sufficient recompense, in the very
honor of having served him. It is the nature of a wicked man, who is, or
thinks himself superior, to believe that men his fellow creatures, have been
born for his amusement. This, I am persuaded, is the sentiment of every tyrant,
and particularly of the Majesty of Britain, with respect to those unhappy
beings, who subserve him in his dirty work, now carrying on in America. The use
of power is intoxicating; and the very servitude that is offered to a base
prince, will cause him to expect the continuance of subjection. At first he
will look upon attachment as a favor. At length he will expect it as a duty --
a duty not to be recompensed in any other way, than in the pleasure, and mighty
honor which he supposes them to have had, in performing it. For this reason,
these men who labor, by a mighty kind of faith, for the unseen realities of
George's favor, are not about to find any certain substance, to answer the
deluded expectation. Verily I say unto you tories, you shall lose your reward.
You may go home to England, and have a gracious sight of his Majesty's royal
countenance, but this will scarcely slake your appetite, or, unless you have
clothes upon your back, keep your bodies warm. You may go to England, and walk
about as pilgrims on the earth, but you shall be buffeted by satan, and
contemned by every class of men. You may go home to England, and walk about as
pilgrims on the earth, while you live; but when you die, I am for having it
written on your tombs,

They have perished in the gainsay of Core.

THE AGENCY OF HEAVEN, IN THE CAUSE OF LIBERTY.
And there was war in heaven.

Rev. xii, 7.
THESE words have not a reference to the war imagined to be in heaven, when the
devil first sinned and fell from the light above -- imagined, I say, because we
cannot tell whether God permitted him to levy war, for a while, in a dubious
contest, with the holy angels; or whether he hurled him at once, by his own
almighty power, to the lake of hell. Nor have these words a reference to any
war waged since in the higher world; for heaven is a place of love; and as no
contention, or hostile debate, can arise amongst the inhabitants now confirmed
and secure in bliss; so no kind of violence can have entrance to it, from any
other quarter. The meaning therefore is not that angel combated with angel, on
the plain of heaven; but that heaven was engaged in a war.

The devil is constantly exciting some tyrannic monster, to make war upon the
world, and take away the rights and privileges of society. God is ever ready
to resist him; and this, in the common measures of his providence; or by the
agency of holy and celestial spirits, that execute his orders.

From this it follows, that at any time, when a war is commenced against the
cause of truth upon the earth, there is likewise a war in heaven, or heaven is
engaged in a war. In this sense it is said, in the words consequent on those I
have chosen, "Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon
fought, and his angels."

I shall not undertake to say, who was the tyrant, whom Saint John principally
intended. It may have been a certain of the Roman Caesar's; Nero, or Caligula,
or Domitian. These were stirred up by the devil, to begin a war upon the earth,
against the rights and privileges of the church of God. These came all to an
untimely end, and evidenced by their fate, that providence beheld their
villainy, and fought against them.

It is possible Saint John may have had his eye, upon a later period. The
present time and the George of England may be that which is pointed out in this
place of scripture. Be this as it will, the construction is applicable to the
tyrant; for wicked men every where are the soldiery of satan. They support the
cause, and range themselves beneath the standard of the devil; but the troops
of God are embodied, and war in heaven, is levied to oppose them. I shall so
apply it at the present time, and show,

I. That in our contest with the tyrant, hell has been against us.

II. That heaven has taken an active part, and waged war for us.

1. In our contest with the tyrant hell has been against us. It is evident,

1. From the nature of the cause, the success of which must be agreeable to
satan. What would the arch fiend wish more, than to behold despotism in
America? What would he wish more than to behold one man with such rule, and
authority, that with a word, he could take away the life of the bravest subject
-- That without a jury of his peers, he could sentence him to death, and shed
his blood upon the scaffold -- That without restraint of law, he could take
away the property of any, and spend it on his favorites, and debauchees, sent
out from home, to rule, with arbitrary sway, upon the continent. What would he
wish more than to behold, in consequence of this, the labor of the husbandman
checked, in the annual tillage of the ground -- the country waste -- every
plain desolate? For who could have heart to cultivate the ground, or build a
mansion house to hold it, only at the precarious pleasure of some Bashaw, or
viceroy of the tyrant? How laughable would it be to the grim prince of
darkness, to behold science, which has bloomed so sweetly in these infant
states, to languish and decay! This I aver to be the consequent on tyranny.

Tyranny is destructive to religion also. The sovereign in his absolute, and
unresisted empire, may forbid this or that denomination, to worship God,
according to the dictates of their consciences. Good and upright men may
struggle hard against it -- may seal the truth with blood; but the greater part
shall shroud themselves, in the religion of the state, because of the offices,
and honors which attend it. The consequence is spiritual death, and the face
of misery every where. Ignorance, and superstition follow despotism. Satan is
old enough, and sufficiently sagacious, to attend to this. He sees it every
day, in India, in Turkey, and in some parts of Europe; and as he traverses the
globe, he wishes to behold it in America. Can we then doubt but that in our
contest with the tyrant he is, heart and hand, against us? It is evident from
the nature of the cause, and

2. From the manner in which the tyrant has endeavored to establish it. He
has made use of fraud in negotiation with us. He has brought a mercenary
army, from the heart of Europe, to destroy us. He has excited Indian savages,
to murder us in cold blood. He has made war, with a remorseless rage; refusing
quarter, on the field of battle. He has famished our prisoners, in his goals;
or sentenced them to other climes, at a distance from the light of God's
revealed truth. He has burned towns. He has wasted settlements. He has
insiduously offered terms of peace, with a view to effect by artifice, what he
could not do, by open force, and fair hostility. When we consider these things,
can we doubt; but that as the cause has been fabricated in the shop of satan;
so it has been carried on, in a manner agreeable to his suggestions? Can we
doubt, but that satan has been busy with our enemies? He has, undoubtedly,
been busy. He has been present at the council board. He has been an aid upon
the field of battle. He has brought many evil spirits to assist him. The
troops of hell has been against us.

II. Heaven has taken an active part, and waged war for us. It is conspicuous,

1. From our union which was so early, and so universal. God only, who has the
hearts of all men in his hand, could have brought about such consent and full
agreement in the cause, amongst a people of different origin, and occupations,
and customs, and manners, and religion. The descendants of the Scot, the Irish,
the English and the German, have all embarked on the same bottom. The labourer,
the husbandman, the merchant, the mechanic, have understood and equally
resented the measures of Great Britain. The presbyterian, the independent, the
anabaptist, and the churchman, have made the cause common. The inhabitant of
cold New Hampshire, and of burning Georgia, felt alike the patriotic spirit.
The polite Virginian, and severer moralist of Pennsylvania, were equally the
subjects of this noble passion. The obedience paid to the resolves of congress
by every one of these, was so regular, and so steady, as to excite the wonder
of our enemies. What prince, or any legislator in the world, has ever found an
equal pliancy, in the minds of subjects, to his laws, as was discovered in the
attention of this people, to the committees, and conventions of their
respective colonies? The hand of God is visible in this so singular a
circumstance. It is equally apparent,

2. In the wisdom of our councils. A more venerable body of men never sat upon
the earth than the first congress. Their writings were truly worthy of so great
a cause. If any man feels himself to flag in his patriotic principles, let him
take up the letters, and remonstrances sent to Britain -- let him read the
address to Canada -- to Ireland -- to the Americans, and the declaration, and
appeal to foreign powers; and I defy him, if he has the least spark of virtue
in his breast, not to feel a noble, a resistless, and almost enthusiastic
ardour for his country. The spirit of God, which taught the workmen at the
building of the temple, and gave them uncommon skill, was present with these
men. The spirit of God, which brightly kindles, the clear spark of genius in
the soul, and gives a fine degree of understanding, doubtless, aided them in
these productions. The blessed God directed them to prudent words, and to wise
and useful measures. Heaven has taken an active part in our behalf; and this
illustriously appears,

3. From the great, and almost unhoped for success with which our cause has
been attended. We took up arms with trembling apprehensions of the mighty
difficulties we were obliged to encounter. We saw behind us slavery, and before
us, the most trying scenes of fortitude* and suffering. As every virtuous and
generous mind would do, we fled from slavery, though we know not, but the
consequences was death. We had not arms -- we had not ammunition -- we had not
many officers of good experience -- we had not soldiers trained and disciplined
for battle -- we had not any thing, but the justice of our cause, and the
goodness of almighty providence, to support our sinking spirits. Glory to God,
who has befriended us -- has given us arms, and ammunition, and many officers
of good experience, and soldiers trained and disciplined, for battle -- has
made our arms successful -- illustriously successful in many places.

Heaven has made our cause her own, and this appears.

4. From the manner of our success in general, and deliverance in some
particular cases. At the commencement of the war, our greatest fears
originated, from the navy of Great Britain. We did not entertain the least idea
of saving the smallest boat or vessel, from her depredation. We apprehended her
so fully the mistress of the ocean, that not one bay or creek, or inlet could
be found, which was not under her inspection; yet we see, our merchantmen have
brought, from every port of Europe, a great supply of what we wanted. Our
privateers have scoured the ocean, and in the very channel, on the coast of
England, have captured such prizes as more than makes amends for all the loss
we have sustained. Our ships of force, of which we had not one at the
beginning, have bravely fought the tyrant; and often proved victorious. This is
a noble and exhaustless fund of evidence that God himself has been our Admiral.

In our operations on the continent, we had expected little from the militia
soldiery; yet these have had a share not inconsiderable in some the most
important actions. The militia fought at Lexington, they fought at Bunker-hill
engagement. These little victories were kindly granted them, by providence, as
necessary at the first, to lift their hope, and satisfy the mind of every one,
that Americans were not irresolute, and Britons, however veteran in experience,
were not invulnerable. The militia fought in Carolina, and quelled the Tory
insurrection. They fought in the Virginia state. They fought in Jersey. They
fought with Harkemer. They fought with Stark. They fought with the illustrious
Gates. They acted nobly in every battle, and encounter, from the westward of
the Hudson, to the heights of Saratoga.

Nor less remarkable was our deliverance, in some particular cases. A gracious
providence has not permitted us to be successful in any one particular place,
more than was consistent with the safety, and general interest of our whole
exertions. We made the greatest slaughter, but lost the ground at Bunker-Hill
engagement, and this because it did not suit us to retain it. Had we possessed
the heights, the British must have left the city of Boston, and sailed for
New York or Philadelphia, where we had not been so well prepared to receive
them; but flatterd vainly with the small advantage of the ground, they still
continued to attempt this province. The summer and succeeding winter was, in
consequence of this, exhausted fruitlessly; and before they could approach us
to the westward, we also were in readiness to bid them welcome.

Our cause was at the lowest ebb, when How had traveled through the Jersies,
and appeared upon the Delaware; yet even then, we rose upon the wings of
conquest; and from an almost hopeless situation, became the talk and panegiric
of the world. Our foe themselves could not but own the merit of our general,
those of them especially, who had the soul to understand what praise was due to
patience, fortitude, and skill and valor in the breast of heroes.

Our case was gloomy, when Burgoine had passed Ticonderoga, and penetrated
deeply through the northern provinces. In this distressed quarter we had
expected nothing but defeat and devastation. Our eye of hope was fixed chiefly
on the success of the campaign in Pennsylvania. But on the contrary our
principal success has been obtained against the northern forces of the tyrant.
In this department we have been remarkably victorious; and it would seem that
God permitted the rude foe to come thus far, in order that at length his
gracious providence might have an ampler field of triumph, in delivering him to
ignominy and defeat amongst us.

With this I mention what at first may seem unhappiness; that is the inroad of
the foe through Pennsylvania and the Jersies. But is it not completely evident,
that thus it was the will of God to make us taste so much of gall and wormwood,
in the cup of tyranny presented to us, that afterward we should not easily
forget it; or even halfway tories, be tempted to desire a second draught of
such malignant poison?

Thus in the manner of our success in general, and deliverance in some
particular cases, the hand of God is visible. We have succeeded where we had
not hope to succeed. We have been delivered when we looked not for deliverance.
Our aid has come from whence we had not much expected it. We have been
favored in a manner, and on occasions truly singular. Are we not then sensible
that heaven is active for us? I argue lastly,

The company of good and pious men, who have most eminently struggled with us.
Take a view of those amongst ourselves, who are against us, and count the
debauchees, and rakes, and covetous, and designing, and self-interested men,
and you will find them to compose a greater part of that collection. On the
other hand, set down the honest, the sensible, and serious of your neighbors,
and extend your computation, to the good and virtuous of the country round you;
and how few, if any of these, will you will find against our measures? nay are
not the most religious, and most pious persons, the warmest advocates for
opposition and resistance? How many sweet and holy prayers, are every day put
up, by good and worthy men of all denominations? Our company in this debate is
heavenly; and heaven I am persuaded, does patronize, and will finally succeed
it.

Heaven knows nothing of neutrality. The sound of such indifferance, was never
heard in heaven. Every angel, every seraph feels in our behalf. They know not
the secret will of God, and so are anxious for the great event. Doubtless it is
pleasing to any one of these, when he is ordered to take his flight to earth,
and there direct the course of such a victory, in favor of the brave American.
For providence is but the agency of God, either by his own interposition, or by
the ministry of powers, and principalities, that stand before him. Angels are
his ministering spirits, and they delight to execute his orders amongst men, or
through the bounds of the unseen creation. Much sweet assistance have we had
from these since the beginning of the contest. There is not one tory, to be
found amongst the order of the seraphim. There is not one cold phlegmatic
spirit, that can bear to be a neutral. Heaven is active for us, and her
inhabitants, through all their shining ranks and orders.

Let me now improve the subject,

1. You see from hence, that we are to give God the glory. The arm of flesh is
weak, and in itself contemptible. It is God that steels the heart, and gives a
resolution to engage in trials. It is God that crowns our efforts with success.
Let the cause in which we are engaged praise God. Let the councils by which it
has been pleaded praise God. Let the patriots he has raised to support it,
praise God. Let the success which has attended it, praise God. Let the day of
Lexington and the dawn of our renown, praise him. Let the death of Warren and
the Bunker-Hill engagement, praise him. Let our approach through Canada, and
the death of a Montgomery, praise him. It was God who raised these gallant men,
and filled their bosoms with the sacred glow of freedom. It was God who bade
them die, and give them immortal to their country.

Think, my brethren on Fort Sullivan, and lift your souls to God. Think on the
Carolina -- and the Virginia victories. Think on the thousand that we stormed
at Trenton. Think on victorious Princetown, and be ashamed of your ingratitude.
Think on the Brunswick Ambuscades. Think on the souls who fought at Brandywine.
Think on the well-conducted charge at Germantown. Think on Fort Mercer, and the
shore of Delaware. Think on Fort-Miflin so gallantly defended. Think, O think,
on these my countrymen, and let your hearts be warmed with a holy fervor.

Think on the noble death of Harkemer. Think on victorious Stark, and the
success at Bennington. Think on illustrious Warner, who shared with him in the
glory. Think on the garrison at Fort Montgomery -- a fort retained and quitted
with immortal honor. Think on the field -- the field of Stillwater. Think on
the heights -- the fair capitulated heights of Saratoga. Think on Burgoyne.
Think on his proclamation -- what sound, what triumph -- what defeat, what
ignominy. It Is God that raises up the humble, but lays the lofty low before
him. Let every pulse that beats throughout our veins, let every breath that
draws the air this day, be sacred to his glory. He is God, and there is not
another. He is great, and there is none besides him.

From the subject, and the thoughts suggested on it you have

2. Foundation of encouragement. Our cause is yet upon the balance. Our swords
are yet unsheathed. Our hands are still upon the hilts of them. Much has been
done. Much yet remains to do. Be not dismayed. Remember your support. Has
France declared war; or is it out of doubt, that Spain has taken an active
part in our behalf? Of this, I am not certain, nor strictly able to inform you;
but this I say, that God is for us, and heaven has taken an active part. The
court of heaven has long determined it, nor was there one dissenting voice
among them. Michael says it is war, and younger angels say, it is war -- with
Britain.

Are the officers of France called home, to take their places in her armies?
The above discourse was drawn up and delivered on thn 18 th of December, 1777,
in Queen-Ann's county, Maryland; at which time there was a report that France
had declared war, and that in consequence of this, her officers who serve in
America were ordered home to take the command of their respective regiments and
divisions.
It Is said they are; but what is that to us, my countrymen. The officers of
France, are noble, gallant and experienced, but still inferior to the bright
and the shining captains of the host of heaven. The officers of France have
seen the wars in Germany, in Poland, and in Russia. The captains of the host of
God have seen the war, and combat with the dragon -- have seen the wars before
the flood, and since in every age and country. These have come down to help us,
and these shall be continued with us. Had we our eyesight, we should see, that
they that be with us, are more than they that be against us. Had we our
eyesight we should behold chariots of fire, and winged steeds encompassing our
mountains. We are afraid perhaps that Britain will recruit from the European
continent, and send in thousands to augment her forces. Let us be confident
that God is for us, and the armies of the universe, are not sufficient to
resist his providence. The subject,

Lastly; suggests to us a motive to repentance. It seems to me our cause shall
prosper, and be finally successful; yet cloudy days of suffering may be in
reserve before us. I do not by any means expect a sudden issue to the contest.
Before it is concluded, many a mother shall have lost her son and many a wife
her husband. Let every individual lay this matter for himself to heart. If we
are delivered from our enemy, yet many wicked persons, like the unbelieving
lord, that that was trodden under foot, at the gate of Samaria, shall not live
to see it. What shall it profit any man, if we gain our liberty, and assert our
independance, if in the mean time, he shall have lost the eternal liberty, and
freedom of his own soul? What will it profit him, if he escape the taxation of
Great Britain; but in the mean time, must lie down in sorrow, and pay the debt,
due to God's justice in the flame of hell. In time of war, or in time of peace,
there is no safety but in Christ. Haste therefore, and give no rest to your
eyes, nor slumber to your eyelids, till you have found an interest in his
mediation and atonement. As some countryman, who travels in the stormy night,
when the wind shakes the forest, and the rain beats upon him, would hasten to
the shelter of a rock, where he may be safe from the hurricane, and the forked
lightnings, which play above the mountain; so it becomes every one in this day
of storm and sore commotion, to fly swiftly to the rock Christ Jesus, and seek
for refuge, in the merit, and peace speaking blood of a redeemer. Amen.

THE BLASPHEMY OF GASCONADE AND SELF-DEPENDENCE IN A CERTAIN GENERAL.
And there was given unto him a mouth, speaking great things and blasphemies.

Rev. xiii, 5.
I DO not mean to enter into the controversy, whether it is the Pope, that
originally is intended by these words, or some other noble worthy of an equal
mouth. I mean to say, that they are applicable to a certain general, with whom
we have tried our swords a while; and that is the celebrated John Burgoyne
Esquire, lieutenant general, in North America, with many other designatory
titles, which it were tedious to recapitulate or mention. This general has
spoken great things, and blasphemies.

I. Great things. It is said that a certain old gentleman, of whom many things
are fabled, usually comes upon the earth, especially about evening-time, in the
shape of a common man; but on discovery of his cloven foot, takes departure in
a flame of fire. The general, has no resemblance, in this particular, to
satan; for he came amongst us in a flame of fire, but went away like a common
man.

He made his first appearance on the continent, in a sky-rocket, and fire-work
description of the day of Charlestown, and the Bunker-hill engagement.
Pyramids of flame, and the roar of cannon, musketry and mortars, sounded and
blazed through the paragraphs. I have seen poems on the last conflagration that
were nothing to it. The heart of every Whig was made to tremble, for certainly
a man that thought and spoke so loftily, must be capable of doing very lofty
actions.

We do not hear much more of him, except in his letter to general Lee, until at
the opening of the last campaign, when with about eleven thousand men, and half
a dozen Indian nations, at his heels, he landed from the lakes of Canada.

The cause of an earthquake is said to be a column of condensed air, pent up
in the bowels of the earth, and suddenly rarefied by a hill of sulphur, nitre,
or hot materials, of some kind or other, subterraneously on fire. In this case
the column hastily expands, and not finding an immediate passage, opens to
itself a vent, with great noise and concussion of the continent. This may serve
to illustrate the passion and behavior of the general, who had for a long time
conceived a most fierce indignation against the inhabitants of North America.
His wrath was pent up in his breast, and struggled to express itself. He wanted
elbow-room. We need not wonder, therefore, that on meeting with some small
advantage, like a bed of nitrous particles, to inflame his ire, he burst forth,
all at once, in the sound of a proclamation.

The custom of a proclamation from a warrior, is of very ancient date. The
champion of Gath was the first who brought it into practice. We read that he
came forth and proclaimed to the host of Israel. Give me a man that we may
fight together. O, I love fighting mightily. Do, turn out some active, brisk
fellow, that we may have a knock at one another.

David, a young militia soldier, that had never been in action, takes him at
his word, and comes out against him. The Philistine thought it an affront to be
matched with a boy, and trusting to his great stature, and his long experience
in the service, disdains the stripling rebel, and cursed him by his gods. As
they approached to the combat, the giant opens wide his mighty mouth, in a
second proclamation -- come to me, and I will give thy flesh unto the fowls of
the air, and to the beasts of the field.

I am of opinion that Goliath, notwithstanding his challenge to the host of
Israel, was, as all bullies are, a coward at the bottom; and that his great
vaunt of words, previous to the contest, was intended to intimidate, and, if
possible, prevent the young soldier from coming on the ground at all. He could
not, consistent with the reputation of his prowess, decline the proposed duel;
but it was his hope that he should be able to prevent it, by high looks, big
words, and some parade at a distance. True valor, like true wisdom, talks
little.

The proclamation of Burgoyne was not much unlike the proclamation of the son
of Gath. O ye saints and rebels of New England, wherefore are ye come out
against me with pitch-forks, Burgoyne had written a play, called The blockade
of Boston, in which the New-Englandmen were represented as coming out to
battle, with pitch-forks, and rusty, muskets on their shoulders.
and with pruning hooks? Am I a dog that you think to drive me into Lake
Champlain, with staves and with broken bayonets? But if so, leave your prayers,
and your fastings, and come along, that I may scalp your heads, and toma-hac
your carcases. I have but to give stretch to the Indian forces under my command
and they amount to thousands.

The one proclamation is very much a copy of the other; yet I am not certain
that the British general had this monument of jewish history in view, because I
am not certain that Burgoyne reads the scripture. There is indeed no necessity
to suppose that he had it in his view, in order to account for the resemblance;
for the same spirit, however distant in place or period, will always beget the
same manner, and produce the same language.

It is more probable our gallant general, took the idea of striking terror by a
proclamation, from the behavior of Achilles, at the siege of Troy, as it is
told us by Homer, in the eighteenth book of his Iliad. The Trojans, with Hector
at their head, contending for the body of Patroclus, press upon the Greeks to
the very limits of their camp. In this critical conjuncture, Achilles is
prevailed on by Minerva, to show himself at the head of the entrenchments, and
endeavor to stop the fury of the Trojans by a proclamation. Accordingly he
mounts the parapet, and bawls out very briskly, so that the hostile army are
shocked by the clamor and driven back from the battle.

Forth marched the chief, and distant from the crowd,
High on the rampart raised his voice aloud,
So high his brazen voice the hero reared,
Hosts dropped their arms --
As the Scotch-man said, when he saw a rope-dancer on the stage, it is a noble
thing to be a scholar. Burgoyne loves poetry, and doubtless had admired this
circumstance in the conduct of the great son of Pelus. He was willing to adopt
and put forth in the modern taste, something in the same style and manner.

A thing of this sort is very pardonable, for we are all usually one half of
what we are, by imitation: nay it is commendable, for a study to equal, or
excel fine models, is placed by the ancient critics amongst the sources of good
writing; and may it not be so likewise in the sublime of character and conduct?
The great Don-Quixotte made himself still more great, by a constant and careful
perusal of the histories of green, black and grey-coloured knights, and by a
magnanimous and steady resolution to emulate their warlike glory and
achievements.

Burgoyne is not more a poet than historian. Is it not then possible, that he
may have had the example of the great Pyrrhus in his eye as we have it related
by Polibyus? This prince was not less daring in an enterprise, than crafty in
device and stratagem. When he had invaded Italy, and lay with his troops above
Tarentum, he thought it necessary to make trial of the patriotism of the
Romans, and of their fortitude, before he adventured far into their country.
For this purpose he invites Fabricius, the consul, to a conference, in some
such manner, as Lord How, on Staten-Island, the other year, invited three
members of the continental congress. By smooth speeches without any meaning,
and by the offer of a sum of money, he endeavors to engage Fabricius, to act
inconsistently with the true interest of the commonwealth. Having failed in
the attempt, and finding that Roman patriotism was not to be corrupted, he next
determines an experiment upon their fortitude.

He provides an old resty elephant, and had it placed behind a curtain, just by
Fabricius, with its probosscis over him, where he sat in conversation. All at
once a stout able-bodied sergeant pricks it with the end of his halbert. The
beast suitably alarmed and opening its mouth in a loud proclamation, is
exceeding terrible. The animal was strange and unusual to the Roman; but
discovering no sign of fear or perturbation, he sat still, and continued his
discourse with this reflection: Thy beast, O Pyrrhus, has moved me to day as
little as thy gold did yesterday. The king observing such dignity and strength
of soul in this people, gave over his attempt upon their country, and
transported his troops back to Epirus.

Burgoyne to a certain length has imitated Pyrrhus. He had not been able to
procure an elephant; for though some large bones found upon the banks of the
Ohio, do indicate that there may have been of this creature in America, yet
none are to be found at the present time. -- He had not been able to procure an
elephant, to make the trial in a true classic way; but he does what he can do,
and thinks it not amiss to make a little noise himself.

To say the truth he roared very hideously. His first roar was on Ticonderoga
hill, The proclamation was given at Ticonderoga.
stamping with his foot, and the second roar was on the margin of Lake-George,
about ten miles nearer to us. His roaring waxed loud, and shrill, and terrible.
As he came down through the woods of Skeensborough, it was audible to a very
great distance. It was his intention to roar on to Albany; but a giant of the
name of Gates, with a parcel of New England men, came out against him and
caught him by the beard, and smote him, so that his proclamatory voice shall
not be heard any more, in the woods of North America.

I have already said, that Burgoyne, in the manner of the great Quixotte, had
built up himself, on the system of the early battle-men. He had not read so
fully as that celebrated Spaniard, the history of the renowned Amadis de Gaul,
Don Bellianis of Greece, or the Seven Champions of Christendom; but he had
studied, what was equally improving, the exploits of Mahoment the second, and
of Tamarlane who put Bajazet in an iron cage, and made use of him as a block to
assist him when at any time he should choose to mount his horse. He had made
himself acquainted with the great killing times, at several periods, on the
border of the Greek and Roman empires, so that if the hero of Cervantes had it
in his power to boast a superior knowledge in the laws of chivalry and
knighthood, yet the British general was considerably before him in the skill of
Caesar-hood and Alexander-ship. That you may know what I mean, it must be told
you, that it is the humor of these great combatants, to cut and carve
furiously about them, and to rage and rave like angry lions, or like mad
tigers, until they have slain half the world of inhabitants; and then to sit
down, and be as tame as a dog that has just chewed a bone, or as a young ox
that licks his lips after salt.

The above may serve as a key to the famous speech of Burgoyne, before he left
England, promising to temper his punishment to the Americans with humanity. It
may serve to explain that declaration also, that he would dance with the
ladies, and coax the men to submission; for you must be told, if you know it
not already, that it is the humor of your well bred slaughter-men, to be
highly complaisant, gentle and humane, to a distressed lady, the very next hour
after they have cut the throat of a fond husband, or an only son, or beloved
brother. Of this you have an instance in the behavior of the Macedonian, to
the wife and mother of Darius, whom a few hours before, he had unjustly slain,
and basely deprived of his kingdom. -- It was something of this nature which
Burgoyne would have us understand by the honor of a soldier, of which he
speaks in his proclamation. For though he had let loose, or as he himself terms
it, given stretch to the Indian forces under his command, to murder the infant,
and the young soldier, and the mother, and the virgin, on her bridal day; yet
this did not hinder, but that when he came to Albany victorious, he might show
himself a generous conqueror, by wiping away the tears of the mourning family,
as Alexander wiped away the tears of Statira.

There is another species of writing not less familiar to the general, and that
is the French and English tragedy. Hence it is that he has drawn many of those
noble flights of fancy, conceived in very lofty language, which appear in his
speeches and epistolary correspondence. The sentence which may serve as a
specimen of many others, says to this purpose; I would not be justly chargeable
with such proceeding, no, not for North America, had she the wealth of worlds,
in her bowels, and a paradise upon her surface.

It is thought by some young gentlemen to whom I have the honor to be known,
that Burgoyne has in this sentence caught something of the true spirit and
sublime of the ancient authors. The taste of these young gentlemen is accurate
and good; for I defy you to impose upon them a ham of bacon, for a sea-turtle,
or a dish of turnips, for a bowl of egnog. The only objection that any man can
offer to their judgment, is, that, his non erat locus -- These words are not
in their proper place, and do not so well suit a letter upon business, as a
speech of Anthony to Cleopatra, or of Herod the great, to his Mariamne.

The General in many places, shines out in such high-winged and silver-tongued
words. It is his happiness to have so rich a vein of tragic fancy, and high
flight of dramatic thought, that on occasions very common, he can get upon his
buskins, and talk -- rotundo ore -- with a swelling mouth.

When, therefore, we sum up the evidence, and consider that the general has a
most intimate acquaintance with all Homer's heroes; that he has at his fingers
ends, all the great examples of the ancient history; that to this he has added
a full and universal reading of the best English plays, and particularly that
of the two rival queens, writ by the immortal Lee -- when to close and complete
the whole, we take it into view that he has drawn copiously of rich style and
sentiment, from this source, or rather these sources; need we wonder that when
he came upon this western continent, a new world, and a new stage opening to
his view, he has spoken great things.

II. Blasphemies. Here I mean to be serious. The word blasphemy is of Greek
original, and is made up of two words, one of which is -- to wound, and the
other is -- the reputation. According to its etymology, it is what is wounding
to the reputation. It is the Greek word for calumny, and answers to one we have
borrowed from the latin -- defamation. I have not any author by me to establish
it; yet I make no doubt, but that at first it was used to signify a slander
against the character of men, as well as against the providence of God. After a
little time, in the manner of many words, it lost a part of its original
application; and by it we now understand what is said in derogation of the
divine Majesty of heaven, either in the persons of the Trinity, his attributes,
or providence This is the strict and higher sense; yet, no doubt, a word may be
occasionally and by construction blasphemous. The man that declares to the
world, that he will do this or that, and at the same time pays no attention to
the permission of divine providence, makes a near approach to that which is
called blasphemy. It ought to be our language, that if God will, we shall do
so. What, so to speak can be more wounding to his reputation in whose hands our
breath is, and whose are all our ways, than not to acknowledge him, when we
engage in any matter, or not to give him thanks, when, with his help, we have
been enabled to perform it? It is treason to the monarchy of heaven. It is
blasphemy.

Let us apply this to the proclamation of which we have said some things
laughingly. Omitting the invective and falsehood contained in it; even the soul
of a tory must be sensible that with regard to God, it is daringly impious and
profane. Except in one slight phrase, he pays not the least attention to the
almighty providence, who rules and governs all things: and even this slight
phrase is crowded down, and disappears in the boast and ranting of the other
periods. Self-dependent, and balanced on his strength, he seems to look down
with scorn, on all the casualties of circumstance and time.

"At the head of troops in the full powers of health, discipline and valor,
determined to strike where necessary, and anxious to spare where possible, I
invite and exhort all persons, in all places, where the progress of this army
shall point -- And by the blessing of God I will extend it far." The last words
of this sentence make the phrase to which I have a reference as that seeming to
hold forth something rational, and pious. Yet if you examine its position, and
the manner of its flow in the sentence, you will find that it is not so much an
acknowledgment of the superintendency of God, as an oath that verily in spite
of all opposition, he will do what he had proposed. It differs little from the
common declaration of a soldier swearing by the almighty, that in spite of
fortune he will do it. The best that we can say of it, is, that when he meant
to pray, he naturally fell into the idiom of an oath. Such is the force of
habit, on the human mind, and so hard is it to speak in a language different
from that to which we have been long accustomed.

But if he meant it even serious, it has something in its nature blasphemous;
for if it is wounding to the character of God, the great disposer of events, to
deny his kind and good providence, surely it is so likewise, to ask his
countenance and aid, in a course of action diametrically opposite to justice
and to truth. What? -- shall it be your design to strip, rob, and cut the
throats of men and mankind, and shall you in the mean time ask the blessing of
God in the execution of it? It is an insult upon heaven. It is blasphemy.

I remark farther on the proclamation; that it seems to adopt the style of the
sacred book, and speaks of those called rebels as the scripture speaks of
reprobated men after death. The British army are the messengers of justice and
of wrath; and those which shall be so unhappy as to fall into their hands are
the wilful outcasts. This is arrogance to a high degree, for it is more than
falls to the share of man to apply to himself or claim.

Such was the language of the general with regard to what he had in view to do.
Not less excessive was it in the account of what he had already done. Of this,
his letter to lord George German, on the reduction of Ticonderoga, may be
selected as an evidence. It is pompous in idea, and conceived in very lofty
terms. Were one to read it over, it would naturally extend his mouth as if he
had been used to pronounce the high heroic scenes of some swelling tragedy.
When you hear him describe the mount, whose top, and gradual ascent was covered
with artillery: when you consider the obstructions of the booms and sunken
piers through which he made his way: when you listen to the great address of
his officers and men in scaling, and climbing over these, you would suppose
that each of them was at least a Themistocles, and that the general himself had
done more than Alexander did, when he took by storm the city of the Tyrians,
having first in spite of winds and a thousand storms, built a mole in the sea
to join the island to the continent. A gasconade of this nature becomes
irreligious, when it is not accompanied with the least idea of gratitude to God
for that wherein he had succeeded.

Taking these things into view, we may easily account for the ignominious exit
of Burgoyne. It is to be resolved not so much into our skill and bravery, as
into the providence of God, which he had slighted and despised. He had made
himself master of the only post of consequence, where he had expected
opposition. He had hung on the rear of our broken army, and had taken
camp-equipage and prisoners. He had penetrated through a great depth of
country, and the road to victory was now smooth before him. At this very
instant he is deserted of his wonted prudence. It behoved him to have marched
on, with his whole army solidly, and to have given no time to the troops before
him, to re-assemble, or to rally. His great strength lay in continnuing
self-collected and impenetrable to our smaller bodies. But how providentially
for us, do we find him sending out his army by detachments! Hence it was that
in the very triumph of success, like an eagle that has stooped for a lamb, and
mounted to the clouds, he was wounded with an arrow, and brought down again.
Pride and self-confidence was the effect of his success, and it became the
cause of his future losses, and his last catastrophe.

From what we have said upon this subject, may there not arise some pertinent
reflections? It is the duty and interest of every man, who aspires to be
distinguished by a happy success, in that to which he puts his hand, that he
acknowledge God, and have an eye to his Almighty providence. God resists the
proud, but gives grace to the humble. Let me see a man go forth in any
enterprise, confiding in his own skill, resolution, or diligence, and paying no
attention to the great disposer of events, and I think I shall pretty generally
be right, if I venture to foretell to him that he shall not prosper in it. God
is represented in the sacred book as jealous of his glory. He will not fail to
assert his sovereignty over those who deny it, and by a proud vaunt and
boasting of their own great strength and prowess, do virtually preclude the
necessity of the divine interposition and assistance.

We are told in the ancient histories, of some great and fortunate commander,
whose name I cannot now recollect, that in recounting his successes, he added
frequently, at the end of each relation, and in this fortune had no share,
after which it is remarkable, that he never once more succeeded in any
undertaking.

The Assyrian monarch is an instance of the same nature. Under God he had done
very great things. He had overrun half the world with his arms. He had built
Babylon for the domicilium of his empire. The temple of Belus, in magnitude and
height, equalled the largest of the pyramids of Egypt. His gardens hanging in
the air, and groves planted on a level with the clouds, were a sight new and
admirable to the eye of man. His palace for its architecture far surpassed any
thing that had ever been in the world before this period. In this palace it is
said he walked, and, it was most probably, in some lofty story of it whence he
could have a view of the whole city, as it lay beneath him. His vain heart
swelling with its pride, he breaks forth in a strain of self-applause and
arrogance, not to be endured by the God of heaven. Is not this great Babylon
that I have built for the house of my kingdom, by the might of my power, and
for the honor of my majesty? And while the word was in his mouth, a voice fell
from heaven, and no doubt it came with an awful shock to his soul, O king, to
thee is it spoken; the kingdom is departed from thee.

The saying is as good as it is old, and as expressive as it is simple, that
pride goes before a fall. It is the history of many men, that they have
flourished and continued to ascend in the world for a time; but by and by have
experienced a reverse of fortune, and were again dashed down. It is the history
of many people, that they have endured poverty, and pain, and at length
surmounted these; but that now, almost established in plenty and in ease, they
have become viciously secure, and are struck from the happiness which they had
in view. The next generation saw their names blotted out, and lost among the
things that had once been.

It is the usual course of every war, that some one of the contending people is
suffered to prevail, until they are become secure, and irreligious by success;
then the wheel returns, and the troops which they had beaten, recover new
strength, make head again, and prove the last upon the field.

It is for this reason that I look upon the present to be the most critical
point of time, that has yet revolved to America. We set out very weak, and we
were sure of the providence of God, because we were sure that we needed it. We
were beaten very low, and we despaired not, because there were many instances
of those who had emerged from the deepest situation of trouble and distress.

We have emerged according to our hope, and have struck off a main limb from
the body of the tyrant. We may again be overcome. It is an easy thing for the
providence which rules the world to lay us lower than he has yet raised us,
and to make our present eminence serving to a fall more terrible.

If we would be still victorious, let us be still humble. Was I to see in these
united states, a departure, in any instance, from that spirit of sobriety, with
which at first we set out, I should fear that it presaged us a great reverse of
fortune. I never thought it possible that a people who had virtuously rejected
every luxury, and every vain amusement, could be overcome in so just a cause. I
never could believe it in the course of providence, that a people could be
conquered, whose practice it had now become to go to the house of prayer,
instead of a horse-race, See a recommendation of the Delegates in Congress,
about the commencement of this debate.
and to church instead of a ball-room. Should this practice be reversed, we
should have just ground to apprehend that our fortune also should be reversed
with it.

If we would still have ground to boast, let us still take care that we boast
not. We have seen the nature and the issue of gasconade and self-dependence in
Burgoyne. I have spoken of it with some degree of ridicule, in order that it
might appear ridiculous. Laudible has been our practice hitherto, in asking
the aid of divine providence when we were about to engage in any undertaking.
Laudible has been the recommendation of our Congress in setting apart a day
for public thanksgiving and praise to God, when through divine favor we have
been successful. Let this taste and sense of things be kept up in the breast of
every senator, and soldier, and subject of the states of North America. How
much more becoming is a day set apart for praise to God, than entertainments in
a hall of merriment, or assembly of intemperate joy. How much more becoming is
it at a time, when it is yet undecided what shall be the fate and issue of our
contest -- at a time more especially when many of our countrymen lie in jails
famishing for bread. These poor men, fellow soldiers and fellow sufferers in
the common cause, must certainly take it very hard to hear of mirth, and
music, and festivity entertained by others, while they lie faint and hungry in
the hand of the cruel foe. For this reason, and for many others, may sobriety,
and wisdom, be the spirit of our times.

If we begin to exult too soon, we shall look very mean and contemptible if we
are shortly beaten, and have the ground of our triumph taken from us. If at any
time we are frowned on by providence, let us hope; but if on the contrary we
bend along in a full gale of fair prosperity let us fear. In every instance of
success, O fellow soldiers let your offerings rise,
Not in loud mirth, and cantico, and song;
But in true piety, and light of love,
And warm devotion in the inward part.
Let your festivity he mixed with thought,
And sober judgment, on the grand event.


I have said that the present time is a crisis to America. We are in that
situation where a reverse of fortune does usually take place. We have
experienced for some time past a high flow and full gale of continued success.

The latter end of the last campaign was critical to the British arms in
America. They had reduced fort Washington, and traveled through the Jersies.
They had obliged us with a few troops to retire on this side the Delaware. What
now remained but the full taste of triumph, and the fruits of victory? They had
reached a summit, and this was the crisis. From the eminence attained, they now
began to decline down the hill. This is no more than what is usual to those,
who, flattered by success, look upon their work as already done.

The present time is a crisis to America. We have vanquished Burgoyne. We have
reached a very great eminence. Let us so behave, that providence, may not in
justice and in punishment fix it down as the summit to which we shall attain.
Let not security take the place of prudence. We have yet a great height of
mountain to ascend. It would be the best policy of general How and the devil,
if they knew it, to give way, and make as if they were beaten altogether, so
that by and by they might return again, and taking us unguarded, deal a severer
blow. On the other hand, it is our best policy to be upon our guard, and
notwithstanding our late success and victory, not to tempt providence by a
remission of our vigilance and care -- not to offend the great arbiter of
causes, by giving way to vain glory and a boasting spirit, while our
deliverance is yet incomplete, and it remains to be decided, whether we shall
live freemen, or be made slaves.

THE GREAT WRATH OF THE TYRANT, AND THE CAUSE OF IT.
Having great wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time.

Rev. xii, 12.
THESE words are characteristic of the devil, who, in the late age of the
world, and just before the millenium, is about to act with redoubled fury,
knowing, that in a short time, he shall be shut up in the dark abode of hell,
not to vex or disturb the human race any more. It is the case not only with the
devil, but with all who in any shape resemble him, that they vent themselves
the more outragiously, in proportion as the time is short in which they have
any hope of opportunity to exercise their vengeance. It is the case
particularly with the tyrant of Great Britain, who at this time has made war
upon us -- He has had great wrath; and it is because he knows that he has
but a short time*

1. He has had great wrath. It is usual in language when a man is angry, for
himself as well as others to say that he is mad. He is mad with rage -- you
have made me mad and the like. Nor is there so great an impropriety in these
words as may at first be imagined; for according to the ancient, anger is a
short madness. Passion of any kind and more especially that of anger, disturbs
or prevents any exercise of reason, so that the subject of it, in the wildness
of his looks, the impetuosity of words, and the extravagance of action, shall
differ little from a madman. In the sally of resentment he shall take the way
to gratify it which is not only most ineffectual to hurt the person with whom
he is offended, but is most deadly and destructive to himself. An eager thirst
of revenge will prompt a man to engage in a duel with a more skilful adversary,
and to risk his life with but half a chance, forth preservation of it. At the
same time, the blind and inconsiderate fury of his rage, will perfectly destroy
that small share of skill and prudence which he may have had, and render him an
easy prey to the more cool and deliberate combatant.

We saw this remarkably in the direction of the war waged by the tyrant. He was
principally enraged with the four New England provinces* and therefore was
disposed to make these the first examples of his vengeance. Prompted by his
passion, this quarter of the confederate colonies he attacked first, contrary
to the well established maxim -- Seek the weak side of an enemy. Had he brought
his first ten thousand men up the Bay of Chesapeak, and made his inroad on the
then unarmed, undisciplined, and defenseless Pennsylvanians, he might have
effectuated something. But so inveterate was his rage against the people of the
Massachusett's-Bay province in particular, that these he must attack first,
though he well knew, that of all the Americans, they were the best prepared to
receive him. This province, which at that time might be acaccounted the
citadel, he continued with unavailing assiduity to batter, until the other
parts of the empire were put into a posture of defense, and rendered equally
impregnable to his assault. Thus it may be said that the tyrant has been mad
with rage -- that his anger has overshot his wit, and that from a desire
instantly to satiate his malice, he has lost the opportunity to satiate it at
all.

The madness of his passion was equally observable in many other parts of his
behavior. His business was to rob, and it was his wisdom to have attempted it,
like a man of honor, so that many might give up their purse with some degree
of readiness, taken with the gallant look of the highway-man, and the
politeness of the manner in which it was demanded. "Gentlemen, he might have
said, I am in want of money, and you must pardon me if I take the freedom to
request a little. You see my arms, and my capacity to force it from you;
nevertheless I scorn any ungentlemanly and unfair advantage Equip yourselves,
and come out and fight with me, and my retinue, in even play and fair
hostility. I scorn the assistance of the Hessian offered me from Germany -- the
Negro, or the Indian, to shed the blood of Christians. If I cannot conquer you
myself, I will disdain to take your money. Ladies in the coach be easy and
compose yourselves. I make not war upon the fairer sex. It is your husbands
with whom I am to combat."

Very contrary to this was the behavior of the tyrant. By his grim threats,
cruel outrage, and base barbarity, he at once discovered himself to be a
ruffian and a villain. The passion of his soul was too dark and gloomy to admit
the appearance of so much gallantry and sprightliness, but which, if exercised,
would have been the only most effectual way to have gained his purpose, and
prevented that declaration of independence and separation from his empire,
which, in consequence of his brutality, has taken place upon the continent.

It is evident from the bad policy of all his manners, that the tyrant has
been mad; and to what can we attribute this, so naturally as to the strength of
his resentment, which hurried him impetuously to gratify it, without attention
to the rules of prudence, or the maxims of experience. He has been mad with
rage. Like a madman he has been impolitic, but at the same time violent. His
rage has been exerted without skill, but at the same time with great strength
and great cruelty. He has had great wrath.

I need not write, nor describe it to you. It is writ in blood. You may cast up
your eye, and read it on every height from Bunker's-hill to fort Sullivan -- on
the heights of Abraham -- on the heights of Danbury -- on the heights of the
Hudson-river -- on the heights of Raritan -- on the heights of Delaware -- on
the heights of Schuylkill -- on the heights of Brandywine.

Some time ago we read sad appearances of bloodshed, in the fiery vapors
spread upon the north. Aurora borealis.
Ah! my countrymen, you may read it much better, not in the firmament, but upon
the earth. The Hessian has writ in blood -- the Indian has writ in blood --
the British soldiery has writ in blood. Here lies a Warren -- here lies a
Montgomery -- here lies a Mercer -- a Haslet -- a Worster -- a Harkemer -- a
Nash -- a Witherspoon. The wrath of the tyrant, in blood-red characters has
been writ by every one of these. He has had great wrath, and

II. It is because he knows that he has but a short time. The tyrant very
early had so much glimmering of light upon his mind, as to see what was very
easy to be seen, that these colonies could not be very long a member of his
empire. It was therefore his policy, he apprehended, to make the best use of
them, while he had them in his power. For this purpose he laid the stamp act
upon them, in order to enrich himself, and at the same time keep them low, and
at a greater distance from that period, when conscious of their own importance,
they might be disposed to throw off all subjection to his authority. In the
imposition of this tax he found a greater spirit of resistance than he had
expected, and therefore thought it prudent to repeal it for the present.
Sensible that he had aimed a most unfriendly stab at the vitals of our liberty,
he did not think it possible that we could in any future time forgive him. Thus
he was enraged against us, because he was persuaded that we must be enraged
against him. So true it is that he who injures never can forgive. His fancy and
imagination whirled in a perpetual fit of jealousy. He felt within himself,
that he had intended the greatest injury, and therefore justly thought, that
the people against whom it was intended must have conceived an answerable
indignation. He was convinced that it was our true and best interest, to break
off all connection with him; and therefore judged that we must be disposed to
take the first opportunity to do it. A state of suspense is worse than a state
of disappointment. His eager and unquiet spirit prompted him, as soon as
possible, to make the experiment, and to see whether the Americans had really
those designs of separation, which his own evil and foreboding fears had given
him to believe they began to entertain. He openly asserts the claim of binding
them in all cases whatsoever, and thus immediately brings about that
establishment of an independent empire in America, which otherwise might have
slept in embryo, for two or three ages.

When the claim was denied, and the attempt to enforce it was resisted, he
waxed very wroth, but was not yet come to the height of rage and desperation.
He had still some fluctuating hope that he should be able to reduce us for the
present, and hold us some longer time in subjection. At the commencement of the
debate he was pleasant in his manner, and talked much of clemency. It was some
time before he used the word -- rebels. His deluded and mistaken subjects was
the term. During the blockade of Boston he confined our prisoners to dungeons,
and to jail, but did not put them to death by famine, and the supply of
vitiated food. He shed our blood in the Bunker-hill engagement; but we do not
hear that he butchered the wounded, or refused quarter to any supplicating for
their life. He set fire to Charlestown, but this was rather to skreen his own
cowardice behind the smoke, than with a design to desolate the country. In
proportion as he became less sanguine in his hope of reducing us, he became
more outrageous, and barbarous in his resentment.

It was not until his departure from Virginia, that he set fire to the town of
Norfolk. It was not until his retreat from the White Plains, that he began to
burn dwelling houses, and lay waste our settlements. It was not until he had
ingloriously withdrawn from this tract of country, and retired back into
New York, that he began to show the civilized world something to astonish them,
in the usage of the unhappy prisoners of Fort-Washington.

It was not until his inroad through the Jersies that he let fully flip the
hounds that followed him, to lap, and feast luxuriously upon the blood of men.
It was not until this time that he mangled the wounded on the field of battle,
and stabed unpitiedly the soldier supplicating for his life. It was not until
his departure from this state, that he so wantonly every where began to burn
and destroy the buildings and edifices of the country through which he made his
rout.

In the last campaign he surpassed all that he had done before. In the retreat
of Clinton from the neighborhood of Albany, he consumed every fine building on
each side of the Hudson river. He laid in ruins the beautiful and pleasant
streets of Esopus or Kingston. He burned many other smaller villages, and
marked every vestige of his progress with waste and desolation.

In the inroad of Burgoyne he stirred up the savages to come down upon us, and
with more inhumanity than usual even to himself, he encouraged them by a reward
to scalp and murder the inhabitants in their places of abode. He ordered our
prisoners, under the very eye of the British troops, to be gnawed upon by these
dogs of hell. He murderously sent them in amongst the trembling captives, and
in the manner of the Canibals of South-America, caused them to choose out the
fattest, that they might put their knives in him, and feast upon his limbs with
a horrid appetite See the deposition of Doctor Young Love.
.

In his progress through the state of Pennsylvania, we have heard the cry of
the ravished virgin, and the murdered soldier, and have seen every horrid act
perpetrated that can disgrace the memory of wicked and apostate men. The
soft-expostulating souls that want bread in the jails of Philadelphia, recall
the memory of fort Washington, and lodge a new complaint in the ear of the God
of heaven, and in the ears of their countrymen.

I expect that next campaign, if the tyrant is able to effect an inroad, he
will vent his fury with a still more dispairing vengeance. We may guess his
loss of hope by his increase of wrath. When his rage is come to the very
height, so that no gleam of humanity remains to temperate his actions, we may
conclude that it is over with him and the day of our deliverance draws nigh.
Thus, that hour is the darkest which precedes the break of day, and February,
which is the last month, is the coldest and most stormy of the wintry year.

I have said that it is probable the tyrant will act, in the next campaign,
with a still more dispairing vengeance. When I ruminate upon it, I do not see
that he has any thing to add, to the gloomy catalogue of his former cruelties.
It is true he might assasinate and endeavor to satisfy his malice by the
private death of some of our greatest statesmen, and bravest heroes; but this
is what he has already plotted, and endeavored to accomplish. The dark scene
of hell laid against our general, on York-Island, is an evidence of this; And
the late attempt made against the great FRANKLIN at the court of France, sets
it beyond a possibility of doubt. It would seem therefore that nothing
barbarous or cruel of a new nature remains for him to perpetrate. If so, may we
not hope that he has run his round, and that shortly his opportunity of showing
himself barbarous and cruel to Americans, shall be made to cease?

It is indeed devoutly to be wished; for much pain and sore calamity is yet
upon us; and many poor families driven from their places of abode, suffer in
the contest. Well might it have been said with a reference to this war, as in
the words of the scripture immediately preceding those prefixed to this
discourse. Woe to the inhabiters of the earth and the sea, for the devil is
come down unto you. The devil is indeed come down in the service of the tyrant.
We have felt his fury on the land We have felt it on the sea. Many of our poor
sailors, taken by him, has he forced to act against the cause in which we are
engaged and to do reluctantly that which the principle of conscience
disapproves. Many of them has he shut down in the dark holds of vessels to
lament the lost light and the hope of day. Many of them has he sent away to
the scorched isles, where slavery takes place, and where hot fevers soon fix a
limit to the life of man.

The time of war is the devil's time. War is not friendly to religion. -- It is
not friendly to the sciences. Animosity and bloodshed is unfavourable to all
that is good and useful on the earth. I trust we shall soon be delivered from
the necessity of wading in it.

The reign of the tyrant is the reign of satan. I trust that a short space of
time shall fix the limit to them both. War and fierce debate shall show
themselves no more. Tranquillity and days of happiness shall again be ours. The
husbandman now destitute of habitation, shall return to his dwelling house. The
tear shall be wiped from the eye of the fair virgin, driven from the city,
where she had been delicately bred. The prisoner shall be lifted from the jail,
and have his name placed with those who have suffered for their country. The
soldier shall retire from the danger of the camp, and the wooden leg and the
gray hairs of valor shall be honorable. Historians shall hear from him the
tale of that which he did in battle. They shall dip their pens in the luster of
his fame, and give immortality to what they write.

Be cheared, O my country, for thy garden-bowers, and thy walls shall be built
again. Thy meads shall be decked with grass, and the grain shall be heavy on
thy fields. The villages shall rise from their rubbish and their smoke, and new
towns shall smile along thy streams.

Commerce shall extend her wings, and come from every shore. It will be
pleasant to see a new Exchange in every fair metropolis upon our coast. It will
be pleasant to observe every nation in their proper dress about to barter their
commodities upon our wharfs -- The native of Bencoolen, of Sumatra, of Borneo,
and the Malayan, with his pearl fished from the bottom of the sea -- The Turk
with his Turban on his head -- the Venetian -- the Genoese -- the Frenchman --
the Dane -- the Portuguese -- the Dutchman, and the Englishman himself taught
the arts of peace.

Science shall be planted in our country, and many seminaries shall again show
their heads. Like fair lights, and pyramids of fire, they shall shoot up in
every state. The muses every where shall strew the land with flowers; and
slumbering bards shall yet awake, to sing of nature, and the praise of men.

Religion shall again come down and live upon the earth. Free exercise of
conscience shall be allowed every where. Bigotry -- vile bigotry that springs
from ignorance, shall fly away. Truth, pure truth shall dispel the fog and
vapor of the mind. The light of knowledge, like the light of day shall kindle
heat in the pious soul. Days, happy days are yet before us.

The devil, in equal measure with the tyrant, has had great wrath, and it is
because he knows that he has but a short time. He has been let loose for a
while, but after he has taken a turn or two more, he shall be shut down in the
lake of hell. He shall carry with him blasphemy, and oaths, and profane
swearing* We shall have fair weather at the clearing up of this storm.

Let these bright ages hasten on, and to God, with whom all time, and
situation, and event is inscrutably laid up, be the glory. Amen.


