SERIOUS CONSIDERATIONS On several Important SUBJECTS; VIZ. On WAR and its
Inconsistency with the GOSPEL. Observations on SLAVERY. AND Remarks on the
Nature and bad Effects of SPIRITUOUS Liquors.

Ah! Why will men forget that they are Brethren, -- why delight,
In human Sacrifice? -- Why burst the ties
Of Nature, that should knit their Souls together,
In one soft band of Amity and Love
Father of men, was it for this!
Thy breath divine, kindled within his breast,
The vital flame? For this, was thy fair Image
Stamped on his Soul, with god-like lineaments?
For this, dominion given him absolute
Over all thy works, only that he might reign
Supreme in woe?
PROTEUS. PHILADELHIA: Printed by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Market-street, Between
Second and Third-streets 1778.

CHRIST our Lord, to whom every knee must bow, and every tongue confess, either
in mercy or in judgment, came down from his father's glory, took upon him our
nature and suffered death for us, to restore to us that first life of meekness,
purity and love, that being dead to sin, we should live unto righteousness.
Leaving us an example, says the Apostle, that we should follow his steps. He
positively enjoins us, to love our enemies, to bless them that curse us; to do
good to those that hate us, and pray for them which despitefully use us and
persecute us. A new commandment, says our blessed Savior, I give unto you,
that ye love one another as I have loved you. The meek, the merciful and the
pure in heart are by him pronounced to be the particular objects of divine
regard. These are the watch words of Christianity to all the true followers of
Christ.

On the other hand, War requires of its votaries that they kill, destroy, lay
waste, and to the utmost of their power distress and annoy, and in every way
and manner deprive those they esteem their enemies of support and comfort. Now
reader, consider the difference; look at the suffering and distress which has,
and continues to desolate this once highly favored land; numbers of human
beings, equally with our selves the objects of redeeming grace, are daily
hurried into eternity, many, its to be feared, in an unprepared state; and if
upon comparing the one with the other we feel compunction, if we are moved with
compassion toward our fellow-men, let us cherish this sensation; it is a call
from the God of Love, the beneficent father of mankind, whom the Apostle
denominates, under the appellation of love. God is Love -- and he that dwells
in God dwells in love and God in him.

THOUGHTS ON THE NATURE of WAR, etc.
WAR, considered in itself, is the premeditated and determined destruction of
human beings, of creatures originally formed after the image of God, and whose
preservation, for that reason, is secured by heaven itself within the sense of
this righteous law, that at the hand of every man's brother, the life of man
shall be required. And though this created image of our holy God must be owned
to have been so wretchedly defaced, as to retain but a very faint resemblance
of its divine original; yet as the highest enforcement of that heavenly law,
which was published for the security of life, it is most graciously renewed by
the incarnation of the son of God, and the indwelling of the Holy Ghost.

The apostle James, chap. 4th, has answered the question with respect to the
cause of war, in so precise and determinate a manner as to preclude all
difficulty and doubt about it; from whence comes wars and fighting amongst you,
says he, come they not hence, even of your lusts, that war in your members: Ye
kill and desire to have, and cannot obtain: Ye fight and war, yet have not,
because ye ask amiss, because ye have no respect to the will of the Lord that
reigns, but forsaking the Supreme Good in whom alone your happiness consists,
ye follow an earthly and deceitful good and think only of procuring it by your
power. James iv, 3. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, from a
supposed respect to the Lord that reigns, but, too generally, for animal and
sensual enjoyment, that ye may consume it upon your lusts. In this very
explicit and true account, war, like all other evils, is described as centering
in itself; and the end of it is declared to be gratification of those very
appetites and passions, from which it derives its birth; for in this unhappy
circle, which is indeed the great circle of the history of man, the fatal
mischief proceeds. War is the inseparable union between the sensual and
malignant passions; war protracted to a certain period, necessarily compels
peace; peace revives and extends trade and commerce; trade and commerce give
new life, vigor, and scope to the sensual and malignant passions, and these
naturally tend to generate another war.

The disorders of nature and of life are wholly the effects of sin, of a
voluntary aversion and alienation from the life, light and love of God; in
perfect union, with which perfect peace and happiness are only to be found;
hence that discordance of the outward elements, which brings forth pestilence,
famine, earthquakes, storms,,and tempests; hence, in the corporal part of the
human frame, pain, sickness, and death; in the mental, sensuality, pride, and
malignity, including all the selfish and wrathful passions, that between
individuals, engender envy, hatred, injury, resentment, and revenge; and
between nations, a peculiar kind of enmity and wrong, that issues in war.
Surrounded with evil as men are, and full of evil themselves, what would become
of the whole wretched race, at any given instant of time, at this very moment
for example, if the effect of that evil were not continually suspended, and
directed by infinite power; so as to become continually subservient to the
purposes of infinite wisdom, righteousness, and love.

It would be needless to mention the nature of that universal redemption which
is proposed by the gospel; if in this age of levity we were not so apt to
forget it. It is, in general, a full restoration of the life of God in the
soul; the life of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, which was once the life and
perfection of fallen man, which the Son of God, the bruiser of the serpent, has
by his suffering, been restoring, to human nature from the time in which Adam
fell.

When the Son of God became incarnate, what was implied in this restoration as
the effect of its influence upon man, was fully evident from our blessed
Savior's doctrine and his life; namely, the conquest and renunciation of the
world, the death of the will, and of all the appetites and passions of fallen
animal nature, through faith in his name -- not an historical and speculative
faith, a mere rational assent to the truth of a well attested history of facts
and doctrines; but a full, ardent, continual desire of the life of Christ, as
begotten and formed in the soul, by the continual operation of the Holy Ghost.
Thus what was at first the personal duties of single christians, when they were
scattered over the face of the earth, and were only parts of different nations,
became afterward national duties, when whole nations became christians. If,
therefore, to love our enemy, to forgive him, to do him good, and pray for him;
it to overcome the world, whose power consists in the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eye, and the pride of life, are christian personal duties, if to
love the Lord our God, with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our
mind, and with all our strength, and our fellow creatures as ourselves, is the
purity and perfection of the christian personal life, the same must also be
true of a christian national duty; for a christian nation differs no otherwise
from a christian person, than as the whole differs from one of the parts of
which it essentially consists.

It would be needless to propose this subject to the consideration of
experimental christians, who know with certainty, that human nature left to
itself, has no power but that of producing mere evil, and that every thing
within it and without it, that is either great or good, is the free gift of
grace, the unmerited bounty of redeeming love. But the true christian spirit
being much departed from the earth, true christian knowledge, as its
inseparable companion, is departed with it, and men seem to be gone back again
to their old animal life; and though in speculation and idea they prosess an
assent to the truths of revelation, yet in heart and practice they are apt to
consider the course of all things as connected only with temporal good and
evil, and themselves as the center and circumference, the first cause, and the
la^^ end of all, ascribing to human understanding, designs which only infinite
Wisdom can form, and to human power, events which Omnipotence only can produce.
If the christian, however, recollects himself, he will find war to be a sad
consequence of the apostasy, and fall of man, when he was abandoned, to the
fury of his own lusts and passions Wars, says Augustine, are spectacles by
which the devil cruelly sports with mankind.
, as the natural and penal effects of breaking loose from the divine government
the fundamental law of which is LOVE; Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, with all thy strength, and thy
fellow creatures as thyself.

The consequences of war, when impartially examined, will be found big, not
only with outward and temporal distress, but also with an evil that extends
itself (where in the darkness and tumult of human passions, it is, by many,
neither expected nor conceived to reach) even into the regions of eternity.
That property is confounded, scattered, and destroyed; that laws are trampled
under foot, government despised, and the ties of all civil and domestic order
broken into pieces; that fruitful countries are made deserts, and stately
cities a heap of ruins, that matrons and virgins are violated; and neither the
innocence of unoffending infancy, nor the impotence of decrepit age, afford
protection from the rage and thirst for blood; this is but the mortal progeny
of this seeming wombof mischief; the worst, even the dreadful effect it has
upon the immortal soul, is still behind; and though remote from those senses and
passions that are exercised only by present good and evil, must yet, upon the
least recollection, impress with horror every mind that believes there is a
righteous God, and a state of retribution, that is to last forever. Under these
considerations, what must the real christian feel; he who is fully convinced
that the fall of man, is a fall from meekness, purity, and love, into
sensuality, pride, and wrath; that the Son of God became incarnate, and
suffered and died to restore that first life of meekness, purity, and love; and
that for these in whom the restoration of that life is not begun, in the
present state the Son of God incarnate, it is to be feared, suffered and died
in vain. What must he feel for those immortal spirits, who in the earliest dawn
of their day of purification, are by hundreds and thousands driven into
eternity, in the bitterness of enmity and wrath -- some inflamed with
drunkenness, some fired with lust; and all stained with blood? In those direful
conflicts, which are maintained with so much rage, that when the vanquished, at
last, retreats with the loss of twenty thousand human beings, the victor finds
he has purchased some little advantage, at the expense of more than half that
number Smollet, in his History of England, speaking of the battle of
Cunerfdorf, where the Prussians, attacked the Muscovites, in the year I759,
says, The carnage was truly horrible, above twenty thousand Prussians lay dead
on the field. The loss of the Russians amounted to ten thousand He adds, That
at no time since the days of ignorance and barbarity, have the lives of men
been squandered away with such profusion, as in the course of this German war.
They have not only been unnecessarily sacrificed, in various exploits of no
consequence, but have been lavishly exposed to all the rigor and distempers of
winter campaigns -- in despite of nature, and in contempt of humanity.
. Heaven and earth! what a possibility is here of a sacrifice made to the
prince of darkness, the first and chief apostate, who rejoices in beholding
men, through the abuse of those benefits which undeserved mercy has conferred
upon them, transformed into enmity and hatred of God and their brethren;
forsaken by God, and destroying one another, and thus hastening once more into
his horrid society; that having been accomplices in his rebellion, they may
become partakers of his misery and torment.

Now if the man of valor, whom consenting nations have dignified with the
title of hero, and the man devoted to the world, are asked, From whence this
immortal mischief, that may thus extend its influence into the regions of
eternity, can proceed, what must they answer? indeed what can they answer, but
that it is engendered by the love of human glory -- as vain a phantom as ever
played before a mad man's eye; by the lust of dominion, the avarice of wealth,
or some other pursuit that centers in this present life. May all those who are
called to be the followers of Christ be preserved from these earthly, these
sensual and malignant motives, so repugnant to the generous, compassionate and
forgiving temper, which, through the influence of redeeming mercy, is
concomitant with the pure beams of heavenly light, that light which is intended
to remove all the darkness of human corruption, and transform selfish, sensual,
proud spirits, into angels of patience, humility, meekness, purity and love;
the children, and heirs of God; the brethren, and joint heirs of Christ.

All external blessings, whether national or personal, are curses, when they
become the fuel of the sensual and malignant fire in corrupt nature, when they
not only alienate the mind from the Lord that reigns, but madden it to
impious rebellion and defiance against him. If ye will not lay it to heart to
give glory unto my name, says the Lord of Hosts, I will even send a curse upon
your blessings. Malachi ii, 2. From the foregoing, it is evident, that
Christians can have no interest in war, they cannot derive blessings from its
success, nor triumph and exult, when to the short sighted view of the human
mind, the appearance of success presents itself; these know, that the means are
infinitely disproportionate to the end, and our Redeemer himself, in the
revelation of his future judgments, upon a fallen and obstinate evil world, has
declared, that, he that leads into captivity shall go into captivity, and he
that kills with the sword, must be killed with the sword. Rev. xiii, I0. Here
is the trial of the faith, and patience of the saints, who being called to a
state of suffering, and treading in the footsteps of their great exampler, when
they are reviled, revile not again. When they suffer, threaten not, but commit
themselves to the Lord that reigns to him that judges righteously. Peter ii,
23. And to this solemn declaration of righteous judgment; the penman of that
awful book, calls upon all mankind to attend, and says, If any man have an ear,
an ear that is not totally deafened by the tumultuous passions of nature,
separated from God, and turned wholly to itself, let him now hear; let him now
repent, and forsaking his own sensual and malignant will, seek after the God of
peace and love, and live.

EXSRACT from LAW's ADDRESS to the CLERGY.
THE temporal miseries and wrong which are the sad effects of war, are neither
to be numbered or expressed. -- What theivery bears any proportion to that
which with the boldness of drum and trumpet, plunders the innocent of all they
have? and if themselves are left alive, with all their limbs, or their
daughters unravished, they have many times only the ashes of their consumed
houses to lie down upon. -- What honor has war gotten, from its thousands and
tens of hundreds of thousands of men slaughtered on heaps, with as little
regret or concern as at loads of rubbish thrown into a pit. -- Who but the
fiery dragon, would put a wreath of laurel on such heroes head? Who but he,
could say unto them, Well done, good and faithful servants. But there is still
an evil of war much greater, though less regarded, apparent to those who
reflect, how many hundreds of thousands of men, born into this world, for no
other end, but that they may, by being born again of Christ, from sons of
Adam's misery, become sons of God, and fellowheirs with Christ, in everlasting
glory, who reflects, I say, what nameless numbers of these are robbed of God's
precious gift of life to them, before they have known the one sole benefit of
living, who are not suffered to stay in this world, till age and experience
have helped them to know the inward voice and operation of God's spirit, have
helped them to find and feel that evil, curse, and sting of sin and death,
which must be taken from within them, before they can die the death of the
righteous; who instead of this, have been either violently forced or tempted in
the fire of youth, and full strength of sinful lusts, to forget God, eternity,
and their own souls, and rush into a kill or be killed, with as much furious
haste and goodness of spirit, as tiger kills tiger for the sake of his prey.
Amongst unfallen creatures in heaven, God's name and nature is love, light, and
glory -- to the fallen sons of Adam, that which was love, light, and glory in
heaven, becomes infinite pity and compassion on earth; in a God, clothed with
the nature of his fallen creature, bearing all its infirmities, entering into
all its troubles, and in the meek innocence of a lamb of God; living a life and
dying a death of all sufferings due to sin. Sing! O ye heavens! and shout all
ye lower parts of the earth, for this is our God, that varies not, whose first
creating love knows no change, but into a redeeming pity toward all his fallen
creatures. Look now at warning Christendom, what smallest drop of pity toward
sinners is to be found in it? or how could a spirit, all hellish, more fully
contrive and hasten their destruction; it stirs up and kindles every passion of
fallen nature, that is contrary to the allhumble, all-meek, all loving,
all-forgiving, all-saving spirit of Christ -- it unites, it drives, and compels
nameless numbers of unconverted sinners to fall murdering and murdered, amongst
flashes of fire, with the wrath and swiftness of lightning, into a fire
infinitely worse than that in which they died -- O sad subject for thanks
giving days, whether in popish or protestant churches; for if there is a joy of
all the angels in heaven for one sinner that repents, what a joy must there
be in hell, over such multitudes of sinners, not suffered to repent? And it
they who have converted many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars in the
firmament forever, what Chorazin woe may they not justly sear, whose proud
wrath, and vain glory, have robbed such numberless troops of poor wretches, of
all time and place of knowing what righteousness they wanted, for the salvation
of their immortal souls Most lamentable was the calamity, or rather grievous
judgment, which besel the English State, by means of the intestine wars which
prevailed between the two Houses of York and Lancaster, in support of their
claim to the crown. We are told in History, That above one hundred thousand men
perished in the several conflicts, which ensued on that debate, with great
numbers of the principal men of the nation, amongst whom were more than fifty
of the royal blood, who laid down their lives either in battle, or by the hands
of the public executioner. And here an awful consideration occurs -- What did
either party obtain by this lamentable devastation and destruction of their
fellow creatures, their countrymen, their brethren, called to be heirs of the
same salvation.
. Here my pen trembles in my hand -- But when, O! when will one single
christian church, people, or language, tremble at the share they have in this
death of sinners -- Again, would you further see the fall of the universal
church, from being led by the Spirit of Christ, to be guided by the inspiration
of the great fiery dragon, look at all European Christendom sailing round the
globe, with fire and sword, and every murdering art of war, to seize the
possessions and steal or kill the inhabitants of Africa and the Indies. -- What
natural right of man, what supernatural virtue, which Christ bro't down from
heaven, is not here trodden under foot? -- all that you ever read or heared of
heathen barbarity, was here outdone by christian conquerors. What wars of
christians against christians, blended with scalping heathens, have stained the
earth and the seas with human blood, for a miserable share in the spoils of a
plundered heathen world; a world which should have heard, or seen, or felt
nothing from the followers of Christ, but a divine love, that had forced them
from distant lands, and through the perils of long seas, to visit strangers,
with those glad tidings of peace and salvation, to all the world, which angels
from heaven, and shepherds on earth, proclaimed at the birth of Christ It is
frequently urged in favor of war, that our Savior near the time of his
passion, gave directions to his disciples to take their swords. The passage is
as follows, Luke xxii, 35. "When I sent you without purse, or scrip, lacked ye
any thing? and they said, Nothing. Then be said into them, But now he that has
a purse, let him take it, and likewise his scrip; and he that has no sword let
him sell his garment, and buy one. And they said, Lord, behold here are two
swords. And he said unto them, It is enough." Now from what follows in the
context, it appears this passage ought not to be taken literally, but rather as
some annoters say, to be understood as an emblem of the dangerous situation
they were in, as we find at Mat. xxvi, 51. "And behold, one of them which were
with Jesus, stretched out his hand, and drew his sword, and struck a servant of
the high priest, and smote off his ear. Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again
thy sword into his place; for all they that take the sword, shall perish with
the sword" This agrees with the answer made by our Savior to Pilate. John
xviii, 36. "My kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this world,
then would my servants fight; that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but
now is my kingdom not from hence.
.

But to know when her christianity admits of war, christianity is to be
considered as in its right state; now the true state of the world, turned
christian, is thus described by the great Gospel-prophet, showed what a change
it was to make in the fallen state of the world; It shall come to pass, in the
last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the
top of the mountains, and all nations shall flow into it, and many people shall
say, Let us go up to the mountain of the Lord's house, and he will teach us of
his ways, and we will walk in his paths, Isa. ii, 2. Now what follows from this
going up of the nations to the mountain of the Lord's house, the holy prophet
expressly tells you in the following words: They shall beat their swords into
plow-shares, and their spears into pruninghooks; nation shall not lift up its
sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. Isa. ii, 4. Mic.
iv, 3. This is the prophet's true Christendom, with one and the same essential
divine mark set upon it; as when the Lamb of God said, By this shall all men
know, that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another, as I have loved you,
John xiii, 34. Chrits's kingdom is no where come, but where the works of the
devil are destroyed, and men are turned from the power of satan unto God -- God
is only another name for the highest and only good, and the highest and only
good means nothing else but love, with all its works. Would you farther see
when and where the kingdoms of this fallen world are become a kingdom of God,
the Gospelprophet tells you, that it is then and there where all enmity
cease. The wolf, faith he, shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall
lie down with the kid; the cast and the young lion, and the fatling together,
and a little child shall lead them. The cow and the bear shall feed, and their
young ones shall lie down together; and the lion shall like the the ox. The
sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put
his hand on the cockatriceden -- for they shall not hurt and destroy in all my
holy mountain, Isa. xi, 6. See here a kingdom of God on the earth; it is
nothing else but a kingdom of mere love, where all hurt and destroying is done
away, and every work of enmity changed into one united power of heavenly love
-- but observe again and again, whence this comes to pass, that God's kingdom
on earth is, and can be nothing else, but the power of reigning love; the
prophet tells tells us, it is because in the days of his kingdom the earth
shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea."

Hence we are enjoined, by our blessed Savior, to pray for, and continually to
watch over every suggestion of our corrupt minds, which may impede the
accomplishment of these gracious promises; Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done
in earth, as it is done in heaven. The frequent accounts we meet with in the
Old Testament, of wars being carried on in the time of the law, gives no
sanction to the same practice under the gospel; as this last dispensation is a
wondrous display of divine benignity and love, pronouncing those only blessed,
who are found in the actual possession of that poverty of spirit, that meekness
and purity of heart, which was pointed out in types and ceremonies, under the
law; hence the gospel dispensation is declared to be the bringing in of a
better hope, by which we draw nigh unto God, Heb. vii, I9.

We are christians, not Jews, and are therefore required to attend to the
instruction and practice of our great and good exampler, Jesus Christ, who was
declared from heaven to be the beloved Son of God; and whole appearance on
earth was ushered in by the angels and heavenly host, with a publication of
peace on earth, and good will toward men. The prophecies which preceded our
Savior's coming, clearly pointed to the greater excellency of the
dispensation, which was to take place when He, the peaceable Shiloh, the desire
of nations should come, unto whom the gathering of the people was to be, Hag.
ii, 7.

The primitive christians bore a testimony to the inconsistency of war with the
gospel. Robert Barclay, in his Apology, says, That this was the judgment of
most (if not all) the ancient fathers, (so called) the first three hundred
years after Christ. They affirmed the prophecies of Isaiah and Micah,
respecting the peaceable reign of the Messiah, to be fulfilled in the
christians of their time. Origin (who wrote in the beginning of the third
century) confirms this in his answer to Celsus, a most virulent adversary, who
had charged the christians with refusing to bear arms, and to enter into
military employment. Origin contra Celsum., iib. 8. p. 426. Cantab. editio.
Many of the Reformers favored the same sentiment, particularly John Wickliff;
the first eminent instrument raised in opposition to the errors and corruption
then prevalent in the world; of whom we are told in the account of his life,
Life of John Wickliff, etc. by W. Gilpias
That he thought the whole trade of war was sinful.

We find by the accounts we meet with in John Fox's Acts and Monuments of the
Church, that the same testimony against war was maintained amongst the
followers of Wickliff. This appears more particularly, from a representation,
called Conclusions and Reformations, laid before the parliament, by those first
Reformers, the I7th of Richard the IId, in the year I395, as mentioned vol. I.
p. 579. It farther appears from what John Fox calls, "The godly Declaration of
Walter Brute;" of whose susserings for the truth, he gives us a large account,
at page 555. An extract of the said Walter's expressions, on that head, are as
follows, viz.

I marvel why wise men, leaving the plain and manifest doctrine of Christ,
whereby he teaches patience, do seek corners of their own imagining, to the
intent they may approve fightings and wars, why mark they not after what manner
Christ spoke to Peter, striking the high bishop's servant, saying, Put up the
sword into the sheath; for every one that shall take the sword, shall perish
with the sword.

Again; the apostle writing to the Corinthians, as touching judgment and
contention, which are matter of less weight than are fightings; he writes, Now
verily there is great fault in you, that ye be at law amongst yourselves; why
rather take ye not wrong? why rather suffer ye not deceit. And that apostle
generally in all his epistles, teaches, that patience should be kept, and not
corporal resistance by fightings, because charity is patient, it is courteous,
it suffers all things. I marvel how they justify, and make good the wars by
christians, saving only the wars against the devil and sin. For seeing that it
is plain, that those things which were in the Old Testament, were figures of
things to be done in the New Testament; therefore we must needs say, that
corporal wars being then done, were figures of the christian wars against sin
and the devil, for the heavenly country, which is our inheritance.

Wickliff thought all arts which administered to the luxuries of life, were
prohibited by the gospel. The scripture, he said, tells us, that having food
and raiment, we should be therewith content. Beihner, though a popish writer,
gives a very favorable account of Wilckliff's disciples. He says theys they
were men of a serious, modest deportment, avoiding all ostentation in dress;
chaste and temperate; never seen in taverns, or amused by the trifling gaieties
of life -- that they utterly despised wealth, being fully content with bare
necessaries. Gilpein's life of Wickliff
. -- Hence it appears that these first Reformers, as well as the primitive
christians, took our Savior's injunction, Mat. vi, I9. Lay not up for
yourselves treasures upon earth, in a more literal sense than it has been
understood by many high professors in more later days. They were sensible of
the truth of his declaration, Mark x, 23. That it would be hard for those that
had accumulated riches, had added house to house and field to field, to enter
the kingdom of heaven
In the times which preceded our Savior's appearance on earth, every battle of
the warrior was with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood; but the
warfare which was to be introduced by HIM, the Prince of Peace, of the increase
of whose government there is to be no end, was to be "with burning and fuel of
fire," This expression Of the increase of whose government, there is to be no
end appears to point out, that the prevalency of the suffering spirit of the
gospel in the world, is to be a gradual work, which will be brought about under
suffering to the followers of Christ, as it was to their Master, who was made
perfect through suffering
. Isaiah ix, 5. to the destruction of the man of sin, the corrupt propensity of
nature, and establishment of that purity of heart and universal love, which the
gospel proposes.

The apostle tells the believers, Ephesians. vi, I2. "That they warred not after the
flesh." 2 Cor. x, 4. That the weapons of their warfare were not carnal, but
mighty through God, to the pulling down the strong holds, casting down every
imagination, and high thing which exalts itself against the knowledge of God,
and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. It was by
meekness and patient suffering, that our Savior overcame and gave a deadly
blow to sin; leaving us an example that we should follow his footsteps. "Learn
of me," says this blessed Redeemer, for I am meek and low, and ye shall find
rest to your souls. Blessed are the meek, the merciful, and those who hunger
and thirst after righteousness, (with this blessed promise) for they shall be
filled. Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called THE CHILDREN OF
GOD, Mat. v. And to his disciples, when he sent them to preach the Gospel, he
says, Behold I send you as lambs amongst wolves. The evangelick prophet had a
clear prospect of the abasement and sufferings of our Savior, when he says, He
was oppressed and afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he is brought as a
lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opened
not his mouth, Isa. liii, 7.

The efficacy of this suffering spirit of Christ was contrary to the natural
will, and a mystery to the reasoning part in man; it was to the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks, foolishness; and still remains a mystery to
the "wisdom of the world," I Cor. i, 22.

Our Savior himself, in the course of his precepts, clearly distinguished the
greater purity of the doctrine he was about to establish, from the
imperfectness of that practiced in the former dispensations; Mat. v. Ye have
heard that it has been said to them of old times -- an eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth, but I say unto you, that ye resist not evil. Again: Ye have
heard that it has been said, thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine
enemy, but I say unto you, love your enemies, It is certainly as easy to
reconcile the greatest contradiction as these declarations of our Lord's with
the practice of war, resist not evil, with distress and annoy those we are
contending with; love your enemies with contrive every method to spoil, to make
a prey of, and pursue them with fire and sword
. bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
which despitefully use you and persecute you, that ye may be the children of
your Father which is in heaven. A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love
one another as I have loved you, Job. xiii, 34.


Hence we have reason to believe, that the injunction and allowance granted to
the Jews, of making war upon their enemies, and one upon another; was in
consequence of that hardness of heart, which prevailed amongst them; and that
this permission was granted from the same motive, as that mentioned by our
Lord, when the Jews were pleading the license given them by Moses, to put away
their wives, and marry other women: Mark x, 5. For the hardness of your hearts,
Moses wrote you this precept; but from the beginning of the creation God made
them male and female -- what therefore God has joined together, let no man put
asunder. This, as well as war, slavery, an other practices of the like nature,
were a violence upon that union, purity, and brotherly love, which subsisted in
the beginning, in the original constitution of things, whilst man retained his
primitive innocence. And that the spilling of human blood was not acceptable in
the eyes of perfect Purity, who the apostle denominates under the appellation
of love, God is Love, appears from the prohibition laid upon king David, not to
build an house unto God, on account of his having been concerned in the
destruction of so many of his fellow creatures, as himself declared, I Chron.
xxii, 8. The word of the Lord came to me, saying, Thou have shed blood
abundantly, and have made great wars; thou shall not build an house unto my
name, because thou have shed much blood upon the earth in my sight.

That pious, learned man, bishop Tailor, chaplain to king Charles the Is It, in
his dedication to his Discourse on the liberty of Prophesying, printed in
London, I702; appears to have had a clear prospect of what must be the genuine
effect of the doctrine and power, which our blessed Savior came to communicate
to mankind, even that inexpressible love, which breathing peace and goodwill to
every individual, knows of no enemy; but, in Jesus Christ, embraces with
brotherly affection, the whole creation. He expresses himself as follows at
page 3, etc. As contrary as cruelty is to mercy, tyranny to charity; so is war
and bloodshed, to the meekness and gentleness of the christian religion. I had
thought, says he, of the prophecy, That under the gospel, our swords should be
turned into plowshares, and our spears into pruning hooks: I knew that no
tittle spoken by God's Spirit, should return unperformed and ineffectual; and I
was certain, that such was the excellency of Christ's doctrine, that if men
would obey it, christians should never war one aganst another.

OBSERVATIONS ON SLAVERY.
THE Slavery which now so largely subsists in the American Colonies, is another
mighty evil, which proceeds from the same corrupt root as War; for, however, it
may be granted that some, otherwise, well disposed people in different places,
particularly in these provinces, at first fell into the practice of buying and
keeping Slaves, through inadvertency, or by the example of others; yet in the
generality it sprang from an unwarrantable desire of gain, a lust for amassing
wealth, and in the pride of their heart, holding an uncontrollable power over
their fellow-men. The observation which the Apostle makes on War, may well be
applied to those who compelled their fellow-men to become their slaves, they
lusted, for wealth and power and desired to have, that they might consume it
upon their lusts.

It is a very afflictive consideration, that notwithstanding the rights and
liberties of mankind have been so much the object of public notice, yet the
same corrupt principles still maintain their power in the minds of most Slave
Holders. Indeed nothing can more clearly and possitively militate against the
slavery of the Negroes, than the several declarations lately published, with so
great an appearance of solemnity, through all the colonies, viz. We hold these
truths to be self evident, that all men are created equal, that they are
endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights; that among these are
life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. And That all men are oy nature
equally free and independent, and have certain inherent rights, of which when
they enter into a state of society they cannot by any compact, deprive or
divert their property, namely the enjoyment of life and liberty, with the means
of acquiring and possessing property, and pursuing and obtaining happiness and
safety. That after these, and other declarations of the same kind, have been so
publicly made to the world, Slavery should continue in its full force in the
Colonies; and even in some cases, its bands should, by Law, be farther
established, By a Law of the Province of North Carolina, May I777. All Slaves
who have been set free, except by license first obtained from the County court,
for what said court shall judge to be a meritorious service, shall be seized
and sold by the sheriff to the highest bidder
. is a great aggravation of that guilt which has so long lain upon America; and
which together with the blood of the Native Indians, so daringly spilt, Many of
the Indians in this and the neighboring provinces have at different time been
treacherously and cruelly murdered, particularly in the town of Lancaster and
the neighboring manor of which little judicial inquiry has been made, in
order to bring the murderers to justice
. is likely to be one of the prinpcial causes of those heavy judgments, which
are now so sensibly displayed over the Colonies. Perhaps nothing will so
sensibly teach us to feel for the affliction of the oppressed Africans, as that
ourselves partake of the same cup of distress, we have so long been
instrumental in causing them to drink. If we look back to early times, and
bring to our remembrance what we have heard from our fathers, relating to the
first introduction of Negroes amongst us, we shall have reason to conclude,
that there were but few of those concerned in those purchases, who were not in
some measure acquainted with the dreadful calamities introduced in Guinea, in
order to procure Slaves for the American Market. They had doubtless heard
something of these accounts; they saw their afflicted fellow-men, after being
by the ravages of war deprived of all property, and cruelly rent from every
tender connection in their native land, brought to America, and there sold like
beasts for burden or slaughter; yet we have too much reason to conclude that
but little sympathy was extended to them, few, very few, even amongst
professors, endeavored, on their behalf, To seek judgment, to relieve the
oppressed; to plead for the fatherless, and to judge for the widow; few mourned
with those that mourned; people saw their affliction and heared the doleful
story of their particular cases with little or no fellow feeling, indifferency
prevailed; there was too much of a joining in spirit with those who had slain
with the sword, and had carried into captivity, arising from a secret
satisfaction, at the prospect of having an opportunity, through the Slaves
labor, of increasing their substance, and amassing much wealth, In the
acquirement and possession of which, a proper regard not being had, to the will
of the Lord that reigns, there has been sent a curse upon what they esteemed
a blessing; their riches have proved as wings to raise their children above
truth and real happiness: The offspring of many of these are still living in
idleness and pride; whilst others are rioting in dissipation and luxury. If the
good and just father of mankind is now arisen to plead the cause of the
oppressed Africans, and to bring the matter home to ourselves; who can say,
what do thou. Will not the Americans, amongst whom the establishment of
religious as well as civil liberty is the present and great object of
consideration and debate, be a witness against themselves, so long as they
continue to keep their Fellow-Inhabitants in such grievous circumstances,
whereby they are not only deprived of their liberty, but of all property and
indeed of every right whatsoever?

From the experience of others, we may deduce a proper application to
ourselves: We read Jerm. xxxiv, 8. that the Jewish people, a little before the
Babylonian Captivity, acknowledged the duty which lay upon them, of proclaiming
liberty to those of their brethren who had been forceably kept in servitude,
beyond the term limited by the Mosaic Law; for the performance of which they
had made a covenant before the Lord; but upon the danger appearing to be over,
by the retreat of the king of Babylon, they caused the servants and handmaids
whom they had let go free, to return, and brought them again into subjection.
Where-upon the prophet pronounces the judgment, threatened by the Lord, against
those who had thus falsified their covenant, Chap. xxxiv, II. Ye have made a
covenant before me, but ye turned and polluted my name, and caused every man
his servant, and every man his handmaid -- to return and brought them into
subjection. Therefore, thus faith the Lord, Ye have not hearkened unto me, in
proclaiming liberty every one to his brother, and every man to his neighbor;
behold I proclaim a liberty for you, faith the Lord, to the sword the
pestilence and the famine.

Here it may not be necessary to repeat what has been so fully declared in
several modern publications, of the inconsistence of slavery with every right
of mankind, with every feeling of humanity, and every precept of Christianity;
nor to point out its inconsistency with the welfare, peace and prosperity of
every country, in proportion as it prevails; what grievous sufferings it brings
on the poor Negroes; but more especially what a train of fatal vices it
produces in their lordly oppressors and their unhappy offspring. Nevertheless
for the sake of some who have not met with, or fully considered those former
publications, and in ho^es that some who are still active in support of
slavery, may be induced to consider their ways, and become more wise, the
following substance of an address or expostulation made by a sensible Author,
to the several ranks of persons most immediately concerned in the trade, is now
republished.

And, first, to the Captains employed in this trade. Most of you know the
country of Guinea, perhaps now by your means, part of it is become a dreary
uncultivated wilderness; the inhabitants being murdered or carried away, so
that there are few left to till the ground; but you know, or have heared, how
populous, how fruitful, how pleasant it was a few years ago. You know the
people were not stupid, not wanting in sense, considering the few means of
improvement they enjoyed. Neither did you find them savage, treacherous, or
unkind to strangers. On the contrary they were in most parts a sensible and
ingenious people; kind and friendly, and generally just in their dealings. Such
are the men whom you hire their own countrymen, to tear away from this lovely
country; part by stealth, part by force, part made captives in those wars which
you raise or soment on purpose. You have seen them torn away, children from
their parents, parents from their children: Husbands from their wives, wives
from their beloved husbands; brethren and sisters from each other. You have
dragged them who had never done you any wrong, perhaps in chains, from their
native shore. You have forced them into your ships, like an herd of swine, The
following Relation is inserted at the request of the Author.

That I may contribute all in my power toward the good of mankind, by
inspiring any of its individuals with a suitable abhorence for that detestable
practice of trading in our Fellow Creatures, and in some measure alone for my
neglect of duty as a christian, in engaging in that wicked traffic, I offer to
their serious consideration, some few occurrences of which I was an eye witness
That being struck with the wretched and affecting scene, they may foster that
humane principle, which is the noble and distinguished characteristic of man.

About the Year I749; I failed from Liverpool to the coast of Guinea, sometime
after our arrival, I was ordered to go up the country a considerable distance,
upon having notice from one of the Negro Kings, that he had a parcel of Slaves
to dispose of, I received my instructions and went carrying with me an account
of such goods we had on board, to exchange for the Slaves we intended to
purchase; upon being introduced, I presented him with a small case of Spirits,
a Gun, and some trisles, which having accepted, and understood by an
interpreter what goods we had, the next day was appointed for viewing the
Slaves; we found about two hundred confined in one place. But here how shall I
relate the affecting sight I there beheld, the silent sorrow which appeared in
the countenance of the afflicted father, and the painful anguish of the tender
mother, expecting to be forever separated from their tender offspring; the
distressed maid wringing her hands in presage of her future wretchedness, and
the general cry of the innocent, from a fearful apprehension of the perpetual
slavery to which they were doomed. I purchased eleven, who I conducted tied,
two and two to our ship. Being but a small vessel (ninety ton) we soon
purchased our cargo, consisting of one hundred and seventy Slaves, whom thou
may reader range in thy view, as they were shackled two and two together,
pent up within the narrow confines of the main deck, with the complicated
distress of sickness, chains and contempt; deprived of every fond and social
tie and in a great measure reduced to a state of desparation. We had not been a
fortnight at Sea, before the fatal consequence of this despair appeared, they
formed a design of recovering their natural right, liberty, by raising and
murdering every man on board; but the goodness of the Almighty rendered their
scheme abortive and his mercy spared us to have time to repent: The plot was
discovered; the ringleader tied by the two thumbs over the barricado door, at
Sunrise received a number of lashes, in this situation he remain till Sun set,
exposed to the insults and barbarity of the brutal crew of Sailors with full
leave to exercise their cruelty at pleasure: The eonsequence was, that next
morning the miserable sufferer was found dead, flead from the shoulders to the
waist. The next victim was a youth who, from too strong a sense of his misery
refused nourishment and died disregarded and unnoticed, till the hogs had fed
on part of his flesh.


them who had souls immortal as your own. You have stowed them together as
close as ever they could lie, without any regard either to decency or
convenience -- And when many of them had been poisoned by soul air, or had sunk
under various hardships, you have seen their remains delivered to the deep,
till the sea should give up his dead.You have carried the survivors into the
vilest slavery, never to end but with life: Such slavery as is not found among
the Turks at Algiers, no, nor among the heathens in America.

May I speak plainly to you? I must. Love constrains me: Love to you, as well,
as those you are concerned with. Is there a God? You know there is. Is he a
just God? Then there must be a state of retribution: A state wherein the just
God will re ward every man according to his work. Then what reward will he
render to you. O think betimes! before you drop in eternity: Think how, He
shall have judgment without mercy, that showed no mercy. Are you a man? Then.
you should have a human heart. But have you indeed? What is your heart made of?
Is there no such principle as compassion there? Do you never feel another's
pain? Have you no sympathy? No sense of human woe? No pity for the miserable?
When you saw the flowing eyes, the heaving breast, or the bleeding sides and
tortured limbs of your fellow creatures. Was you a stone or a brute? Did you
look upon them with the eyes of a tiger? When you squeezed the agonizing
creatures down in the ship, or when you threw their poor mangled remains into
the sea, had you no relenting? Did not one tear drop from your eye, one sigh
escape from your breast? Do you feel no relenting now? If you do not, you must
go on, till the measure of your iniquities is full. Then will the great God
deal with you, as you have dealt with them, and require all their blood at your
hands. And at that day it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah than
for you: But if your heart does relent; though in a small degree, know it is a
call from the God of love. And today, if you hear his voice, harden not your
heart -- To day resolve, God being your helper to escape for your life --
Regard not money: All that a man has will he give for his life. Whatever you
lose, lose not your Soul; nothing can countervail that loss. Immediately quit
the horrid trade: At all events be an honest man.

This equally concerns every merchant who is engaged in the Slave Trade. It is
you that induce the African villain to sell his countrymen; and in order
thereto, to steal, rob, murder men, women and children without number: By
enabling the English villain to pay him for so doing; whom you over pay for his
execrable labor. It is your money, that is the spring of all, that impowers
him to go on, so that whatever he or the African does in this matter, is all
your act and deed. And is your conscience quite reconciled to this? Does it
never reproach you at all? Has gold entirely blinded your eyes and stupefied
your heart? Can you see, can you feel no harm therein? Is it doing as you would
be done to? Make the case your own. Matter! (said a Slave at Liverpool to the
merchant that owned him) what if some of my countrymen were to come here, and
take away my mistress, and master Tommy and master Billy, and carry them into
our country and make them slaves, how would you like it? His answer was worthy
of a man: I will never buy a slave more while I live. O let his resolution be
yours! Have no more any part in this detestable business. Instantly leave it to
those unfeeling wretches, Who laugh at humanity and compassion.

And this equally concerns every Person who has an estate in our American
plantations: Yea all Slave-holders of whatever rank and degree; seeing
menbuyers are exactly on a level with menstealers. Indeed you say, I pay
honestly for my goods; and I am not concerned to know how they are come by.
Nay, but you are: You are deeply concerned, to know that they are not stolen:
Otherwise you are partaker with a thief, and are not a jot honester than him.
But you know they are not honestly come by: You know they are procured by means
nothing near so innocent as picking of pockets, house breaking, or robbery upon
the highway. You know they are procured by a deliberate series of more
complicated villainy, (of fraud, robbery and murder,) than was ever practiced
either by Mahometans or Pagans; in particular by murders of all kinds; by the
blood of the innocent poured upon the ground like water. Now it is your money
that pays the merchant, and through him the captain and African butchers. You
therefore are guilty: Yea, principally guilty, of all these frauds, robberies,
and murders. You are the spring that puts all the rest in motion; they would
not stir a step without you. -- Therefore the blood of all these wretches, who
die before their time, whether in their country or else where, lies upon your
head. The blood of thy brother, (for whether thou will believe it or no, such
he is in the sight of him that made him) cries against thee from the earth,
from the ship and from the waters. O! what ever it cost, put a stop to its cry,
before it be too late. Instantly, at any price, were it the half of thy goods,
deliver thyself from blood guiltiness! Thy hands, thy bed, thy furniture, thy
house, thy land, are at present stained with blood. Surely it is enough;
accumulate no more guilt: Spill no more the blood of the innocent! Do not hire
another to shed blood! Do not pay him for doing it! Whether thou art a
christian or no, show thy self a man; be not more savage than a lion or a bear.

Perhaps thou will say., I do not buy any negroes: I only use those left me by
my father. But is it enough to satisfy your own consceience! Had your father,
have you, has any man living, a right to use another as a slave? It cannot be,
even setting revelation aside. It cannot be, that either war, or contract, can
give any man, such a property in another as he has in his sheep and oxen: Much
less is it possible, that any child of man, should ever be born a slave.
Liberty is the right of every human creature, as soon as he breathes the vital
air. And no human law can deprive him of that right, which he derives from the
law of nature. If therefore you have any regard to justice, (to say nothing of
mercy, nor of the revealed law of God,) render unto all their due. Give liberty
to whom liberty is due, that is to every child of man, to every partaker of
human nature. Let none serve you but by his own act and deed, by his own
voluntary choice. Away with ships, chains and all compulsion. Be gentle toward
all men. And see that you invariably do unto every one, as you would he should
do unto you.

Remarks on the Nature and bad Effects of SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS.
THE common use of Spirituous liquors distilled from molasses, grain, fruit,
etc. is a matter that calls for the particular attention of every lover of
mankind.

Several physicians of note, Doctor Hoffman, Cl^yne, Short, Lind, Buchan, etc.
have given it as their sentiments, that those distilled spirits when taken
inwardly, even though mixed with water, destroy the human frame; being burning
spirits, the use of which bring on many fatal diseases, such as fevers,
jaundice, dropsies, consumptions and whereby multitudes are daily destroyed.
That they parch up and contract the stomach to half its natural size, like
burnt leather, and rot the entrails as is evident not only by opening the
bodies of those pesrons who are killed by drinking them; but also by what
Doctor Hoffman says, was observed of the effects which the cau^t^^ fiery
remaining wash of the distillers, has on the gots of those hogs which in some
places are sed by it: which are thereby so tendered, that puddings cannot be
made in them: Wherefore all people who have any regard to their health and
lives ought to tremble at the cravings for such poisonous liquors, which
shorten and destroy the lives of such multitudes of people. It is farther
observable, that the free use of those Spirits. deprave the morals of those who
addict themselves thereto; the feelings of their minds are gradually benumbed;
an insensibility to the healing influences of grace prevails, and many become
profane and regardless of their duty to God and Man.

Doctor Cheyne, in his Essay of health and long life, says. "All people, who
have any regard to their health and lives, ought to tremble at the first
cravings for such poisonous liquors. The maladies begot by them bring forth
necessity upon necessity of drams and gi^^s; till at last, a kind dropsy,
nervous convulsion, f^^x* if not a fever, or phrensy. sets the poor soul free.
It has often raised in me, says the Doctor, the most melancholy reflections,
to see the virtuous and sensible, bound in such chains and fetters, as nothing
less than omnipotent grace or the unrelenting grave could release them from.

It is pretended. that drams comfort, warm, and defend from the severity of
weather, to which men are sometimes exposed; without which they say, they
should perish with cold; which is probably, in a great measure, true of those
who are habituated to drink them; the blood of such being thereby so much
impoverished, that it is well known many of the drinkers of drams are cold and
lifeless in the midst of summer, without frequent repetitions; this is what
some of them have owned. But on the other hand, how much more able are sober
persons to endure cold and hardships; their vital heat not being extinguished
by intemperance, does by its kindly genial warmth, more effectually secure them
from the inclemency of the weather, than the false flash of a dram. Besides, it
is well known, that men did not perish in the coldest countries for want of
drams formerly, when they were not to be had, of the undoubted truth of this,
Captain Ellis gives a full proof in the account of his voyage to Hudson's bay,
page I99: Where he observes, "That the natives of the very cold coast of that
Bay, to whom the French are kinder than to sell distilled spirituous liquors,
are tall, hardy, robust and active; whereas those of them that are supplied
with drams from the English, are a meagre, dwarfish. indolent people, hardly
equal to the severity of the country and subject to many disorders. And as to
the pernicious effects of spirituous liquors in very hot climates, (as on the
coast of Guinea,) it is observed, that the French and Portuguese, who do not
indulge in distilled spirits, are healthy compared with the English; who,
drinking freely of spirits etc. die fast.

The unhappy dram-drinkers are so absolutely bound in slavery to these infernal
spirits, that they seem to have lost the power of delivering themselves from
this worst of bondage. How much then is it the bounden duty of those, who have
it in their power to withhold this destructive man bane, either as parents,
masters, or rulers to the people committed to their trust This is a case so
calamitous to mankind, that to have a thorough sense of it, and yet not to
remonstrate, nor earnestly caution against it, is certainly as criminal as it
is unfriendly not to warn a blind person of a dangerous precipice or pit. Yet,
alas how unconcerned are the greatest part of mankind at this enormous ruin of
multitudes! In trials for life, what diligence is used to find the occasion of
the loss of one subject. What care will not a faithful Physician bestow for the
preservation of one life. How did the wise Romans honor him, who saved the
life of one Roman citizen. But in the present case it is not one, nor one
hundred, nor one thousand, but probably no less than a million that perish
yearly.

The mistaken use and grievous abuse of rum and either distilled spirits, in no
case appears more palpably than at the time of harvest, a business which the
people under the Mosaic dispensation were enjoined to, ^arry on with
humiliation and thanksgiving; but which amongst us through the free use of
spirituous liquors is made an occasion of a greater abuse of the ^pan^ of the
Creator; this arises in many, from a mistaken persuasion that hard labor,
particularly that of the harvest field, cannot be carried on without using a
quantity of rum or other distilled spirits. In support of this opinion, we are
frequently told of the many people who have died at those times through the
extreme heat and fatigue, and it is supposed that many more would die, if a
plentiful use of spirituous liquors was not allowed, but this is a mistaken
notion. it being much more likely that the free use of rum occasioned the death
of those people, the quantity they had swallowed down, sending a great flow of
spirits into the head in proportion to the strength of their body caused them
to strain their strength beyond what nature could bear; and in general the
repeated large quantities of spirit commonly drank during the whole time of
harvest, keeps up the blood in so continual a ferment and fever, that people
cannot have a proper re^torative sleep; their constitutions are thereby
enervated their lives shortened and an unfitness for religious impressions
generally prevails.

These weighty considerations have induced some well minded people to endeavor
to induce, by their examples, their friends and neighbors into a contrary
practice; and under these attempts experience has made it manifest that very
little or no strong liquor is necessary at those times; indeed they have been
convinced that the harvest, and other labourious work, can be very well managed
without making use of any spirituous liquors at all. If such labor was carried
on with steadiness and proper moderation, there would certainly be no need of a
recruit of strength being fought for by that means; more frequent intervals of
rest with a little food oftener allowed the reapers, and small drinks, such as
molasses and water, either alone or made more agreeable with a little cider,
small beer, or even milk and water would fully enable them to perform their
work to their employer's satisfaction and their own advantage, and the overplus
wages they would receive to the value of the spirits usually given them, might
be sufficient to purchase bread for their families. Several persons who from a
persuasion that the common method of giving spirituous liquors to laborers was
exeeding hurtful, have made it a condition with those they have employed, not
to use any spirituous liquors in their field; these have had their work
performed to good satisfaction and without any damage ensuing to their
laborers. Nay. where they have remained any considerable time with such
employers, they have generally acknowledged themselves sensible of the benefit
arising from having thus totally refrained the use of those liquors.

Should this practice take place, it would prove a great blessing particularly
to the laboring people* one half of whom (a physician of this country has
given as his sentiment) die sooner than they otherwise would do, solely by the
use of spirituous liquors. Besides* that it would discourage the distillation
of rye and other grain; a practice which is not only a great hurt to the poor
in raising the price of bread* but must also be very offensive to God* the
great and good father of the family of mankind, that people should* in their
earthly and corrupt wisdom, pervert their Maker's benevolent intention, in
converting the grain he has given to us as the staff of life, unto a fiery
spirit, so destructive of the human frame and attended with the other dreadful
consquences already mentioned. Here it may be noted, that any quantity of good
molasses will by distillation, yield more than the same quantity of proof
spirit. And that a considerable quantity of molasses if taken with bread at one
time, as the Indians will sometimes do, will not intoxicate, the spirituous
parts in the molasses being properly united by our good and wise creator with
the earthy and balsamic parts, so as to make it quite friendly to our nature;
but when by distilation the spirituous parts are separated from the other
parts, that measure of spirits proceeding from the same quantity of molasses,
becomes a fiery liquid. destructive of the human frame. Doctor Buchan in his
Domestic Medicine, or Family Physician, a book which has gained so much esteem
as to be twice published in this city, at page 7I of the English Edition says,
many imagine that hard labor could not be supported without drinking strong
liquors. This, though a common is a very erronous notion, men who never tasted
strong liquors are not only able to endure more fatigue, but also live much
longer than those who use them daily. The few of those who notwithstanding
their excess in drinking spirituous liquors, from the uncommon strength of
their constitutions, may have attained to considerable age, would doubtless
have lived much longer if they had lived temperate liv^s.
But suppose strong liquors did enable a man to do more work, they must
nevertheless waste the powers of life, and of course occasion premature old
age. They keep up a constant fever, which wastes the spirits, heats and
inflames the blood and predisposes the body to numberless diseases. At page the
same author tells us, that all intoxicating liquors may be considered as
poisons. However disguised, that is their real character, and sooner or later
they will have their effect.

Amongst the several prejudices in favor of the mistaken use of spirituous
liquors. there is none gives it a greater sanction or support, than the
prevailing opinion, even with persons of reputation, that what they term a
moderate quantity of rum mixed with water, is the best and safest liquor that
can be drank; hence confirming the opinion, that spirit in one form or other is
necessary. To such who have not been accustomed, and think they cannot
habituate themselves to drink water, there may appear to be some kind of plea
in this argument, especially to travelers, who often meet with beer, cider, or
other fermented liquors that are dead, hard, sour, or not properly fermented,
which tend to generate air in the bowels, produ^^ing colicks, etc. But if those
persons suffered the weight of the subject, and the encouragement they thereby
give to the use of these destructive spirits, to take proper place with them,
it might suggest the propriety, if not necessity of introducing a more salutary
practice.

That pure fluid (water) which the benevolent father of the family of mankind,
points out for general use, is so analegous to the human frame, that people
might with safety gradually use themselves to it. Dr. Cheyne observes, that
without all doubt, water is the primitive original beverage, as it is the only
simple fluid sitted for diluting, moistening and cooling; the ends of drink,
appointed by nature, and he adds happy had it been for the race of mankind, if
other mixed and artificial liquors had never been invented. Water alone is
susficient and effectual for all the purposes of human want in drink: Strong
liquors were never designed for common use. Speaking of the effect of wine,
which he says to have been so much in use at the time he wrote, that the better
fort of people scarcely diluted their food with any other liquor, he remarks,
That as natural causes will always produce their proper effects, their blood
was inflamed into gout, stone, and rheumatism, raging fevers, pleurifies, etc.
Water is the only disolvent or menstrum and the most certain diluter of all
bodies proper for food.

Doctor Short, in his discoorse of the inward use of water, speaks much in its
commendation. He says, we can draw a very convincing argument of the excellency
of water, from the longevity and healthfulness of those who at first had no
better liquor, and the health and strength of body and serenty of mind, of
these who at this day have no other common liquor to drink, of this the common
people amongst the Highlands of Scotland, are a sufficient instance, amongst
whom it is no rarity to find persons of eighty, ninety, yea an hundred years of
age, as healthy strong and nimble, as wine or ale bibbers are at thirty six or
forty. The Doctor says, There is a ridiculous maxim used by drinkers, that
water makes but thin blood, not sit for business. I say, says he, it is water
only that can enduce its drinkers with the strongest bodies and most robust
constitutions, where exercise or labor is joined with it, since it bell assits
the stomach and lungs to reduce the aliments into the smallest particles, that
they may better pass the strainers of the body, which separates the nutritious
parts of the blood to be applied to the sides of the vessels, and exercise
invigorates the fibers and musles; whereas the rapid motion of the blood
excited by drinking spirituous liquors, can not fail of being prejudicial to
the body, it will cause the watery parts to dissipate, and the remaining to
grow thick and tough, and the event be obstructions, inflammations,
imposthumations etc. -- and though strong liquors afford a greater flow of
spirits for a short time, yet this is always followed with as much lowness of
spirit; so that to gain a necessary stock of spirits, the person is obliged to
repeat the same force, till he learns a custom of drinking drams. In this we
are confirmed, if we consider the great strength and hardiness of poor rusticks
in many parts of the world, whole provisions is mostly vegetable food, and
their drink water. The doctor adds, that it often happens that persons of
tender, weakly, crazy constitutions, by refraining from strong liquors and
accustoming themselves to drink water, make a shift to spin out many years.

After describing the many distempers produced by drinking malt or other
sermented liquors he adds, that seeing constitutions differ, it is not to be
expected that spirituous liquors should produce all the same symptoms in one
and the same person, yet that all drinkers have several of them; and if they
come not to that height, its because they afterward use great exercise or hard
labor, with sometimes thin diluting liquors, which prevent their immediate
hurting.

And with respect to such well disposed people, who still retain a favorable
opinion of the use of spirits mixed with water, ought they not, even from a
love to mankind, to endeavor to refrain from it, on account of the effect
their example may have in encouraging others in the use of spirituous, liquors,
agreeable to the example left us by the apostle Paul, I Cor. VIII, I3. If meat
make my brother to offend I will eat no flesh while the world stands, left I
make my brother to offend. How much more ought they to refrain from that which
tends to establish mankind, in a practice so generally destructive, more
especially when they consider the danger themselves are in of increasing the
quantity of spirit with their water, as it has been observed, that the use of
this mixture is particularly apt, almost imperceptible to gain upon those that
use it, so that many otherwise good and judicious people have unwarily to
themselves and others, fallen, with the common herd, a sacrifice to this might
devourer.

A very eminent physician has given the following direction, for the benefit of
those who have not wisdom enough left at once to abandon the odious and
pernicious practice of drinking distilled spirituous liquors, viz. By degrees
to mix water with the spirit, to lessen the quantity every day, and keep to the
same quantity of water, till in about the course of a week, nothing of the dram
kind be used along with water. By this means the person will suffer no
inconveniency, but reap great benefit upon leaving off drams or spirits as has
been tried by many. If any gnawing be left in the stomach upon quite leaving it
off, a little warm broth, weak tea, or any thing of that kind, will be a
service. The appetite always increases in a few days after leaving off drams,
unless by the too long continuance of them, the tone of the stomach is
destroyed. And when the stomach is thus affected a cup of carduus, camomile
tea, wormwood or centaury every morning fasting and every evening will be found
a good remedy.

THE END.

