Mr. Whitney's SERMON AT A SPECIAL LECTURE. September 12, 1776.

American Independence Vindicated. A SERMON DELIVERED SEPTEMBER 12, 1776. AT A
LECTURE Appointed for Publishing the DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE PASSED JULY 4,
1776. BY THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA IN GENERAL
CONGRESS ASSEMBLED. And now Printed at the desire of the Hearers to whom it is
Inscribed.

BY PETER WHITNEY, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST IN Northborough.

STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS BAY. BOSTON: PRINTED BY E. DRAPER, IN Newbury-Street,
M,DCC,LXXVII.

To the Honorable JOHN HANCOCK, Esquire Major General of the Militia of
Massachusetts Bay, and President of the AMERICAN CONGRESS.
May it please your Honor,
THE following Discourse, I beg leave to present you, hoping, however small and
trifling, in itself considered, yet since offered in token of respect and
regard for your Honor, that it will not be rejected. If not the execution, yet
the goodness of the design herein, which was to justify to an impartial world,
the doings of the Right Honorable the Continental CONGRESS, and especially, in
declaring these Colonies "Free and Independent States," will, I trust, alone
for presuming in a Dedication, to make use of your name to give it a currency.
Your zealous, upright endeavors to save your country from tyranny and
oppression, from slavery and ruin, it may reasonably be expected, will never be
forgotten, or pass unrewarded, by this much obliged People, and by GOD's
blessing accompanying them and the strenuous exertions of the CONGRESS, and all
other Patriots, may America soon emerge from her present depths of woe, rise
and shine distinguished among the nations of the earth, and continue, what she
has been declared, "Free and Independent," till time shall be no more. That
every needed good may be your portion while you live, and that, since blessed
with an affluent fortune, and a liberal soul, you may continue, "to do good,
and be rich in good works," so "laying up in store for yourself a good
foundation against the time to come, that you may then lay hold on eternal
life," is the earnest prayer of

Your Honor's Most obedient And humble Servant, PETER WHITNEY.
Northborough, Oct. 1st. 1776.
A LECTURE SERMON.
1st. Book of King's, XII Chap. 16 Verse. "So when all Israel saw that the King
hearkened not unto them, the People answered the King, saying, what portion
have we in David, neither have we inheritance in the Son of Jesse: to your
tents, O Israel: now see to thine own house, David."


THE Independence of the North-American Colonies, is a matter of great
importance, and has been the subject of much dispute and speculation in times
past. The debate is now closed, respecting this grand point; for, after mature
deliberation, the American Congress, necessitated thereto by the wanton, cruel,
and unprovoked conduct of the king and parliament of Great Britain, have
declared these Colonies totally Independent on, and unconnected with that
State, and now mean to consider and treat them like other nations and states,
as "enemies in war, in peace; friends,"

THE words of my text are peculiarly suitable for the subject of discourse upon
such an event. The story of which, what I have read, is but a part, we have at
large in the preceding part of this chapter. The sum of it is this; Rehoboam
reigned in the stead of Solomon, his Father, king over all Israel. Upon his
accession to the throne, the people by the representatives of their several
tribes, petition the king for redress of their grievances, they complain of the
last reign; they address Rehoboam for relief, and upon condition of its being
granted, they will continue their allegiance to the house of David. Rehoboam
consulted with them about him; the grave experienced men of his council advised
him* by all means, to give the petitioners a kind answer, and this would secure
them in his interest, "They will be thy servants for ever," say these wise
counselors. But this counsel of the old man he regards not, he forsakes, and
takes advice of the "young men who were grown up with him, and who stood before
him," to them he adhered, who urged harsh and rigorous measures, and advised to
the imposition of far heavier taxes. He answered the people agreeable to such
weak and foolish counsels. He threatened not only to squeze them by heavy taxes,
but to chastise them with cruel laws, and severe executions thereof. Thus was
Rehoboam infatuated in his counsels and measures, and hereby the righteous
designs of the Supreme Ruler of the world were fulfilled. "It was from the
Lord." He left Rehoboam to his own folly, and hid from his eyes the things
which belonged to his peace, that the kingdom might be rent from him, agreeable
to God's threatening, related in the preceding chapter. God often serves his
own wise and righteous purposes, by the imprudence and wickedness of men, and
snares sinners in the works of their own hands. When the ten tribes of Israel
were thus roughly answered, and threatened, they all as one declare a revolt
from Rehoboam, and the two tribes who adhered to him, and set up a separate
kingdom, and independent state, as the text teaches us. They highly resented
the provocation which Rehoboam gave them, were incensed at his menaces,
concluded that that government, in its progress, would be intolerably grievous,
which, in the beginning, was so very imperious and haughty, and therefore
resolve no longer to yield allegiance and submission to such a Tyrant. By the
way, we need not wonder that the ten tribes of Israel fall off from the house
of David, if the house of David fall away from the great end of their
advancement to rule and authority which was "to be ministers of God, for good
to the people."

My view, in further discoursing upon this scrap of sacred story, is to apply
the revolt of the ten tribes of Israel from Rehoboam, (as far as it will apply)
to the Thirteen Colonies of North America, renouncing "all allegiance to the
British crown, and totally dissolving all political connection between them and
the state of Great Britain, and declaring themselves Free and Independent
States, vested with the full powers, privileges and prerogatives belonging to
separate states, and endeavor to justify this measure to the world. It is not
to be supposed that these two cases are exactly parallel; it is sufficient if
they are so in the main points.

Let it then be observed, in the first place, that this foolish and wicked
Rhehoboam was the third king of that house and family. When the people of
Israel foolishly and impiously asked God to give them a king, hereby rejecting
the kingly government of the most high, God condescended to gratify their
desire, after previously warning them of what would be the certain consequences
of their unhappy choice; they would be such as, if they had any reason left,
and would consult their own interest, they would withdraw their petition, and
desire rather to continue as they were. They notwithstanding, persisted in
their demand, and God gave them a king, but in his anger, and as a great
scourge and curse to them. The first king of Israel was Saul, the son of Kish,
a Benjamite. He was a silly prince, infatuated in his councils, invaded by his
neghbours, deserted by his soldiers, disordered in his own spirit, sacrificeing
in confusion, and rejected of God from being king. After this, God directs
Samuel to anoint David king, the youngest son of Jesse, of another family.
David was in the main a good king, though he had his faults.

SOLOMON, his son by Bathsheba, the wife of Uriah, reigned over Israel, after
the death of David. He was a wise and good king, and in general ruled well.
Indeed he was led away, by his wives, from God, for which he threatened to rend
ten tribes from him, and give to his servant Jeroboam, though not in his day,
And further, it seems probable, there were some things in his reign grievous
and oppressive to the people; for when Rehoboam son of Solomon, came to the
throne of Israel upon his father's death, the people petition him to relax
somewhat the grievous service of the former reign. "Thy father made our yoke
grievous; now therefore make thou the grievous service of thy father, and his
heavy yoke which he put upon us lighter, and we will serve thee." But Rehoboam
hearkened not unto the people, but threatened them with intolerable burdens and
impositions.

Let us apply this:

THE present king of Great Britain is the third prince of the house of Hanover.
George Lewis, Elector of Hanover, succeeded Queen Ann. He was succeeded, in the
throne, by his son George the second. The reigns of these two Georges were
tolerably good. Passing by the cruel and oppressive measures adopted with
respect to these Colonies, in the reigns of the inglorious Stuart family, from
whence, under God, the Revolution delivered us; It must be observed that acts
were made in (...) reigns of Georges, first and second, called ^^ts of trade,
whereby our commerce suffered useless and oppressive restrictions: yet still we
submitted without complaint or petition, for when the present king came to the
throne, succeeding his grandfather, we did not request him to make "the
grievous service, and heavy yoke, lighter," which his predecessors had put upon
us: and had not "his little singer been thicker than their loins," we should
never have disturbed the royal car with petitions and complaints, nor would
George the third, have lost the bigger and better half of his kingdom. Had no
measures been pursued with regard to these states, more grievous than were
adopted before the year 1763. we had still owned George for our rightful
sovereign. For, as the people, at first emigrated chiefly from Great Britain
and Ireland, they ever (until now) held under the crown thereof, and
acknowledged the same king, with the other tribes beyond the atlantic. But soon
after he came to the throne of his ancestors, he discovered an haughty and
despotic spirit and behavior. He, like Rehoboam, forsook the counsel of the
old men, and followed the impolitic advice of his young mates, and his
preceptor. In the reign of George the second, the British empire was carried to
its height and perfection in glory, renown, wealth, grandeur, and extent of
dominion, through the wise counsels, and prudent management of that able
statesman and counselor, Mr. PIT, now Earl of Chatham, of immortal memory. He
had the whole conducting of the last war, and by his sound judgment and skill,
and uncorruptible patriotism, under God, enabled Great Britain to conquer the
united powers of France and Spain, to spread terror through the world, and add
to her dominions an immense extent of territory in the East and West Indies,
and in North America. He put it into the power of Britain to make the most
honorable and gainful peace, at the close of the last war; but Lord Bute, the
king's preceptor, sent plenipotentiary to the treaty at Paris, consents to the
most inglorious terms.

THE kingdom was a long time in coming to that pitch of grandeur and
prosperity, to which, in divine providence, it was exalted at the accession of
the present king: but it soon began to decline. The old men, the able
counselors who stood before his grandfather, and to whom the nation was
greatly indebted, were discarded, neglected. Though they have ever given their
best advice to the king, urging such mild, conciliatory measures as would have
secured to him the allegiance and affection of all his subjects, yet their
counsels were reprobated, while the young, inexperienced men, who grew up with
him, he has ever consulted, and their advice he has steadily followed through
the whole of his reign. The people of England and America have had constant
cause for complaints and petitions; for his reign has been one continued series
of oppressions, and usurpations. Bute, Hillsborough and North, with their
detestable Junto, have advised to oppressive measures of taxation, in America,
and when we have petitioned for redress, they have urged further harsh and
vigorous methods, and when we have attempted to defeat the operation of their
acts they have advised to the most wanton and cruel punishments: So that we
have had just cause of complaint; to show which we need only mention what he
and his parliament have done, leaving an impartial world to judge whether we
have not sufficient reasons to reject him, as our king, and to set up as free
and independent states, saying, "What portion have we in George? neither have
we inheritance in the house of Hanover; to your tents O Americans, and now see
to thine own house George." "He has refused his assent to laws, the most
wholesome and necessary for the public good.

He has forbidden his governors to pass laws of immediate and pressing
importance, unless suspended in their Operation till his assent should be
obtained; and when so suspended, he has utterly neglected to attend to them.

He has refused to pass other laws for the accommodation of large (...) of
people, unless those people would relinquish the right of representation in the
legislature, a right inestimable to them, and formidable to tyrants only.

He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual, uncomfortable,
and distant from the depository of their public records, for the sole purpose
of fatiguing them into compliance with his measures.

He has dissolved representative houses repeatedly, for opposing with manly
firmness his invasions on the rights of the people.

He has refused for a long time, after such dissolutions, to cause others to be
elected; whereby the legislative powers, incapable of annihilation, have
returned to the people at large for their exercise; the state remaining in the
mean time exposed to all the dangers of invasion from without, and convulsions
within.

He has endeavored to prevent the population of these states; for that purpose
obstructing the laws for naturalization of foreigners; refusing to pass others
to encourage their migrations hither, and raising the conditions of new
appropriations of lands.

He has obstructed the administration of justice, by refusing his assent to
laws for establishing judiciary powers.

He has made judges dependent on his will alone, for the tenure of their
offices, and the amount and payment of their salaries.

He has erected a multitude of new offices, and sent hither swarms of officers
to harrass our people, and eat out their substance.

He has kept among us, in times of peace, standing armies, without the consent
of our legislatures.

He has affected to render the military independent of and superior to the
civil power.

He has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our
constitution, and unacknowledged by our laws; given his assent to their acts of
pretended legislation:

For quartering large bodies of armed troops among us:

For protecting them, by a mock trial, from punishment for any murders which
they should commit on the inhabitants of these States:

For cutting off our trade with all parts of the world:

For imposing taxes on us without our consent:

For depriving us, in many cases, of the benefits of trial by jury:

For transporting us beyond seas to be tried for pretended offenses:

For abolishing the free system of English laws in a neighboring province,
establishing therein an arbitrary government, and enlarging its boundaries, so
as to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same
absolute rule into these Colonies:

For taking away our Charters, abolishing our most valuable laws, and altering
fundamentally the forms of our governments:

For suspending our own Legislatures, and declaring themselves invested with
power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.

He has abdicated government here, by declaring us out of his protection and
waging War against us.

He has plundered our seas, ravaged our coasts, burnt our towns, and destroyed
the lives of our people.

He has at this time transported large armies of foreign mercenaries to
complete the works of death, desolution and tyranny, already begun with
circumstances of cruelty and perfidy scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous
ages, and totally unworthy the Head of a civilized nation.

He has constrained our fellow-citizens taken captive on the high seas to bear
arms against their country, to become the executioners of their friends and
brethren, or to fall themselves by their hands.

He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and has endeavored to bring
on the inhabitants of our frontiers, the merciless Indian Savages, whose known
rule of warfare, is an undistinguished destruction, of all ages, sexes and
conditions. -- A prince, whose character is thus marked by every act which may
define a tyrant, is unfit to be the ruler of a free people."

These are some of the acts and doings of George the third, and the British
parliament: but these are not all, neither can the baleful influence, and cruel
operation of these be painted in full and proper color. These are all facts,
not to be denied by any, neither do any pretend to deny, that he and his venal
ministry, and corrupt parliament have done, or, at least, attempted to do all
these things.

BUT some pretend to justify the administration in Great Britain, with saying,
we have, by our abusive treatment of the king's servants, provoked government
to treat us with such unexampled severity: Our troubles, say they, we have
brought upon ourselves, and the various acts of king and parliament arose from
our opposition to government. To this objection, let me answer, That,
notwithstanding certain acts of trade which were grievous and oppressive, the
people preserved due decorum, and were peaceable and submissive until 1764. The
British administration began its attacks on our liberties with a stamp act, but
meeting with strong opposition, they thought fit to repeal it. This act threw
the colonies into strong convulsions, and we rejoiced exceedingly on its
repeal, fondly hoping we should enjoy future tranquillity. But we were mistaken.
They never intended to relinquish their design, but only to change their
ground, that, which they first pitched upon, not seeming tenable. An American
revenue granted by a British parliament was the object, and they never lost
sight of it: for soon renewed their attacks, upon principles which they thought
more favorable to their intentions: but they met with as little success in
this as in their former attempt. If the Americans, in some instances, carried
their resentment too far against some among us, whom they, not without reason,
thought to be instrumental of such oppressive acts, they should remember the
provocation given, pity and overlook any indecencies and lawless measures some
few run into, knowing that, "Oppression makes a wise man mad." Admitting that
some wrong steps were taken by some in certain places, in opposing revenue
laws, this can never justify their punishing the innocent with the guilty, and
attempting to deprive a whole province of its chartered rights, for the follies
and freaks of individuals. But further, if those revenue laws were unjust,
cruel and oppressive, and inconsistent with liberty, and the enjoyment of our
property, it was the duty of this people to oppose them: and if this opposition
could not be made in what some call, a regular way, we must take such measures
as we could, and it was certainly wrong in them to punish us for opposing their
acts, big with such fatal consequences to America. There was no oppugnation of
government here until it became grievous, oppressive and intolerable, and then
it was, and ought to be, opposed. Our opposition was misrepresented by our
governors, and other crown officers, as proceeding from an impatience of any
government, or restraint: every little riot or disturbance was magnified beyond
all the possibilities of truth, and represented as the doing of vast
multitudes. Thus, America was first oppressed, and for struggling and groaning
under her oppressions, she was calumniated and loaded with more intolerable
burdens.

But, say some, if these acts of parliament, measures of administration were
grievous and oppressive, we did not take the right course for redress: we
should have petitioned therefore in a regular way, by the three branches of the
legislatures. This, I would answer, was always attempted, but never could be
obtained; for when governors found the two houses of assembly ripening
petitions to the king, they were immediately adjourned, prorogued, or
dissolved. Whenever the several houses of assembly, in their separate capacity,
sent petitions and remonstrances, then they were rejected, because they were
not proper acts of the court. At this time the assemblies found they had not
suitable agents at the court of Great Britain; the governors would not consent
to the choice of such as the two houses could confide in as friendly to their
interest and rights; from that time they had separate agents. Our agents could
not be heard, because they were not the agent of the whole court, and governors
were instructed not to consent to any grants for their services. Thus there be
no petitioning in what some affect to call, the regular way. When the
representatives of this state wrote circular letters to the other states,
soliciting a union in remonstrating and petitioning against some late acts of
parliament, this and several other assemblies were dissolved. Thus things went
on until 1774, when the colonies chose delegates to represent them in one grand
Congress, who, being met, drew up a most humble and respectful petition to the
king, wherein they say, "From this destructive system of colony administration
adopted since the conclusion of the late war have flowed those distresses,
dangers, fears and jealousies, that overwhelm your majesty's dutiful colonists
with affliction; and we defy our most subtle and inveterate adversaries to
trace the unhappy differences between Great Britain and these colonies, from an
earlier period, or from other causes, than we have assigned, had they
proceeded, on our part, from restless levity of temper unjust impulsers of
ambition or artful suggestions of seditious persons, we should merit the
approbrious terms frequently bestowed on us by those we revere. But so far from
promoting innovations, we have only opposed them, and can be charged with no
offense, unless it be one to receive injuries and be sensible of them. -- We
ask but for peace, liberty and safety. We wish not a diminution of the
prerogative, nor do we solicit the grant of any new right in our favor. Your
royal authority over us, and our connection with Great Britain, we shall always
carefully and zealously endeavor to support and maintain. -- We present this
petition only to obtain redress of grievances. -- We therefore beseech your
majesty, that your royal authority and interposition may be used for our
relief, and that a gracious answer may be given to this petition." In the
second address of the Congress to the king, the last year, they say, "Attached
to your majesty's person, family and government, with all the devotion that
principle, and affection can inspire; connected with Great Britain by the
strongest ties that can unite societies, and deploring every event that tends
in any degree to weaken them, we solemnly assure your majesty, that we not only
desire the former harmony between her, and these colonies may be restored, but
that a concord may be established between them upon so firm a basis, as to
perpetuate its blessings, uninterrupted by any future dissentions, to
succeeding generations in both countries." After mentioning the new system of
statutes and regulations adopted with respect to the colonies, they add, "We
therefore beseech your majesty that your royal authority and influence may be
graciously interposed to procure us relief from our afflicting fears and
jealousies, occasioned by the system before mentioned, and to settle peace
through every part of your dominions, with all humility submitting to your
majesty's wise consideration, whether it may not be expedient for facilitating
those important purposes, that your majesty be pleased to direct some mode by
which the united applications of your faithful colonists to the throne, in
presence of their common councils, may be improved into a happy and permanent
reconciliation: and that, in the mean time, measures may be taken for
preventing the further destruction of the lives of your majesty's subjects, and
that such statutes as more immediately distress any of your majesty's colonies
may be repealed." Thus these colonies have, by their representatives in
Congress, unitedly and in the most humble, respectful manner, repeatedly
petitioned the king, for redress of grievances. They have asked only for relief
from cruel and oppressive acts made since 1763. But the king's ear has been
deaf to our requests, and humble suits.

I know it is said by some among us, that those petitions could not be heard,
because they came not from a constitutional body. But I would reply, that every
way of remonstrating, and petitioning was tried, before this, but was
ineffectual, or was attempted, but was frustrated; necessity therefore, if
nothing else, would justify this measure of petitioning by a general Congress.
But besides, what method could have been taken to obtain the sense of all the
colonies, and collect the whole force and strength thereof united in humble,
earnest petitions for relief, but this, of choosing men in all the colonies, by
their respective assemblies, to sit in one grand Council, to consult, and
deliberate upon matters respecting their common safety and happiness. To me, it
appears, no assembly could be more constitutional, or absolutely necessary, and
no petitions could come with greater weight, or have, (all things considered) a
more likely tendency to gain audience, than when coming from all the colonies
united therein. But these have been trampled under foot: all our humble
petitions every way, and from every quarter, have been answered only by a
repetition of injurious abuses and insults. The king and ministry have been
obstinately bent upon carrying their design into effect, for taxing these
colonies, overturning our free constitutions and establing an absolute tyranny
over us, otherwise he would have heard us, when we have so often called for
relief, for mercy, for justice. The real truth appears to be this. They were
determined not to hear us, if we called; accordingly they cut off all
possibility of petitioning in what they pretend is the only regular,
constitutional way, and then refuse to hear us, because we do not present our
petitions in that way. The necessity therefore, we have been under, of throwing
off our connection with Great Britain, renouncing king George, and his evil
counselors, and setting up as independent states, plainly appears. We could
get no relief: if we had submitted to their usurped jurisdiction, we must have
been in a state of the most abject slavery and wretchedness; and because we
could not submit, we are threatened to be devoured with the sword. We have not
been rash and hasty in declaring ourselves independent; as the ten tribes were
in their revolt from Rehoboam; but we have waited even unto long suffering.
These thirteen years have we been suffering from the cruel hands of tyrants,
and merciless oppressors; "in every stage of these oppressions we have
petitioned," entreated, cried for relief, but they have made their hearts as an
adamant stone, that they might not hear us. When such a long train of abuses,
and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object evinces a design to reduce
us under absolute despotism, it is our right, it is our duty to throw off such
government, and provide new guards for our future security. The king, ministry,
and parliament of Great Britain have by their foolish, mad, and infatuated
measures, lost by far the greatest part of the British dominions, and that
which was a constant source of wealth and strength to them. He surely must be
either a very weak or a very wicked prince, who could persevereingly conduct in
this manner. If he has been led by his ministers and counselors, contrary to
his own inclination, he must be very foolish and weak. And we may here apply
the saying of a much wiser king, Ecclesiastes, 10.16.
"Woe to thee, O land, when thy king is a child, and thy princes eat in the
morning." Also that other proverb I speech. Ecclesiastes 4.13, 14.
"Better is a poor and wise child, than an old and foolish king, who will no
more be admonished. For out of prison he comes to reign, whereas also he that
is born in his kingdom, becomes poor: on the other hand, if these measures
were agreeable to his will and inclination, and approved of by him, if he has
all a long chosen, and kept in office, such men as he knew would favor and
support his measures, he has been very wicked. Either of these characters is
not very honorable. They must both, in some degree, belong to George the third:
we therefore cheerfully renounce him, as totally unfit and unworthy to be our
king and head: let them who like him, take him, and make the best of him. It is
pity, that some way could not be discovered, whereby the few in these states,
who appear peculiarly fond of such a king, might be transplanted to
Great Britain, there to participate in the fruits of his tyranical reign. Such
as have an ap-like disposition as Issachar, who would willingly couch down
between two burdens; who think, a quiet life, in a good land, though
accompanied with slavery and bondage preferable to large sacrifices and great
struggles for the sake of enjoying freedom and liberty, ought, if possible, to
be gratified. It is a natural remark we may here make, that it had been easy
for George to have retained these states in allegiance to his crown, and hearty
affection to his person. Let a prince consider what it is that moves a people
principally to affection, and dearness toward their sovereign. He shall see
that there needs no other artifice in it, than to let them enjoy unmolested,
what belong to them of right: if that has been invaded, and violated in any
kind or degree, whereby their affections are alienated, the next consideration
for a wise prince, who would be happy, is how to regain them: to which three
things are equally necessary: to reinstate them in their former liberties: to
revenge them of the authors of those violations, and to secure them from the
apprehensions of the like again.

But to return.

What has been said above, shows that we have adopted independency of
necessity, not of choice; to which some object, and pretend to charge us with
aiming all along at independency, with being seditious, and impatient of any
government. To this I reply in the words of the Congress, in their first
address to the inhabitants of Great Britain. Be assured that these are not
facts, but calumnies. Permit us to be as free as yourselves, and we shall ever
esteem a union with you our greatest glory, and our greatest happiness: we
shall ever be ready to contribute, all in our power, to the welfare of the
empire: we shall consider your enemies as our enemies, and your interest as our
own." In the last address to the inhabitants of Great Britain they say. "It has
been said that we refuse to submit to the restrictions on our commerce. From
whence is this inference drawn? not from our words; we having repeatedly
declared the contrary, and we again profess our submission to the several acts
of trade and navigation passed before the year 1763, trusting, nevertheless, in
the equity and justice of parliament, that such of them as, upon cool and
impartial consideration, shall appear to have imposed unnecessary, or grievous
restrictions, will at some happier period, be repealed or altered. And we
cheerfully consent to the operation of such acts of the British parliament as
shall be restrained to our external commerce for the purpose of securing the
commercial advantages of the whole empire to the mother country, and the
commercial benefits of its respective members, excluding every idea of taxation
internal or external, for raising a revenue on the subjects in America, without
their consent." "We ask not (say they in their address to the people of
Ireland) for pentions, for wealth, or for honors, but for the humble boon of
being permitted to possess the fruits of honest industry, and to enjoy that
degree of liberty, to which God, and the constitution have given us an
undoubted right*" Governor Johnstone in his speech in parliament vindicates the
colonies from this aspersion, of aiming at independence. He says from his
knowledge, and from conversation with Americans, friends to administration,
"That America is unanimous in resisting the power of taxing them by the British
parliament where they have no representatives: that they will never yield this
point: that in case they were made easy on this point, and secure as to their
charter, on which their property depends, they would immediately return to
their duty and obedience. This, I aver to be the universal report and opinion
of men, with whom I have conversed, from America. If any one disputes the truth
of my assertions, I now defy him to bring any evidence to contradict me, and I
now undertake to bring men of the best character in support of what I aver. --
I maintain that the sense of the best and wisest men, in this country, is on
the side of the Americans: three to one, in Ireland, are on their side: the
greatest characters in this country consider them as contending in the glorious
cause of preserving those institutions which are necessary to the happiness,
security, and elevation of the human mind." I add, if certain individuals were
zealous advocates for American independency, it was by no means the voice of
the Congress, nor of the body of the people, in any of the colonies, until all
hope of a reconciliation with Great Britain was entirely cut off, but upon the
terms of asking pardon for crimes we had never committed, and absolute
unconditional submission.

It has been said, we have dared England to fight us, have bid them a
challenge, and now complain of their cruelty and inhumanity because they accept
it. Now this, if from any thing, must be collected from the public petitions
and addresses of the Congress. I have attentively and impartially reviewed them
all, and I find nothing bearing such an aspect. They have mentioned our
grievances, and petitioned for redress. They have stated our rights, and
declare their firm resolution to defend them to the last, and if Britain means,
by force, to attempt to compel us to submission to her unrighteous edicts we
shall endeavor to repel force by force. This is the most we have said, and does
this look like a challenge? surely no. The Congress in their declaration
setting forth the causes and necessity of taking up arms, say. "We are reduced
to the alternative of choosing an unconditional submission to the tyranny of
imitated ministers, or resistance by force. The latter is our choice. We have
counted the cost of this contest, and find nothing so dreadful as voluntary
slavery. Honor, justice, humanity forbid us tamely to surrender that freedom
which we received from our gallant ancestors, and which our innocent posterity
have a right to receive from us. We cannot endure the infamy and guilt of
resigning succeeding generations to that wretchedness which inevitably awaits
them, if we basely entail hereditary bondage upon them. Lest this declaration
should disquiet the minds of our friends and fellow subjects in any part of the
empire, we assure them, that we mean not to dissolve that union which has so
long, and so happily subsisted between us, and which we sincerely wish to see
restored. Necessity has not yet driven us into that desperate measure, or
induced us to excite any other nation to war against them. We have not raised
armies with ambitious designs of separating from Great Britain, and
establishing independent States. We fight not for glory or for conquest. We
exhibit to mankind the remarkable spectacle of a people attacked by unprovoked
enemies, without any imputation, or even suspicion of offense. They boast of
their privileges, and civiligation, and yet proffer no milder conditions than
servitude or death. In our own native land, in defense of the freedom that is
our birthright, and which we ever enjoyed, till the late violation of it, for
the protection of our property acquired solely by the honest industry of our
forefathers, and ourselves, against violence, actually offered, we have taken
up arms. We shall lay them down when hostilities shall cease on the part of the
aggressors, and all danger of their being renewed, shall be removed and not
before." Thus we have bid no challenge; we have only declared we will maintain
our rights; we only fight in our own defense: some among us indeed endeavor to
persuade themselves, and others, that the oath of allegiance which many have
taken, bind them to submit to those acts of administration we complain of, or
by no means to resist them: -- That if they resist they are guilty of perjury,
and the most awful violation of their oath. To this, as they imagine, weighty
and plausible objection, I beg leave to reply; that allegiance and protection
are reciprocal duties, is due to rulers from their subjects while they are
protected and secured in the enjoyment of their just rights, liberties,
property and lives (which was the only design of the institution of civil
government) but if rulers, instead of thus protecting and defending their
subjects, use their power, influence and authority, to enslave, ruin and
destroy their fellow subjects; allegiance is no longer due, whither men have
expressly, or only implicitly taken the oath of allegiance and submission to
the government. Between rulers and their subjects, there is always a covenant
expressed or supposed, and rulers are under oath to govern according to the
constitution, and fundamental laws of this State; and the people even where
they have taken express oaths of allegiance to their rulers, are thereby bound
to obey them, no further than they govern and rule agreeable to the settled
constitution. But when rulers, by leaping the bounds of constitution, violate
the covenant or compact, between them, and the people; the people are
discharged from their oath of allegiance, and it then is their right, their
duty to oppose and resist them. In all covenants, contracts or compacts, where
one party violates them, the other party is no longer held thereto, or bound
thereby. For this reason is it, that although the government is under
obligation to secure to every subject, the enjoyment of property, liberty and
life; yet when subjects rebel against lawful authority, are guilty of
treasonable practices against good rulers, or the state, they are no longer
entitled to protection, they have forfeited property, liberty or life, and the
government may lawfully take either away, according to the nature and degree of
their offenses. Besides, this objection, if it has any weight in it, would at
once support those justly exploded doctrines of passive obedience, and
non-resistance; doctrines directly contrary to the practice of the apostles,
who yet preached up all due submission to civil government. For, if the oath of
allegiance, which many actually take, and all are supposed to be under to their
rulers (bind as they pretend) there must be ready submission yielded to all
their commands, there must be no resistance offered to them in any cases, even
where they enjoin and require things contrary to the constitution, to the
nature and reason of things, inconsistent with the design of government, the
well-being of the State, or repugnant to the express will of God. Whereas, "we
are bound to God rather than men." I further add, this objection, if it proves
any thing in the present case, proves too much; it proves that GEORGE the
third, has no right to the British crown, but that that is the right, the
inheritance of the immediate heir of JAMES the second, or somebody else, no
mortal can tell who. -- But after all it is impossible to satisfy some people.

There are among us, men who professed to be friends to their country, and who
say, they look upon the acts of the British parliament, we complain of, as
cruel, unconstitutional and oppressive, and yet find fault with every step we
take, with every measure we pursue, and endeavor to discourage people from
attempting deliverance therefrom. But how can such men reconcile their
profession and their conduct? They point out no other way wherein to look for,
or expect relief. If they must find fault let them suggest some steps and
measures for public consideration, which they think advisable to take. But it
is not a little vain and arrogant for men, totally unacquainted with public
affairs, the affairs of the State, and with the world, and who seldom go beyond
the smoke of their own chimnies, to pretend to arraign the wisdom of the
Congress, the wisdom of the Continent. We are remarkably united in the measures
taken: We have petitioned, we have remonstrated: We have tried every way for
relief: We have been driven to arms: We have been forced to an independency.
Still the men cry out; nothing is conducted as it ought to be: We are all
undone! "Doubtless they are the men, and wisdom will die with them." I grant
all men have a right to canvass public measures, and to speak their minds. But
then there is a deference due to the public judgment. Individuals, who dissent,
should do it with modesty and self-diffidence, as not being certain but others
may know as well, if not much better than they. If they protest, let them give
their reasons, otherwise they had better be totally silent.

But not to enlarge. From what has been said above, from plain undeniable
facts, it is evident these colonies will and must be justified, by the whole
candid and impartial world in declaring themselves free and independent States,
absolved from all allegiance to the British crown, and totally disconnected
with the British empire.

I shall now make a few reflections upon, and inference from what has been
offered.

It is a natural inference from sacred story, and from what has been said
above, that kingly government is not agreeable to the divine will, and is often
a very great evil. The will of God as made known by Gideon; and the prophet
Samuel expressly disapproves of government by kings. "Near three thousand years
passed away from the Mosaic account of the creation, before the Jews under a
national delusion, asked a king, -- 'Till then their form of government (except
in extraordinary cases where the Almighty interposed) was a kind of republic
administered by a judge, and the elders of the tribes. Kings they had none, and
it was held sinful to acknowledge any being under that title but the Lord of
hosts. And when a man seriously reflects on the idolatrous homage paid to the
persons of kings, we need not wonder that the Almighty, ever jealous of his
honor, should disapprove of a form of government which so impiously invades the
prerogative of heaven." No form of government but kingly or monarchial, is an
invasion of God's prerogative; this is. It will be vain to allege, in proofs
of the divine approbation of kingly government, that we are commanded to pray
for kings, and to submit unto kings. For, when in their folly, and "strong
delusion," a people fix upon kingly, monarchial government, they must make the
best of it, pray that their king may reign in righteousness and rule with
judgment, and must submit to his rule and authority, so long as it can be done
consistent with their duty to themselves, to posterity, to mankind and to God.
The most high over all the earth, gave kings at first, to the Jews (as he sends
war) in anger, and as a judgment, and it may be affirmed, that upon the whole,
they have been a scourge to the inhabitants of the earth ever since. We in
these States, are now evidently under the frowns of heaven for our many and
great transgressions: it is to be hoped we shall not "add to our sins, this
evil to ask us a king." It may be observed that new truths are often struck out
by the collision of parties, in the eagerness of controversy, which otherwise
would have lain hid. The divine disapprobation of a form of government by
kings, I take to be one of this sort of truths. The times have led to a free
inquiry into the origin, nature and design of civil government, and into the
various forms which have obtained in the several ages of the world, and into
the divine hereditary right of kings. And, I am fully convinced, the more this
subject is controversed and considered, the clearer it will appear to
unprejudiced minds, that kingly government is in fact contrary to the mind and
will of God.


Again, we may infer that however faulty the king may be, and although he has
forfeited the allegiance, and affection of this people, yet they who have
advised him to such acts, and to such harsh and rigorous measures, as have
divided the kingdom, and brought us into this condition, are verily guilty in
the sight of God, and must, with the king, answer another day before God, for
all the evil consequences of their wicked advice, and rash conduct, and
especially for that torrent of human blood with which our land is deluging. The
acts of the British parliament, and the measures taken against us, have been
mostly suggested, contrived, and urged by the notoriously infamous Hutchinson
(late governor of this province) and his minions of this country, and furthered
by men in place and power in Great Britain. Leaving our other enemies; the
crimes of such as are of this land, who have been plotting their country's
ruin, seem to pursue these bloody men, they are fallen into the pit they were
digging for others, they are the most and greatest of them banished their
native land, and fair inheritances; many of them destitute, afflicted,
tormented, and the voice of their brethren's blood, shed greatly by their
means, cries unto God from the ground. Nor are they entirely guiltless, let me
here say, who, among ourselves, seem to think the war in which we are engaged,
not just, or the attempt impracticable, and therefore will not asist in our
defense when our all is at stake, but stand aloof from our troubles, and wish
well to the cause of our adversaries. They who decline the service, and will
not lend an helping hand, while we are struggling for life, must expect to meet
with some heavy judgment Judges v. 23.
"Curse ye Meroz (said the angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the inhabitants
thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord
against the mighty." If our cause be good and just (and who can deny this) if
heaven has conducted us to an independency, if this "cause is from God," as the
revolt of the ten tribes was, if when the salvation of our country calls for
our aid, we refuse it, through opposition, cowardice, or any other cause, the
curse of God will pursue us. "Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
deceitfully, and cursed be he that keeps back his sword from blood." Jeremiah
XLVIII, 10,


Once more, As we have been necessitated to separate from Great Britain, we
must make the best of a state of Independency. Notwithstanding we give up that
state with reluctance; yet I am fully convinced that Independency is, in every
view, the interest of America. If any among us are desirous of being satisfied
that this is our interest, and that we are able to support ourselves therein,
under the patronage of that infinitely wise Being who has brought us hitherto,
let them divest themselves of prejudice and preposition, and read that
incomparable pamphlet called "Common Sense," with its additions, and they will
have all the satisfaction they can reasonably demand. Some among us think we do
but dream, when we talk of supporting ourselves as a separate people: -- They
have thought so in other instances, and lived to see, what they called our
dreams, come to pass.

Let me here subjoin, that since this mighty revolution has taken place in
America, there must of necessity be a change in our modes of civil government;
and this is a matter of the greatest consequence, as to this life, and ought to
engage our closest attention. It will be unpardonable in us to submit to
tyranny and oppression within, when we are hazarding every thing dear to us, to
defend ourselves against it from without. A plan of government will soon be
laid before the people of this State, for their consideration. Let us not
hastily adopt any one form; and while we reject the defects, let us preserve
the virtues and excellencies of our ancient mode. Let us cooly examine, and
thoroughly weigh the plans already adopted by any sister States, and improve
upon them. And whatever form we fix upon, let us be peculiarly careful that
every part of the State is fully and freely represented in our legislative
Assembly. A large and full representation of a people, is of the greatest
importance to the State. The people ought to retain in their own hands a check
upon the legislative powers, by having their elections very frequent, at least,
once in a year. This is a right we should be peculiarly tenacious of, nor ever
upon any consideration, give it up. Power is too intoxicating, to be committed
for any great length of time, to the hands of any man, or any body of men, Long
parliaments are fountains of corruption and venality, are totally inconsistent
with liberty in the people, and in time, fail not to work the ruin of a State.
Further, if the form of government we shall adopt, consist of more than one
branch, each ought to be entirely independent of, that it may not in the least
be influenced by the other. Hereditary succession in legislatures, this people
must be greatly deluded ever to admit of. In a word, the plan of government
ought to be noble and generous, securing equal liberty and happiness, both
civil and religious, to every individual; that foreigners may find among us an
asylum from tyranny, slavery and persecution. It is the duty and interest of a
people to grant free and full liberty of conscience, in religious matters, to
all sects, parties and denominations, to whom it can be allowed, consistent
with the safety of the State. Religious intollerance in any sect, is a
sufficient, and the only reason why that sect ought not to be tolerated. This
might easily be made evident, but would require a treatise by itself. They who
want further satisfaction upon points of this nature, I would refer to that
inestimable volume, entitled "The Palladium of Conscience."


Finally, Since we are become independent on an earthly power, we eminently
need the divine favor, smiles, protection and blessing, and should be
concerned, therefore to conduct in such a manner as to secure the same. As our
revolt is, undoubtedly, of God, he is saying to us this day, as he said to
Jeroboam and the ten tribes of Israel, "It shall be if you will hearken unto
all that I command you, and will walk in my ways, and do what is right in my
sight, to keep my statutes and commandments, that I will be with you, and build
you up." To establish ourselves in our Independency let us not take ways and
measures which are sinful, as Jeroboam and the ten tribes of Israel did. Let us
be careful to profess, maintain, encourage, and promote the Protestant
religion, as far as in us lies, in opposition to Heathenism, all Idolatry.
That we may be supported, let us not too much countenance, and encourage such
neighbors and states, as are enemies to the Protestant cause and interest;
lest, if we should, we be tempted to depart from the living God. God has ever
been the friend and patron of the American Israel, and he will continue so, if
we act up to our character and obligation. "The Lord is with you, while you be
with him, and if you seek him, he will be found of you: But if you forsake him,
he will forsake you." 2 Chronicles XV. 2.
As said Azariah unto Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin. It is of more importance
for us to keep in covenant with God, and to be upon good terms with heaven,
than to be in league and friendship with the most potent States. Let us be
careful to keep up among us, the religion of Jesus Christ pure and uncorrupted
by human additions or mixtures, and the worship of God unadulterated, and then
the God, "In whom our fathers trusted, and were delivered," will delight to
build us up, and to plant us; he will give us success in the present war, he
will rebuke the king and people of Great Britain, with their allies, and say to
them, as he did to Rehoboam and the two tribes who adhered to him, when they
were about to levy war upon the ten tribes; "Ye shall not go up, nor fight
against your brethren, the children of Israel; return every man to his house,
for this thing is of me." He will disappoint the devices of our enemies, and
make them to be at peace with us." "If God be thus for us, who can be against
us." We shall be safe and happy. Deuteronomy XXXIII. 26, 27, 28, 29.
"There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rides upon the heaven in
thy help, and in his excellency on the sky. The eternal God is thy refuge, and
underneath are the everlasting arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy from
before thee, and shall say, Destroy them. Israel shall then dwell in safety
alone: the fountain of Jacob shall be upon a land of corn and wine, also his
heaven shall drop down dew. Happy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee, O
people saved by the LORD, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy
excellency! and thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee, and thou shall
tread upon their high places." We are ready to anticipate those happy times,
when these days of tribulation shall be at an end; when our brethren shall
return from the high places of the field, when we with them, shall set under
our own vines and fig trees quietly enjoying the inheritance our Ancestors have
left us, and the fruits of our own hard labor, and honest industry, and have
none to make us afraid. "Safe from the enemy of the wilderness; safe from the
griping hand of arbitrary sway, and cruel superstition; here shall be the late
founded seat of peace and freedom. Here shall arts and sciences, the companions
of tranquillity and liberty, flourish. Here shall dwell uncorrupted faith, the
pure worship of God unawed, uninterrupted; here shall it extend itself, and its
benign influences among them, who have hitherto "Sat in darkness, in the
region, and under the shadow of death." "Truth shall spring out of the earth,
and righteousness shall look down from Heaven: Yea, the Lord shall give that
which is good; righteousness shall go before him, and shall set us in the way
of his steps." New sources of wealth shall continually open upon us, our trade
shall flourish and increase, this land shall be the Mart of all nations; here
shall we become great among the powers of the earth, by growing numbers; for
this vine, which the Lord has planted, shall extend her branches from sea to
sea, and from the rivers unto the end of the earth. Here shall we enjoy the
most perfect freedom and liberty, while we live, and transmit the same, as a
good inheritance, to our children, and they to theirs, 'till time shall be no
more; for "The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting, upon them
that fear him, and his righteousness unto children's children, to such as keep
his covenant, and to them who remember his commandments to do them." Let us
rejoice that the Lord reigns, and let us patiently trust in him, and wait his
time for complete deliverence. And may God fulfill to us his ancient promises,
delivered in the noblest strains, by the enlightened prophet, with which I
close. Isaiah I.IV. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, -- 17.
"O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted: Behold, I will lay
thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy foundation with saphires, and I will
make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy borders of
pleasant stones. And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and great
shall be the peace of thy children. In righteousness shall thou be established:
Thou shall be far from oppression, for thou shall not fear, and from terror,
for it shall not come near thee. Behold they shall surely gather together, but
not by me: Whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy
sake. No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper," Isaiah, LX. 17, 18,
21, 22.
"For brass I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and for wood
brass, and for stones iron. I will also make thy officers peace, and thine
exactors righteousness. Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, waisting
nor destruction within thy borders; but thou shall call thy walls salvation,
and thy gates praise. Thy people also shall be all righteous: They shall
inherit the land forever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands that
I may be glorified. A little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a
strong nation: I the Lord will hasten it in his time."

AMEN.

