AN ANIMADVERSORY ADDRESS TO THE INHABITANTS OF THE STATE OF VERMONT; WITH
REMARKS on a PROCLAMATION, under the Hand of his Excellency GEORGE CLINTON, Esquire
Governor of the State of NEW YORK.

BY ETHAN ALLEN.

HARTFORD: Printed by WATSON and GOODWIN, near the Great Bridge. M.DCC.LXXVIII.

An Animadversory ADDRESS, etc.
GENTLEMEN and FRIENDS,
I SHALL make no apology for writing this pamphlet; sure I am it was meant for
your good: Besides, this is not the first time I have moved my quill in your
behalf. Many times have I hazarded my life for you, as well as for my own
property; and if occasion shall in future require, will freely do it again.

ON my return from a barbarous captivity, (part of which extraordinary
sufferings was for your sakes) to Bennington, the latter end of May, 1778, and
having received the congratulations of a large circle of friends, and returned
them the mutual exchange of compliment and friendship, and had agreeably
entertained ourselves in commemorating the surprising success of the last
campaign; -- the downfall of a whole British army, with a BURGOYNE at their
head: And after moving the flowing bowl, expatiated on the ever-memorable
battle and victory of Bennington, the forerunner and grand typical figure of
the destruction of the Northern army; we then took a retrospective view of our
old New York quarrel, and entered into a discussion on the political events of
forming the new State of VERMONT, it then appeared to me to be a very political
movement. I have since, upon mature deliberation, expatiated on the good
effects which cannot fail of redounding to the inhabitants, in so extensive a
frontier country, from the blessings of a well established civil government;
and think it worth my trouble to communicate my sentiments and reflections to
the public, with a view of encouraging the good and virtuous inhabitants of
this State, to persevere and be happy in the further confirming and
establishing the same.

TO live in a state of anarchy, has been found to be inconsistent with the
wisdom and practice of mankind in all ages and nations, particularly the
civilized; and savage tribes have certain maxims, customs or traditions, which
are substituted instead of written laws. Indeed, the state and condition of men
urges, nay, necessitates them to adopt some form of government for their
mutual protection and defense: And, inasmuch as a long course of experience
has, or in truth may convince every capable judge in the said state of Vermont,
that the government of New York never desired to exercise jurisdictional
authority over the inhabitants of said state, for any other purpose but to
oppress and deprive them of their lands and labors; therefore, it is our duty
and interest to yield them no subjection. Surely, it was not because they loved
us or we them; for, the hatred subsisting between us, is equivalent to that
which subsists between the Independent States of America and Great Britain.
Every overture of pretended peace and friendship to us, is big with mischief
and secret design to entrap and ensnare the unwary among us, to divide us, and
overturn our new government. This may be learnt from their late proclamation,
as well as from many other ways and arts used particularly in the south-east
corner of Cumberland county, where there are many Tories, who, to a man,
through the whole state, are using their influence and intrigues against our
new state, in favor of the government of New York, which, for certain motives
they prefer.

BUT, to take a retrospective view of the conduct of that government toward
us, from four to six, or seven years ago, and we shall find that the New York
patentees got judgment against those under New Hampshire at trials at common
law; but the claimants under New Hampshire appealed to club law, and, in this
mode of trial, they beat the claimants under New York; and, in those days, a
sort of mob government, in the now county of Bennington took place, which,
however deficient in most respects, was nevertheless the terror of the
government of New York, and the only means by which we could possibly maintain
the possession of our lands. In the mean the then counties of Cumberland and
Gloucester were greatly oppressed by the venality and corruption of the
government of New York: This I refer to the knowledge of the inhabitants in
those counties; though it is altogether probable, that provided New York
government had conquered the Green Mountain Boys, and monopolized their lands,
those on the east side of the mountain would have shared the same fate. I have
only to add, in this place, that in those days civil government could not be
assumed; but I now rejoice to see it established. This is the happy era which
our worthy and deceased friend, Doctor Thomas Young, beautifully expressed
himself to the inhabitants of the state of Vermont, in these words: As the
supreme Arbiter of right has smiled on the just cause of North America at
large, you in a peculiar manner have been highly favored; God has done by you
the best thing commonly done for our species; he has fairly put it in your
power to help yourselves. Our constitution is very much approved of in such
parts of the eastern states, where it has been circulated; and though it be
difficult, nay, impossible to form a mode of government to the entire
satisfaction of the whole body politic; yet I am apprehensive, that there are
as little, I may say less dissatisfaction in the state of Vermont, as to
matters of government, as in any of the eastern states, Connecticut excepted.
Probably, there are some in every state who are averse to any mode of
government at all; and such, I fear, are out of the reach of argument and
reason; such are untractable and barbarous souls, who enjoy no satisfaction in
the happiness of their species, or in the effusion of domestic peace, order,
and social virtue: But all good and wise men, will exert themselves in
establishing and supporting good government and order, which are inseparably
connected together: And though, in the tumults and confusions of a cruel war,
the present formed constitutions and modes of government may, and undoubtedly
are, more or less imperfect; yet they may, in future, be corrected and amended
as time of leisure, cool deliberation, and experience may dictate.

CERTAIN I am, that our frontier country was under the greatest necessity of
forming into a civil and political government. They were obliged to exercise,
not only an internal policy among themselves, but an external policy against a
foreign invasion. This they could not trust to New York, who would have been
rejoiced to have our inhabitants cut off, that their lands might have fallen
into their hands; an object which they have been pursuing for more than seven
years last past. In this extreme situation government was formed, and General
Burgoyne at the same time advancing into the country. The Council of our new
state was very busy and zealous in forming the militia into regiments, under
brave officers, to face Mr. Burgoyne: At the same time General Schuyler ordered
our militia to march to Sarataga; but the Council would not allow it, as they
viewed Bennington, and the adjacent country, to be the object of destruction by
the enemy, at least, if not so, by their old adversaries. The Council,
furthermore, sent an express to the Council of the state of New Hampshire,
acquainting them of the distressed situation of the state of Vermont, and
imploring their assistance, which New Hampshire generously afforded, sending
their hero General Starks, with a brigade of valiant men, which being joined by
the Green Mountain Boys, terminated in the memorable and twice glorious battles
and victories of Bennington. This proved the salvation of our new state, and
had its salutary influence on the pending cause of the Independent States of
America at large, and is a striking proof of the good policy of assuming
government.

ANY one who is acquainted with mankind and things, must know, that it is
impossible to manage the political matters of this country without the
assistance of civil government. A large body of people destitute of it, is like
a ship in the sea without a helm or mariner, tossed by impetuous waves. We
could not enjoy domestic peace and security alone, set aside the consequences
of a British war and New York strife, without civil regulations. The two last
considerations do, in the most striking manner, excite us to strengthen and
confirm the government already set up by the authority of the people, which is
the fountain of all temporal power, and from which the subjects of the state of
Vermont have already received such signal advantages. This puts us on an equal
footing with our old New York adversaries, and will enable us to baffle all
their schemes; and this the General Assembly of the State of New York well
knew, when they sent forth their Proclamation from Poughkeepsie, dated the 23d
day of February, 1778, and signed by his Excellency George Clinton, Esquire
Governor of that state: Which Proclamation I do here insert, (for the purpose
of informing the inhabitants of the state of Vermont of the designs of the new
legislature of the state of New York) together with my observations on the same.

By his Excellency GEORGE CLINTON, Esquire Governor of the State of New York,
General of all the Militia, and Admiral of the Navy of the same.
A PROCLAMATION.
L. S.
WHEREAS the Senate and Assembly of this state, did, by their several
resolutions passed the twenty-first day of this instant month of February,
declare and resolve, That the disaffection of many persons, inhabiting the
north eastern parts of the county of Albany, and certain parts of the counties
of Charlotte, Cumberland and Gloucester, clearly included within the ancient,
original, true and lately established bounds of this state, arose from a
contest, about the property of the soil of many tracts of land, within those
parts of the said counties respectively.

THAT the said contest was occasioned partly by the issuing of diverse
interfering patents or grants, by the respective governments of New York, on
the one part, and those of Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire, on the other,
antecedent to the late establishment of the eastern boundary of this state;
partly by an higher quit rent reserved on the said lands, when re-granted under
New York, than were reserved in the original grants under New Hampshire or
Massachusetts Bay, and the exorbitant fees of office accruing thereon; and
partly by a number of grants made by the late government of New York after the
establishment of the said eastern boundary, for lands which had been before
granted by the governments of New Hampshire and Massachusetts Bay,
respectively, or one of them; in which last mentioned grants by the late
government of New York, the interest of the servants of the Crown, and of new
adventurers, was, in many instances, contrary to justice and policy, preferred
to the equitable claims for confirmation of those who had patented the lands
under New Hampshire or Massachusetts Bay.

THAT the aforesaid disaffection has been greatly increased, by an act passed
by the Legislature of the late colony of New York, on the ninth day of March,
in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy-four, entitled,
"An Act for preventing tumultuous and riotous assemblies in the places therein
mentioned, and for the more speedy and effectual punishing the rioters." That
many of the aforesaid disaffected persons, though unjustifiable in their
opposition to the authority of this state, labor under grievances arising from
the causes above mentioned, which in some measure extenuate their offense, and
which ought to be redressed.

THAT therefore the Legislature of this state, while on the one hand, they will
vigorously maintain their rightful supremacy over the persons and property of
those disaffected subjects, will on the other hand, make overtures to induce
the voluntary submission of the delinquents.

THAT an absolute and unconditional discharge, and remission of all
prosecutions, penalties and forfeitures, under the abovementioned act, shall
be an established preliminary to such overtures; which overtures are as follow,
viz.

1st THAT all persons actually possessing and improving lands, by title under
grants from New Hampshire or Massachusetts Bay, and not granted under New York,
shall be confirmed in their respective possessions.

2d. THAT all persons actually possessing and improving lands, not granted by
either of the three governments, shall be confirmed in their respective
possessions, together with such additional quantity of vacant land, lying
contiguous to each respective possession, as may be necessary to form the same
into a convenient farm; so as the quantity to be confirmed to each respective
person, including his possession, shall not exceed three hundred acres.

3d. THAT where lands have heretofore been granted by New Hampshire and
Massachusetts Bay, or either of them, and actually possessed in consequence
thereof, and being so possessed, were afterward granted by New York, such
possessions shall be confirmed, the posterior grant under New York,
notwithstanding.

Provided always, That nothing in the above regulations contained, shall be
construed to determine any question of title or possession, that may arise
between different persons claiming under New Hampshire or Massachusetts Bay, or
between persons claiming under New Hampshire on the one, and under
Massachusetts Bay on the other part, independent of any right or claim under
New York.

4th. THAT with respect to all such cases, concerning the aforesaid
controverted lands, as cannot be decided by the rules exhibited in the
aforegoing articles, or some or one of them, the Legislature of the state of
New York, will provide for the determination of the same, according to the
rules of justice and equity arising out of such cases respectively, without
adhering to the strict rules of law.

5th. THAT in all cases where grants or confirmations shall become necessary,
on acceptance of the above overtures, such grants or confirmations, shall issue
to the grantees, at and after the rate of five pounds for a grant or
confirmation of three hundred acres or under, and for every additional hundred
acres, the additional sum of sixteen shillings, except in cases, where lands
shall be granted or confirmed to diverse persons in one entire tract, in which
case the grants shall issue, respectively, for fifteen pounds each, which
allowances shall be in lieu of all other fees or perquisites whatsoever.

6th. THAT whenever, agreeable to the above regulations, new grants or
confirmations shall become necessary under this state, for lands heretofore
granted by New Hampshire or Massachusetts Bay, the same quit rent only shall be
reserved, which was reserved in the original grants, under New Hampshire or
Massachusetts Bay.

7th. THAT where lands heretofore granted by New Hampshire or Massachusetts
Bay, have been since confirmed to such grantees by new grants under New York,
the quit rents on such lands, shall be reduced to what they were in the
original grants, under New Hampshire or Massachusetts Bay.

8th. THAT in order to encourage the settlement of the aforesaid disputed
lands, in a peaceable subjection to the authority and jurisdiction of this
state, and also of all other lands, held within and under this state, the
following commutation for the quit rents, shall be allowed, viz. That on
payment, at the rate of two shillings and sixpence lawful money of this state,
into the treasury of this state, for every penny sterling of quit rent
reserved, or on delivery into the same, of seventeen times the quantity of
grain, or other commodity reserved for such quit rent, the same shall thence
forward be utterly discharged, and for ever cease and be extinguished.

THAT these overtures should be offered with a view, not only to induce the
aforesaid discontented inhabitants, of the counties of Albany, Charlotte,
Cumberland and Gloucester, to return to a lawful and rightful obedience to the
authority and jurisdiction of this state; but also in favor of all others whom
the same may concern; and to be of no avail to any person or persons
whatsoever, who shall after the first day of May next, yield or acknowledge,
any allegiance or subjection to the pretended state of Vermont, the pretended
government thereof, or to any power or authority, pretended to be held or
exercised thereunder.

THAT the aforegoing overtures, on the condition above expressed, be tendered
for acceptance to all persons, to whose case the same, or any or either of
them, do, or shall apply, upon the public faith and assurance of the
legislature and government of this state of New York, pledged to such person
and persons for the purpose.

THAT the several branches of the Legislature of the state of New York, will
concur in the necessary measures for protecting the loyal inhabitants of this
state, residing in the counties of Albany, Charlotte, Cumberland and
Gloucester, in their persons and estates, and for compelling all persons,
residing within this state, and refusing obedience to the Government and
Legislature thereof, to yield that obedience and allegiance, which, by law and
of right, they owe to this state.

And whereas, The said Senate and Assembly of this state of New York, have
also, by their resolution requested me to issue my Proclamation, under the
privy seal of this state, reciting their aforesaid declarations and
resolutions, and strictly charging and commanding all manner of persons, in the
name of the people of the state of New York, to take due notice thereof, at
their peril, and to govern themselves accordingly.

I DO THEREFORE hereby, in the name of the people of the state of New York,
publish and proclaim the aforesaid declarations and resolutions; and I do
hereby, strictly charge and command all manner of persons, within this state,
at their peril, to take due notice of this proclamation, and of every article,
clause, matter and thing therein recited and contained, and to govern
themselves accordingly.

Given under my Hand, and the Privy Seal of the State of New York, at
Poughkeepsie, in the County of Duchess, the Twenty Third Day of February, in
the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Seventy Eight. GEO. CLINTON.

GOD save the PEOPLE.
THIS proclamation, after mentioning a disaffection of many persons inhabiting
the northeast parts of the county of Albany, and certain parts of the counties
of Charlotte, Cumberland and Gloucester, proceeds to affirm that these tracts
of country were clearly included within the ancient, original, true and lately
established bounds of the state of New York.

THAT many, nay almost the whole of the inhabitants in those counties, alias,
the state of Vermont, are disaffected to the government of New York, will not
be disputed. This is a fact: But it is not fact, that the ancient, original and
true bounds of New York included those lands. The first intimation that ever
saluted the ears of the public, asserting this doctrine, was, from a
proclamation of Governor Tryon's, dated the 11th day of December, 1771, which
begins thus: Whereas, it is the ancient and incontestible right of this colony,
to extend to Connecticut River as its eastern boundary. This assertion has
been answered at large in my Treatise on the Conduct of this Government toward
the New Hampshire Settlers, to which I refer the reader, and at present
observe, that as the quoted assertions in these proclamations, are wholly
without foundation, they need only to be as positively denied as they are
asserted. The fact is, that the tract of land which now comprehends the state
of Vermont, was universally known to be in the government of New Hampshire.
Thus it was placed by all Geographers in their maps, 'till the year 1764, when
the now English King, for certain political reasons, which I shall mention,
extended the jurisdiction of New York over the premises, by his special royal
authority. At the time of the alteration of this jurisdiction, jealousies had
fired the minds of King and Parliament against the growth and rising power of
America, and at this time they began to advance men and governments into power,
with a political design to crush the liberties of America. New York had ever
been their favorite government: They could almost vie with Great Britain in
the art of vassalaging common people, and in erasing every idea of liberty from
the human mind, by making and keeping them poor and servile. This Great Britain
well knew; and therefore sliced a large territory from New Hampshire, and added
it to New York, to depress the power of the one, and enlarge and extend the
other. A well concerted plan: But the Green Mountain Boys disconcerted it, by
throwing their weight in to the scale of Congress, which, thank God, has fairly
ponderated. Thus may be seen the design, as well as date, of the original,
ancient and true bounds of the state of New-York's being extended over the
state of Vermont; and, for the same reason it was thus extended by
Great Britain, it will undoubtedly be curtailed by Congress.

AS to the acts of outlawry, mentioned in the Proclamation, they died a natural
death the first day of January, 1776, as may be seen from the act itself, here
quoted: And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that this act
shall remain and continue in full force and effect, from the passing thereof,
until the first day of January, which will be in the year of our Lord, one
thousand seven hundred and seventy-six.

THE subjects of the state of Vermont were under no apprehensions from these
old, lifeless acts: Nor do I conceive, that the present Legislature of the
state of New York have laid them under any obligation, in granting them a
pardon. It was a matter which formerly respected Governor Tryon, the old
Legislature of New York, and the Green Mountain Boys; and the party last
mentioned, choose to settle that old quarrel with Mr. Tryon, and resent it,
that the Legislature of the state of New York have, so late in the day,
undertook to give an Unconditional discharge and remission of all penalties and
forfeitures incurred, under an act, which had been long dead; and which, when
alive, served only to discover to the world, the wickedness and depravity of
that legislative body which enacted them. In the lifetime of this act, I was
called by the Yorkers an outlaw, and afterward by the British was called a
rebel; and I humbly conceive, that there was as much propriety in the one name
as the other, and I verily believe, that the King's Commissioners would now be
as willing to pardon me for the sin of rebellion, provided I would afterward
be subject to Britain, as the Legislature abovementioned, provided I would be a
subject to New York; and, I must confess, I had as leave be a subject to the
one as the other, and, it is well known, I have had great experience with them
both.

NEXT, I propose to consider that part of the proclamation called Overtures,
which are contained in the three first articles. Article 1st. That all persons
actually possessing and improving lands, by title under grants from
New Hampshire of Massachusetts Bay, and not granted under New York, shall be
confirmed in their respective possessions.

THIS first article cannot be considered of any material consequence, inasmuch,
as among almost the whole possessions referred to in the article, there are but
very few, if any, but what are covered with New York grants.

THE second article is as follows: That all persons possessing and improving
lands, not granted by either of the three governments, shall be confirmed in
their respective possessions, together with such additional quantity of vacant
land, lying contiguous to each respective possession, as may be necessary to
form the same into a convenient farm, so as the quantity of land to be
confirmed to each respective possession, shall not exceed three hundred acres.

NEITHER of these two first articles, called Overtures, affect the controversy,
except in some very few instances, inasmuch as all, or in a manner all the
possessions spoken of, were first granted by New Hampshire, except some few
which were granted by Massachusetts Bay; and then, lastly, almost the whole of
those possessions regranted by New York. This being the case, what has been
hitherto proposed, does not reach the essence of the controversy, as the
New-Yorkers very well know; besides, it is not in the power of the government
to confirm any of those possessions which have been already granted, and
therefore become the property of the grantees, as will be more fully discussed
in its proper place. I proceed to the third article of the much boasted
Overtures.

THAT where lands have been heretofore granted by New Hampshire and
Massachusetts Bay, or either of them, and actually possessed in consequence
thereof, and being so possessed, were afterward granted by New York, such
possession shall be confirmed, the posterior grant under New York
notwithstanding.

THOUGH it is absolutely out of the power of the said legislative authority, to
confirm the possessions mentioned; yet, to discover their want of generosity in
their proposal, I shall, in the first place, consider what a trifling
proportion of those possessions could be confirmed upon their own stating,
inasmuch, as the confirming clause in the article, only confirms the possessor,
who being so possessed at the time that the New York grant was laid, and has no
respect to any additional possession carried on after the grant took place: The
identical words are, And being so possessed, were afterward granted by
New York; viz. After such possession was actually made, and the possessor being
so in possession, at the time the grant took place, such possession shall be
confirmed, but any later possession cannot be included in the condition of
"being so possessed;" for, a later possession was no possession at all at the
time the condition of possession took place; and consequently, every possession
which has been begun in the state of Vermont, since the lands were granted by
New York, must be lost to the possessor, and fall into the hands of the
New York grantees, with all other uncultivated lands in the state; and all our
purchases of those lands from New Hampshire and Massachusetts Bay, fall to the
ground, together with our possessions, which have been increased an hundred
fold.

THESE Overtures have hitherto been considered only in a grammatical and
logical sense, allowing them their own construction; I now proceed to consider
them in a law sense. A legislative authority, within its own jurisdiction, may
confirm a possession on vacant land, by making a grant of the same to the
possessor: But, for the legislative authority of the state of New York, to
pretend as they do in their proclamation, to vacate any grants made by their
own authority, in favor of any possession, and to confirm such possessions, by
nullifying and defeating their own grants, is the height of folly and
stupidity: For, the lands being once granted, the property passes to the
grantee, who is become the sole proprietor of the same; and he is as
independent of that legislative authority which granted it, as any person may
be supposed to be, who purchases a farm of land of me by deed of conveyance;
and it is as much out of the power of that legislature to vacate a grant made
by them, or the same authority, in favor of any possessor, as it is out of my
power to vacate my deed of conveyance in favor of some second person. It is
contrary to common sense, to suppose, that the property of the subject is at
the arbitrary disposal of the Legislature: If it was, they might give a grant
today, and vacate it tomorrow, and so on, ad infinitum. This would destroy
the very nature and existance of personal property, as the whole would depend
on the sovereign will and last act of the Legislature: But the truth of the
matter is, the first conveyance will, and ought to hold good; and this defeats
all subsequent conveyances.

FROM what has been said on this subject, it appears, that the Overtures in the
Proclamation set forth, are either romantic, or calculated to deceive woods
people, who, in general, may not be supposed to understand law, or the power of
a legislative authority.

I HAVE further to evince my arguments on this subject, by the concurring
opinion of the Lords of the Board of Trade, on complaint made to them from
those very persons, possessing the lands we are speaking of. That clause of
their report which is similar to what I have argued, is in these words: Such
subsequent grants made by the government of New York, however unwarrantable,
cannot be set aside by any authority from his Majesty, in case the grantees
shall insist on their title.

THUS it appears, in a trial (of the same case we are treating of) before the
Board of Trade, that the King, under whose authority the government of New York
had, in an oppressive manner granted those very lands, could not, by his royal
authority, vacate or set aside the grants; yet the present legislative
authority of the state of New York, proclaim to the world, and pledge the faith
of government, that they will do it: But enough has been said on the
impossibility of it, as well as on the ungenerousness of the proposal: And as
to the quit-rents, the General Assembly of the state of Vermont will determine
their expediency, and probably release them all.

WHAT has been observed, answers every part of the Proclamation worth notice,
as the five last articles had an entire reference to the three first; though,
it may be worth observing, that the time of compliance with those Overtures are
run out, and, it is my opinion, that but few of the subjects of the state of
Vermont have closed with them. The main inducement I had in answering them was,
to draw a full and convincing proof from the same, that the shortest, best, and
most eligible, I had almost said, the only possible way of vacating those
New York interfering grants, is, to maintain inviolable the supremacy of the
legislative authority of the independent state of Vermont: This, at one stroke,
overturns every New York scheme which may be calculated for our ruin, makes us
free men, confirms our property, "and puts it fairly in our power to help
ourselves," in the enjoyment of the great blessings of a free, uncorrupted and
virtuous civil government. You have fought, bled, and hitherto conquered, and
are as deserving these good fruits of your valor, hazard and toil, as any
people under heaven.

YOU have experienced every species of oppression, which the old government of
New York, with a Tryon at their head, could invent and inflict; and it is
manifest, that the new government are minded to follow nearly in their steps.
Happy it is for you that you are fitted for the severest of trials, you have
been wonderfully supported, and carried through thus far in your opposition to
that government. Formerly you had every thing to fear from it: But now you have
little to fear, for your public character is established, and your cause known
to be just. In your early struggles with that government you acquired a
reputation of bravery; this gave you a relish for martial glory, and the
British invasion opened an ample field for its display, and you have gone on
conquering and to conquer until TALL GRENADIERS are dismayed and tremble at
your approach. Your frontier situation often obliges you to be in arms and
battles; and by repeated marchings, scoutings and manly exercises, your nerves
have become strong to strike the mortal blow. What enemy to the state of
Vermont, or New York land monopolizer, shall be able to stand before you in the
day of your fierce anger!

BENNINGTON, August 9, 1778.
THE END.
ERRAT. In page 5, line 25, after mean add time.


