Dr. Chauncy's SERMON AT THE Boston Thursday-Lecture, September 3, 1778.

The accursed Thing must be taken away from among a People, if they would
reasonably hope to stand before their Enemies.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE THURSDAY-LECTURE IN BOSTON, September 3, 1778.

And printed at the Desire of the Hearers.

By CHARLES CHAUNCY, D. D.

Senior Pastor of the first Church in BOSTON.

BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: PRINTED BY THOMAS and JOHN FLEET, 1778.

A Lecture SERMON.
JOSHUA VII. 13. -- "Thus says the Lord God of Israel, there is an accursed
thing in the midst of thee, O Israel! Thou can not stand before thine
enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing from among you."
THE preceding chapter gave us an account of Israel's besieging Jericho, and
of the falling of the walls of that fenced city by a mavelous display of the
power of almighty God: Upon which it is added in the close of the chapter, "So
the Lord was with Joshua, and his fame was noised throughout all the country."
And yet, one of the first things we are acquainted with in the progress of his
history is, the defeat he met with in his attempt against Ai, a city about nine
miles west from Jericho. This unhappy defeat filled Joshua with great concern,
insomuch that he "rent his clothes, fell upon his face before the Lord, and put
dust upon his head, continuing all day in fasting and prayer." The words of his
prayer we have in the 7th, 8th and 9th verses of the context.

The good God saw the sincerity of this prayer, notwithstanding the
imperfections that attended it, and lets Joshua into the true reason why Israel
fled before their enemies. Says he, in the 11th and 12th verses, "Israel has
sinned -- they have even taken of the accursed thing -- therefore they could
not stand before their enemies, but turned their backs before their enemies,
because they were accursed: neither will I be with you any more, unless ye
remove the accursed thing from among you." And now come in the words of my
text, "Thus says the Lord God of Israel, there is an accursed thing in the
midst of thee, O Israel! Thou can not stand before thine enemies until ye
take away the accursed thing from among you." The accursed thing in the midst
of Israel was Achan's sin, verse 20, 21.

It would not be unprofitable, should I enlarge in describing this sin, and
those circumstances relative to it, which made it so provoking to God; and also
in vindicating that awful, but righteous severity with which it was punished.
But to do this as it ought to be done, would take up too much of the present
time; for which reason I shall pass over all that might be said upon these
points, and immediately proceed to employ your thoughts on the text itself;
from which the following notes are obviously deducible.

I. Sin is an accursed thing. II. This accursed thing is too often in the midst
of a people when engaged in war. III. They must take away this accursed thing
from among them, if they would hope, upon just grounds, to stand before their
enemies.
I. Sin is an accursed thing. So it is stigmatized by God himself in the text;
and with the highest reason.

For it is an accursed thing in its own nature. What this is we may learn from
the description which an Apostle has given us of it, 1 John iii. 4. "Whosoever
commits sin, transgresses also the law: for sin is the transgression of the
law." i. e. the law of God, however made known, whether by the light of reason,
or the revelation he has made of his will in the scriptures of the old and new
testament. Mankind are all under the law of God, in one or other, or both of
these senses; and when they transgress this law, they are chargeable with sin.
This is its nature.

And it carries in its idea rebellion against the most rightful authority. For
nothing is more indisputable than that the God who made us is our sovereign,
and has a right to give law to us, and demand our subjection. But by sin we
practically call in question this right of his, and reflect dishonor on his
governing authority. And what is this short of rebellion against the most
sovereign majesty, whose authority carries with it the most binding force, the
most indubitable obligation?

It implies in it also horrid contempt of God, and the most slighty regard to
him. The language of it is, that his laws are not worth minding; that he either
knows not how, or has not taken care, to make laws that are fit to be regarded;
and that men can govern themselves much better than they will be governed by an
observance of the divine precepts. This is the practical language of sin,
whereby the wisdom of God is reflected upon, and the supreme Majesty himself
treated with contempt.

Moreover, sin practically defies the power and anger of God; for his laws are
guarded with sanctions which are awfully severe. He has declared he will arm
himself with power, and take vengeance on those who obey not the truth, but
unrighteousness. And therefore to violate the laws of God, and to go on in a
course of doing so, is a practical declaration that we regard not the anger of
God, nor fear what he has threatened to bring upon us. The language of sin is,
that we are stronger than the Almighty; at least, that we are not afraid of his
power, or his wrath. All this is included in sin, on which account it may, with
the highest propriety, be called an accursed thing.

Nor is sin an accursed thing in its nature only, but in its effects and
consequences also. It has proved a curse, and the most dreadful one by its
mischievous effects.

It Is sin that has cursed the ground, so that it brings forth thorns and
thistles, and obliges mankind to toil and pains to get a livelihood out of it.
The curse of God upon the ground, by means of sin, is pronounced, Genesis iii. 17,
18, 19.

It Is sin that has brought a curse upon our bodies, subjecting them to diseases
and pains, infinitely various both for kind and degree; yea, exposing them to
death, in all manner of forms. The words of the curse are recorded, Genesis iii.
19.

It Is sin that has brought a curse upon our souls, introducing into them
confusion and disorder, weakness and depravity. It Is this that has blinded our
understandings, perverted our judgments, stupefied our consciences, corrupted
our passions and affections. It Is this that has deprived us of our original
glory, sunk our natures, and from creatures but little lower than the angels,
reduced us to a level with the beasts that perish. It Is this that has commenced
a war in our faculties, disturbing the peace of our minds, and filling them
with tumult and vexation, intestine jars and horrid inward recoilings.

It Is sin that has brought a curse upon this whole lower world, filling it, in
all ages, with innumerable spectacles of woe and misery. It Is this that opened
the door to all that grief and sorrow, distress and trouble, in infinitely
various kinds, which has made mankind unhappy, even from the days of Adam,
whether as single persons, or as subsisting in societies, whether smaller or
greater.

It Is this that has harrassed so many particular individual persons, perplexing
their minds, afflicting their bodies, and creating numberless uneasinesses to
them, in all the different shapes that can be conceived of by the liveliest
imagination.

It Is this that has disquieted families, introducing disappointments, losses,
crosses, feuds and animosities, the want of outward good things, and the
suffering a thousand evil ones.

It Is this that has ever been the makebate in the church of God, destroying
its peace and order, promoting strife and contention, alienation and
disaffection, and crumbling it into numberless parties.

It Is this that has been the troubler of nations and kingdoms, unsheathing the
sword and making them the devourers of one another. It Is this that has
dethroned princes, ruined cities, depopulated countries, yea, emptied the earth
of its inhabitants, filling it with slaughter and bloodshed. And it is this also
that has "shut up the heavens, and made the rain of a land powder and dust";
it is this that has brought "the pestilence that walks in darkness, and
destruction that wastes at noon day"; it is this that has caused the earth to
tremble, and open its mouth so as to take in thousands of souls at once: Yea,
whenever the judgments of God have been abroad in the earth, it is sin that has
brought them down: To this must they all be attributed as the alone procuring
cause.

Nor are these dreadful calamities the worst effects of this accursed thing.
Its malign influence extends beyond the grave, and reaches even to the eternal
world. It Is this that guards the heavenly paradise as with a flaming sword, so
that there is no admission for sinners, continuing such, into that blessed
place: As the Apostle John expresses it, "there shall in no wise enter into it
any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a
lie." Nor is this the worst effect of sin yet. It Is this that has made the
dreadful place in the other world called in scripture hell; the bottomless pit;
the lake that burns with fire and brimstone; the place of blackness of
darkness, of weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. If it had not been for
sin, there had never been such a place as hell; we should never have heard of
the sire that goes not out, and the worm that dies not.

But I need not say any thing more to satisfy you that sin is an accursed
thing. That is certainly worthy to be spoken of in this style, which has
brought mankind under the curse of God in this world, and exposes them to his
curse in the future one. (...) is of all things the most accursed. There is
indeed a curse in nothing but by means of sin. This is emphatically the
accursed thing. And whatever else has a curse in it, is derived from sin.

Let us, my brethren, take care to make a just estimate of sin; not looking
upon it as an harmless innocent thing, not entertaining an opinion of it as a
slight inconsiderable evil; but as that which is accursed in itself, and
carries with it all manner of curses. We must thus conceive of it. It Is the
first thing necessary to a deliverance from the curse it has subjected us to;
as it will not only engage us in the work of repentance, but open to our view
our infinite indebtedness to the Lord Jesus Christ, who has taken upon him the
curse of sin. And this will inspire us with zeal and vigor, in the use of all
means, that we may obtain, through him, redemption from the curse of the law
and the wrath of God. -- But I must not enlarge. It Is time that I proceed to
the second note from the text, viz.

II. That sin, this accursed thing, is too often in the midst of a people, when
engaged in war.

This was the charge against Israel, now they were gone forth against the
nations of Canaan. Says the context, "Israel has committed a trespass in the
accursed thing. Israel has sinned and transgressed my covenant." Nor was this
the only time they were chargeable with sin, while engaged in war. We never
read of this people, when in a state of war, but they are complained of as
having sinned against the Lord their God. And there are scarce any sins but
they were prevalent among them. The Prophets, whom God sent with his messages
to them, testify against their profaneness, their covetousness, their
uncleanness, their pride, their hypocrisy, their idolatry, and sometimes their
universal debauchery of manners. And it was indeed the prevalence of these and
such like sins that engaged them in war, either putting them upon invading the
rights of their neighbors, or provoking God to stir up their neighbors to
invade theirs. It would be needless to go over the wars of Israel, as they are
recorded in the old testament, to illustrate this; but if any should choose to
be at this pains, they would find that their moral character was always such as
might justly give the holy God (...) to complain of them, as in Isa. i. 4. "Ah!
sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers; they have
forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the holy one of Israel to anger."

And is it true of Israel only, that the accursed thing was in the midst of
them when engaged in war? Is not this the charge that may be justly made
against our land at this day? -- Was it ever in a more corrupt and degenerate
state? Was it ever in a more unhappy situation, morally speaking, to engage in
war? Did we ever hear so loud a cry of oppression? Was common honesty ever at a
lower ebb? Were extravagance, intemperance and lewdness ever more general? Were
the sabbaths of the Lord ever more profaned, or his sanctuary more polluted?
Was the name of God ever more dishonored by horrid cursing and swearing? -- We
are, in truth, a sinful people, and have exceedingly provoked the holy one of
Israel to anger against us. The accursed thing is in the midst of us, impiety
toward God, unrighteousness and unmercifulness toward our neighbor, and
insobriety with respect to our selves; yea, we have dishonored Christ,
neglected his salvation, abused his grace, and grieved his spirit. This, in
general, though I am grieved to say it, is the true character of the country,
at this day, notwithstanding all our pretenses, and all our spiritual
advantages. A melancholy illustration of the truth we were upon, that the
accursed thing is too often in the midst of a people when at war with their
enemies. I now go on to the next and last note from the words, viz.

III. That a people at war must take away the accursed thing from among them,
if they would hope, upon just grounds, to stand before their enemies.

You see that Israel could not stand before the men of Ai: And what was the
reason? It Is given to Joshua by God himself, ver. 11, 12. "Israel has sinned
-- therefore the children of Israel could not stand before their enemies, but
turned their backs before their enemies." And this is but agreeable to the
covenant which God made with them, after he had brought them out of Egypt with
a mighty hand and an outstretched arm. Those are the terms of it. "If ye walk
in my statutes and keep my commandments, and do them; -- then ye shall chase
your enemies, and they shall fall before you by the sword. But if ye will not
hearken unto me, and shall despise my statutes, and not do my commandments; --
I also will do this unto you, ye shall be slain before your enemies, ye shall
be delivered into the hand of the enemy." Lev. xxvi. And according to the tenor
of this covenant, it all along happened to Israel. While they kept themselves
from the accursed thing, or soon took it away, they had the better of their
enemies, and caused them to flee or fall before them: But when the accursed
thing was in the midst of them, and they took no care to remove it away, they
fell before their enemies, or run from them, or were delivered into their
hands. And as an awful illustration of the truth of my text, and of the
threatening contained in God's covenant with Israel, they were, about forty
years after our Savior, invaded by the Romans, and totally broken up as a
people, and scattered among all the nations of the earth, among whom they
remain as a taunt and a curse to this very day.

And God will deal, in general, after the same manner, with other people, as he
dealt with his Israel. While they walk with him, and do that which is right and
just and good, he will make their enemies to be at peace with them, or deliver
them into their hands: But if they violate the law of God, and trespass in the
accursed thing, he will not enable them to stand before their enemies, but will
give them into their hands.

It Is true, the parties in the war may both of them have sinned against the
Lord; the accursed thing may be in the midst of them both: In which case, they
are both made use of in the providence of God to chastise one another; and to
which of them God will give the advantage is known only to himself; unless that
party in the war, whose cause is just, should put away the accursed thing: in
which case they might upon good grounds hope for help against their enemies, so
as to be able to stand before them; yea, and to tread them under their feet.
Says God, in the text, "thou can not stand before thine enemies, until ye
take away the accursed thing from among you." It may be worthy of special
notice, though the accursed thing was in the midst of Israel, yet this should not
hinder their success against their enemies, if they would but take it away. In
this case, they might, notwithstanding their former folly, hope to come off
with glory and victory.

But the question here is, what are we to understand by this "taking away the
accursed thing?" How is it to be done? To which I answer,

If the accursed thing is of such a nature that the "civil arm" is necessary to
remove it, it is, in this sense, to be taken away. Thus the accursed thing was
taken away from Israel. The sin of Achan was a capital offense, and it lay with
the civil magistrate, by cutting off the sinner, to clear the community of
guilt. Accordingly, Joshua and the Elders of Israel were no sooner made
sensible of the sin of Achau, than they brought him under trial, pass sentence
upon him, and put it in execution in the face of all Israel. In like manner,
when the accursed thing, in the midst of a people, is of a capital nature, the
civil magistrate must remove it by the death of the offender: or if it be any
other crime, which it belongs to them, as guardians to the state, to restrain
or punish, they must, in an authoritative way, purge the community of it.

And permit me to say here, as oppression of the poor, the fatherless, and the
widow, is eminently the accursed thing in the midst of us, it ought to be taken
away, so far as may be, by the powers ordained of God to be his ministers for
good. It Is observable, and may be worthy of special notice, there is no
prohibition, among the laws of the supreme Legislator, more particularly,
expressly, solemnly, and repeatedly urged than this, thou shall not oppress the
poor, the fatherless, and the widow. Those therefore who are entrusted with
governing authority, would do no more than their duty, and what they are called
to by the King of Kings, should they exert themselves to discourage oppression,
and guard against it to the utmost of their power, more especially a the poor,
the fatherless, and the widow, are the distinguished sufferers by it. And
should they neglect to restrain and guard against this kind of oppression, they
could not excuse themselves from the guilt of violating a most express command
of the great King and Judge of all the earth. The 82d Psalm begins with those
majestic words, "God stands in the congregation of the mighty, he judges
among the gods," that is, among civil magistrates. It then follows, as a
peremptory command to them from the Sovereign of the world, "defend the poor
and fatherless, do justice to the afflicted and needy; deliver the poor and
needy; rid them out of the hand of the wicked." If it was ever proper, if it
ever was, or could be, the duty of the civil magistrate to lay restraint upon
the malignant vice of oppression, as widows, fatherless children, and afflicted
needy persons are affected by it, it is eminently so now.

I am sensible it may be difficult, if within the reach of the magistrates
skill or power, to remove that injustice, which, like an overbearing flood, has
made its way through these American States; occasioned partly by the paper
currency, partly by the necessities of people in this day of general calamity,
but principally by the undue love of money: But however difficult, or
impossible, it may be for the governing power, in the present state of things,
effectually to restrain, in general, the affair of commercial dealing within
the bounds of righteousness, this may be done, and without the least
difficulty, in regard of those widows and orphans, together with many others,
who have greatly suffered and are still suffering, by means of a law of this
State, which obliges them to accept of four or five shillings instead of a
pound, or to lose the yearly interest which they depend upon for a subsistence.
I fear not to say, that glaring injustice, justice, and of the worst kind too,
wherein it affects the fatherless and widow, is established by this law. It
would be a dishonorable reflection on the makers of such an establishment, who
are politically dead, to suppose, that their intention was, to give opportunity
for the cancelling bonds by the payment of one half or a quarter of their real
value. As the emission of paper-bills was necessary to the carrying on the war,
they might think a law of this kind would tend to prevent their depreciation,
and with this view be determined to make it: But as it is now known,
notwithstanding this, and every other device, that the depreciation has been
amazingly great, and that hundreds and thousands of helpless widows and
orphans, to say nothing of others, have been reduced to the utmost distress by
means of it, together with the law that has given it an oppressive efficacy, it
may reasonably be expected, that the powers that now be will interdict the
continuance of this law, lest there should be the continuance of that
injustice, which would be a disgrace to even a pagan state.

I am now upon the duty of the civil magistrate, wherein it lies within his
sphere, to take away sin, which is an accursed thing, from a people, I would
mention the sad case of salary-men, and particularly the Clergy. So far as I am
able to learn, most of the p^^^shes in this State have made their ministers no
allowance at all for the depreciation of the currency, and those who have made
any have fallen short one half, if not three quarters, of what in reason might
have been expected of them. Is it right (...) people, who have solemnly
contracted with their ministers to pay them such a sum, to discharge their
obligation with that which amounts to not more than one half, or a quarter, or
a seventh part of its real value? Is it consistent with common honesty for
people to demand, and to take, of their ministers for labor, for provision, for
clothing, and all the necessaries of life five, six or seven times more in
proportion than they are willing to give them, though obliged to it by explicit
contract? And shall government, while they know this, sit still, and look upon
their oppression without offering them any help? Is this as it ought to be?
Especially, as it is owing to government bills, and a government law making
them a tender to discharge contracts, though by a nominal sum, not worth a third,
or it may be a seventh part of the value originally agreed for, that they are
thus injured? So long ago as May 26, 1725, the General Court passed the
following Resolve, which it is thought proper to insert at large. It is in
these words, "At a Great and General Court or Assembly for his Majesty's
Province of Massachusetts Bay in New England, begun and held at Boston, upon
Wednesday May 26, 1725. the following Resolve passed both Houses, and was
consented to by his honor the lieutenant Governor, viz.

Upon serious consideration of the great distresses that many of the ministers
of the gospel within this province labor under with respect to their support
or maintenance, their salaries being generally paid in the public bills of
credit of this province, although many of the ministers contracted with their
people in the time when Silver Money passed in payment; and the necessaries of
life, such as clothing, provisions, together with labor and other things, now
demand so much more of the bills of credit than heretofore;

Resolved, That it is the indispensable duty of the several towns, precincts
and parishes of this province, to make such additions to the salaries or
maintenance of their respective ministers, as may honorably support and
encourage them in their work; and therein to have regard as well to the time of
the contract between the minister and people, and the s^ec^e therein mentioned,
as to the great and growing difference in the value of the bills of credit,
seem what they have sometimes been. And this could do therefore most earnestly
recommend the speedy and cheerful practice of this duty, to the several
congregations and religious assemblies within this province: And that this
resolve be public to read on the next Lord's day after the receipt thereof, in
the afternoon before the congregation be dismissed; and at the anniversary
meeting of the several towns or precincts in the province in the month of March
next.

By order of the great and general court or assembly.

Jos^^h W^lla^^, Sec^*"

Previous to the above resolve, and that justice might be done between man and
man, it was enacted by government in the year School, that the executive courts,
upon the forfeiture of the penalty annexed to any agreement, covenant,
contract, or other specialties -- should chancer the forfeiture, and enter up
judgment for the just debt and damages. -- In the year 1741, the judges of the
respective courts, in case of a depreciation of the emitted bills, were
particularly empowered "to give judgment for so much silver as the true debt
appears to be, and in want thereof for so much in said province bills, with the
addition of so much more as will make amends for the depreciating said bills
from their present stated value, or the value at which such other bills should
be stated." In the years 1744, and 1747, additional care was taken by the
General Court to prevent oppression by means of the depreciation of their
emitted bills.

It will not, I believe, be disowned by any, who have made themselves
acquainted with the character of those who constituted our General Courts in
the years above specified, that they were men of wisdom, integrity, public
virtue, and political skill. The specimens they have given of this, in the laws
I have referred to, are well worthy of notice; and should like laws, which are
now more loudly called for than in those times, be made by the present
governing powers, I doubt not but they would carry with them effectual relief
to thousands of Widows, Orphans, and others, who have been the great sufferers
in this day of difficulty and distress, not having had it in their power, in
common with almost all sorts of persons, to help themselves.




Surely, the Pastors of the Churches in this State are not so inconsiderable
and contemptible an order of men as not to be worth the notice of Government,
when almost universally wronged, and to an high degree. Some special provision
for their relief is a matter of justice, and not mere favor, as it is by means
of government bills, and a government law, however contrary to the design of
Government, that they are oppressed. And such provision, I am sure, if
inclination is not wanting, may be made, and without any great expense either
of thought, time, or pains; and the provision might be effectual to put it out
of the power of people to turn their ministers off with any thing short of the
true value of what they agreed with them for, when they settled with them. This
is all they desire: And as it is nothing more than common equity, would it not
be hard, may I not say, would it not be unjust, should they be left to groan
under their oppressions, and to have no helper?

Should it be said, if what has been mentioned, was to be carried into
execution, it might unhappily tend to increase the depreciation of the
currency, which would be a great and public damage. -- It Is obvious to answer,
there are no persons in this, or any of the States, who have it in their power,
but are so aware of the sunken value of the paper-bills, as to rise
proportionably in their demands for whatever they have to dispose of. Common
laborers of all kinds, farmers, traders and merchants, take effectual care to
balance, in their commercial conduct, the fall of the medium, with an adequate
increase of the price they ask for their commodities: Yea, our General Court
have thought it just and equal to inhance their daily stipend, on account of
the inhanced price of what is necessary for their subsistence, while employed
on the affairs of the public: Nor have they in this done any other than what is
right, and will be acknowledged to be so by all who are acquainted with the
situation of things among us: But shall widows and fatherless children,
together with the clergy and other salary men, who have it not in their power
to help themselves, be the distinguished grand sufferers in this day of
oppressive wickedness? When others can help themselves, while these cannot,
shall Government sit still, and not exert themselves, so that justice may be
done them. God forbid, that we should be any longer given up as a prey to the
devouring teeth of avaricious worldlings?

I shall add here, it ought to be deeply impressed on the hearts of our civil
rulers, that they are accountable to that God whose throne is in the heavens,
in common with other men; and his eyes behold their conduct in their public
capacity, and he sees and observes it, not merely as a spectator, but an
almighty righteous judge, one who enters all upon record, in order to a
reckoning another day. And the day is coming, when they shall all stand on a
level with the lowest of the people, before the tremendous bar of the righteous
judge of all the earth, and be called upon to render an account, not only of
their private life, but of their whole management as entrusted with the
concerns of the public.

If there needs any excuse for that plainness of speech I have now used, I
would say; -- "my conscience bears me witness," that what I have offered has
proceeded, not from want of decent respect for those who are our civil Rulers,
but from faithfulness to God, "whose I am, and whom I desire to serve," as well
as from a tender concern for those thousands among both the Laity and Clergy,
especially Widows and Orphans, whose groanings, by reason of oppression, are
heard in heaven, and may, if they are not heard on earth, bring down vengeance
from almighty God, in addition to what we have already felt. --

But to go on,

If the accursed thing is sin generally prevailing among a people, it must be
taken away by a general reformation. This is the only effectual method in which
it can be done; and it is the very one every where directed to in the word of
God: and it will, of (...) mercy, through the mediation and merits of the
Savior Jesus Christ, avail to the pardon of a people. This will bring them into
favor with heaven, and engage the presence of God with them, so as that they
shall be able to "stand before their enemies, and tread them under their feet."

What then remains, as the improvement of the present discourse, but that we
make it our care, by true humiliation and repentance, to remove sin, that
accursed thing, from among us. It will not, it cannot with any face of reason,
be denied, that sin, in every kind, abounds in the land. -- But if I may speak
what I believe is the real truth, I would say, that sin which is the source of
every other sin, and may emphatically be called the ACCURSED THING AMONG US, is
sordid avarice, an unsatiable thirst for money. It Is this that has overspread
the land with such base selfishness as has been destructive of that public
patriotic spirit which was its glory: It Is this that has engaged such
multitudes to " seek their own," to the neglect of, and in opposition to, "the
weal of others:" It Is this that has been the occasion of that injustice,
oppression, and extortion, which is so generally prevalent in all parts of the
country: It Is this that has reduced great numbers to penury and want,
especially among those, who have had it neither in their power, nor
inclination, to do by others, as others do by them: It Is this, in a word, that
has swallowed up all serious attention to "the things pertaining to the kingdom
of God, and of Jesus Christ;" instead of which, the gain of this world has been
the great and general concern, though at the hazard of that loss of the soul
which cannot be compensated. And in this view of our character, as having
reigning in us this avaricious disposition, which has been, and is still
productive of all wickedness, what can we expect but the frowns of heaven upon
our military operations? It Is true, and ought to be acknowledged with
gratitude, the good God has, notwithstanding our great unworthiness, "for his
holy name's sake, and to make his power known," given our armies remarkable
success in their contests with the enemy, at one time and another. So when
Israel went against Jericho, it pleased God by a miraculous exertion of
almighty power, to shake down the walls of that strongly fenced city, and
deliver it into the hands of Joshua, the chief Jewish military commander. But
Israel committed "a trespass in the accursed thing," for which cause they were
afterward defeated, and driven back by their enemies. Thus it has been with
us. By remarkable interpositions, in the government of Providence, we have been
marvellously succeeded, at one time and another, in our attempts against the
enemy; but, as the accursed thing has been retained among us, they, by like
interpositions of heaven, have been succeeded in their attempts against us. An
observable instance of this, yea, an instance wherein the God that is above
has, in a very conspicuous manner, interposed to serve them, and disserve us,
we have in the affair of Rhode Island, with what gave rise to it, and was
essentially connected with it.

We all know, the squadron of capital ships sent to America, by the MONARCH OF
FRANCE, was kindly intended for our help in our struggle with Great Britain;
and we all had great expectations from what might, humanly speaking, have been
effected thereby. But we have hitherto been greatly disappointed. But how? Not
through any failure in the use of proper means, but by the exertions of that
almighty Being, "who brings the wind out of his treasure," or keeps it
there, as "seems good in his sight." By contrary winds, or no winds, the
fleet from France was detained so much longer than ordinary in coming to the
Delaware, that the British ships, lying in that river with all their stores,
had opportunity, before their arrival, to go unmolested to New York. It Is true,
their looked for approach might be the occasion of the British army'^ quitting
Philadelphia with such haste, and doing it by the way of the Jersies, which
proved to them a disgraceful retreat, and the loss of some thousands of their
men. But this was soon followed by that which was greatly disadvantageous to
us. Upon Admiral D'Estaing's leaving the Delaware and anchoring at the Hook,
near New York, an expedition was planned, with a view to dispossess the enemy
of Rhode Island, by the joint operation of his fleet, and an army to be
immediately raised and sent upon this design. No army, it may be, was sooner
raised, or consisted of better men, many of whom, though men of fortune, figure,
and respectable characters, voluntarily entered upon this service as privates,
for the good of their country: Notwithstanding which, and the most flattering
prospect of success, they were disappointed: Not for want of wisdom in planting
the expedition, or of skill and resolution in the officers and men, either of
the army or navy; but by interposing frowns in the providence of him who
"sits King forever." The next day after our troops had landed without the
least opposition, and were to have been joined by a number of French regulars,
and the whole French fleet, they were called off, by the appearance of Lord
How Is naval force, which obliged the Count to go out after, and pursue them:
But before any action could commence, there arose, at the command of that God,
whom "the winds obey," an unknown storm in this part of the world, at such a
time of the year, which disabled a number of the French ships, and made it
necessary they should come to Boston to refit. -- This put an end to our
Rhode Island expedition. It may not be improper to say here, our Troops, under
the blessing of heaven, retreated from Rhode Island with signal success and
honor: For they not only went off with all their stores and baggage, without
the loss of a single article; but drove away the enemy who endeavored to pursue
them, with the loss only of two hundred and eleven of our men, killed, wounded,
and missing, which was vastly more than balanced by the loss of more than a
thousand of their's killed and wounded.
and the salutary effects we expected to reap from it. But, as it was wholly
owing to the extraordinary providence of God, which overruled this important
design to our sad disappointment, we can find no fault, unless we would reflect
blame upon the alwise righteous ruler of the world; instead of which, we might
do well to reflect upon the moral cause of this divine chastisement, which,
without all doubt, is, our not "taking away the accursed thing from among us."
This can be done, as has been said, in no way but by reformation. And the
reformation must be general, extending to all orders and degrees of men, among
us, from the highest to the lowest; and to all sins, from the greatest to the
least. Magistrates must be sensible of their faults, and rectify them;
ministers must be humbled for theirs, and amend them; and people in common must
be convinced of the evil of their doings, and repent of them. And in order to
this general reformation, every man must endeavor to know the plague of his
own heart; every one must come to a pause, and enquire what have I done? and
not be satisfied, till every thing amiss is done away, both in heart and life.

Thus let us remove the accursed thing from the midst of us; "breaking off our
sins by repentance, and our iniquities by turning to God." We shall not do
this, unless we betake ourselves for help to the great dispenser of grace. He
can dispose and influence us to "cease from doing evil, and to learn to do
well;" he can enable us to "unloose the bands of wickedness, and let the
oppressed go free," and to make it our care to "deal justly; loving mercy, and
walking humbly with God." And if, in consequence of our earnest supplications
before the mercy-seat in heaven, we shall be wrought upon to become a penitent
and obedient people, having faith in God, and in his son Jesus Christ, we may
hope, and upon just grounds, that our father's God will be our God, and
manifest himself to be so by "riding in the heavens for our help, and in his
excellency on the skies;" giving us occasion to triumph, and sing, as in the
144th Psalm, beginning, "Blessed be the Lord our strength, who teaches our
hands to war, and our fingers to fight; our goodness and our fortress, our high
tower and deliverer, in whom we trust: who subdueth the people under us."

AMEN.

