A SERMON, PREACHED AT STAMFORD, IN CONNECTICUT, UPON THE GENERAL THANKSGIVING,
DECEMBER 18th, 1777.

HARTFORD: Printed by WATSON AND GOODWIN, M DCC LXXVIII

A SERMON.
JOEL, II 20, 21. But I will remove far off from you the northern army, and
will drive him into a land barren and desolate, with his face toward the east
sea, and his hinder part toward the utmost sea; and his ill savor shall come
up, because he has done great things. Fear not, O land, be glad and rejoice;
for the LORD will do great things!
WERE the first of those verses designed solely as a theme for the preacher,
who should discourse upon the principal occasion of this day's solemnities; it
is not easy to conceive what more suitable or applicable terms, could have been
chosen by the prophet. The surprise, produced by this extraordinary
circumstance, will be naturally lessened, when we reflect, that the event of
which it was a prediction, almost perfectly resembled that, which produced the
injunction of our senators upon every order of AMERICAN inhabitants, thus
publicly to acknowledge and commemorate the goodness of GOD. This prophecy was
written about ninety years before the event: but JOEL, like his fellow
favorites of heaven, by a kind of divine intuition, charmed up to immediate
view things deeply buried in the womb of future ages. Thus he clearly foresaw,
and by that foresight as clearly predicted, a principal subject of this
chapter, -- the rise, success, and ruin of the ASSYRIAN army, which in the
reign of HEZEKIAH, invaded JUDAH and JERUSALEM.

About seven hundred and ten years before the birth of our SAVIOR, SINACHERIB,
a mighty, and successful monarch of the ASSYRIAN empire, having wasted the
neighboring regions like an over flowing flood, or the flame of a devouring
fire, sent a principal General Officer named RAB-SHAKEH to reduce the little
nation of the JEWS to subjection; or, if he found that attended with
difficulty, to cut off their name from the face of the earth. This active,
intrepid warrior, at the head of a numerous body of veteran troops, entered the
northern parts of JUDEA, and, with as much rapidity as he could march his
troops over it, conquered the whole country before him; towns were unpeopled,
the strongest fortresses evacuated, the most fertile and beautiful provinces
turned into deserts, at the sound of his name. To this mighty tide of success
the city of JERUSALEM proved a limit. Strengthened to a high degree both by
nature and art, it easily resisted the first impulse though a dangerous one,
and gave its prince an opportunity, at least, of debating whether he would
basely subject his countrymen to the innumerable evils of despotic dominion, or
attempt bravely to secure their freedom and happiness. To meet his enemies in
the field, he was unable; but to refuse mean, unconditional submission was
clearly in his power. At this crisis, he drew up the determination or a brave
man, a wise man, an honest man, a religious man -- to make the best possible
defense, and trust the issue to his MAKER. This resolution, in the view of his
enemies, was equally surprising and ridiculous, -- Unaccustomed to any
successful resistance from human force, and entire unbelievers of the
efficiency of divine interpositions, they felt for HEZEKIAH, and his MAKER, a
contempt, which they tortured language to express. To an army numberless,
disciplined, furnished, and experienced as his, RABSHAKEH supposed man and GOD
would make feeble opposition. Nor can we wonder that a proud man, educated from
his infancy to invariable success, should laugh at every human foe; or that a
wicked man, nursed in peace in the stews and brothers of NINEVEH, should hiss
at the vengeance of a divine one. To these feelings he gives vent, in a
proclamation delivered by order of SENNACHRIB to HEZEKIAH and the inhabitants
of JERUSALEM -- a proclamation the most extraordinary, one excepted, to be
found in history, ancient or modren. I beg leave to repeat it.

II Kings xviii. 10
Thus says the great king, the king of ASSYRIA -- What confidence is this
wherein ^hou trustest? Thou say (but they are but vain words) I have counsel
and strength for the war; now on whom do thou trust, that thou rebelest
against me? Now behold thou trustest upon the staff of this bruised reed, even
upon Egypt, on which if a man lean, it will go into his hand and pierce it; so
is Pharaoh, king of Egypt, to all that trust on him. But if ye say unto me we
trust in the Lord our God, is not that he, whose high places and whose altars
HEZEKIAH has taken away, and has said to JUDAH and JERUSALEM, ye shall
worship before this altar in JERUSALEM. Now therefore, I pray thee, give
pledges to my Lord, the king of ASSYRIA, and I will deliver thee two thousand
horses, if thou be able, on thy part, to set riders upon them. How then will thou turn away the face of one captain of the least of my masters servants, and
put thy trust on EGYPT for chariots and for horsemen? Am I now come up, without
the Lord, against this place to destroy it? The Lord said to me, go up against
this land, and destroy it. Thus says the king, let not HEZEKIAH deceive you,
for he shall not be able to deliver you out of his hand. Neither let HEZEKIAH
make you trust in the Lord, saying, the Lord will surely deliver us, and this
city shall not be delivered into the hands of the king of ASSYRIA. Hearken not
unto HEZEKIAH: For thus says the king of ASSYRIA: Make an agreement with me by
a present and come out to me, and then eat ye every man of his own vine, and
every one of his fig tree, and drink ye every one the waters of his own
cistern: until I come, and take you away to a land like your own land, a land
of corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards* a land of oil olive and of
honey, that ye may live, and not die; and bearken not unto HEZEKIAH, when he
persuadeth you, saying, the Lord will deliver us. Has any of the Gods of the
nations delivered at all his land out of the hand of the king of ASSYRIA. Where
are the Gods of HAMATH and ARPAD? Where are the Gods of SEPHARVAIM, HENA and
IVEH? Have they delivered SAMARIA out of my hand? Who are they among all the
Gods of the countries, that have delivered their country out of mine hand, that
the LORD should deliver JERUSALEM out of mine hand. 2 Kings. 18th Chap. 19, 20,
21, 22, 23, 24, 25, (...) 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, (...),


This proclamation, however, failed of the designed effect. The Jews still
continued within their walls, and HEZEKIAH still determined, in the use of
every prudent exertion, to commit his cause to the hands of the ALMIGHTY.
SENNACHERIB, informed of this obstinacy, sends to HEZEKIAH a second
proclamation, less prolix, but not less foolish, arrogant, or impious: For it
appears to have been the custom of ancient, as well as modern heroes, to war
much by proclamations. The second attempt succeeded like the first. HEZEKIAH,
whose conduct from his infancy, had been pleasing in the eye of ALL-SEARCHING
WISDOM, did not return insult for insult, but betook himself, with the greatest
earnestness, to that effectual fervent prayer, which, from the heart of a
righteous man, ever avails much. No sentiments, no words can form a more
striking contrast, than those of the contending princes. The substance of
SENNACHERIB'S I have already given you in the haughty menaces of his General
RAB SHAKEH. How different those of HEZEKIAH?

O LORD GOD of ISRAEL, Who dwell between the cherubims, thou art the GOD,
even thou alone of all the kingdoms of the earth; thou have made heaven and
earth! LORD bow thine ear and hear, open LORD thine eyes and see, and hear the
words of SENNACHERIB, who has sent him to reproach the LIVING GOD. Of a truth,
LORD, the kings of ASSYRIA have destroyed the nations and their lands, and have
cast their gods into the fire, for they were no gods, but the work of men's
hands, wood and stone, therefore they have destroyed them. Now therefore O LORD
our GOD, I beseech thee, save thou us out of his hand, that all the (...) of
the earth may know that thou art the LORD GOD, even thou only. 2 Kings, xix.
15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
The effect of this becoming, this aimable behavior was such as every good man
must necessarily wish. The MIGHTY BEING, who holds the scales of empire, of
flight and of triumph in his hands, and with infinite ease makes one ascend,
and the other fall, in whose view a single petition from a meek and quiet
spirit, is of more worth than all the wealth, pride and crowns in his universe,
sent a minister of vengeance to convince the intoxicated monarch, that the gods
of ARPAD, and SEPHARVAIM were exceedingly different from the OMNIPOTENT
JEHOVAH. By the hand of this celestial messenger, an hundred; four-score and
five thousand men perished in the period of a night. A dreadful, but as
experience abundantly proves, an unimproving lessen to succeeding pride,
tyranny, and lust of dominion.

The remaining part of this army, with their monarch and his boasting Generals,
according to the prediction of the prophet, were removed far off, with their
faces toward the east sea, and their hinder part toward the utmost sea, and
the ill savor of their disgrace, like the foetor of those who remained corpses,
filled with astonishment all the surrounding regions. The reason of this great
dispensation of PROVIDENCE is assigned by the prophet, in these words --
because he has done great things -- or, as the passage might perhaps be more
properly translated, -- because he has magnifyed himself, or boasted to do
great things. -- Such an interpretation will derive weight from this
circumstance, that the prophet ISAIAH expressly asserts the same cause for the
overthrow of the ASSYRIAN army, in his denunciation of divine vengeance against
SENNACHERIB.

This is the event, principally designed by the first verse of my text. Its
similarity to that for which I hope some, at least, are now lifting up holy and
acceptable hands to GOD, will strikingly appear by a slight examination.

For several Years, a controversy has subsisted between AMERICA and BRITAIN,
which exceedingly resembles that, between JUDEA and ASSYRIA. The cause of both
was the same. HEZEKIAH paid a tribute to SENNACHERIB, and these States to
GEORGE the third; but in both instances insatiable tyranny demanded more, than
the tributaries were willing or able to pay; this was the cause.

The methods of conducting the controversy, on the part of the exactors, were
also the same. Armies with chariots then, and with ships now, enforced the
demand, and threatened a refusal with slaughter and desolation. To the
Americans, promises were given by the British king, to pardon their past
crimes, and withdraw his formidable armies, if they would only yield a
peaceable, unlimited compliance. Similar promises were also made to the JEWS by
SENNACHERIB, in the proclamation of speech I have recited: A speech whose
meekness, humanity, and reason, mightily resembles several most gracious
speeches from the British throne. These promises however were without effect.
-- Mighty forces, with renowned officers at their head were sent to compel
obedience to the requisitions of their masters. From the northern regions,
especially, numerous hosts invaded the territories of these pretended
delinquents. General BURGOYNE, proud of the number and valor of his troops, and
flushed with unexpected success at the commencement of his operations, in
imitation of his predecessor and pattern, RAB SHAKEH, published to the
AMERICANS the only proclamation, which can be fairly compared with that of the
ASSYRIAN. Both accuse their enemies of stupidity, trusting in pretended
counsel, and imagined strength. RAB SHAKEH impeaches HEZEKIAH of impiety in
(...) the places and altars consecrated to idols; (...) folly in still
continuing to look to HEAVEN for assistance after the commission of what was in
his view, so capital a crime. General BURGOYNE also impeaches the AMERICANS of
prophanenes and folly, with similar reason and justice. Both express the
highest contempt for the military strength of their enemies, and the most
unlimited confidence in their own. -- Both, with equal truth and piety, pretend
to act, under the influence and guidance of HEAVEN. -- With equal insult upon
common sense, both assert that they are actuated by an affectionate regard, to
the happiness of those they invade; such happiness, as honestly interpreted,
amounts to burning, butchering devastation and ruin. With similar effrontery
they invite their enemies to make an agreement with them; an agreement by
present. With equal haughtiness, they arrogate to themselves qualities, little
less than divine. But here it must be observed, the modern is surpassed by the
ancient; for General BURGOYNE only claims a few of the divine attributes.
RABSAHKEH esteems himself superior to very Diety.

Thus far the parrallel is exact. Their designs, the great things they boasted
to do, the grounds and propriety of their boasting, appear to have been the
same. The event to both will also be found to have been the same. The fate of
RAB SHAKEH, and his army I have already mentioned. Let us attend to that of
General BURGOYNE.

In a manner perfectly correspondent to the feelings expressed in his
proclamation, he sent into the heart of the country a detachment from his army,
by far too small for such an enterprise, to procure a variety of necessaries,
and conveniences, for forwarding the principal expedition. This detachment,
falling in with a body of militia under the command of General STARKS, was cut
off, almost to a man, in the neighborhood of Bennington. This was but a
prelude to succeeding misfortunes. Animated by this success and a prospect of
the danger that threatened their country, the inhabitants of New England and
New York flocked in from every quarter to the standard of General GATES,
determined to live, or die, like men. By this brave army was General BURGOYNE
worsted in every encounter. Still, however, his haughty mind could not brook
the ruin of his design, and the reputation of being forced to retreat over the
region, he had once traversed. Hence he still continued in a place where danger
every day thickened over his head. The same pride, which at first assured him
certain success, now drove him to certain ruin; for it prevented him from
attempting a return, 'till a return was impossible. No alternative now remained
but to surrender to the enemy, he had once despised, or hazard the slaughter of
his whole army. Wise, for the first time, he determined to spare the effusion
of blood, and gave himself into the hands of those he could not resist. The
face or front of his army was driven toward the cast sea; and the rear or
hinder part into CANADA toward the utmost sea, the ill savor of his dishonor
is come up; and, had we a prophet to inform us of the reason of this great
providential movement. I have little doubt that he would tell us, it was
because he had magnified himself, or boasted, to do great things.

There are among the most remarkable, but are by no means the only instances,
in which terrible judgments have been executed, upon pride. No evil is more
common, or monstrous than this. Could the worms of the dung hill speak the
language of men, how should we be astonished to hear them arrogating to
themselves those mighty transactions, which fill up the providential system!
Equally astonishing is it to angels to hear man, who is a worm, and the son of
man, who is but a worm, ascribing those transactions to his own power, wisdom,
and exertions. But no time or words are necessary to paint to a rational being
the guilt and folly of this vice, or the wisdom and amiableness of its opposite
virtue, (...). Little need be said to convince a mind, fraught with just
sentiments, that the business of man is to be humble, to trust, to adore, and
to praise. Not a breath we draw, not a morsal we taste, not a moment we live is
derived from ourselves. With what face then can we presume to think those great
events, which so evidently display the finger of GOD, (...) within the limits
of our power?

Let us therefore most carefully avoid that arrogance, by which so many others
have been ruined, and of the fatal effects of which we have so striking an
example. Let us, in every enterprise, look to him who teaches the hands to
war, and the fingers to fight. In every prosperous transaction, let us
gratefully acknowledge his agency, and goodness, who sets up one and puts
down another; who kills and makes alive; who makes one chase a thousand,
and two put ten thousand to flight.

No land, that of PALESTINE excepted, has in the same time experienced more
extraordinary interpositions of Providence than this. At no period has this
land, seen more of those interpositions, than during the present controversy.
These interpositions have also been singularly visible, and evident, Infidels
have acknowledged them, and good men beheld them with astonishment and rapture.
Who united us at first in a general and vigorous opposition to our enemies, and
thus thwarted every expectation of the most boasted human foresight? Who
directed our enemies at first to that province, and town, where alone, perhaps,
they could have been confined, 'till we could furnish ourselves with materials
for carrying on the war? Who has raised up those powerful armies, with which
we now resist our foes? Who gave us a person to direct our military affairs,
whom the tongue of envy acknowledges to be thoroughly qualified for so
difficult and dangerous a station? Who, when our hearts died within us, at the
success of our enemies, the last campaign, dispelled the gloom by the timely
and illustrious victories of TRENTON and PRINCETON? Who, in a manner still more
extraordinary, enabled us, with a handful of troops, to keep the field against
a mighty force, during the last winter? Who collected a sufficient body of
militia to destroy Colonel BAUME's detachment, by the glorious and most
beneficial victory of BENNINGTON. For it must by no means be forgotten, that
they were so far from being collected to oppose his force, that some of them
had actually marched to join the northern army, without dreaming that an enemy
was near. Who gave into our hands the whole army of General BURGOYNE, and
infixed such a wound upon BRITISH pride, as it has scarcely received, during
the present century? Who, finally, has so infatuated the counsels of our
enemies, that their measures have, almost in every instance, been is
advantageous to us, as our own? He, who sits on the circle of the heavens,
answers most loudly and clearly in the language of his Providence "I THE LORD
DO ALL THESE THINGS."

May we not then, with singular propriety, address AMERICA, in the words of the
second verse of our text, Fear not, O land! be glad and rejoice, for the Lord
will do great things." Have we not the best reason to hope, that GOD will not
leave such mighty beginnings unaccomplished, but will hasten them to a glorious
and happy completion. I wish not to encourage sloth or security; the last is
folly the first impiety: But I wish ever to see, and with my best endeavors to
promote a most grateful acknowledgment of the divine beneficence. I wish every
eye to flow with pure and sacred pleasure, every heart with thankfulness, and
every voice with language like this. "Not unto us, O LORD, not unto us, but
unto thy name be the glory."

But it is not enough that our words be thankful; we must live, as well as
speak his praise. Our sins should be hated and relinquished. Our minds should
be filled with faith in JESUS CHRIST; and our hearts with love to GOD and man.
Without these, our verbal acknowledgments to GOD will be worse than sound
without sense; they will be profaneness, they will be impious mockery. Were
religion painful and burdensome, mankind would have plausible pretense for
continuing in sin. But nothing can be more certain, than the reverse. Piety is
not only our indispensable duty, but our highest happiness. Let me therefore
exhort you, my friends and countrymen, by those great, those interesting
motives, of love to yourselves, love to your country, and obedience to your
MAKER; as you would wish that peace which passes all understanding, and that
future happiness, which heart of man has not conceived; as you would wish for
your country the continuance of those great things GOD has done for it; to
turn immediately from every false way, to break of your sins by righteousness,
and your iniquities by repentance, and showing mercy unto the poor. Nothing
obstructs the deliverance of America, but the crimes of its inhabitants; sins,
and their authors, are its greatest enemies. If this land be ruined, it will be
ruined by its iniquities. Which of you, my country men, will say, he is willing
to have a hand in this destruction? As you would therefore shudder at being the
parricides of your country, let me urge, let me conjure you immediately to
enter upon those duties, so justly recommended to you by the great senate of
AMERICA, reverence that glorious and fearful name THE LORD YOUR GOD. -- Serve
him with joyfulness and gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things.
With the most elevated devotion acknowledge his good hand, in every instance of
military prosperity. -- Deprecate his judgments, not by prayer only, but by
faith, repentance and reformation. -- Exhibit yourselves blameless, exemplary
of every christian grace and virtue. Were such a reformation widely extended,
without inspiration I might venture to prophecy, that our armies would be
crowned with health, success and glory; our councils would be fraught with
wisdom, firmness, and integrity; our seasons would be propitious, and our
fields luxuriant, our schools would be nursed by HEAVEN; our youth trained to
knowledge and virtue; our churches blessed with grace, mercy and peace; our
Independence and happiness fixed upon the most lasting foundations; and that
kingdom of the REDEEMER which consists in righteousness, peace, and joy in
the HOLY GHOST, highly exalted, and durably established, on the ruins of the
kingdom of Satan. AMEN.


