A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED, On the 18th Day of December, 1777, the Day of PUBLIC
THANKSGIVING, APPOINTED BY THE HONORABLE CONTINENTAL CONGRESS, By the Reverend
ISRAEL EVANS, A. M. Chaplain to General POOR's Brigade. And now published at
the Request of the General and Officers of the said Brigade, To be distributed
among the Soldiers, GRATIS.

LANCASTER: Printed by FRANCIS BAILEY. M,DCC,LXXVIII.

A DISCOURSE, etc.
WHEN we turn our thoughts inward, and consider the constitution of our bodies,
together with all the powers and faculties of our souls: When we extend our
views to the various parts of creation, and contemplate the beauty and harmony,
as well as the evident signs, which every where appear, of an Allwise and
righteous government; we say, for we cannot but say, there is one most wise and
omnipotent being, who governs the whole universe, and superintends the actions
of all his creatures. To deny this, would be to deny and contradict our reason,
and divest ourselves of the honor and dignity of intelligent creatures. The
government of mankind, and the preservation of the numerous and various parts
of the world, have in all ages appeared so arduous, and so much above the
power, wisdom, and foresight of finite beings; that even the unenlightened
heathens have represented to themselves, one necessary and omnipotent being,
seated upon the throne of the universe, giving laws to all his creatures, with
infinitely more ease and success, than ever the most wise and exalted earthly
monarch could to the most obedient and submissive nation. If this sentiment is
not enforced by reason and experience beyond contradiction; let us hear the
majestic declaration of the sacred scriptures, which say. "And I blessed the
most high, and I praised and honored him that lives for ever, whose dominion
is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation to generation.
And all the inhabitants of the earth, are reputed as nothing: and he does
according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the
earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, what do thou? For the
kingdom is the Lord's, and he is the Governor among the nations." The voice of
nature and revelation, both assure us, that all things were created for the
manifestation of God's glory. "The heavens declare the glory of God, and the
firmament shows his handy work. Day unto day utters speech, and night unto
night shows knowledge." But if the whole creation were left to itself, and
all things should run into that confusion and disorder, which must end in their
total dissolution; we are unable to see the glory of God promoted. Therefore
the most natural conclusion is, that as God has created all things, he also
governs all things: as he is our creator, so he is our preserver, and governor.
"For in him we live, and move, and have our being. By him all things consist,
and he upholdeth them by the word of his power." It is infinitely easy for God
to govern the world, which he has made, and to dispose of all things, agreeable
to the utmost wisdom, justice and goodness. And however objections may arise,
in the minds of some men, from a partial and short sighted view of the
government of God; so that they may be ready either to say with the fool:
"There is no God, or to doubt the certainty of his providence and say. "Does
God know, and is there knowledge in the most high?" Yet reason and revelation
teach us, that "The Lord reigns, who is wise in heart, and mighty in
strength; and that when clouds and darkness are round about him: righteousness
and judgment are the habitation of his throne." This doctrine of God's
providence is carried to the greatest perfection, and is most comfortably
established by our Savior Jesus Christ. "Are not (says he) two sparrows sold
for a farthing? And one of them shall not fall on the ground without your
father. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered." Nothing but a
prevailing conviction of the truth of this great doctrine, of God's preserving
care and governing power, could ever rationally justify and enforce the great
and pleasing duties of prayer, praise and thanksgiving. For if God were absent,
or disregarded us, in vain should we raise our hearts and our hands, in humble
supplications for the removal of approaching danger; and we should in vain
joyfully exalt our voices, in united praises, for some remarkable deliverance
and unmerited mercy. But why should I any farther pursue this subject? The
presence of this assembly seems to confirm this truth more undeniably, than my
voice is able.

This day, agreeable to the resolution of the honorable Continental Congress,
our most worthy General has called us together, to return most humble and
hearty thanks, to almighty God, for the many instances of his unmerited
goodness, unto us in general, as a nation, and in particular, for the very
signal and complete victory obtained, over a potent army of Britons. And I
imagine, in the order for the convention of this assembly, I hear the words of
my text repeated, and pointed out to me. Not unto us, oh Lord, not unto us, but
unto thy name give glory for thy mercy, and for thy truth's sake. And should I
forget these words, and the intention of our meeting, and spend your time in
hearing military panegyrics on your wisdom and valor, though you are truly
entitled to more praise than my feeble tongue can express: were I to invade the
rights of heaven, and arrogate to ourselves all the praise of our late signal
victory; I foresee that I shall draw upon myself the just censure of every wise
and virtuous man; disappoint your hopes and expectations, and, as far as my
influence will go, turn this day's meeting into a curse. For the glory of all
conquests and acquisitions, should be ascribed to God, as due to him alone:
therefore we read, that when the people gave a shout, saying, of Herod, "It is
the voice of a god, and not of a man; immediately the angel of the Lord smote
him, because he gave not God the glory: and he was eaten of worms, and gave up
the ghost."

The words of David, in the hundred and fifteenth Psalm, are therefore the
words of my text, and a proper guide to lead us to give all praise and glory to
God. They were pronounced immediately after a recollection of God's miraculous
power and goodness, shown unto the Israelites; and was intended to show the
dependence men have upon God, and that he is the principal director of all
happy and successful events. Time would fail me to enumerate all the reasons
which we personally have to praise and glorify God. In order that our praises
might keep pace with our mercies, every moment of our lives should be devoted
to his service, and all our actions directed to his glory.

The words, which are the ground of what shall be said at this time, were drawn
from the grateful heart of the king of the Jews, by public mercies, and were of
national concern. I shall therefore endeavor to follow the spirit and
intention of them, in a view somewhat similar, and speak of those mercies which
have been conferred upon us, and in which this great continent is interested.
Let us ascribe unto God all power, wisdom, and goodness, and say, not unto us,
but unto thy name be the glory given, who have been pleased with unerring
wisdom to direct, with unconquerable power to support, and with never failing
goodness to bless the United States of America, in all their wise counsels, and
successful enterprises, since the commencement of the present war.

I need not inform you, Gentlemen and Fellow Soldiers, that many years past the
language of Britain corresponded with the language of Pharaoh and his cruel
taskmasters, who said, "come let us deal wisely with them, lest they
multiply." But when by the blessing of Heaven, we were enabled to elude all the
snares which were so thick planted, both in Britain and America, to deprive us
of our freedom; and a corrupt and tyrannical court found that arms alone could
promise them any success in their unjust and inhuman designs of subjugating a
free people: then we saw the arms of the king of England turned against us, and
threatening the ruin and destruction of every thing, worthy the notice of a
brave and wise man. Thus we beheld the invincible navy, which claimed the sole
dominion of the ocean, invading our country, and distressing our cities. Thus
came forth the veterans of Britain, who had been so accustomed to conquer, that
victory seemed bound to their arms: and then we saw the boors and mercenary,
half-starved Germans, lured, like hungry harpies, and ravenous wolves, by the
hope of preying upon the lives and estates, of the innocent Americans. But were
all these warlike preparations necessary for the conquest of America, when
unprepared for hostilities? Surely it might have been reasonably supposed, that
all this pomp and majesty of war, was destined against some powerful nation or
army, accustomed to mark their way with destruction, blood and carnage. How
then must our thankful amazement be excited, when we reflect upon our happy
situation as freemen, and find ourselves able to say, we are not slaves: though
oppression made such near and dreadful approaches to us, when in our most
defenseless state.

Who, that is a friend to virtue and liberty, will a moment hesitate to give
glory to God, for his providential care and goodness, in preserving us out of
the hands of the enemy, who seemed ready to swallow us up, when we were without
arms or ammunition, without ships of war, and without the skill or love of war.
For these and innumerable instances of public mercy, we desire most heartily to
praise God, and say, "Not unto us, oh Lord, not unto the wisdom of our
counselors, that their counsels and wisdom have surpassed our most sanguine
expectations. Not unto our commanders and armies though they have so often
behaved themselves valiantly, and conducted wisely; yet, give glory, not unto
them, but unto the name of God; for he it was who taught our senators wisdom,
and girded our soldiers with courage and strength. It is the Lord our God who
has fought for us, in every successful battle, and has hitherto supported our
righteous cause, against those who hate us without any just reason. Truly we
may say, oh sing unto the Lord a new song, for he has done mavelous things:
his right hand, and his holy arm has gotten him the victory. The Lord has
made known his salvation: his righteousness has he openly showed in the sight
of our enemies. He has remembered his mercy toward us; all the ends of the
earth shall see the salvation of our God. What shall we render unto the Lord
for disposing a foreign nation, to show favor unto us, and supply us with such
a plentiful apparatus of war? How much have we acquired by sea, where our
expectations were the least? But more particularly, let the voice of this day
continue to ascend, in most hearty thanks, to Almighty God, for his great
goodness in qualifying, and raising up so many worthy and wise men, to form the
grand council of the United States of America, and be the guardians of our
rights and privileges. Oh give thanks unto the Lord our God, for a brave
general, the commander in chief of all our armies. A general possessed of such
unparalleled fortitude and patience, and not more patient, than meek, virtuous
and humane. And if I am permitted to say any thing of a character, which so
much outshines the brightest encomiums the writer can offer: I will venture to
say, that if you search for faults, in the conduct of that true patriot, and
most excellent hero, you will find none, unless you call it a fault to
exercise compassion and lenity toward those negligent and guilty offenders,
who by their sloth and inattention to the best orders, counteract the wisest
plans, and frustrate the best schemes of military discipline and policy. But
this humane excess of goodness is found in the most noble and exalted souls.
Not to enumerate the various and evident signs of an interposing providence,
which enabled us to extricate ourselves out of imminent danger, or to check the
enemy's rage, even when our armies have been almost disbanded.

Methinks I see the illustrious Washington, with but two or three thousand men,
retreating indeed before 10 or 12000 of the enemy; but yet checking their
progress through the country, and when reinforced by the brave militia, turning
upon the enemy, killing some, captivating many, and obliging so large an army
to retire, and confine themselves, during the whole winter, within narrow
bounds. Oh America, give glory to God, for such a faithful hero! Then you saw
him greatest when most without your aid. Collected in himself, he greatly
resolved, with his few faithful followers, to be the barrier of liberty, or
fall in its defense. Oh sons of America, let it not again be said, that you
seemed to desert liberty and Washington: But God supported and preserved him
and us all; so that instead of being conquered, we gained strength and
knowledge, in the art and means of defense, during the two last campaigns: And
having now nearly concluded the third campaign, although victory has not fully
attended us in every enterprise, the prospect is glorious, and far exceeds our
former expectations or hopes, and calls us to praise God, and say, blessed be
the Lord, who has not given us to be a prey to our enemies.

Had any one, three or four years past, ventured to predict, that we should
have been able to have lived through such a tempest of war, and at length arrive
within sight of the haven of conquest and peace; we should have called him an
enthusiastic prophet of madness and folly, and said he was unacquainted with
the swelling billows of British wrath; but having stemmed the torrent of
oppression and tyranny, though many times with no other hope of success, than
that which arose from a view of the mercy and justice of God, and an humble
expectation, that he would pity and vindicate a people, who were marked by
their enemies for the slaughter of oppression and tyranny, because of their
noble defense of the righteous cause of God and mankind. The Lord exercises
righteousness and judgment, for all that are oppressed. We now look back with
pleasing amazement, and say, this is the work of the Lord, and mavelous in
our eyes. Not unto us, oh Lord, not unto our wisdom and fortitude, not unto our
perseverance, patience, and courage, though they have been much greater than we
could have flattered ourselves they would be; yet not unto us, but unto God
give the glory. I have been unwilling to show a narrowness of soul, by
confining the praises of this day, to the subject of our glorious conquest and
finished campaign, in the northern department: When our souls are filled with
an overflowing sense of the goodness and mercy of God; we know not where to
begin or where to end our ascriptions of praise and thanksgiving. Many have
been the streams of mercy, which have refreshed our drooping spirits, since the
beginning of the present war, and often has our good God put songs of praise in
our mouths; but this day, in the view of our late signal victory, more than all
the streams, of past mercy and goodness, seem to be united, in constituting one
copious river of goodness and love, and overflowing, and exceeding our highest
praise and gratitude. Like the Israelites of old, we beheld the enemy subdued,
and in silent and inexpressible admiration, adored the Lord who wrought such a
wonderful deliverance, and with them we now say: Thy right hand, oh Lord! is
become glorious in power; thy right hand, oh Lord! has dashed in pieces the
enemy.

But let us now turn our attention to what may be considered the more immediate
subject of this day's praise, namely our conquest over the northern British
army. Behold the enemy leave Canada, ten thousand in number. Our strong
fortresses are evacuated. The enemy take possession of them, and afterward
pursue our little divided army, though not without a spirited opposition. Our
army being so much inferior to the enemy, were not able to protect the country,
and stop the progress of the British army, now flushed with success, and
tempted to believe, that where ever they turned their arms, submission must
meet them, or opposition be turned into flight. Nothing then seemed to hinder
them from suddenly taking possession of the state of New York, from one end to
the other. In this extremity of our public affairs, it was the season of
Jehovah's merciful appearance; and the God whom we this day adore, turned their
counsels into foolishness, and set bounds to their rage. When the language of
the enemy was, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil: my lust
shall be satisfied upon them, I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them:
God secretly said unto them, as he did to the waves of the sea, hitherto shall
thou go, and no farther.

That the hand of God, was in this, has been acknowledged by the most profane,
in common with the wise and virtuous. For what but the providence of God could
dispose a commander, of sense and experience, to divide his army, and leave the
grand object which he first had in view, when there appeared nothing to prevent
him, from forming a junction with another army of Britain. Who inspired the
inhabitants and militia of Bennington, with resolution to oppose the enemy,
with such incredible bravery, and to kill and captivate so great a number of
them? Who inspired the garrison and militia to the westward, to make so bold
and resolute a defense, to defeat the enemy there, stop their incursions, and
save that part of the country from savage barbarity? Courage and resolution are
as much the gifts of God, as any qualifications whatever; for without him the
greatest natural courage may be turned in fear. At that time, when our army
were few in number, why did not the enemy improve the opportunity they had, of
marching through the country, before we had time to collect, and oppose their
progress, as we have since done? Under the checks and influence of divine
Providence, the opportunity, which was so precious, being past, they suffered
our army to collect, under the command of the brave and honorable general
Gates. And when we had so increased in numbers, as to be able to advance, and
meet the enemy in the field of battle, did not the Lord teach our hands to war,
and our fingers to fight, so that many of the enemy fell down slain and
wounded. Nor was the bravery of officers or men less in the second conflict,
when the dead of the enemy were strewed over the field, and the living chased
to their strong holds. There you saw the intrepid Arnold, like the thunder bolt
of war, hurling (...), fear and death, among your terrified flying foes: and
then fearless, and impatient of delay, you followed your hero, and forced the
strong lines of the enemy. Oh noble ardour for victory! brave contempt of
death, where American liberty was the prize contended for! In vain did the
enemy attempt to escape, though they might have said, as the Egyptians did, let
us flee from the face of Israel; for the Lord sighteth for them, against us.
However not to enter into more particulars, save that by the wisdom and
perseverance of the commander, and the vigilance and bravery of the officers
and men, the enemy were neither able to flee from our army, nor yet dared to
risk a battle, nor able to subsist themselves; thus the final grand result of
all, was, that they were by the good providence of God, delivered into the
hands of our army, and that without the loss of more precious American blood.
And so manifest has been the hand of God, in all these transactions, that I
have met with none, whose sentiments do not very fully correspond with the
language of the text. Not unto us, oh Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give
glory, for thy mercy, and for thy truth's sake. Behold, I am this day happy
enough to remind you, of what history has scarcely a parallel. A potent army
and five generals, either cut off, or totally subdued in one campaign. How
great the addition which is made to our ordnance, our arms and military stores;
all these are acquisitions not unworthy our most grateful acknowledgment.

Thus far I have endeavored to follow the spirit of the text, and, as much as
possible, imitate the psalmist, in the enumeration of many instances of God's
goodness, and in humbly acknowledging that his hand has been in all. As far as
I have succeeded in this way, so far, I trust, I have not done amiss. David,
who was as great a warrior, and as valiant a prince, and as eminent a saint, as
ever lived or filled a throne, ascribed all his success to the overruling
providence of God. Never had a man more reason to boast of his wisdom and
success in war. In all his wars, success waited upon his courage, and victory
paid homage to his sword; yet he says, "I will not trust in my bow, neither
shall my sword save me. Thou art my king, oh God! through thee will we push
down our enemies; through thy name will we tread them under that rise up against
us. It is God that girdeth me with strength, and makes my way perfect. Some
trust in chariots, and some in horses; but we will remember the name of the
Lord our God."

For less success than we have obtained, the ancient Romans and Grecians said,
let us hasten to the temples of the gods, and thank them for all their goodness
and favor. And happy am I this day, when I consider, that the continental
congress have so publicly shown their wise, and humble acknowledgment of the
superintendence of the king of kings, and lord of lords, and have invited every
friend of virtue and liberty, throughout this vast continent, to adore the one
living and true God, and praise him for every merciful interposition of his
providence; to be submissive to every stroke of his righteous hand, confessing
that his judgments are lighter than our sins have deserved, and that in the
midst of deserved wrath, he has been pleased to remember mercy.

Happy am I also to find, that we are pleased to be seen uniting with our
brethren, in praising God for that success which you have been so instrumental
in gaining. Oh happy victory which gives new life to the friends of liberty
every where. This will raise the dignity and importance of our ambassadors in
Europe, and make us more and more respectable in the eyes of the world: and
shall I not hope, that this is a happy prelude to victory over all our enemies
in America. Among the many blessings which God has bestowed upon us, I must not
forget to take notice of the happy union, which subsisted in the army, between
the troops of the different states. All discord and animosity departed, and
made room for courage, friendship, and the united love of our country. Oh happy
union, where all strove to excel in bravery, and the service of our common
cause and interest. United we stand, divided we fall, is a truth, which reason
and the sacred scriptures both support. A kingdom divided against itself cannot
stand. We are brethren, we have the same God to worship, and the same cause to
defend. The happiness of the one state, is the happiness of the other; and as
we have seen the good effects of that perfect harmony which has prevailed among
us; let us cultivate it more and more, and may that man, who attempts to sow
the seeds of discord and contention among us, be accounted our greatest enemy,
and be banished from our society.

For a moment reflect on the divisions of the German and British troops.
Nothing, under God, so much contributed to their defeat, as their internal
animosities and discord: but the hand of God was in this, and set them against
one another, as he did the swords of the Midianites against their fellows,
throughout their whole camp. Therefore let brotherly love and friendship cement
us together; let a wise and patriotic zeal fire us with true courage; May a
nobleness of soul, and a love of true honor, run through all our actions, and
may a generous emulation inspire us to excel in all the duties of the brave
soldier, and the accomplished gentleman.

Hear how sweetly the Psalmist describes the beauty and happiness of union.
Behold, how good and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell together in
unity. As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains
of Zion. And let me add, how good and how pleasant was it, for the troops of
the New York and the New England states to dwell together in unity. And let me
go farther, and say, how necessary, useful, and pleasant is it, for the
brethren of the united states, to dwell together in unity. Surely for all these
mercies, none will be backward to praise God.

I now enter upon a less joyful subject than the triumphs of victory; but it is
to some the sure attendant of conquest. Suffer me, my dear fellow soldiers, to
check, for a moment, the current of joy and gladness, and blame me not for
doing honor to the memory of the brave heroes, who fell in battle, honorably
defending their country. They well deserve the tribute of a tear, and are
justly entitled to the honor of being recorded in our breasts, among the
saviors of our country. For us and posterity they bravely fought, and bled,
and died, and fell in the field of glory, and the arms of victory. With us they
were acquainted, and to us they were dear. Neither officers nor soldiers shall
be ungratefully forgotten by us; for they have done honor to their country,
and made a generous sacrifice of their lives, to the rights and liberties of
mankind. Such bravery is worthy of imitation, and gives a dignity to human
nature. Follow therefore, ye men of war, their noble example, and to all your
innate bravery, join love to all the friends of liberty, and true love to God,
who covered your heads in the day of battle, and shielded you from death, when
you saw his arrows fly so thick around you, and so many were slain. I beseech
you, let not your near escape from death, harden you against God, and dispose
you to forget and neglect him. He is continually doing you good; why will you
offend him, and disregard the innumerable obligations, you are under, to be
obedient to his laws and submissive to his will. Behold, how tenderly the
Psalmist represents the care and kindness of the Lord, unto all those who put
their trust in him. He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings
shall thou trust. Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night; nor for the
arrow that flies by day. In the strength of God, therefore, go on ye heroes,
who, in two battles with the enemy, bravely fought, and have survived those
conflicts, and are happily before me this day, employed in the most reasonable
and dignified service, of praising and adoring the Lord of hosts, the God of
battle, who with infinite ease disposes all the events of war, and guides the
seemingly casual revolutions of kingdoms and states, to his own appointed
purposes. Walk in the road of glory, and the pleasant path of true virtue, and
gather fresh laurels in every enterprise. Regret not your removal from the late
successful command of the honorable general Gates, for here is his excellency
general Washington. Look on him, and catch the genuine patriot fire of liberty
and independence. Look on him, and learn to forget your own ease and comfort;
like him resign the charms of domestic life, when the genius of America bids
you grow great in her service, and liberty calls you to protect her. Look on
your worthy general, and claim the happiness and honor of saying, he is ours.
Like him love virtue, and like him, reverence the name of the great Jehovah. Be
mindful of that public declaration which he has made. "That we cannot
reasonably expect the blessing of God upon our arms, if we continue to profane
his holy name. Learn of him to endure watchings, cold and hardships, for you
have just heard that he assures you, he is ready and willing, to endure
whatever inconveniences and hardships may attend this winter.

Are any of you startled at the prospect of hard winter quarters? Think of
liberty and Washington, and your hardships will be forgotten and banished. Let
Europe, nay let the world hear, that the American army, in the defense of their
country, cheerfully submitted to the inconvenience of having no other houses of
accommodation, than such as their own hands reared in the depth of winter. Be
encouraged, therefore, to undertake all that has been proposed to you, in the
generals orders. And let me assure you, from some little experience obtained,
in three campaigns, that what has appeared hard and impracticable, at a
distance, has been found tolerable and easy, when the worst that could be
imagined has arrived.

Surely you, who have carried the war to the very walls of Quebec, and
supported it through the whole winter, will not complain of the winter's cold,
in the state of Pennsylvania. But there are few of this brigade, who are not
inured to war, who are not veterans in hardships, and losses, as well as in the
service of their country. Let us be firm and exact in the discharge of our
several duties, as soldiers and officers; and by our ardour in the common
cause, by our patience and obedience, render ourselves respectable, and
honorable, in the fight of our leader, and make it seem a pleasure to command
us.

Allow me to say, my dear gentlemen officers and fellow soldiers, I cannot be
satisfied that we should be only as good as others; I earnestly wish to have
the honor of saying, This is the best brigade in the continental service: and
such a one we may be, if we will seriously consider, how much we can possibly
do to serve the public, without going out of our proper sphere of action.

Base is the man, whether in the civil, ecclesiastical or military department,
who contents himself with doing only so much, as will preserve him from the
reproach of gross and visible neglect of duty. An army consists of many parts,
and if some parts move either too slow, or not at all, the great whole will be
thrown into confusion and disorder, and consequently suffer. Uniformity of
motion in all the parts, gives strength, and ease, and beauty, and expedition,
which is so absolutely necessary in every enterprise. Not an individual person
in the army, but may contribute so much, in the regular and strict discharge of
his duty, to the good of the whole, that, were he separated from the army, it
would suffer some real loss. Let every one therefore consider how useful,
important, and honorable he may render himself, in the army and in the service
of his country: and on the other hand, how mean and contemptible he must
appear, if he is either unacquainted with his duty, or negligent in the
performance of it.

I now pass on, having already taken notice in some instances, of your valor
and success, to recommend to you the caution, which is recorded in the word of
God. Let not him that girdeth on the harness, boast as him that puts it off.
The war is not yet at an end, the enemy are not all conquered, though so large an
army has been totally subdued. We have yet an army to oppose; but our prospect
of success is glorious. How soon it may please God to deliver them into our
hands, or call them away, would be rash in me to venture to tell; but I however
look forward, with an inconceivable pleasure, and view, not far off, American
liberty established upon a sure and honorable foundation. Be therefore
undaunted in battle, and modest in prosperity; these dispositions of mind
belong to the character of a brave and great man. But I had little reason to
exhort you in either of these respects, for you have been culpable in neither.
Such a generous spirit of candor and modesty, as you discovered after so
signal a victory, has scarcely been known in any army. Our enemies themselves
acknowledge, that when they marched in prisoners of war, none of our troops
insulted them, or showed any signs of contempt, or disrespect. Happy was I to
hear this from the mouth of an enemy. Your conduct, my friends and countrymen,
was truly characteristic of brave and noble spirited men. Cowards insult those
who fall into their hands; but the brave are compassionate, and fight no longer
than there is an absolute necessity. Let general Burgoyne, and his officers
generously speak the truth, and bear witness that nothing was wanting, on the
part of the noble spirited general Gates, and his officers, to render them as
happy as possible, and even make them forget that they were conquered. Glad
have I been to find that our generous and kind treatment of prisoners, has been
such, that it extorted, even from Britons this confession; that we treated them
much more mildly, than we should have been treated in a similar situation. Not
so have our most unhappy brethren been treated, who have fallen into the hands
of general How. Let the mean insults which Britons have so liberally offered
to officers of rank and note; officers who might have justly disdained to
associate with men, who had neither principles of generosity nor humanity, and
yet men who had many of them received unmerited favors from the Americans,
whom they dared to insult. Let these mean and unmanly insults, let the wanton
cruelties of stripping helpless women and children of the very means of
subsistence, destroying their houses, and burning our towns, in a manner which
nothing contributed to finish the war; let all these things convince the world
that we fight with men, who are neither gentlemen, nor honorable soldiers, nor
yet men possessed of the common feelings of humanity. May the dying groans, of
famished soldiers, be lodged in the merciful ear of him, who hears the
prisoners cry, and will be avenged upon cruel, hard hearted, and bloody men.
Oh! tell it not in America, that her sons perished for want of a morsel of
bread to eat; and yet proclaim through the world, that Britons tortured their
prisoners, even to death, by the lingering torments of hunger. And still do my
ears hear of the same cruelties exercised upon those who are so unfortunate as
to fall into their hands. The blood of so many already murdered, has not
satiated those cruel men. Alas! too many are now unhappy victims to their
relentless rage. Oh! merciful God, if thou have permitted that nation suddenly
to fill up the cup of their iniquity, that thy vengeance may be executed upon
them; let not, we beseech thee, their cup be filled with American blood.

Be assured my friends, that under God, the only means to procure you good
treatment, are the sharpness of your swords, and your skill in war, and your
invincible courage in battle. May the groans of the hunger-starved, may the
griefs and indignities, sorrows and aflictions of our suffering brethren fire
your minds, and spur you on to military revenge and universal conquest.

I leave the painful gloomy subject, and return to consider what improvement we
shall make, of the many instances of God's goodness and mercy, which have been
the subjects of this day's praise and gratitude. The improvement which Joshua,
the heroic and pious leader of the Israelites made of all the victories and
triumphs which they had obtained, was, that they should love the Lord their
God. Take good heed therefore unto yourselves, said he, that ye love the Lord
your God. All public mercies are bestowed for this very purpose, that they may
be improved for the honor and glory of God. Thou shall love the Lord thy God,
with all thy heart, and all thy soul, is the first, and great commandment of
the law: And God in all his providential dealings with us, whether merciful or
afflictive, enforces what his law demands. David, after receiving great
success, said, I will have thee, oh Lord! my (...). Let us (...) hero and
eminent saint, and manifest the thankfulness of our hearts, for the unexpected
and unmerited favors conferred on us, by loving the Lord our God, and fearing
to offend him in any respect. It is because the compassions of the Lord fail
never that we have not been consumed. His judgments sometimes appear, and with
a stern and severe voice command our obedience unto his laws, and say, "Turn
ye, turn ye, for why should ye be stricken any more." But how much more
frequently, do his mercies address us in the mildest accents, and invite our
return unto him.

Surely when God confers mercies and favors upon us, who are not only unworthy
of them, but have deserved to be severely punished: our hearts must be hard and
void of every grateful feeling, if they are not melted into love and
thankfulness for such great goodness. If we give ourselves time to reflect upon
our past conduct, either as a people, or as individuals, we must confess that
the smallest instance of God's goodness and mercy, has been truly unmerited,
and far beyond any thing we could reasonably have expected. We have most basely
offended our most merciful and gracious God, and that even when he has saved us
out of the hands of our enemies, and loaded us with his benefits. During the
present year in particular, men have too commonly lived as if there was no God
to take notice, and they were not accountable creatures. Alas my friends, you
cannot be ignorant that the name of the great Jehovah, has been commonly
profaned by the profligate swearer, in bold and open defiance of his laws and
authority. Here might I avail myself of the tremendous curses of God's holy
law, and thunder out the denunciations of heaven against wilful offenders, and
say, "Cursed shall ye be if ye will not obey the commandments of the Lord your
God: and the Lord your God will not (...) him guiltless that takes his name in
vain."

But I forbear, the gentle voice of mercy this day calls upon you; I therefore
pass by every thing dreadful and harsh, and beseech you to suffer yourselves to
be subdued by the overflowing, diffusive goodness of God. The way to obtain
greater blessings, is to be truly thankful for those we have already received.

We have this day been praising God, but, believe me, praise cannot ascend
acceptably to God, unless it rise upon the wings of love and obedience. Come
then, my friends, consecrate yourselves to the service of the Lord our God,
humble yourselves on the account of past sins, and sin no more. Let the world
know that the man who loves and fears the living and the true God, fears not
any danger, in the road of his duty. For the man who puts his (...) in his God,
and engages in his service, is in the surest way of protection and safety; or
if it should please the Lord, to call him, by death, from the field of battle,
it would only be a removal, a little sooner, from the foot stool on earth, to
the throne of glory, in heaven. Learn then to endure hardness as good soldiers
of Jesus Christ. And, oh I beseech you! as on my bended knees, reverence and
obey the words of that Savior, who has done and suffered so much for the
salvation of such guilty sinners as you and me.

SWEAR NOT AT ALL. Think how horridly ungrateful it is to offend and affront
that God, who is continually doing us so much good. Since God has so remarkably
smiled upon the arms of the United States, let the sincerity of our gratitude
be seen by taking heed to fear and love him; and let me assure you, that to
live soberly and righteously, is the only way to show the thankfulness of your
hearts, and the high esteem you have of all our mercies.

May we never forget the transactions of this day, nor the occasion of our
meeting. Oh! that the united praises and prayers of this great continent, may
this day meet at the throne of divine mercy and justice. May brigades of angels
guard our commander through all the toils and dangers of war, until peace,
liberty and independence are established; nor let them leave him through life,
nor at death, but safely convoy him to the regions of eternal liberty and
happiness, and seat him high, as the most renowned heroes of liberty and
religion. May angels look down upon us with pleasure and approbation, while we
are contending with our enemies, and grappling with every difficulty in the
defense of the blessings of heaven. But above all may our adoring praise ascend
up to God, so pure and sincere, that it will please him to say, concerning us,
I will bless this people yet more, I will add unto them blessings tenfold more.
Your enemies shall fall before you by the sword. And I will walk among you, and
will be your God, and ye shall be my people.

Let us, my friends and fellow soldiers, unite in earnestly praying, that God
would engage our hearts, in sincere love and holy obedience to himself. Then
may we hope and expect, that the Lord of hosts, the God of battle, will go with
our armies, and lead them to new and greater victories, until at length the
horrors of war, shall be terminated in a safe, honorable and lasting peace.

May God grant this, for the sake of Jesus Christ, the Son of his love; to whom
with the Father, and Holy Ghost, be ascribed, as is most due, all might,
majesty, and dominion, forever, Amen.

FINIS.

