A well tempered Self-Love a Rule of Conduct toward others:

A SERMON PREACHED AT WINDSOR, JULY 2, 1777, BEFORE THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE
TOWNS IN THE COUNTIES OF CHARLOTTE, CUMBERLAND, AND GLOUCESTER, FOR THE FORMING
THE STATE OF VERMONT.

By AARON HUTCHINSON, of Pomfret, A. M. Pastor of the Church in that and the
two adjacent Towns, Hartford and Woodstock.

Also, thou shall not oppress a stranger: ye know the heart of a stranger,
seeing ye were strangers in the land of Egypt,

Exodus 23. 9. To loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and
to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke: -- and that thou
hide not thyself from thine own flesh.

Isa. 58. 6, 8. But he that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong which he
has done: and there is no respect of persons,

Col. 3. 25. So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law of
liberty. For he shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy.

Jam 2. 12, 13. DRESDEN: PRINTED BY JUDAH-PADOCK and ALDEN SPOONE^*

To the Honorable the COUNCIL of SAFETY for the State of VERMONT, now sitting
at BENNINGTON.
GENTLEMEN,
YOU may remember with what reluctance I yielded with a kind of silent
submission to the motion of our late Convention, whereof you were a part for
giving a copy of my sermon for the press. I urged the critical and difficult
times, my want of leisure, and the like. Under awe of the honorable Convention,
in their presence after prayer the next morning, I said but ^^ttle, fearing it
might be taken as a want of zeal for our injured country, or these oppressed
plantations. But I had other reasons against the motion, whether I then hinted
them or not, viz. I had expected the Convention would not sit at that time by
reason of the dark cloud then coming over us, and which overwhelmed us the week
after. Hence the discourse, delivered extempore after my riding in the heat
that day, had not been so well digested, nor was so well delivered, as it
should have been, before such an honorable audience on such an important
occasion.

I came home resolved however, (...) prosecute the business; but Ticonderoga
was disgracefully evacuated the next Sabbath: our Israel turned their back upon
their enemies. I yielded to the shock; and before I had begun, laid all care or
thoughts aside about the affair, 'till this present month And I know not but it
would have lain by forever (forgive me this wrong) if I had not been roused by
some members of the late Convention.

After so long waiting, it must be hurried into the world, undigested as it is.
I have endeavored (I hope without offense) to patch it up a little, and supply
it where it was most deficient by omissions in the delivery: but am sorry after
all, that it is likely to f^ll so much short of your reasonable expectations. I
flatter myself, however, that the same candid temper you showed in hearing,
will kindly plead some allowances for it is deficiencies, and take all in good
part accepting the will for the deed. I ask the tenderness and candor of any
others that may condescend to read these sheets. If by the blessing of God, one
mite may hereby be contributed to the weal of our oppressed country, or our new
Sat, to God be all the glory; and may the State of Vermont long enjoy the
fruits thereof; which is the prayer of,

Honored Sirs, Your most unworthy, most obedient and humble Servant for JESUS
sake, The AUTHOR.
Pomfret, Sept. 6, 1777.
A well tempered Self-Love a Rule of Conduct toward others.
MATTHEW VII. 12. THEREFORE, ALL THINGS WHATSOEVER YE WOULD THAT MEN SHOULD DO
TO YOU, DO YE EVEN SO TO THEM: FOR THIS IS THE LAW AND THE PROPHETS.
THE illative particle therefore, leads us back to verse 1 and 2, Judge not,
that ye be not judged. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and
with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. q. d. Do not
judge and censure others, further than you would think it reasonable and just
for you in a like case to be judged and censured. Give no worse measure to a
neighbor, than you would think it fit and just to receive from him, could you
exchange sides, and you be in his case and he in yours. Or the reference may
be to verse 7, Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find, etc.
Then it intimates, that, if in answer to our prayers, we would receive good
things from God, we must do things fair, just, and of good report one toward
another. Zech. 7. 9, 10, and 13. Thus speaks the LORD of hosts, saying,
Execute true judgment, and show mercy and compassion every man to his brother.
And oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor the poor: and
let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart. Therefore it is
come to pass, that as he cried and they would not hear, so they cried and I
would not hear, says the LORD of hosts. Isa. 1. 15. And when ye spread forth
your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: yea, when ye make many prayers, I
will not hear: your hands are full of blood. God hears not sinners acting in
contempt of his moral law, and especially the law of the second table,
respecting our duty one to another.

BUT this golden rule, uttered by our Judge and Lawgiver, Prince and Savior,
in the sermon on the mount, is suited to all the circumstances and conditions
of human life: very proper on the present important occasion; for it is fit for
all occasions, and suitable for every relation; good for all communities and
orders of men, in this evil world. The very work of righteousness, by this
rule, is peace; and the effect of righteousness, quietness and assurance
forever.

THE whole of our duty, to God and man, is briefly summed up, Mat. 22. 37 on.
Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great
commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets. They are
the substance of all that Moses and the Prophets have written, as rules of duty
to God and men. Rom 13. 8, on. He that loves another, has fulfilled the law.
For this, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not
steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou shall not covet, and if there be
any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thyself. Love works no ill to his neighbor:
therefore love is the fulfilling of the law.

THE rule in the text is the same in effect as loving our neighbor as
ourselves, or a branch from that sacred root: or it is that excellent law
reduced to practice, and comprehends the whole law of Moses, and writings of
the prophets, so far as they have taught us our duty, in our several relations
one to another.

THIS divine law, for regulating our moral conduct, is very plain and easy to
be understood; it is concise, and easy to be remembered. Any man that has the
faculty of reason, and a will to do his duty to his fellow creatures, by the
aid of self-love, may soon discern it in the glass of this rule. Self-love is
first, or it could not be a rule of loving our neighbor. By a natural and
innocent self-love, we first look within, and consider what we would in reason
have done to us, in the like case, and proceed to conduct in like manner
toward others.

AWAY then with all the metaphysical jargon of the schools, or of our mystical
divines, that pretend in that way to teach us our duty; and attend to the wise
instructor, who used great plainness of speech, and taught the way of God in
truth. Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, etc.

I. EXPLAIN and illustrate this excellent rule. II. THE reason to enforce it.
III. POINT out duty in some special cases by this unerring rule. IV. THE
application.
I. EXPLAIN and illustrate this excellent rule.

A VICIOUS self-love and hatred of others, will render us incapable of entering
into the spirit of the text. It does not mean that we should do to others, as
an heart leavened with malice and wickedness, and hatred of God's law, would in
that temper wish to have done to us. The wicked join hand in hand; aid a sinful
companion to perpetrate, and cover sin, hoping for the like deceitful favors
from him again. But this is a conspiracy against the whole moral law, and
making it void: yea it is an impious, and daring attempt to jostle the Almighty
Ruler from his throne, and repeal the sacred decalogue, and cancel all our
bonds of duty to the supreme king. An unjust judge that neither fears GOD nor
regards man, may thus think with himself, If I was in the case of this poor
criminal at the bar, I should wish to be discharged, however unjust it might
be; I will therefore acquit him, and do as I would be done by. But the judge
ought to ask himself thus, if I was in the case of this prisoner, what could I
in reason ask of a judge, consistent with his office, the honor of law and
rights of justice? The answer would be, so much mercy as is consistent with
justice, the honor of government, and faithfulness of his office, and no more.
Whatsoever in a consistency with truth, with reason and justice, we would that
men should do to us, so should we do to them. We must not counteract our sense
of justice, the honor of law, or majesty of conscience, under a mistaken notion
of this rule. Him that would borrow of thee turn not thou away, sounds as
obliging us in all cases whatsoever. But let common sense bring the words to
this infallible test, thus. My neighbor asks such a favor: if I grant it I
shall disoblige myself, five times as much as I shall oblige him. Could I in
honor and reason, ask him to injure himself so much to oblige me so little?
Surely no.

I WILL therefore deny him. Rutilius, the noble Roman, being requested to do an
unworthy thing for his friend, refused. Whereupon his friend reproached him as
violating the sacred laws of friendship. He then replied in a manner becoming
his sense of honor; "I can well bear the loss of such a friend, whose
friendship cannot be preserved, but upon the hard terms of breaking through all
the laws of justice and honor." This masterpiece of human nature, merely by
natural light, did as he would be done by.

ALL orders of men may soon find out their duty, if they are willing to know
and do it. Thus. The husbandman may say, if I followed any trade or other
business for my support, should I think it just to set such an exorbitant price
for the necessaries of life; to use extortion, and make a neighbor's necessity
my opportunity to exact more than is meet? The lawyer may say, was I in the
place of my poor client, at the head of a needy family, could I think it just
to exact such a fee, and have my case put off from court to court? The merchant
may say, was I the buyer, should I think it reasonable to give such a price?
The magistrate may say, was I the subject, could I think it just, to be ruled
with such rigor, and have my life made bitter by cruel bondage? A master may
say, if I was the poor servant, should I not think such severity hard and
unjust, and quite unbecoming one that has a master in heaven, with whom there
is no respect of persons?

WE find Joseph, Genesis 42. 17. using a judicious, necessary, and well timed
severity toward his brethren; but on the third day after their imprisonment,
says, this do and live: for I fear GOD. He must forsake the fear of the
almighty, or (...) his afflicted brethren, though under a necessary discipline.
He will be as tender and benevolent toward them, as his judicious soul could
wish them to be, were they in his case, and he in theirs. He had himself been
in prison. The irons had entered into his soul, and his feet hurt with fetters.
He had learned to pity the distressed, and strangers, by the things he had
suffered, and as the law in the text, then unwritten, was resplendent in his
conscience. The like fear of God, and benevolence to men we find in Job 31. 13,
on. If I did despise the cause of my manservant, or of my maid servant, when
they contended with me: what then shall I do when God rises up? and when he
visits, what shall I answer him? Did not he that made me in the womb make
him? and did not one fashion us in the womb? Ver. 21. If I have lift up my hand
against the fatherless, when I saw my help in the gate: for destruction from
God was a terror to me, and by reason of his highness I could not endure. In a
word, that judicious tenderness, and generous benevolence, which never fail to
accompany the fear of the Almighty, will guide us in the path of duty according
to this rule. None of us will live to himself, but as members one of another
And as many as thus walk by this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon
the Israel of God.

THIS path of our indispensable duty, is the sure way for the lengthening our
own tranquillity; and our peace and happiness are closely linked with our duty.
This law is liberty, and this service freedom: in keeping this commandment,
there is great reward. If any thing further need be said to illustrate the
genuine sense of this go den rule, and prevent mistakes about it; let us attend
to the following story. Contentus had an estate of L.9000, Avarus of L.3^00,
Penitus of L.1000. Avarus being blind through covetousness, to the sense of the
rule, asks of Contentus L.3000 of his estate to make him equal, and pleads the
text. Had you, says he, but L.3000. and I L.9000, you would have me give you
the sum I ask of you, and must do as you would be done by. Penitus, who
penetrated deep into the affair, after a judicious pause, charges Avarus with
covetousness, and engages to prove it upon him; not by a train of labored
reasonings, which he knew, Avarus could not comprehend, but by a blow at the
root. Thus, says he, Contentus has thrice as much as you, and you have thrice
as much as I; now give me L.1000 of your estate, and make me equal with you,
otherwise, I must conclude, that not from a sense of the rule, but from evil
covetousness you asked L.3000 of Contentus He was confounded; his own
conscience repreached him, not for violating the law in withholding the money
asked by Penitus, but for perverting the sense of it, and making it to subserve
the interest of his avarice; while he is eagerly grasping at the estate of
Contentus, which belongs not to him.


II. THE reason to enforce it: For this is the law and the prophets. If we mean
to claim kindred with Moses, and the prophets, Christ and his apostles, we must
attend to this golden rule. If we set it aside, we discard all the sacred
writers and refuse submission to that one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to
destroy. If we have any reverence for the Jewish lawgiver, who was king in
Jesurun: any regard to that spirit of truth that inspired all the prophets, or
to our King on the holy hill of Zion, who is now in the midst of the throne in
heaven, and sits King forever: or to the words of inspiration in the
writings of the apostles of the Lamb, we must attend to this law. But if we
cast this law behind our back, it will be interpreted, that we will not have
Christ to reign over us. Let us not divide Christ from his own law, or separate
Moses and the prophets from their own writings; as the infidel Jews built the
sepulchers of the prophets, pretending a mighty reverence for their persons,
while they rejected and crucified the Lord of Glory, to whom all the prophets
gave witness. The doctrine and law of Christ is Christ. Ephesians. 4. 20. But ye have
not so learned Christ, viz. as a lesson. So when Moses and the prophets are
said to be read, we understand their writings. Let us then receive this law
from the mouth of our gracious lawgiver, and lay up this his commandment in our
hearts, or give up all the sacred laws of the holy bible. The shocking
consequences of this latter, you may prove by arguing from the less to the
greater, in the words of him that is ordained of God to be judge both of quick
and dead. Mat. 5. 19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least
commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the
kingdom of heaven.

III. POINT out duty in some special cases by this unerring rule.

1. I PRAY you, my friends and brethren, to take a tour with me over to
Great Britain, and see this divine law introduced at the highest court of the
nation, or at a British junto, laying a plot to enslave America. But first
allow me to take one thing for granted, which I am sure you cannot in honor, or
with truth and justice deny me, viz. that the king and parliament, and all the
ministers of state in Old-England, are as fully bound and obliged by this law,
as the meanest peasants. He that sits on the circle of the earth, beholds
the inhabitants thereof as grasshoppers before him, and regards the rich no
more than the poor, for they all are the work of his hands. Distempered minds
may have respect to him that wears the gay clothing, and despise the man in
vile apparel; but God does not so. He sees the difference to be trivial and
momentary. They will soon he down alike in the dust, and the worms shall cover
them. The potentates of the earth, that in contempt of God make a prey of their
fellow creatures, will find sooner or later, that God is more glorious than
these mountains of prey. When they are brought down to the sides of the pit,
you may see their infamy and weakness painted in lively colors. Isa. 14. 10.
All they (in the infernal regions) shall speak and say unto thee, Art thou also
become weak as we? Art thou become like unto us? Thy pomp is brought down to
the grave, and the noise of thy viols: the worm is spread under thee, and the
worms cover thee. ver. 16. They that see thee, shall narrowly look upon thee,
and consider thee, saying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble? that
did shake kingdoms? that made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the
cities thereof? that opened not the house of his prisoners? ver. 18. All the
kings of the nations ( viz. that had not been tyrants but benefactors to their
people, and like Augustus, fathers of their country) even all of them lie in
glory, every one in his own house. But thou art cast out of thy grave as an
abominable branch; and as the raiment of those that are slain, thrust through
with the sword, that go down to the stones of the pit, as a carcass trodden
under fe^t. Thou shall not be joined with them in burial, because thou have
destroyed thy land, and slain thy people: the seed of evil doers shall never be
renowned. Doeg, an armourbearer to king Saul, has hands full of blood, makes
not the Lord his strength, but trusts in the abundance of his riches, and
strengthens himself in his wickedness, by the favor of his bloody prince. But
God soon plucks him away, and roots him out of his dwelling place. They that
set God at defiance, and trust in oppression, and become vain in robbery, will
presently feel their fatal mistake. If earthly rulers are as properly styled
gods at this day, as in old testament times, when they represented that king
that was to come, and is truly God; yet they shall die like men, and fall ^s
other princes have done before them. God respects not any that are wise in
heart; nor is moved with their deepest laid plots. He leads counselors away
spoiled, and makes the judges fools.

BUT it is time to attend on the court. -- Hark! -- Who is it we hear speaking?
Is it a Bute, a Mansfield; or by what name or title shall we distinguish him?
What shall we do with our American colonies? If we let them thus alone to
govern themselves, and enjoy their own laws, their natural and charter rights
and liberties, they will soon arrive to such numbers, wealth and greatness,
that we shall not be able to control them. In less than a century, in the
manner they have increased, they will be more numerous than England, Scotland
and Ireland, with all their appendages in this part of the world. Besides, our
people will leave our lands untenanted, and emigrate to that land of liberty,
and have lands of their own: and alas! our great proprietors of lands,
especially in Scotland, and even in Ireland, must become poor, or work for
their living. My advice therefore is, to assume an absolute despotic power over
them, and assert our right to bind them in all cases whatsoever. In consequence
of which openly avowed claim, we may proceed to tax Sir R. Walpole, (as I have
heard) being urged in his day to tax America, replied, "I will leave that to
some future minister of less sense and more courage."
them by a stamp act and duty on tea; obliging them to purchase it of us, or
live without it. We may show our high authority also by changing times and
laws, curtailing their privileges, altering their charters, blocking up their
harbors, stopping their trade, and prohibiting by our decrees their fishing.
And if, after all, they will not surrender their liberties, and submit to all
the grievousness we may prescribe, we can outlaw them by the omnipotence of
parliament; we may call them rebels, send armed forces among them, divide and
conquer them, or wear them out: then seize their lands; and such as we are
pleased to save alive, may be our tenants at will, and upon our own terms. Thus
a greater revenue will arise from America, than from the conquered kingdom of
Ireland. We can then make ample provision for all the friends of our
government, which at present we cannot do. Who is this that seconds the motion?
The honorable gentleman that spoke last, has proposed something worthy of
himself. Surely his heart is very deep. I apprehend the plan may be easily
carried into execution. The Americans will not fight: or if they do, they will
not be able to cope with the power of Great Britain. And if the nation's debt
be increased, it may soon be reimbursed by confiscating estates, and other
revenues arising from America. The ready rhino will engage many in America to
promote our designs. King Charles the first, though a very good king and martyr,
was impolitic in taxing the people as he did, without the votes of parliament,
(for they would not abet his measures.) But we, you may observe, have a good
parliament, that will vote things proposed to them by the minister, that must
be supposed to know better than they, what is fit for them to vote. -- But are
all united in this device? No. -- Who is that tall, that grave, that venerable
personage? Is it the noted, the victorious Earl, from whose tongue a more than
Ciceronian eloquence has so often flowed in the cause of his country, and in
defense of truth and justice?

The power of Great Britain I will not dispute: let it be so, that she can blow
America into atoms. Allow Great Britain to have the longest sword, and
strongest arm; and by might can overcome right, and reap a large revenue of the
wages of unrighteousness. Can this be true policy? Must not every one of us
give account of himself to him that judges righteously, and respects not the
Britons any more than the Americans? Is this to do as we would be done by? What
if we had been driven by the cruel oppressions and bloody persecutions of a
parent state, from our native land, to seek a refuge among savages, in a waste,
howling wilderness, at the distance of three thousand miles; and at such
immense expense of wealth, lives, and labor, had subdued the uncultivated
wilds, got a comfortable settlement, and put ourselves under the parent state
for protection; taking the public faith as a pledge of security of our lives,
properties, and all the immunities and privileges belonging to liege subjects:
should we think it consistent with truth, with justice, or mercy? with the
loving our neighbor as ourselves, or doing as we would be done by, thus to
encroach upon our rights? Should we not view it as contrary to the whole spirit
of the moral law, and a daring contempt of the God of judgment? And should we
not deem it an insupportable calamity, to have them that hate us to rule over
us? And do not all the oppressed, in all ages and nations, look upon their
oppressors to be their haters? And are we not obliged by all the laws of God,
and rules of our dignified office, to give the best and most hearty counsel to
one so young and tender, and that, we know, cannot withstand us? Thus in a
decent, filial and mannerly temper toward his father Rehoboam, does A^^jah 2.
Chro. 13. 7. pungently tax the rebellion of Jeroboam against him, with this
remarkable circumstance, viz. that it was when he was young and tender hearted,
and could not withstand him; being at the time refered to but about forty years
of age. Solomon, it seems, with an aching heart spoke of his successor: who
knows whether he shall be a wise man or a fool? Woe to thee, O land when thy
king is a child.

"Better die a child at four,
"Than live and die so at four score."



THE good and pious people, in that western world, are very closely attached to
the mother country. They rejoiced in the revolution. They offered many
thanksgivings to God, when in a critical juncture, king George the first came
to the throne. King George the second was their darling, I had almost said
their idol. They look upon his royal successor as their father, ready to
redress their grievances; as their benefactor, ready to promote their welfare.
How will they be shocked and surprised, if the king should change his voice,
and attack them in so tender a part as their liberties? thinking to change
times and laws, and make a prey of his most loving subjects? Can we advise him
to such measures? Shall a people long accustomed to the scepter of love, be now
made to groan under the iron rod of oppression? Will they not say, If it had
been an enemy that reproached and oppressed us, we could have borne it: but it
was thou, the successor of him who was dear to us as the apple of our eye: thou
that did promise fair at thy first coming to the throne, and under whose
shadow we hoped to enjoy great quietness, peace and safety. Moreover, shall the
throne of iniquity have fellowship with the God of justice and love, while it
frames mischief by law? Don't we certainly know by the unerring oracles that
the throne of a king is upholden by mercy: and as Isa. 16. 5. And in mercy
shall the throne be established; and he shall sit upon it in truth; in the
tabernacle of David, judging and seeking judgment, and hasting righteousness.
What can we mean by advising to such a change of conduct toward America? Has
he too many living subjects? Do we mean to alienate the hearts of the three
millions all at once from their beloved king? Do we mean to undermine his
throne, ruin his house, or together therewith the whole kingdom? Is this to
honor the king and love our neighbor as ourselves, and to do as we should
think it honorable, just, and reasonable to be done by, if they were Britons
and we Americans?

The turn that things took in Great Britain we all know very well. But whether
they did right or wrong, I will not absolutely determine, but follow that of
the apostle, to judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both
will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the
counsels of the heart. I shall leave the representation on each side to your
sober consciences, and refer the whole matter to him that judges righteously.
And may I not on this occasion adopt the words of Jepthah in his pungent
remonstrance against an invading Ammonitish king? Judge. 11. 27. Wherefore I
have not sinned against thee, but thou do me wrong to war against me: the
Lord the judge be judge this day, between the children of Israel and the
children of Ammon. And of this you may be assured, that if the Britons have
dealt truly and sincerely with Americans, they will rejoice in all the
advantages, they may at any time have gotten against us; but if not, then a
fire will come out from some where, and burn in their consciences, or in their
land; and a fire kindled in God's anger, if repentance and faith in the atoning
blood of the great sacrifice prevent not, will burn to the lowest hell. The God
of judgment and the God who is love, beholds mischief and spite, to requite
them with his hand. The poor leaves it to him. We will then leave the Britons
to their own master to stand or fall, while we know for certain, that they must
be judged as well as we, by this perfect law of love and liberty in the text.
In this unerring balance must they and all their conduct toward America be
weighed; and it lies upon them to consider whether they shall not be found
wanting.

2. LET us then bid adieu to the land of our forefather's sepulchers. A dark
cloud is thence arising upon America. What shall we do? Shall we tamely submit
to all their encraochments, or shall we resist? This is the important point to
be canvassed. But before we attend the council, let one thing be granted, viz.
that we all ought, with great reverence and humiliation, to submit to God, and
own his hand. Who gave Jacob to the spoil, and Israel to the robbers? Is it not
the Lord, against whom we have so grievously sinned? God has drawn out a sword
against us, to avenge the quarrel of his covenant. And his anger is not yet
turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. For the people turn not to
him that smites them, nor do they (duly) seek the Lord of hosts. The wicked
chastising the people of God, are his hand and sword. We must have our
uncircumcised hearts humbled, and accept of the punishment of our iniquity,
receive correction, own that God is righteous, and that we are wicked.

AFTER the wicked counsel of Balaam to draw Israel to sin, that they might be
forsaken of God, and become a prey to the Moabites, it was ever the cunning
craft and policy of the enemies of Israel, to fall upon them, when they forsook
God, and their defense departed from them. Would the Britons have dared thus to
magnify themselves against this people of the Lord of hosts, had they not been
apprised of our declensions, and abounding iniquities? The iniquities of Israel
often brought them low, and withheld good things from them; as we are now
brought low by our iniquities. But shall we submit to men, in what appears to
us a matter of wrong and injustice? Some tool of British tyranny stands up in
it is defense, and presses submission. We are obliged to fear and honor the
king, to be subject to the higher powers, to obey magistrates, and submit to
every ordinance of man, and not meddle with them that are given to change. The
powers that be are ordained of God. Many of us are under an oath of allegiance:
great would be the guilt of perjury if we resith. We ought to obey the king's
commandment, and that in regard to the oath of God, which obliges us to
non-resistance and passive obedience.

FURTHER, we cannot withstand the power of Great Britain. She has long in a
good measure held the balance of Europe. We have neither counsel, nor strength,
nor preparations for the war. If we refuse the decrees from our mother country,
however unrighteous, nothing but ruin is before us. It is the best prudence for
us to bow our shoulders to bear all the burdens that may be laid upon us,
rather than to make bad worse, by rising in rebellion against the government.

MOREOVER, if we were in the case of the king and his ministers, we should wish
for a tame submission. Let us do as we would be done by, if we were in their
case and they in our's. So that our duty to God, prudence for ourselves, and
our duty one to another, as enjoined us in the golden rule, do all oblige us to
nonresistance, and passive obedience. If you are shocked at such a gross
perverting the scripture, you will do well to consider, that he that is first
in his own cause seems just; but his neighbor comes and searches him out.
Let us attend to an American patriot, and hear what can be said in reply. We
owe our first and chief subjection to the supreme King: and the fear of God is
first before the fear of an earthly king. Our obedience to earthly rulers is to
be for the Lord's sake, and in obedience to him. They must then conduct as his
vicegerents, be the ministers of God for good to the people; act in character
as benefactors to mankind, shepherds of the people, to watch over, feed,
protect, and rule them to their, own happiness. An earthly ruler must indeed be
obeyed while he guides and governs in the integrity of his heart, and by the
skilfulness of his hands. I readily agree in this, that a civil magistrate
should be obeyed, as long as he answers that character, Esth. to. 3. For
Mordecai the Jew was next unto king Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and
accepted of the multitude of his brethren, seeking the wealth of his people,
and speaking peace to all his seed.

BUT when a king breaks over the compact, violates his coronation oath, sets
aside truth, justice, and mercy, those foundations of all government human and
divine; no more acts in character by redressing the grievances of his people,
is deaf to their petitions, withholds his protection, yea commences hostilities
against them; and because they put not into his mouth what he cannot
constitutionally demand, The taxing, at our Savior's birth, was a mere
enrolling; and a tax laid on land, or otherwise levying money by the
representatives of a free people for necessary uses, has been hitherto approved
and practiced among all civilized nations. But to tax a people, and extort
money from them, otherwise than by the constitution of government they have
agreed to, has been so detested in all ages, that we find but one instance of
it among all the kings of Judah, viz. Jehoiakim, 2 King, 23, 35. and even that,
by the despotic command of the tyrant his master. Nor have we more than one
instance in all the holy bible of taxing, in this sense, among the Pagans viz.
Seleucus Philopater, son of Antiochus the great, Dan. 11. 20. Then shall stand
up a raiser of taxes, or a sender forth of the extortioner or extorter: but he
was soon destroyed, neither in anger, nor in battle; being slain by Heliodorus,
one of his own servants, as king Charles I. was for the like cause advanced to
a scaffold.
he even prepares war against them: such an one does virtually unking himself,
become an usurper, and give out his mandates without authority. If a king will
keep within the line of his office, and exercise only a lawful and
constitutional authority, he must be obeyed: but if he and his ministers
arrogantly think to change times and laws, and alter the constitution, we must
not meddle with them thus given to change. We are obliged by the allegiance we
owe to Christ, to discard all usurpation, and tyranny among men. My soul, come
not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honor, be not thou
united. Shall he prosper, by despising the oath, by breaking the covenant?
Shall the statutes of Omri be kept, and all the works of the house of Ahab, in
contempt of the great King? We have a divine warrant to resist a tyrant and
oppressor, not only in the oracles of truth, but by that light and law of
nature, by which we resist a thief or robber, that comes not but for to kill,
to steal, and to destroy; demanding our purses, spoiling our goods, and
threatening our lives. This law of nature was put into us by our great Creator,
has been in force in all ages, and among all nations: not to resist in such a
case, is the way to receive to ourselves damnation. The Holy Ghost styles them
roaring lions, ravening wolves, leopards, bears, dragons, crooked serpents, and
such like venomous beasts; and who ever disputed the lawfulness of resisting
such mischievous devourers? But are we able to defend ourselves against such a
potent unnatural enemy? We will not boast of our own strength, nor vaunt
ourselves against our foes. We own we have no might against this great company
of savages, and foreigners, and Britons, that comes against us, neither know
we what to do, but our eyes are to the hope of our Israel; our help is only in
the Lord that made heaven and earth. Our fathers trusted in him, and were
delivered from the numerous natives. We cannot help ourselves, but God can help
us; and it is well known that power belongs to God, and he can save with many
or few, as he pleases. And though we are now under his frowns, yet we hope for a
reformation, and that God will return and have compassion according to the
multitude of his tender mercies. But if we surrender our liberties, we give up
the divine protection, and virtually say as Jehoram, This evil is of the Lord;
what or why; should I wait for the Lord any longer? We know he is a God of
judgment, and hates wrong and injustice. Though for wise and holy ends, he may,
for a time, look on them that deal very treacherously, and hold his tongue,
while the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous than he; and make men
like the fishes, the greater devouring the less; yet he is the holy one of
Israel: will sooner or later vindicate his name. And when he rises to save all
the meek of the earth, he will make the wrath of man to praise him. We hope he
will, in his own time, judge our fees, and plead our cause against an ungodly
nation, that delight in war, and against all that have been an arm of strength
to the children of Lot. The justice of our cause gives us hope of help from a
faithful Creator. If a parliament, at three thousand miles distance, can bind
us in all cases whatsoever, our lands are at their dispose. Strange, if they be
the proprietors of America, that they never put in their claim before. When the
king of the children of Ammon, invaded Israel, to take spoil and a prey, he had
no other pretext for his injustice but this, viz. Israel took away my land,
when they came out of Egypt. Now therefore restore again those lands peaceably.
The truth was, the Moabites had taken those lands before Israel's coming, and
Israel took them from the Moabites, by the special gift and favor of him whose
is the earth and the fullness thereof: and the people of God had quietly
possessed them for 300 years.

WE have a title to our lands by possession; for more than a century and half.
The great proprietor of the universe, and the God of the whole earth has given
us our lands, by almost as great wonders as those wrought for Israel, in giving
them the land of Canaan. It has been the practice, and is till this day, to
purchase them of the natives; and our lands have been guaranteed to us by the
king of England. Is not all this enough to make out our title? Must we now be
turned out of the possession, which God has given us to inherit? Must we be
servants in the land which we have so good a title to? When king Ahab received
the summons from Benhadad to surrender, 1 Kings, 20. 3. Thy silver and thy gold
is mine, thy wives also and thy children, even the goodliest are mine: he
submitted upon this tenor -- My lord O king, according to thy saying, I am
thine, and all that I have. i. e. I will pay homage to thee as my liege Lord.
But the cruelty and covetousness of the tyrant, like the horseleech's two
daughters, crying, Give, give, being emboldened by so ready and tame a
submission, he proceeds to add insult to a most extravagant demand; the
substance of which was, that his servants should search his house, and take
what they pleased, and especially what was most pleasant and goodly in the eyes
of Ahab. The elders of the land were then consulted. They all agree not to
hearken to such a cruel insulting demand. This thing I may not do, is the
message back. There is a may not, or a cannot, in such cases. God then frowned
upon the insulting foe. If we struggle for our liberties, and are conquered, we
may be humbled and reformed, and God may at length pity his people. The wheels
may turn, but if we give up our liberties, before they are by violence wrested
from us, they are gone forever.

THE most popular plea for a tame surrender of our all, to be bound in all
cases whatsoever, is that proposed by Sennacherib, Isa. 36. 16. A plea likely
to prevail with people that are weak, unthinking and soon weary of the troubles
of the war. Thus says the king of Assyria, make an agreement with me by a
present, and come out to me: and eat ye every one of his vine, and every one of
his figtree, and drink ye every one of the waters of his own cistern: until I
come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a
land of bread and vineyards. Hezekiah had given him above two hundred thousand
pounds sterling, to turn away from him, and yet in violation of the treaty, and
without returning the money, he would persuade them to trust him with their
all; and that they may thereby better their condition. But tyrants with all
their fair promises, are political hypocrites; and they that believe them are
ensnared. The whole truth is not told. The whole is thus. If you will rely upon
the word of one that neither fears God nor regards man, and lately proved
himself so false to Hezekiah, you may quietly possess your estates, so long,
and no longer, than the tyrant pleases. Whom he will he slays, and whom he will
he keeps alive. If he sees cause to give your lands to his soldiers, he will
carry you to a land (and it may be) as good as your own: but it will not be
your own. You will be poor and strangers in it, and far from the holy land. Is
this to better one's condition? But you may say, if I was the prime minister of
state in England, I should wish for a surrender of American liberties, and we
must do as we would be done by. If you was as blind and infatuated as all
tyrannical ministers and in their place, you would, doubtless, do as they do.
So, if you was a wolf, you would wish to have the sheep tamely submit to be
devoured; and if you was a devil, you would go about as a roaring lion seeking
to devour. But this is not the sense of the rule. If you was a Briton, could
you in reason, conscience and honor, desire such a tame, unmanlike, dastardly
submission in America? If not, then by this rule you cannot find yourself
obliged to surrender. I speak as to wise men; judge ye what I say. Weigh the
premises, and stand up in self-defence, or yield yourselves as willing slaves,
and entail bondage upon your children; who, perhaps, may rise up and call you
cursed; but if you struggle and are conquered, your own consciences will not
reproach you, and your children may rise up and call you blessed, on account of
your faithful endeavors. And who can tell how soon the tables may be turned?
The great God may appear for us, and make Britons to know that the heavens do
rule: that he whose name alone is Jehovah is the most high over all the earth.
Let us do our duty and leave the event with God, who will certainly show that
he rules in Jacob and to the ends of the earth, being king of nations as well
as king of saints, and will plead our cause. He styles himself a God that
brings down high looks, and saves the afflicted people; and has said, by
strength shall no man prevail.

3. Now, sirs, I request your patience, hoping you will take a turn with me to
the metropolis of that State, to which we were annexed in 1764, enter their
cabinet, and attend to the state politicians. If the New Hampshire Grants on
our northern borders were annexed to us, we might lay claim to their lands, and
fill our purses, by granting patents, and get a large share of those lands into
our hands. This will greatly impoverish the new settlements, and bring them
low. We may set up officers over them, that will promote our designs, and
establish courts so numerous and expensive, as to be too heavy for them to
bear: by all which many will become our tenants. We may enlarge the quit-rents,
and hold them subject to special writs from this chief seat of government, and
keep them low. Now is the time. Let us not consult them. They will oppose the
motion here and in Great Britain. But let us write to the king, and represent
it as for their interest to be annexed to us, and request it as a favor. And
considering the plan formed to subjugate these Colonies, and considering who is
on the throne, and about it, we shall be easily believed. And if by an
arbitrary act, they should be annexed to us, it will be a good step to teach
the Americans submission to despotic government, and will bring us under
special obligations to stand by them in all their future advances of arbitrary
power. And as for the new settlers, poor people, they will not be able to
withstand the royal authority, and so they may in the event be to us, what
Ireland is to Britain. Do all thus seek their own, not every man another's
wealth?

Nature has left that tincture in our blood,
That all men would be tyrants if they could:
If they forbear their neighbors to devour,
It Is not for want of will, but want of power.
JURE DIVINO. THE wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with
his teeth: the Lord shall laugh at him, for he sees that his day is coming. A
snare did not use to be laid in the sight of any bird. The new settlers are
about their necessary business, and are little aware of the pit that is made,
and the snare hid for them. But does the cabinet afford no patron for injured
innocence? Have the oppressed no comforter, while on the side of their
oppressors there is power? Yes, beloved. For justice shall not be wholly run
down, without a witness for it is injured rights. There was a Nichodemus in the
Jewish court, that could say as much for an injured, abused Messiah, as he
ought to have said for the worst of criminals. Does our law judge any man
before it hear him, and know what he does? And there was a Lot, you know, even
in Sodom, that could plead the laws of friendship, and sacred rights of
hospitality, on behalf of the two angels his guests. Hear one then, even in the
cabinet, that fears God, and regards man; is judicious, just, and hating
covetousness; that wisely knows that the exacting money for patents of those
that came honestly by their lands, is but picking their pockets at the expense
of justice; and that treasures gotten by deceit, or a lying tongue, are a
vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death. Are you in earnest,
gentlemen? Is it possible? Can such policy as this be harbored a moment in our
cabinet? Don't we all acknowledge a God that judges in the earth? And shall
not the measure we mete to others, be measured to us again? Will not a faithful
Creator take their part, and have respect to the work of his hands? Shall we
not set the cries of the widow, the fatherless, and afflicted against
ourselves? Shall we that now hate them in practice, get to be rulers over them?
Hatred is often covered by deceit, but love is without dissimulation. Let us
follow the dictates of humanity and charity, and do as we would be done by.
They have now already got as good a title to their lands, as the English
government can give; if this must fail, other titles may be called in question,
and the public faith be no foundation to build our interests upon. Shall titles
of lands fail, and private property be changed, by being annexed to a different
government under the same king? Who ever thought of such a nonsensical
destruction of private property, by all the additions to Connecticut, or
Rhode Island, from the Massachusetts Bay? I had rather be confined to our
present limits, than to have them enlarged by such gross deceit, iniquity, and
injustice.

I SHALL leave it to you, gentlemen, to decide upon the premises; and only add,
that the late governors and courtiers of New York must, as well as we, be
judged by this perfect law of liberty; and all their conduct toward these
plantations, be weighed in that balance; and he that knows to do good, and
does it not, to him it is sin.

4. Now, beloved, if you are not quite exhausted by hearing so many hard and
ungrateful things, I must entreat you to retire with me, and let us hold a
consultation among ourselves. Let us consider, take advice one of another, and
speak our minds freely. The question now to be discussed is, Are we obliged by
the perfect law of love and liberty, to continue under the yoke of that state,
to which with so much injustice we were annexed? We must be free with, and
friendly to one another, as companions in tribulation: with a mutual
fellow-feeling together, and a genuine tenderness for our offspring; keeping
all along in view the common cause of these injured and oppressed states. We
all know the woe pronounced in the word of God, against them that decree
unrighteous decrees, and write the grievousness that they have prescribed; and
that all the unrighteous acts in the world are in contempt of the God of
judgment; so that all the world ought to discard them, if able to do it. Such
arbitrary, unjust acts, are never ratified in heaven. It is supposed that the
open sons of Beliel, that will endure no yoke, perpetrating their wickedness in
contempt of all law; do not so exceedingly provoke the Lord, as the ministers
of justice, framing mischief by law. These latter do in effect make the Supreme
Ruler to serve with their sins, and use his authority against himself. Let us
call in self-love to our aid, and our justice and charity begin at home. We are
chiefly from New England; our genius and temper, and the laws we have been
accustomed to are very different from those of New York. Hence it may be
reasonably supposed, that these counties would have been three or four times as
numerous, at this day, had they never been annexed to that state. And should we
continue a few years more in that connection, and the quitrents be exacted
according to the late resolve of their convention, for the time past, as well
as now to come; we must soil our lands, if we can find buyers, at least in
part, in order to pay them. The increase of our inhabitants will be retarded.
But let us for a minute set all these aside, and consider our distance from the
chief seat of government, some three, and some four hundred miles from the
chief place of trade and business. How is it practicable for us to be
represented, in their assemblies, in any measure answerable to the exigences of
these remote plantations? A tender God enjoined his people Israel, Deuteronomy. 17.
14, on, to set no other as king or ruler over them but (as it is expressed) one
from among thy brethren shall thou set king over thee: thou may not set a
stranger over thee, which is not thy brother. ver. 20. That his heart be not
lifted up above his brethren. It is elsewhere mentioned as a curse, to have
them that have us to rule over us. We know men by their fruits. Actions are
more invincible proofs than words. We look upon all to be strangers that have
no fellow-feeling with us; and all those as our brethren, that are afflicted in
all wherein these plantations are afflicted. Now, if you find yourselves
obliged to think that the rulers of that state hare us, are strangers to us,
stand aloof from our sore, have forged chains for us, and lift up themselves
above us, not owning us as their brethren: -- How, in the name of reason, can
you expect they will assist us in opening a trade to the lake, in erecting
those mechanical works, that are needful in these remote parts? It is no
pleasure to me to renew your ancient griefs. But I must drop a few words. You
have the feelings of humanity; judge ye what I say. Is it reasonable? is it
just? is it for the public weal? that an infant county, after the expense of a
courthouse and goal, should have four county courts in a year, and to all
these three or four times the number of jurymen be summoned, at the nod of a
petty deputy-sheriff, that ^s necessary? And if any, at two days warning, though
without an horse and cash, do not attend, at the distance of thirty, forty, or
fifty miles, and stay the whole week, or till dismissed, upon their own cost,
while they have nothing, or next to nothing to do: in a few days almost the
only support of their poor families, except bread, must be seized by the
officer. Is this justice? Is this to maintain the honor of government? Does not
righteousness, at this rate, spring up as poisonous hemlock in the furrows of
the field? Does it consist with justice, with mercy, with humanity, or with any
thing laudable and praiseworthy, even among Pagans, to govern such infant
settlements (or any other) by a law, in virtue of which a poor neighbor, at a
small distance, may have his cow taken from him for a note of hand for three
shillings with cost? Who that has one spark of humanity, but would sooner lose
a dozen such trifling debts, than to be the maker, or executor of such a law?
But I could wish many past things might be buried in oblivion, provided we
might, with the consent of our neighboring state, enjoy liberty and wholesome
laws for the time to come. Is it then? I appeal to reason, to conscience, Is it
the mind of our gracious King, expressed in this perfect law of love and
liberty, that we continue annexed to that state, against the whole grain of our
nature and education, and against those principles of justice, resplendent in
your consciences; and contrary to the most apparent interests of these
territories? So speak ye, and so conduct in this weighty affair, as they that
expect to be judged by this perfect law of liberty.

5. BE so good now, my brethren, as to take a tour with me to Philadelphia, and
attend a few minutes to the grand council of these American States. We consider
them as defenders of truth, justice and mercy; the patrons of liberty, and
advocates for the rights of mankind. We long to hear what passes among them,
relative to our affairs, and shall watch to catch any thing out of their mouth
in favor of our tranquillity and freedom. But let me stir up your pure minds by
way of remembrance, that these our political fathers will speak and act in
character: they have no creating power to relieve us, but can do nothing
against our liberty: yea, they may countenance and encourage us that, if we may
be made free, to use it rather.

IT is hoped discretion and prudence will guide us, according to the honesty of
our designs in so nice a point as our union with these States.

WE read of one of good understanding in the fear of the Lord; and that God's
servant shall deal prudently; and of a good understanding, which all they have
that do his commandments: and we find the fearer of God guiding his affairs
with discretion. But we are as well assured, that a great oppressor is void of
understanding; and that oppression, or a temper and resolution to oppress,
makes a wise man mad; so that the wisest counselors of a Pharaoh become
brutish in their knowledge. They that discard truth and justice, do, in point
of prudence, lose their senses, as is evident by the holy bible, and history of
all ages. Being hood winked by bribes, or blinded by pride, covetousness and a
lust of power; they appear as much infatuated in their politics, as viciated in
their morals. Such may apply to the God of judgment to succeed their cruel
plots, or to men in authority, to support, beyond their power, their unjust
claims, but know not what they ask of God or men; and are as much lost to the
dictates of good sense, as to the rights of justice; but I hope better things
of this honorable convention, and that a prudent conduct will be added to the
goodness of their cause, and honesty of their intentions. How otherwise can we,
in a rational way, and by the observation of all ages, account for that wisdom,
that has hitherto guided the chief council of these states; commanding such
universal reverence, from them; as also from the wisest men in Europe: but that
they have all along set the supreme Ruler before them, and kept truth, justice
and mercy ever in view? You will then judiciously consider, they can do neither
more nor less, for us than as they act for all these united States. They may
defend and espouse the cause of any parts or members oppressed; but they cannot
oppress, or hurt us. They may do good, but cannot do evil: as the apostle
says, We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.

LET us then attend to what passes in that august assembly, and wait a while
for the issue. Hearken! Who is this that speaks? Is it a member from that state
that has caused so much grief and trouble to these counties? We shall soon know
by what he faith. How embarrassed! not by the dictates of his own reason, which
might lead him to espouse the cause of an oppressed people, but instructions
from his constituents, may have plunged him into this visible confusion. A bad
cause indeed, that cannot be defended without such perplexity! The three
counties that desire the countenance of this board, as a new American State,
were taken from New Hampshire, and given, or sold to us by a royal edict: our
then so kind and good king was to have no small income from those lands, by the
largest quitrents ever paid on the continent. Our convention, upon this turn of
times, have resolved themselves to be all one a king, to receive those
quitrents, which will be all lost to our state, if they should be encouraged to
set up as a state by themselves. Our convention, in June 1776, was so kind to
them, as to grant several companies of rangers for their defense, which calls
for more grateful returns, than their revolting from our jurisdiction.
Protection calls for allegiance. It will be much to the injury of our state to
be so dismembered, and lose out dominion and tribute money. If such a rebellion
against authority should be winked at by this board, we may perhaps withdraw
from it, at the call of our constituents, and so break the happy union of these
states. With as many more arguments as come into his mind, and as little to the
purpose.

How forcible are right words, but what does such arguing reprove?

BUT we long to bear what is said by some impartial disinterested member, that
knows no man after the flesh, whose soul abhors tyranny in America, as well as
in Britain: and being inspired with the feelings of humanity, cannot stand
aloof from our sore. -- Those New Hampshire Grants were never annexed to the
state of New York by their own consent, but as horses and cattle are shifted
from one to another by the will of their despotic masters. And their taking the
advantage of the change, to put the poor people to the cost of another title to
their lands, was carrying the matter of private property, in this case, further
than many civilized Pagans have done, in case of conquered nations. I should
have thought, that no man that knew any difference between right and wrong,
(meum and tuum) could have hit upon such a project to get money. And this
convention appears to me an heavy burden, which they are no longer able to
bear. And if the state of New York have showed kindness to those plantations,
by granting money for about 200 rangers for their defense; it may serve as some
just compensation for the injuries they have received. I would not expose any
men or body of men further than justice and truth oblige and necessity urges;
yet I must say, on this critical occasion, that (as I have learned) the
convention of New York, in that affair, acted in their simplicity, and knew not
any thing of the circumstances of those remote settlements.

THOSE rangers were granted without the knowledge or request of the people in
those parts, at the motion of one single man who attained the chief command:
and if any representatives from the counties joined in the motion, it was
chiefly from his representation. And though both officers and soldiers would
freely turn out with the militia in those parts upon any alarm, yet when under
orders as rangers they were esteemed rather a nuisance than a defense, and
innocently the wasters of the public money. And must a people be obliged by a
courtesy, they never requested, and which was no favor to them, to be
perpetual slaves to their mere nominal benefactors? I depend upon it, the
people there know better than to purchase mistaken favors at so dear a rate.
But suppose the favor of those rangers as great as was ever proposed, to
barter their liberties for it, is to give a most extravagant price. We all
think the being bound by Great Britain to an absolute submission in all cases
whatsoever, too great a recompense for her protection. This misapplied expense
shows that the divine method is best, viz. that not strangers but our brethren
rule over us; that know our wants and circumstances. Had Vermont then been a
State independent of New York, all the expense of those rangers had been
spared. We find the Britons to be strangers to us, and making gross mistakes
about us, when they meddle with our internal polity. Colonies, at such a
distance from their rulers, are treated with contempt. The rulers lift up
themselves above their brethren. And many things are done by the rulers which
ought not to be done; and many things, which the public good requires, are
ignorantly or carelessly omitted. I see not therefore, but those counties have a
natural right to freedom, and a fair opportunity to assert it. For my part, I
cannot but commiserate their case and feel for their past sufferings. I know
the heart of the oppressed, for I myself have been severely scourged by that
iron rod. My life has been threatened and endangered, for no other cause, but
the sacrificing my interests, and risking my honor and life, in defense of my
injured, oppressed country. Nothing gives me greater pleasure, than to be
happily instrumental to undo the heavy burdens and let the oppressed go free,
and to break every yoke of injustice and oppression. I rejoice to find in those
remote parts wisdom and manhood in asserting their rights as men; and so great
a unanimity in the general cause. Let us encourage them. Their advancement will
be the glory of the American union. We hope to be free, and that all America
will be so, and the cries of the oppressed heard no more, in these western
climes. Truth, justice, and mercy, can never do wrong to the state of New York.
I wish the lengthening of their tranquillity; but cannot do evil that a false
and mistaken good may come to them. If they withdraw from this board, because
we cannot become oppressors in their favor, it is hoped they will not boast
themselves as suffering for righteousness sake. I must therefore, (I speak for
one) cordially bid them welcome to a seat at our board, as the addition of
another state to our happy union; not doubting but other the worthy members,
touched with the same feeling for their distresses, and inspired with the same
patriotic zeal, for the rights of mankind, will concur in the same.

IV. APPLICATION, by way of inference and address.

1 Infer. THE God of heaven does wonders for an oppressed people. The wheels of
Providence are full of eyes; and there is often as it were a wheel in the
middle of a wheel. He first humbles and proves them, and then does them good in
their latter end. The God of grace knows his own thoughts of peace and mercy to
a people, even while he suffers a spirit of unrighteousness to prevail against
them. Makes the ravens to feed Elijah, and brings meat to his people out of
the eater, and out of the strong sweetness. Had Great Britain continued her
protection and faith and justice to these states, we should never have thought
of a change at this time. Never were colonies more closely attached to the
mother country, or royal family, than these now independent states. Not one in
a thousand among us, but was cordially well affected to George the third. Who
but a wonder-working God, could so soon have united so numerous a people of
different interests, in such an entire and established alienation both from
Britain and the royal house? The Britons have been the instruments. The way of
man is not in himself. God left them to take such measures, and persist in
them, against our petitions, and against the remonstrances of the wisest men in
Britain. It was of God to rend these colonies from the parent state, and wean
us from it. So had we continued under New Hampshire, we should likely, never
have thought, at this time, of forming into a State by ourselves, whatever our
oppressors intended. God has made them the tools of his providence, Psalm. 9.
15, 16. The heathen are sunk down into the pit that they made: in the net which
they hid is their own foot taken. The LORD is known by the judgment which he
executes: the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion; selah.
The two last words intimate that we must stop, make a solemn pause, and deeply
consider such a wondrous work of God.

2. Infer. OUR past sufferings are adapted to make us tenderly affected one to
another; and so lay a foundation for our future peace and union. If this law of
love becomes the fundamental principle of our state, we may differ in
sentiment, without the least disaffection one to another. Hence the exigences
of any part, will be felt by the several members as their own. No man will live
to or for himself alone, but as members one of another. So we may in the event
count it all joy, that we have fallen into diverse temptations, as serving to
prepare us for future prosperity and peace.

3. Infer. THAT all treacherous dealing, for or against the country, is
contrary to the light of nature, and the perfect law of liberty in the text.
Treason in every shape is abhorrent to human nature, and detested among all
nations, and in all ages of the world. We must act openly, honestly and
faithfully in all we do for the public; and never betray so much as one private
friend: be true and faithful in what we undertake, and never act under a cloak.
I scarce ever read a worse character than that of Lord Lovet, a Scotch rebel,
executed at Tower Hill 1745, " True to no king, to no religion true." i. e.
Dissimulation and deceit, treachery and hypocrisy, unfaithfulness and double
dealing, were interwoven through the whole web of his conduct in religion and
politics. We must not turn traitors, though to save our country, or do so great
an evil that good may come. Dare to be true, to be honest and fair, and leave
the event with God. This is the way to have the blessing of God, and the favor
of all men of true honor. When Augustus had vanquished his rival Mark Anthony,
and was established in the empire at Rome, he sent for Herod the great out of
Judea, who had joined his rival against him. It was expected his life must go.
But when he came before the emperor, and senate of Rome, in a manly and gallant
speech, owned he had ever been true and faithful to Anthony, and would have
shed the last drop of his blood to save him. But now, since he is no more if he
might be taken into savor with his present majesty, he should be as true and
faithful an ally to him, as he had been to the other. The emperor and senate
were charmed with his manly soul; did not disgrace him; yea loaded him with new
savors. Honesty is the best policy.


4. Infer. IT is our duty and prudence to treat with justice, tenderness, and a
generous compassion, all that differ from us with respect to measures, while
they profess friendship to the country, and act nothing against it. All that
openly join with our oppressors, I leave to trust in oppression, to become vain
in robbery, and take the event. We must wait to see how the ship, in which they
have embarked their all, rides out the storm. We leave all that privily aided
and influenced Great Britain to these hard measures, to him that will shortly
make inquisition for all the blood shed, in this unhappy and fatal war. Those
that enjoy privileges and protection among us, while they secretly practice
deceit and aid our enemies in oppressing us, I must leave to our enemies
contempt, and their country's abhorrence; for a prey to their own consciences,
and to the judgment of him that in all cases requires truth and sincerity in
the inward parts.

BUT there are numbers in these states, that cannot see as we do; that are
conscienciously engaged not to act against us. They fear we are hurting
ourselves, and ruining the country. They cannot see that the kingdom was given
to George the third only by compact with the people, but to David of old, under
a theocracy, by a covenant of salt; and that, nevertheless, it was a just and
manly thing in the ten tribes to refuse an absolute submission to Rehoboam, to
be bound in all cases whatsoever, after his haughty, imprudent menaces, and
telling them of a yoke more grievous, and even of whips and scorpions. They
cannot wisely consider that Rehoboam's infatuation was from the God of
judgment, and the revolt of the ^en tribes by his order and counsel: and showed
a manly soul. For is Israel a servant? is he a home-born slave? No, he is free
born. God forbad Rehoboam therefore to attempt by war to bring back the kingdom
to the house of David; as it was of God, that they were dismembered from it.
Their sin was the rejecting not a stupid, imprudent, infatuated Rehoboam, but
the whole house of David, in contempt of the covenant of salt, for the infamous
son of Nebat, and without doubt too much rashness and fury attended. These our
weak brethren cannot see that all that Great Britain could in justice and
manhood have done with us, supposing us to have erred in not making such an
absolute submission to them as is due only to the Supreme King, was only to
withhold her protection and trade; but to cut our throats, because we will not
be at such enormous expense for them, is a punishment so inadequate to the
fault, (if it be a fault) as quite shocks our understanding. They cannot see
that a compact grossly violated on one side, discharges the obligation on the
other. What shall we do with these our weak brethren? To persecute and oppress
them on account of their political weakness, will serve only to confirm them in
their mistakes, and may harden them against their country. Weak people are
least able to endure a severe discipline. Till such by a fair and impartial
trial are convicted of some overt act, against the common cause, we that are
strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves.
Ye, says the apostle, suffer fools gladly, seeing ye your selves are wise. q.
d. Ye have the heart felt joy of being wise and judicious yourselves, this
should influence you to a generous compassion toward the ignorant, and such as
are out of the way. It seems to me both our duty, and for the common good, to
endeavor by a friendly, courteous, and faithful spirit toward these mistaken
friends, to win and attach them to us. They may be cordially won, and drawn by
the cords of a man and bands of love; but all hard speeches and severe
treatment, tend to alienate them forever; and may be the unhappy occasion of
their own and families ruin. Pride in our own superior wisdom will blind our
eyes, and betray us into a foolish and misplaced severity toward those, that
do not, with what we in pride may call a due reverence, come into our
sentiments. But an humble sense of the law of liberty, will lead us to treat
them in the same humble and obliging manner, as we should think it sit to be
treated by them, if they were in our case, and had all our wisdom, and we in
their's, with all their weakness.

5. Infer. We must yield to this golden rule and law of liberty, before a
merciful deliverance from our present troubles. Oh! when shall the hearts of
the fathers be turned to their children, and the hearts of the children to
their fathers, and the hearts of the disobedient to the wisdom of the just;
that we may be a people ready and prepared for the Lord to command deliverances
for our Jacob? We are now loudly called to reform, to amend our ways, and our
doings which have not been good; to acquaint ourselves with God and be at
peace, that thereby good may come unto us. Here we must begin, if we mean to
comply with the text; and put away those crying sins that have exceedingly
provoked the Lord to leave protestants to bite and devour one another. Our
iniquities correct us, and our backslidings reprove us; let us know and
consider that it is an evil thing and bitter, that we have forsaken the Lord,
the only hope of Israel, and forgotten our resting place. The foolish people
that blaspheme God, and his enemies that take his name in vain, must be
reformed, and learn to fear that glorious and fearful name, the LORD our God.
For because of swearing the land mourns under the sad tokens of the divine
displeasure. They that profane the day of sacred rest, and impiously neglect
the solemnities of his worship and ordinances of religion, must return to their
duty, and enter into his sanctuary which he has sanctified forever, that the
fierce wrath of the Lord may be turned away from us. For because we have not
observed his statutes and despised his sabbaths, God has given us statutes from
Great Britain that are not good, and judgments whereby we cannot live. Wilful
impenitents and unbelievers, that tremble not at the words of the living God;
fear not his wrath, and will not submit to be ruled and saved by him; spurn at
his divine bowels; affront the God of grace, and incense the Savior of the
world; vex and grieve the holy Spirit: these must come to a pause, consider and
turn to the Lord, receive the atonement, and make their peace with God by the
blood of the cross; and all will be well. In a word, the extortioner, the
monopolizer of scarce and necessary commodities, the destroyers of our present
medium of trade; those that oppress one another, and grind the faces of the
poor, must turn back to justice, humanity, and charity, and a love to their
country. Iniquity must be put far from our tabernacles, family religion set up,
and the rising generation instructed. We must put away all violence from our
hands, and malice from our hearts. Love the Lord, and love our neighbor as
ourselves. Our pride, self-sufficiency, impenitency, unbelief, wilful contempt
of God, and his holy laws, not seeing the hand of God, receiving not
correction, trusting not in the Lord, and drawing not near to our God. These
have kept us back from honor and victory, and brought us low, and withheld good
things from us.

THE Addresses follow.

First, PERMIT me to drop a few hints to the honorable the House of
Representatives now convened, to form a plan of government for this State.

Honored sirs, WHAT is purely political, I shall leave to your better skill and
wisdom; and wish you the divine blessing, in all your deliberations. But I
trust your candor will not take it as acting out of character, if I suggest
some things which may be worthy your future consideration.

THE unanimity of the late Convention in calling upon us to fast, and cry to
heaven for direction and help in our present affair, as well as the more public
interests of America, intimates to us a pleasing ground of hope, that this will
be thy land, O Immanuel! That God will be openly acknowledged in all the
important business of our State. Though the Kingdom of the Redeemer is not of
this world, and civil rulers are not to invade the rights of Jesus Christ, yet
they may be nursing fathers to the church and the earth may help the woman:
they may upon occasion forbid servile labor, and call upon us to fast, or
offer thanksgiving to God, without invading his throne. By no means would I
urge civil rulers to bind conscience in the chains of their decrees. Christ
alone is Lord of the conscience: and every man must act for himself in all
matters wherein conscience may be obliged, for this plain reason, viz. Every
man must give account of himself to God. But it is folly and stupidity for a
man to plead conscience for breaking the moral law, which is a transcript of
the moral perfections of God, and written upon the hearts of all by nature.
Civil rulers are God's vicegerents and deputies on earth, to maintain the honor
of his rectoral righteousness, and so prevent divine judgments coming upon the
people. I hope the legislative and executive powers of this State will so stand
in awe of the sovereign Ruler, as to put restraints upon an open contempt of
God and all religion, blaspheming and the taking h^^ tremendous name in vain;
adultery as a sin against God and the State, as well as against the party
injured; the profanation of the sabbath day, (the morality of which may be
easily proved,) and in a word, all gross violations of the sacred decalogue as
far as certain proof can be taken in human courts; are iniquities to be
restrained by the laws and punished by the judges in all christian States. Neh.
13. 17, 18. Then I contended with the nobles of Judah, and said unto them, what
evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the sabbath day? Did not your
fathers thus, and did not God bring all this evil upon us, and upon this city?
Yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel, by profaning the sabbath.

IN forming a plan of government for this State you will judiciously temper and
balance the powers of the several branches of the legislature, that one cannot
arrogate to himself what belongs to another. The legislative authority of
Great Britain, by king, lords and commons, has long been the pride and boast of
the nation, and envy of other nations. But former and later experience
invincibly proves by the most notorious facts, which are the hardest arguments,
that when the powers of those three branches by bribes or otherwise are
engrossed by one, like the beams of the sun contracted by a glass in a focus,
the intense heat may set the whole land in flames. The preventing so great an
evil to this State, will demand your closest attention and care.

MONARCHY and oligarchy carry dignity, but may easily degenerate into
oppression and tyranny. Democracy seems the most free and eligible at first
view, but is found by the experience of all ages both in church and state,
(...) to lose (...) dignity, and so cannot answer the ends of government; and
has often degenerated into the most barefaced, intolerable tyranny. But by an
happy union of the three, dignity and liberty are best seemed.

THE powers of the ministers of justice, jurymen and all officers are to be
prudently adjusted, as well as all the rights and privileges, belonging to
every individual. All the people in general throughout this state, will insist
upon their right of being tried by their peers, i. e. by their equals; and
shall not the judges and chief officers of the state have the same privilege
secured to them. How would it shock the human understanding, to see a governor
e. g. subjected to a mere popular trial? All men of sense and ho^or would shun
the dignities of the state, if that must be their unhappy fate. We hope for
such an establishment of good (...) and wholesome laws, tha^ it will not be in
the power of any man, or order of men, to trouble others but by common law.

PRESBYTERIAN ministers, by the very form of union between England and Scotland
and by the oath of the king of that realm, (...) exempted from (...) trials in
matters that concern their office, except by those of their own order, as
presbytery and synod. And you may be assured, they, and all others of every
denomination, will take it very hard, if, in a state wherein all others have
their rights secured, they may not be as safe in their office, as under the
dominion of Britain.

HAVE we suffered by septennial parliaments, and septennial assemblies, and a
nonsensical and needless expense in the administration of public justice; we
now hope for this sowing in tears, to reap an joy the good fruits of our past
sufferings. Adversity is the school of wisdom. You will look out with great
caution, where others have made shipwreck.

I WISH you prudence, unanimity, and success, and a blessing ^o crown all your
faithful endeavors for our good; and may your service for this state be
accepted of the multitude of your brethren; and our children, and children's
children rejoice in the happy consequences of this business, when, having
served your generation according to the will of God, you shall rest in the dust.

AMEN. SO BE IT.

I CLOSE all with a few words to the people here present before God.

IT is a critical day with us. Perilous times are come. Let all unite for
reformation and to promote the common cause of America, and good of this State.
Whatever we might think heretofore, and however closely attached to the mother
country; we must eye the hand of God in the change. God by a series of
wondrous providence, has made us independent States. We are now to seek their
good.

THE public faith of Britain now well known to us, and how far it is prudent to
trust it; their persecuting us with a rage that reaches unto heaven, the
insults offered to our understandings, as proposals for reconciliation, the
deeply rooted and so universal alienation of these States, from that kingdom;
and our treaties abroad, which may (for ought we know) preclude all rational
and moral possibility of a reunion; all these considered seem to oblige us to
be so prudent for ourselves, as to think and speak no more of that matter; but
to look upon the breach like the sea, past healing. We must, it seems, be their
allies, or conquered vassals, or have no connections with them.

LET us put away those sins that have armed our enemies against us, and be
cordially united in all our efforts for the public weal. The cruelty of our
merciless foes, should make us tenderly affected one to another. You may have
heard of a man, a lamb, and a lion by chance falling into the same pit, so
touched with sympathy and mutual tenderness, under the common calamity, as not
to hurt one another. May the law of love, and that spirit of christian
morality, that runs through the sermon on the mount, be cultivated among us: and
O that all the powers of Europe, for our sakes, as well as their own, might be
under the influence of that same spirit.

WHEN shall that glorious day appear when wars shall cease to the ends of the
earth, by the supreme command of the Lord of hosts? Then Ephraim shall no more
envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim. We shall then very cordially unite with
Britons, not indeed in civil connections, but in christian fellowship, and
amity. The wolf will then dwell pleasantly with the lamb, and the leopard lie
down with the kid; and people both in Europe and America try to render each
other happy, as much as ever the one has struggled to make the other miserable.

ALL the oppressors, and tyrants of the earth, will then be gone down to the
sides of the pit, to lie with the uncircumcised, and their iniquities upon
their bones; though they were the terror of the mighty in the land of the living.

THE greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, will then be given to the
people of the saints of the Most High, and the voice of the oppressor no more
be heard. Civil Rulers will then be benefactors (not malefactors) and seek the
welfare of their people: and the people will love and not oppress one another.
And in the peace of the civil community, and city of God, will every one have
peace. Thy kingdom come, O LORD.

After prayer Doctor WATTS'S Hymn upon the text was sung, and its here inserted
by request.
THE UNIVERSAL LAW OF EQUITY.
Long Meter.
1. BLESSED REDEEMER, how divine,
How righteous is this rule of thine,
Never to deal with others worse
Than we would have them deal, with (...).
2. This golden lesson, short and plain,
Gives not the mind nor memory pain
And every conscience must approve
This universal law of love.
3. It Is written in each mortal breast,
Where all our tenderest wishes rest;
We draw it from our inmost veins,
Where love to sense resides and reigns.
4. Is reason ever at a loss?
Call in self to judge the cause:
Let our own fondest passion show
How we should treat our neighbors too*
5. How blessed would every nation prove,
Thus ruled by equity and love!
All would be friends, without a foe,
And form a paradise below! --
6. JESUS, forgive us that we keep
Thy sacred law of love asleep,
And take our envy, wrath and pride,
Those savage passions for our guide.
Then the whole assembly arose in reverence to that glorious and fearful name,
the LORD our GOD, and sung the Christian Doxology.

To God the Father, God the Son,
And God the Spirit, three in one,
Be honor, praise, and glory given,
By all on earth and all in heaven.

