Mr. MACCARTY's SERMON, ON OCCASION OF THE EXECUTION OF FOUR CRIMINALS.

THE GUILT OF INNOCENT BLOOD PUT AWAY. A SERMON, Preached at WORCESTER, JULY 2,
1778. ON OCCASION of the EXECUTION OF JAMES BUCHANAN, WILLIAM BROOKS, EZRA
ROSS, and BATHSHUA SPOONER, FOR THE MURDER Of Mr. JOSHUA SPOONER, at
Brookfield, On the Evening of the first of MARCH preceding. TOGETHER WITH An
APPENDIX, GIVING Some ACCOUNT of those PRISONERS in Their LAST STAGE.

By THADDEUS MACCARTY, A. M. Pastor of the Church in said WORCESTER.

WORCESTER: MASSACHUSETTS BAY, Printed and sold by ISAIAH THOMAS, and Co.
MDCCLXXVIII.

A SERMON, On occasion of the Execution of four Criminals.
DEUTERONOMY, XIX c. 13 v. Thine Eye shall not pity him, but thou shall put
away the guilt of innocent blood from Israel, that it may go well with thee.
IT is well known to this great Assembly, wherefore it is that these poor
prisoners have been brought under a sentence of condemnation, this day to be
executed upon them, namely, their having murderously shed innocent blood. The
passage now read, I apprehend, therefore, is a fit theme to discourse upon,
upon this solemn and melancholy occasion. And I the rather fixed upon this
subject, that so, if the blessing of God may go along with what may be offered
from it, the minds of these unhappy persons may be deeply impressed with a
sense of the heinousness of the crime which has thrown them into the hands of
justice, and exposed them to the fatal stroke of it, yea, and that having the
heinousness of it set before us, we may be all filled with an utter detestation
at, and abhorrence of it, avoid it, and all approaches to it.

The first man that died out of this apostate world, was drove out of it by the
hand of violence. You know the instance I refer to, Cain's imbruing his hands
in the innocent blood of his brother. Of the old world in the days of Noah, it
is said, that the earth was filled with violence: Violence of this kind, among
other instances. Nor have there been wanting instances in every age of this
kind, until now. It is a crime that is peculiarly soul and black in the esteem
of God, and at which he expresses his angry resentments in his word. This
appears in some measure from the chapter before us, and from the words I at
first read, as well as in abundance of other passages in sacred writ.

Now it is plain from my text that shedding innocent blood contracts guilt. It
is plain also that it is the will of God, that this guilt should be put away.
And,

Lastly, We may see the special reason why God would have it put away,
expressed in the latter part of the verse. "That it may go well with thee."

I shall endeavor with all convenient brevity to speak to these several heads,
in doing which, I shall be led to take notice of the true import of what is
expressed in the first clause of the verse, "thine eye shall not pity him," him
that is guilty of innocent blood.

The whole will be followed with some application suitable to the present
occasion.

In the first place then, shedding innocent blood contracts guilt.

This is the language of the inspired passage we are upon. "Thou shall put away
the guilt of innocent blood." Now guilt necessarily refers to some law
authoritatively enacted, which is broken or violated. For where there is no law
there is no transgression, and consequently no guilt contracted. But that there
is a law violated in the present case, is plain beyond all dispute. Among the
laws or commandments given at Mount Sinai, this is one -- Thou shall not kill.
And that this is a law that was not peculiar to Israel of old, but a standing
law in God's moral kingdom, is evident from this, that our blessed Savior has
adopted it into his own institution. Says he to the young ruler, with whom at a
certain time he entered into a conference, Thou shall do no murder, Matt. xix,
18. I would observe here, that there are some occasions that may happen in
which taking away the lives of others may not be considered as violations of
this commandment we have mentioned. Thus a person may kill another by what is
called chance or accident, without the least evil intention or so much as a
thought of such a thing. Now it is plain from what is said in the chapter in
which is our text, that he who thus accidentally kills another is without guilt
even in the sight of God. Verse 4, 5, Whosoever kills his neighbor ignorantly
whom he hated not in time past, as when a man goes into the wood with his
neighbor to hew wood, and his hand fetches a stroke with the ax to cut the
tree, and the head slippeth from the helve, and lights upon his neighbor
that be die, he shall live, as is plainly expressed in the former part of the
fourth verse.

So again, it may be said; if a man is assaulted, and is thereby brought into
danger of his life, it is just that he should stand upon his defense; and if in
necessary self defense he kills his antagonist, he is not chargeable with
murder in the eye of God's law; he only that is slain has done the wrong, and
his blood must be upon his own head. However, I would observe, that a person of
a sober, good mind, will have such a regard for the life of his most inveterate
enemy, that he will be disposed to suffer very great wrongs, rather than
proceed to such an extremity in self-defence, as to take away his life.

Again. If war is lawful, especially a defensive one, it cannot then be said,
that if enemies are slain in it, that those that slay them are chargeable with
shedding innocent blood. The aggressors in a war are only chargeable with all
the fatal consequences of it.

Once more, I would say, that when criminals and malefactors are put to death,
as is this day to be the case, with these unhappy persons before us, by the
sword of public justice, there is no violation of the law of God, forbidding
murder. I go upon the supposition, that the crimes such are chargeable with,
are deserving of death. And no one surely will call it in question, whether the
shedding innocent blood is not thus deserving. Having observed these things, I
would proceed and say, that the law of God, forbiding the taking away the lives
of others, intends that they shall not be taken away without a just and
necessary cause. This rule extends to persons of all ranks and conditions, to
the meanest slave, as well as to the person of high degree: For both the one
and the other equally partake of the human nature, and are therefore equally
valuable, and have an equal right to the continuation of life, so long as the
Lord of life sees fit.

The question now is, when is it that this crime of murder is committed? I
answer, when from a settled principle of hatred, malice or revenge, persons
take away the lives of others. Such are in the fullest and most absolute sense,
murderers, both in the eye of God and of civil society. Or, if the killing
another is not from a settled principle of hatred, malice or revenge, but owing
to a sudden transport of rage or fury, this, also is murder, even allowing that
it is not so in such a gross sense, as when it is done with premeditation and
malice afore-thought. As men ought not to indulge to wrath, bitterness and
fury, so if they are by these corrupt, malignant passions led to shed the blood
of any of their fellow creatures, they may not expect that this will avail as
any just excuse, either before God or man. "It is (says an author) evidently
unfit that life should be continually exposed to hazard from the turbulent,
ungoverned wrath of man. This would be to subject quiet and peaceable members
of society to the greatest hardships, by constructively giving encouragement to
angry men to vent their fury upon them." Wrath and fury may not be indulged
upon the principles of reason or the Bible. And in vain must it be to plead one
crime in excuse for another, especially, such an heinous one, as that we are
speaking of, shedding the blood of others.

Now this, as I have said, contracts guilt, and guilt of the deepest and
blackest dye. God has forbidden it with the highest authority. His express law
is violated, to say nothing of the laws of civil society. And such therefore,
stand guilty both before God and man; at once and absolutely before God, whose
knowledge is infallible: And before man, sometimes immediately after the
perpetration of the fact, but, however, after a legal process.

But without any further enlargement, I go on to observe in the second place:
It is the will of God, that this guilt should be put away.

How is it to be put away? I answer, by inflicting the penalty of the law upon
the breakers of it. And this penalty, it is plain, by the appointment of God
himself, is nothing less than the destruction of their temporal lives. That is,
a standing, perpetual law of God, published to the new world from Noah. Genesis
ix. 5, 6. At the hand of every man's brother, will I require the life of man.
Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed," shall be so by the
magistrate, or whoever is appointed or authorized to be the avenger of blood
"Before the flood (as one observes) God took the punishment of murder into his
own hands, as in the case of Cain, but since, he committed this judgment to
men; to masters of families first, and afterward to the heads of countries."
There is no language in which the intention of God as to those that are guilty
of shedding blood, can be more plain and express than this, as in the passage
now mentioned, as well as in many others. Accordingly, we have it, Numbers
xxxv. 30. Whosoever kills any person, the murderer shall be put to death; it
follows, "Ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer, which is
guilty of death;" or as in the margin, faulty to die, "but he shall surely be
put to death." We have the like appointment of the holy God in the case,
Proverbs xxviii. 17, A man that does violence to the blood of any person, shall
flee to the pit, let no man stay him." This is the standing, unrepealable law
of the majesty of Heaven. And consonant hereto, this is the standing law of all
civil societies. But not to dwell upon this:

Now this penalty annexed to the divine law respecting shedding innocent blood,
requiring blood for blood, shows it to be a very heinous crime; a crime of the
first magnitude. And that it is so, appears from a variety of circumstances,
which I may but briefly hint at: Before which, I would just observe, that
Barbarians, who never were acquainted with the revelation of God, nor of his
mind in this case, have looked upon murder as a shocking and heinous crime,
exposing the perpetrators of it to some signal vengeance of the deity. We have
an example of this in the case of the apostle Paul: When he landed at the
island Melita, after his shipwreck, it happened that a viper fastened upon his
hand, a venomous beast, whose bite is certain and sudden death, it is said, the
barbarians thus remarked upon it, No doubt this man is a murderer, whom though
he has escaped the dangers of the sea, yet vengeance suffers not to live,
Acts xxviii, 4. "And, as one observes, should murderers escape the vengeance of
man, they scarce ever after enjoy themselves, or take comfort in life; their
hearts misgive them; their thoughts trouble them; their guilty fears
perpetually haunt them; and sometimes for the sake of peace within, they have
been as it were, forced to reveal their own wickedness, choosing rather to die
by the hands of justice, than to drag on life under the uneasy sensations of a
continually self-condemned conscience."

Having observed this, I go on to say that God having made this crime
absolutely punishable with death, speaks it to be a heinous crime indeed. And
it is so, in the first place, in respect of the great injustice done to him
whose blood is shed. Indeed there is no instance of injustice equal to this.
Men may by lawless violence be turned out of the possession of their goods and
properties, they may be many ways injured in their names and in their bodies
too; but all this is no ways equal to what it is to be deprived of life; for
this is the foundation of all other enjoyments, and when this is destroyed all
others fail of course. And then, many injuries that men meet with may be
repaired; their properties may be restored, their characters vindicated, etc.
but when life is taken away, there is no such thing as restoring this, it is
irrecoverably gone. It is therefore the most aggravated instance of injustice
that can be done to a man. Besides all which, the spiritual and everlasting
happiness of the man, may be very nearly concerned, which shows the high and
aggravated injustice of it. What must be the case of a wicked man, who is
suddenly deprived of life by the hand of violence? While life remained he had a
space for repentance, an opportunity to make his peace with God, was in a
capacity of obtaining pardon, and securing his everlasting happiness; but in
being drove out of the world, all opportunity and capacity herefor, wholly
ceases. And it is to be feared, that many, who have fell such sacrifices, have
at once gone to misery. So that, in this case, the immortal soul is in a sense
destroyed, as well as the body. What instance of injustice can there any ways
be, equal to that, which proves the occasion of a man's losing his soul
forever, which is more worth than the whole world, as is evident, among other
instances, from the inestimable price that was paid for its redemption, even
the precious blood of God's only begotten, and dearly beloved son, the Lord
Jesus Christ.

I might also observe upon the great injustice of it, from the consideration of
the loss that is sustained, by those nearly related or connected, and by the
society to which such belong. But passing over this, I go on to say, in the
next place. That murder is a most heinous and aggravated sin, in regard of the
great impiety of it toward God.

He is the author of men's lives, and it is his sole prerogative to dispose of
them. His wisdom as well as goodness is concerned in continuing men in the
enjoyment of their lives. It is, we may be sure, to answer some valuable and
important ends, in his general plan of government; and as he clearly seen into
all the relations, dependencies and connections of things, so he perfectly
knows how to accomplish these ends, let the characters of men, in the moral and
religious sense, be as they will, good or bad. By violently destroying the life
of a man, God is (as one expresses it) virtually robbed of a creature whom his
hands have formed, yea, of a servant and subject from whom he might have
received, a revenue of honor and service. So that it is impiously to break in
upon the wise plan that God has laid. And then, also, it is to be considered,
that man is the noblest work of God, in this lower world; he was at first made
after the image of God, and notwithstanding his apostasy, does, in some
respects, still bear this image; accordingly, when God expressly declares,
after the flood, that murder is a capital crime, to be punished with death, as
in the passage I mentioned before, this reason is assigned for in the image of
God made he man. Upon which one thus notes: Such remains of God's image are
still upon fallen man, as that he who unjustly kills a man, defaceth the image
of God, and does dishonor to him.

Once more. The heinousness of this crime, appears also in this, that it
excludes the perpetrators of it from the kingdom of Heaven, and exposes them to
eternal death. Says the apostle, 1 John, iii, 15. No murderer has eternal
life. He is far from having that principle in him which leads to eternal life.
How can this be when he is under the influence of such diabolical principles as
have been mentioned, wrath, hatred, malice, revenge, etc. principles that will
operate in such a dreadful manner as to put him upon embruing his hands in the
blood of a fellow creature. Murderers, are expressly said by our Savior, to be
of their father the Devil, who (as he says) was a murderer from the beginning,
John viii, 44. He is (says one upon it) an enemy to life, because God is the
God of life, and life is the happiness of man. He was man's tempter to that
sin, which brought death into the world, and so he was in effect the murderer
of all mankind. And as he himself has no lot or portion in Heaven, where is the
enjoyment of eternal life, so neither shall have any of his children, but shall
be punished with eternal death. Accordingly, the apostle John, among other
heinous transgressors, mentions MURDERERS, who shall have their part in the
lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Rev.
xxi. 8. But this, I would just say, that the apostle speaks with respect to
such, goes upon the supposition, that they are not brought to true repentance:
For, it may be observed here, that as black a crime as murder is, it may be
repented of, and in virtue of the great atonement by Jesus Christ, be pardoned
by God. This is sufficiently expressed by the apostle to the Hebrews, Chap.
xii. 24. Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of
sprinkling, which speaks better things than the blood of Abel. Tho blood of
Abel cried for vengeance: But the blood of Jesus, the lamb slain, cries for
mercy. And being sprinkled therewith, as the phrase here is, murderers may
obtain pardon from the hands of God. But unless this is the case, the dreadful
threatening we just mentioned, will be executed upon them. I shall only add
here that passage in Rev. xxii. 15, which refers to those that are finally
impenitent. But without, i.e. the heavenly city, mentioned verse preceding, are
dogs and sorcerers, and whoremongers and MURDERERS.

From all now that has been said, does it not appear, what a heinous crime
murder is? Its being punishable with death, by the express appointment of the
God of Heaven, as well as by the laws of civil society, speaks it to be so. It
is only in this way, that the guilt of innocent blood can be put away, as the
language is in my text. Nor may any, without great offense to God, interpose to
prevent it, or ward off the stroke of civil justice. Thine eye shall not pity
him, says the text. Does this mean, that we should be hard hearted toward such
who have committed this crime? That we should set aside even common humanity?
Shut up our bowels of compassion toward them? Be rancorous, bitter and
wrathful in our dispositions toward them? No, it does not mean this -- Those
that are in distress are objects of pity; and ingenuous minds will have the
feelings of humanity toward them. While they detest the crime, will pity and
compassionate the distressed criminal. And the religion of the compassionate
Jesus, will powerfully lead to this. And this humane, christian principle, will
put them upon every kind office toward them, to pray earnestly for them, and
use all their best endeavors, that so their souls may he saved from death, and
that they may obtain a part in the everlasting salvation of the heavenly world,
which through the abounding grace of God and of the gospel, they are capable
of. But when it is said in my text, thine eye shall not pity him, it intends,
that thou shall not so pity him, as to prevent justice taking place upon him.
That judges and jurors upon sufficient evidence of their guilt, should,
agreeable to the solemn obligation lying upon them to be faithful, declare them
guilty, and pronounce upon them the sentence which the law of God and man has
provided in the case, and, that all who are properly authorized thereto, see
that it be put into execution. All this is consistent with the most tender
emotions of heart toward poor criminals, and the most fervent wishes and
prayers for their everlasting happiness. The most tender compassionate feelings
must never supercede the express, peremptory orders of the God of Heaven.

I pass on now to the last head proposed, viz.

To consider the special reason, why God would have the guilt of innocent blood
put away -- That it may go well with thee.

It intimates, that if the guilt of blood is not put away, it will be very
displeasing to God, and expose the land to distressing judgments. It would
speak a general approbation and consent to so heinous a wickedness, and so the
guilt would lie, not only on the immediate actors and their accomplices, but on
the public, and nothing then could be expected, but God's testifying his anger
in most awful ways. We may see at large in Deuter. xxi. what particular care
was taken to put away the guilt of innocent blood, even when he that shed it,
was not found out. After the devoted heifer was slain, their hands were to be
washed over it, denoting their innocence, to which the Psalmist no doubt
refers, xxvi. 6. I will wash mine hands in innocence. And then the people of
Israel are brought in as addressing the divine majesty, verse 8. Be merciful, O
Lord unto thy people Israel, whom thou have redeemed, and lay not innocent
blood unto thy people of Israel's charge. And the blood shall be forgiven them.
Should not this guilt be put away in the manner that has been said, the whole
land would be defiled. So we read Numbers xxxv. 33. For blood it defiles the
land, and the land it cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, or
as the marginal reading is, there can be no expiation for the land, but by the
blood of him that shed it.

If, as one notes upon it, such escape punishment from men, they that suffer
them to escape will have a great deal to answer for, and God will not, however,
suffer them to escape his righteous judgment. If a man would give all the
substance of his house to the judges, to the country, or to the avenger of
blood to atone for his crime, it must utterly be contemned," that so God may
not be provoked utterly to destroy that land, but that it may go well with it,
that it may be under his special care and blessing.

I have now finished the several heads I at first mentioned, as offering
themselves from the text. And upon so extraordinary an occasion, I apprehend,
as I hinted in the beginning, that it would be suitable to offer that which
might serve to give people a full view of the crime of murder, the exceeding
heinousness of it, and the fatal consequences of it, and, as I said, to impress
the minds of these poor prisoners with a deep and pungent sense of the crime,
for which they are this day to suffer the penalty annexed to the law of God and
man.

To these poor prisoners. I would now particularly speak -- And as this is the
last sermon you will ever hear, I hope you will carefully attend to what may be
now spoken to you, by one who has had much to do with you since your
confinement, and hopes he has a true desire for your immortal interests.

I would, in the first place, speak to Buchanan, Brooks and Ross.

If you have attended to what has been said in this discourse, you must be led
to see, that your arraignment, condemnation and execution, may not be
attributed to the malignant passions of hatred, malevolence, bitterness and
wrath. You must needs be sensible that at the court, all was fairness, candor
and impartiality, both as to judges and jurors, and every advantage to
vindicate your innocence, had you been innocent: -- Had this appeared, it would
have been matter of satisfaction to the court, the numerous assembly, and to
the whole community: But you were found guilty, and received sentence
accordingly; not in rage and fury, but with christian tenderness and
compassion. And why was the fatal sentence pronounced? I answer, because
justice absolutely required it, and the law of God in the case could not be
dispensed with, nor the law of civil society, without becoming partakers of
your guilt, and drawing down the judgments of heaven upon the land. I trust you
view matters in this light, and that you justify both God and man in your
condemnation. Indeed, I have found you freely doing so, and that you have had
no disposition to hide or cover your guilt. The monitor within, charged you
with it, and you have been free in your confession. And I trust you have been
so, not only to man, but to the omniscient God, your righteous judge, before
whom you will this very day appear, before the shadows of the evening are
stretched over us. Such confession to God, enters into the nature of true
repentance, a grace you must be possessed of, as you would be found of your
judge in peace. If you are possessed of true repentance, you see yourselves as
you are, see your vileness, pollution and guiltiness, and how justly God might
cast you off forever. But you see him at the same time, seated upon a throne of
mercy, ready to receive repenting, returning sinners, to pardon and save them;
not for their sakes, but for his own name sake, and for the sake of his son
Jesus, who once hung bleeding for sinners on the ignominious tree, and whose
blood is of infinite value, sufficient to cleanse away all your guilt and
pollution, even the guilt of that scarlet and crimson iniquity, for which you
are this day to suffer an ignominious death. You will see in all its black
colors (I hope you have done so before this your last day) the sin of shedding
innocent blood. The deed of that fatal night, when you might say, as in
Proverbs i, 11, Come let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the
innocent without cause: This I trust you reflect upon with grief and shame,
with the utmost detestation and abhorrence. O the dishonor done to God! the
cruelty and injustice to a fellow creature, one who had never in the least
injured you! Indeed, if he whose blood you imbrued your hands in, was a good
man, you were only the instruments of sending him to heaven a little before the
time, though no thanks to you, for you meant not so. But if he was a wicked
man,(a supposition I would very unwillingly make) what was the case of his
immortal soul, when you hurried him out of the world, without his having the
opportunity to lift up one cry to the God of heaven for mercy? You must not
look upon it as a severe reproach, when I say, that it was a most shocking,
cruel murder, and, taken in all its circumstances, such an instance as has
never happened in this land from the first settlement of it, and indeed it is
scarcely to be parrallelled in all history.

What a wide difference has there been put between you and Mr. Spooner? Without
the least thought or warning he was dispatched out of the world, to appear at
once before the bar of the omnipotent judge: But several weeks were allotted
for you after trial, and a further space still granted, several weeks more,
upon application made to our chief magistrates, that so you might have all the
opportunities and advantages possible, for making your peace with God, securing
a part in the glorious redemption by Jesus Christ, and be prepared for this
solemn day, and for a happy appearance before your great judge. You have surely
no cause to complain, for the want of the most kind, humane, christian
treatment, from first to last. And I trust you have a grateful sense of it.

Much pains, you are sensible, have been taken with you in public and in
private: Most wholesome instructions and counsels have been administered to
you, and prayers have been continually going up before God on your behalf. And
if all this has been blessed to your spiritual, saving good, the evidences of
this, will be a rich and ample amends to all that have in such ways ministered
to you. And although I would not by any means, in this your last stage, say any
thing to you by way of flattery, yet it has been a satisfaction, that you have
all along been ready to receive instructions, and desirous of the prayers of
God's people for you. This we have been ready to look upon as a token for good.
We hope you have been in earnest in seeking after God, that you have been
brought to true godly repentance, and to make your flight to the Lord Jesus
Christ, and committed your souls into his hands; that you have made your peace
with God, and that death which is just before you, does not wear a gloomy
aspect, notwithstanding the ignominy attending it, -- that you have a solid
hope of going this day to be with God and Christ in Heaven, to be happy there
to all eternity. If you are at peace with God, all your guilt, even the horrid
guilt of sheding innocent blood, will be no bar in the way of your attaining to
this superior blessedness. If God is yours, and Christ is yours, then attending
angels will hover around the ignominious tree, to receive your departing
spirits, and take them upon their wings, and bear them away safely to the
regions of joy, bliss and felicity above. Then what a blessed day will this be
to you, better to you than the day of your birth! That introduced you into a
world of sin and sorrow, but this will introduce you into a world of absolute
purity and eternal rest. I do not mean to decide upon your case, but only to
express my hopes.

You are now about to quit the world, to bid adieu to all things and objects
under the sun. You will have a few moments left, after this exercise is over.
My last advice to you is, to cast yourselves down at the feet of God's mercy,
imploring the special aids and influences of his holy spirit, whereby you may
be led to examine yourselves, whether you do indeed repent after a godly sort;
whether you repent of sin, and of the heinous sin for which you are to suffer
death, not merely because of what it has brought you to this day, but because
of the inherent vileness, baseness and odiousness of it, as being a high
indignity to the God of glory, and the most wretched ingratitude, to him your
great benefactor, who has manifested such wondrous love to you, as to give his
own dearly beloved son to redeem you, to save you from sin and wrath, and to
purchase eternal life: Whether you hate sin for its own sake; whether you find
a disposition in you, if you had lived, to obey, serve and glorify God; whether
you see that after all you are unprofitable servants, have no merit of your
own, and have therefore a firm trust in the blood of the all-sufficient savior
for pardon and acceptance with the holy God? Be impartial in these matters now
you are just a going. And beg of God to search and try you and discover to you
your true state, that he would shine in upon your souls, and give you joy and
peace in believing. And that the blessed Jesus, that compassionate lover of
souls, would receive you to himself. Let that be your dying prayer, each one
for himself, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, and may that blessed being say Amen,
to it.

I would now speak a few words to you, Mrs. Spooner. Mrs. Spooner through great
bodily indisposition was not able to attend the public exercise that day; but
it was thought proper to insert, in this publication, that which would have
been spoken to her had she been present.


When we consider your sex; the respectable figure that in times past you made
in life; your connexions, and your many agreeable qualities, it is with a
pungent grief that we behold you a prisoner of death, presently to be led forth
to execution. Surely you must feel your circumstances this day.

It would have been very satisfactory had you been free and ingenuous in
acknowledging your guilt, and the justice of your sentence. But though you have
not been disposed to do this to man, I hope you have done so upon your bended
knees to the omniscient God, who cannot be deceived. You are indeed looked upon
by man, as guilty, yea, as the author and procurer of the bloody deed, but for
whom it had never been perpetrated. The evidence in the case was too glaring to
lead any one to a different sentiment. It is painful to me to say this, but I
must be faithful to you in this matter, though this is not the first time by
many. I say thus, to the intent that you may be led, now at the last, if you
have never been so, to penitential grief and sorrow, before that holy,
righteous God, at whose dread tribunal you must this day appear. I am loath to
dwell upon some very aggravating circumstances of that tragical affair, such as
the near relation (the most so of any in life) of him whose blood was shed; the
orphanizing a number of dear and innocent children; the involving so many in
the same guilt, and some of them, as we see before us, in the same
condemnation; the distress and anguish brought on near friends, relatives, etc.
But without dwelling upon these matters, I would hope that under a deep sense
of your guilt, you have been earnestly applying to God for pardoning mercy and
grace: That from a sense of your unworthiness before him; of your ill deserts,
your lost, perishing condition as a sinner, that you have been earnestly
seeking the face and favor of God; that you have seen that there is a glorious
and effectual remedy provided for you, the precious blood of Christ, and have
fled to it, and have some comfortable evidences that God has received you to
pardon and favor. Is it thus with you poor dying woman! Then the death before
you, though shameful, will yet be safe and joyful. And you shall ascend this
day to be with God in glory. But do not deceive yourself now at the last; look
well to yourself, and cry to God that he would search and try you. Call upon
him even to the last, lie at his feet, beseeching him that his tender mercy and
compassion may be extended to you; that he would not leave you to perish
forever, but give you a name and a place among the redeemed and saved in his
eternal kingdom. This is what we all earnestly wish and pray for on your
behalf, and trust we shall continue to do so till your soul shall take its
flight into the eternal world. And so we bid you a solemn and final farewell!

I must beg your patience a few moments more, while I speak a word to this
great assembly.

My Brethren! You doubtless find the workings of humanity toward these poor
prisoners, though you do not so pity them as to prevent the putting away the
guilt of innocent blood from our Israel. But as they are in a deplorable
condition, in this respect they are objects of pity and compassion. Let this
express itself by lifting up your fervent cries to Heaven for them, the few
moments that remain to them, that though destruction must happen to their
flesh, yet that their souls may be received to everlasting salvation. And pity
and pray for their afflicted distressed relatives, whether parents, brethren, and
sisters, and others that are near to them by the bonds of nature. Let them
never be upbraided and reproached with the untimely, ignominious death of these
poor prisoners. This would be cruel and brutal. And peculiarly would it be so
to the orphan children of Mr. Spooner. No blame belongs to them. They could not
prevent the murder of their father, nor the ignominious death of their Mother.
May they never be made to suffer, for what has happened to their parents. May
they find favor with God and man -- experience the truth of that word, Psalm
xxvii, 10, When my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me
up. I would now further say -- That one end of public justice being executed
upon these criminals, is to the intent that they may be a warning to others,
that they commit not the like heinous wickedness, and expose themselves to the
like capital punishment. No doubt you shudder at the thoughts of shedding
innocent blood. In times past, it is likely these poor dying persons did so.
But they forsook God, and God forsook them, and they were left to perpetrate
the heinous crime for which they must now die. And may not you also be thus
left, if you in like manner forsake him? Alas! how many are there who do so?
And were it not for the restraints of divine grace, what foul crimes would you
be left to, punishable with temporal death, not to mention that eternal death
and destruction which awaits all that go on hardened and impenitent? It is God
that has made you to differ from these criminals. Bless God for his restraints
and be upon your watch and guard, that so you may be kept from falling. The
best security against this is to become truly pious and religious, to walk with
God and to live near to God: This is the great business and end of life; if any
neglect this, death, which all are subject to, whenever it comes, or in
whatsoever form, will transmit their miserable souls to the infernal regions,
where they shall endure the second death, which is eternal, and which is far
more terrible than the first, however painful and shameful.

May the awful spectacles now before us, serve to awaken us to a sense of the
great evil of sin, and how provoking it is to the pure and righteous God, and
put us upon an earnest flight to Christ, that we may be delivered from guilt
and condemnation, and at last brought to the fruition of eternal life in
Heaven. And now may we be all kept from falling, and preserved by God's mighty
power, through faith unto salvation.

May God look down in tender compassion upon these poor prisoners, and admit
them* upon their departure, to be with the blessed Jesus in the paradise above.
For this we shall again supplicate God's glorious majesty. --

APPENDIX.
WHAT is proposed by the author of the preceding sermon, in this Appendix, is
to give a summary account of the prisoners, after their commitment, and
especially after trial and sentence.

What immediately follows has a respect to Buchanan, Brooks and Ross.

When they were first committed, such was the horror of their consciences,
that, as one of them afterward expressed it, the prison was a mere hell to
them. Notwithstanding which they were resolved to lie at God's feet, to cast
themselves upon him for mercy, encouraging a hope of obtaining it through the
merits of Jesus. -- They gave themselves to prayer -- they desired the prayers
of others, and were eager to embrace all opportunities for religious counsels
and instructions.

After trial and sentence, they justified God and man in their condemnation.
They were sensible, as they often said, that it would be just in God to cast
them off, and make them eternally miserable in hell. So sensible were they of
their ill-deserts, that with an apparent sincerity they would say, that should
God put a blank into their hands, they could freely sign it, leaving it wholly
to his pleasure, as to their absolution or damnation. They spent all their
time, even till late at night, in reading the Bible and many valuable books
that were put into their hands, in praying and singing psalms and hymns. They
became mighty in the scriptures, and were wont to make very pertinent
observations upon many passages that were mentioned to them. They were persons
of good, natural capacity: Buchanan and Ross in all their conversation
discovered a considerable extent of it: And Brooks had a good share of it. It
was surprising, especially at times, to hear them converse upon the subject of
real religion. They were wont to speak in a most feeling manner of the love of
God in Christ Jesus -- of their entire, hearty trust to the merit of his blood
-- of the vileness and odiousness of sin, of the dishonor thereby done to God,
the base ingratitude of it toward him, and of the contempt thereby cast upon
the blood and sacrifice of the blessed Jesus: The dishonor done to God by sin,
was the burden of the song with them, not what they suffered or were about to
suffer.

They would sometimes speak in a most moving manner of the love of God, and of
the love of Christ, and of the manisfestations thereof to their souls. The
papers which they left are full of expressions of this kind. They appeared to
have an entire benevolence toward all men -- very thankful for all kindnesses,
and they received many; heartily disposed to forgive all who had any ways
injured them.

There were all the external evidences of true penitence in them that could be
expected. A sabbath or two before their expected execution, Ross was publicly
baptized. He appeared to understand well, the nature and design of the
ordinance, and attended upon it with great seriousness and solemnity: He found
it a good day, having had tokens of God's gracious presence with him, as he
signified afterward. They expected to have been executed on the 4th of June,
the time appointed. When I brought them the tidings of a reprieve for four
weeks, they told me it was contrary to their expectations, trusted that they
were in a state of readiness to leave the world; but expressed great
thankfulness to God and man for this further space, and set apart the 4th of
June entirely for religious exercises; employing it in reading, and in solitary
and social prayer, taking no bodily refreshment till the close of the day. As I
had much opportunity, even almost daily to know their state, so I have reason
to think that they improved the time further granted them, in the very best
manner. When young persons, as was common, visited them, they would deal out
the most serious, solemn, affectionate counsels and warnings to them: They were
desirous of frequent opportunities of this kind, that they might do some little
good before they left the world.

A few days before their execution, being minded that the time drew near, and
being asked, whether it did not give them peculiar anxiety; they replied, None
at all, for that they trusted it would be well with them, or to that effect. I
visited them early in the morning of that day, found them calm and composed.
One of them observed, as near as I can remember, that the sun would no more
arise upon them here* but trusted before night they should be in glory! In the
same composed frame, they went to the place of execution, attended by a number
of ministers. When they mounted the scaffold, Ross made an audible and very
affectionate prayer, the others went to their private devotions, and continued
in them till they were turned off. Buchanan, in particular, upon the stage
appeared with a pleasant aspect, answering to that representation of Dr. Watts,
'smiling and pleased in death.'

A very heavy thunder storm came on just before they were turned off, which
seemed to add to the solemnity of the scene.

As to Mrs. Spooner, she professed that her match with her husband was not
agreeable to her. Domestic dissentions soon took place, and went on from step to
step, till she conceived an utter aversion to him; at length she meditated his
destruction; laid several plans, and never gave over till the fatal act was
committed. Her guilt in this matter appeared in most flagrant colors upon her
trial as well as since, from the solemn declaration of the poor men whom she
employed in the bloody deed, and to whom she promised a large reward, which
reward they immediately received.

I soon visited her after her commitment. She was not very free to converse
upon the subject. And indeed it was difficult to converse freely upon it till
after her trial. After this, opportunity was given in the fullest manner. She
did not blame judges or jurors or the Attorney General, but often declared that
the witnesses wronged her. She declared, that though she had planned the
matter, yet, that she never thought it would be executed; that she relented
when she found they were in earnest. She doubtless could have given her husband
notice of what was designed, and so have prevented it, but she did not; nor did
she make discovery of it as soon as possible, but sent the next morning to a
neighbor's to enquire after him, when at the same time she knew he was in the
well. She could not be brought to acknowledge her guilt or the justness of her
sentence till very late in the day, as shall be mentioned. It seems she went
upon this mistaken principle that she was not an immediate actor. She was a
person of uncommon fortitude of mind; did not for the most part appear to be
affected with many circumstances in her case which were wont deeply to affect
others. She would indeed sometimes say, that she felt more than she did or
could express. Seldom a day passed but I visited her, for which she expressed
great gratitude. I was wont to converse with her upon the main point, and to
endeavor to impress her mind with a sense of her guilt, hoping to observe upon
her the symptoms of true penitence. Appearances of this were from time to time
discouraging.

Her behavior to all was very polite and complaisant. From the frequent
opportunities I had with her, I was led to conceive of her, as a person
naturally of a kind, obliging, generous disposition: But she was unhappy, as
above mentioned, in her first setting out in the world, and so left to a fatal
capital crime.

It appeared to many that carefully observed her, for many weeks before her
execution, that she was in a state of pregnancy. She accordingly petitioned
authority for a respite. A jury of matrons was appointed to examine her. They
did not bring in in her favor; she petitioned again but it was not granted;
accordingly execution was ordered; she received the tidings with great
calmness. At her own desire, that the public might be satisfied, she was opened
the evening after execution, and a perfect' male soetus of the growth of five
months or near it, in the judgment of the operators, was taken from her. Having
undergone a second examination a few days before her execution, and being
thereby greatly disordered, she was not able to attend the sermon that day.

Soon after it, I went to the goal with a number of my brethren; she appeared
very calm, humble and penitent, professed her faith in the great savior and
dependence upon him; upon its being proposed to her, she readily consented to
be baptized; she was so immediately, as but a few moments remained before she
must go forth. The scene was very solemn and affecting; she was not at all
daunted when the sheriff presented her with and-put on the fatal cord; she told
him she esteemed it as much as though he had put on a necklace of gold or
diamonds. She presently went forth, I accompanied her in a carriage to the
place of execution; she appeared undismayed and unaffrighted at the various
striking scenes that opened from one stage to another. At length we came in
sight of the gallows, I asked her if the sight of it did not strike her? She
answered not at all any more than any other object. Her constitutional
politeness still remained, and she discovered it to numbers that were near her.
She presently mounted the scaffold, and while the sheriff was fixing her, she
told him, with a serene countenance, that it was the happiest day she ever saw,
for she doubted not it would be well with her. She acknowledged that she justly
died; that she hoped to see her christian friends she left behind her, in
Heaven, but that none of them might go there in the ignominious manner that she
did. It was a fixed principle with her, that confession of her faults was
proper only to be made to her maker, not to men; she often declared, that she
was not neglectful of this and found satisfaction in so doing; but at the last
cast, she did this at least implicitly to the sheriff, as just related. I would
be far from presuming to decide upon her future state or that of the rest of
them.

I shall only add a short extract from the sermon I delivered to my people the
Lord's day following; "We know what are the infinite compassions of God, and
that the blood of Jesus is of infinite value, cleansing from all
unrighteousness. We may by no means limit the holy one of Israel. We read of
the servant that came in at the eleventh hour, who received the same wages as
those who had borne the burden and heat of the day: We know what was done by
our Savior, to the penitent thief upon the cross, just before he expired. This
shows us what divine power and grace can do and may do. But secret things
belong to God, and we ought to leave them with him.

THE END.

