REFLECTIONS ON EXTORTION, SHOWING THE NATURE, MALIGNITY, AND FATAL TENDENCY OF
THAT SIN TO INDIVIDUALS AND COMMUNITIES, DISPLAYED AND ENFORCED IN A SERMON
PREACHED AT NEWBURY-PORT, ON LORD'S DAY FEBRUARY 15TH, 1778.

By ABRAHAM KETELTAS, A. M.

NEWBURY-PORT: PRINTED AND SOLD BY J. MYCALL, 1778.

EZEKIEL 22.12. -- And thou have greedily gained of thy Neighbors by EXTORTION.
VERY striking and remarkable is the Charge and Exhortation of the great God to
the Prophet Isaiah. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and
show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins. From
this and many other passages of sacred writ, it appears to be the indispensible
duty of God's ministers to bear a faithful testimony against all the sins, and
especially the crying abominations that prevail amongst the people to whom they
are sent. The great Judge of all the earth, who determines the fate of all its
inhabitants, enjoins this important and irksome duty upon the Prophet Ezekiel
in the beginning of the chapter, of which our text is a part: he commands him
to reprove Jerusalem for all her attrocious crimes and transgressions, and to
denounce his judgments against them. These are the words of the incensed
Jehovah to the Prophet. Now thou son of man, will thou judge, will thou judge
the bloody City: Yea, thou shall show her all her abominations. What were these
abominations? The subsequent verses declare -- They were murder, idolatry,
disobedience to Parents, oppression of the stranger, the widow, and the orphan
-- contempt of things sacred, profanation of the Sabbath, slander to promote
the shedding of blood, lewdness, and that of the worst kind; incest and
adultery. These were the enormous crimes, for which God vehemently reproves the
Jews, by the mouth of his Prophet -- crimes at which an unfear'd conscience
shudders and recoils -- Crimes, for which the flaming wrath of heaven comes
down on the children of disobedience. Yet these crimes all black as they were,
and sufficient to plunge a nation into ruin, were but a part of Jerusalem's
guilt; for sin is prolific, and one vice breeds another. Therefore God subjoins
to the dark list of the abovementioned sins, those of bribery, usury, and
corruption. In thee says he have they taken gifts to shed blood -- thou have
taken usury and increase: And then he upbraids them with EXTORTION in the words
of my text, saying, And thou have greedily gained of thy neighbors by
Extortion.

THIS grievous, crying sin, which God formerly charged on his ancient people,
by the mouth of Ezekiel, he now charges on the inhabitants of these American
States, saying unto them, Ye have greedily gained of your neighbors, your poor
distressed neighbors, by EXTORTION. As this SIN prevails amongst us with such
an high hand, I should be utterly inexcusable before God, and unfaithful to my
country, and to the souls of men, if I did not bear my testimony against an
evil so destructive and so enormous.

I shall therefore, by divine assistance, endeavor to show you, I. THE nature
of this sin. II. ITS great baseness, and malignity. III. ITS fatal and
pernicious tendency.


I. THEN I am to show you the nature of this sin.

THE word EXTORTION, is derived from the latin verb Extorqueo, which signifies
to force, twist, or wring any thing from another; and it is that sin, whereby a
person who has any thing to sell, taking the advantage of his neighbor's
necessity, requires more for it than a reasonable price. If you should ask me,
what is a reasonable price? I answer, it is such a one as is limited by those
important commandments of loving our neighbor as our selves, and doing to
others as we would they should do unto us -- such as is consistent with the law
of universal benevolence, charity to the poor, compassion to the distressed,
and regard to the public interest of our country -- Such a price as does not
exceed the former customary profits of honest men, nor the bounds and
regulations fixed by our own delegated authority: in one word, such a price as
is consistent with the various duties incumbent upon us as christians, as
members of society, and as friends to LIBERTY. Every man's conscience, if he
impartially consults it, and has due respect to these points, will readily
dictate to him what is a reasonable price for his goods; now what exceeds this
is EXTORTION, and the greater the excess is, the greater is the EXTORTION.

THIS vice is sometimes in scripture styled oppression, as it is one subject's
oppressing another. Thus the Israelites when they bought and sold, were
commanded not to oppress one another, Lev. 25.14. But oppression is often
distinguished from EXTORTION, as the one is generally a sin of the governors,
and the other a sin of the people. Thus the sin of oppression in its
appropriated sense, consists in a magistrate's laying heavy and unnecessary
taxes, fines, and other impositions upon the people, unjustly seizing their
property, and imprisoning their persons -- witholding justice from them,
rejecting their reasonable petitions, abridging or taking away their lawful
privileges, or making unjust war upon them. EXTORTION seems rather limited to
the actions of those under authority, and is exercised in those private
advantages which men take in their common dealings with one another, and
especially in cases of buying and selling. It would be easy to prove and
illustrate these definitions of oppression and EXTORTION, and evince their
specific difference, from sacred and profane history, but I presume this would
be a needless attempt. The crime of EXTORTION is so common amongst us, that
however ignorant people of other countries may be of it, the inhabitants of
America are so well acquainted by experience, with all its mysteries of
iniquity, that what has been already said of its nature, may be deemed amply
sufficient.

I now proceed to the second proposition of my discourse, namely. To show its
great baseness and malignity.

IT flows originally from the grand source of all sin, the universal depravity
and corruption of our nature contracted by the fall. It proceeds from that
unrighteous, wicked, covetous, malicious, envious, deceitful, unnatural,
selfish, unmerciful disposition, which was the consequence of the original
apostasy, Romans 1.29. It proceeds from that sordid avarice, that infamous love
of money, which the apostle avers, is the root of all evil -- from that love of
the world which is enmity against God -- from that covetousness which is
idolatry -- from that mean love of private interest, which would sacrifice the
welfare of a whole community for the sake of one's own filthy lucre. Thus we
see it is directly opposite to those two great commandments, the love of God
and the love of our neighbor, on which hang the whole law and the prophets --
It proceeds from littleness of soul, contractedness of mind, baseness and
narrowness of heart, low, unmanly, ungenerous, ignoble, and grovling
principles. It is an act of the most flagrant injustice and malevolence against
the peace, comfort, and happiness of society, and highly inimical to our
country. I observed that covetousness, from which extortion springs, is
idolatry. What is idolatry? It is bestowing that supreme love on the creature,
which is due to the Creator alone. And does not the extortioner love the world
and mammon more than God? Does he not sacrifice his time, talents and
affections to those base idols, and for their sakes, live in the continual
violation of his Maker's laws?

IT is a direct transgression of a possitive, divine commandment. Ye shall not
oppress one another, neither shall ye vex nor oppress a stranger, is the
express mandate of the supreme Legislator. Compare Exodus 22.27. with Lev.
25.14. and 17. With this corresponds also, the apostolic exhortation to all
christians, 1 Thessalonians. 4.2. and 6. Ye know what commandments we gave you by the
Lord Jesus, that no man go beyond, and defraud (or as the word might be
rendered OPPRESS) his brother in any matter, for the Lord in the avenger of all
such.

IT is directly contrary both to the law and the gospel. It breaks the first
and second commandment of the first table, which respects our duty to God, as
it idolizes mammon, riches, and the world, and prefers them before the
infinitely greatest and best of beings; it transgresses the second, as it pays
its adoration, its principal care, love and attention, to a little molten gold
and silver, to a few bundles of figured paper, and to the painted trifles of
the present scene. It considers and regards them as the supreme good, and as it
were, bows down to worship them. It violates the eighth and tenth commandment
of the second table, which respects our duty to our neighbor. Thou shall not
covet any thing that is thy neighbor's (says the law) but the extortioner,
under the influence of that sordid lust, avarice, basely covets other men's
property; moreover, he who does not give his neighbor an equivalent for his
money, and exacts from him a greater price for his merchandise than it is
worth, not only covets, but virtually, and in the sight of God, steals his
neighbor's property. What is stealing? It is the unlawful taking away what it
another's -- and although there should be no human law to regular the price of
things, and forbid exorbitant profits (...), they are contrary to the natural
laws of justice and equity, written on every man's conscience; they are
contrary to Jehovah's express prohibition, of extortion and oppression.

BUT this sordid vice, is not only a manifest transgression of the law; but it
is diametrically opposite to the genius, spirit, design, and tendency of the
gospel, the example of its amiable and divine author, and his holy apostles --
it is directly contrary to the love of mankind, and all those generous virtues
enjoined upon christians. It is a flagrant contravention of that excellent and
universally approved golden rule of equity, Whatsoever ye would that men should
do unto you, do ye even so unto them. It is a notorious violation of those
capital and important commandments of our Savior, on which he laid so great a
stress, and an obedience to which he mentions as a peculiar and distinguishing
mark of our discipleship and relation to him, I mean the commandments of loving
one another, and loving our neighbor as ourselves. It is a direct infringement
of the gospel injunction, to do good to all as we have opportunity -- to pity
the afflicted, sympathize with the suffering, relieve the distressed, assist
the widow and fatherless; the stranger and the needy, to promote the honor of
religion, the welfare of the church, and our own meetness for the enjoyment of
God.

IT is contrary to the example of Christ, who being God manifest in the flesh,
gave himself for us, and although rich, became poor for our sakes, that we
through his poverty might be made rich. It is contrary to the example of the
holy apostles, who spended and were spent for the welfare of mankind, and did
not account their lives, their estates, their comforts dear, if so be they
might finish their course with joy; and the ministry they had received from the
Lord Jesus, to testify for the temporal and eternal benefit of others, the
gospel of the grace of God. They suffered stripes, banishment, cruel mockings,
confiscation of goods, imprisonment -- they wandered about from place to place,
being destitute, afflicted, tormented -- they exposed themselves to the
greatest perils, they underwent the greatest difficulties and fatigues, they
undertook the most tedious journeys, and dangerous voyages -- and they endured
pain, watchings, hunger, thirst, fasting, cold, nakedness -- They faced misery
and death in a thousand frightful shapes, for the benefit of mankind.

IT is a shameful reverse of the example of the primitive christians at
Jerusalem, who sold their estates, and distributed the money arising from the
sales, to supply the wants of their distressed brethren. (...) that believed
(says the sacred Historian) had all things common, and sold their possessions
and goods, and parted them to all men, as every man had need. Acts 2.44, 45.
(...) is a crime shamefully disgraced by the virtue of the heathen, who
despised money and private interest, when it came in competition with the
public good. I could relate many illustrious instances of their magnanimity,
disinterestedness, self-denial, and heroic exploits in their country's cause,
to the infinite disgrace of christian extortioners; but if I should, this
discourse would swell beyond its proper bounds -- It is directly contrary to
the noble example of many of our brethren, who have abandoned and sacrificed,
some their all, some a great part of their worldly goods, for the sake of civil
and religious liberty. How many are neglecting their private affairs, and
exposing themselves, their lives and fortunes, to the rage of an implacable
foe, in the councils of this continent -- and how many thousands more have left
their houses, occupations, interest, wives, children, parents and dearest
connexions, and have voluntarily exposed themselves to the inexpressible
hardships of Summer's and Winter's campaigns, and all the horrors of
imprisonment, famine, desolation, wounds, slaughter, and death, for the safety
and deliverance of their bleeding country. Now what a shameful contrast to all
these glorious examples, is the extortioner, who endeavors to fatten by the
fall, thrive by the ruin, and enrich himself by the impoverishment of his
brethren -- who sacrifices religion, liberty, his country -- the blood of the
faithful soldier the councils of the worthy patriot, the happiness of millions
now alive, and the happiness of millions yet unborn, to his sordid passion for
private gain. What a pest of society! What a sordid wretch! What an infamous,
what a despicable character is such a man! Although he is a being destined for
eternity, he is entirely occupied with the most contemptible trifles of time.
His immortal soul, capable of angelic and celestial delights, and of aspiring
to a likeness and enjoyment of the DEITY, flutters in the dirt, wallows in the
mire, contracts itself up into the basest and meanest selfishness as the snail
draws itself up into its shell, and is only active to obtain enjoyments common
with the brutes -- he envies the happiness of his neighbors, he labors hard for
their destruction -- he in fact regards not the tears of the widow and
fatherless, the groans of the poor and distressed, and the miseries of the
friends of mankind. If good offices and charity to such objects are the fruits
of benevolence; then surely grinding the faces of the poor, extorting from
unhappy sufferers their small pittance, by exorbitant prices for the
necessaries of life, must be the effects of a hard, cruel, malevolent,
unfeeling heart, destitute of humanity and compassion. Extortion is a crime so
sordid and odious, that even the Pharisee thanked God, and congratulated
himself, that he was not guilty of it; and the apostle Paul ranks it with the
most attrocious sins, such as drunkenness, theft, and sodomy. Nay, he warns
christians not even to eat with, or to hold the least communication with them;
but to avoid them as a plague, as a nuisance, as an abomination, as odious
criminals, whose persons are contemptible, and whose company is a disgrace. See
1. Cor. 5 11. But now (says he) I have written to you, not to keep company, if
any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater,
or a reviser, or a drunkard, or an EXTORTIONER; with such an one, no not to
eat. Thus you see the inexpressible baseness and malignity of the vice in
question.

I now proceed to the last point proposed, namely, to show the fatal and
pernicious tendency of extortion.

1st. It tends to debase the soul, and render it averse to religion, devotion,
and communion with God. The holy apostle declares, that the friendship of this
world is enmity against God. If any man (says he) will be the friend of the
world, the same is the enemy of God. If any man love the world, the love of the
father is not in him. Thus extortion, which is both an effect and an
encouragement of this ignoble passion, leads us away from the only fountain of
bliss, to those sordid pursuits, occupations, and enjoyments in which it cannot
be found. It frequently impels the avaricious mind to the commission of the
most attrocious crimes of which human nature can possibly be guilty. The love
of money (according to the unerring voice of inspiration) is the root of all
evil, which some having coveted after, have erred from the faith, and pierced
themselves through with many sorrows. Balaam was induced to advise the ruin of
Israel, Judas to betray his innocent Lord and Master, and many others to betray
their friends and sell their country for money. Some have wished their
relations dead, and others have actually embrued their hands in their blood,
for the love of filthy lucre. Numbers have been inveigled by this infamous
passion, to commit theft, forgery, perjury, and other criminal actions, which
have brought them to the gallows.

It throws insurmountable obstacles in the way to heaven; renders us averse to,
and unfit for its enjoyments, and damps every generous purpose for the welfare
of others. Our blessed Lord declares, that it is easier for a camel to go
through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
heaven: We accordingly read that the young man in the gospel, went away
sorrowful from Christ, because he had great possessions. What keeps so many
rich, so many mighty, so many noble, from embracing the gospel? Is it not their
attachment to the unrighteous mammon? What is the reason of all that meanness
discovered by many pretended friends of liberty, in equivocating, lying,
swearing falsely, refusing to assist their country in the cabinet or the field?
What is the reason of their lukewarmness, inactivity, changing of sides, and
finally abandoning the glorious cause of American liberty? Is it not the basest
self-interest, and the sordid love of money? He who is resolved to be rich, at
all adventures, and on no account to sacrifice private interest or part with
his purse, must needs be guilty of many base and mean actions, and will
infallibly fall into a snare, and many hurtful lusts which drown men into
perdition. It has been partly observed before, that extortion proceeds from
injustice, cruelty, hardness of heart -- it also keeps alive, encourages, and
nourishes those odious dispositions -- it insensibly divests the soul of pity,
humanity, integrity, benevolence, and every generous feeling and sentiment --
It degrades human nature, and brutalizes every divine faculty; estranges the
mind from God and religion, unfits it for holy prayers and meditations,
destroys faith, quenches the love of God and man, damps the noblest purposes
for the public good, and leads to the most shameful and inglorious conduct.
What is the cause of this unnatural, bloody civil war, and all the disasters of
our suffering country? Is it not the accursed love of money, and a desire of
enriching the needless and pestilent members of society with the spoils of
others? This has produced all the unjust decrees and measures against America,
and stained its once delightful fields with brothers blood. This has cast a
dark cloud over our prosperity, and filled the land with mourning, lamentation,
and woe.

2ly. EXTORTION and Oppression tend to draw down the anger and curse of God,
temporal judgments and calamities on the heads of those by whom they are
committed. See the following awful threatenings against them. Amos 4 12. Hear
this word ye ^ine of Bashan, that are in the mount of Samaria, which oppress
the poor, which crush the needy, which say to their masters, bring and let us
drink. The Lord has sworn by his holiness, that lo, the days shall come upon
you, that he will take you away with hooks, and your posterity with fish-hooks.
Here the Lord addresses them by the name of beasts, showing thereby his
infinite contempt of such characters -- He declares that he will come near to
judgment, and will be a swift witness against oppressors, against those who
oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow and the fatherless and this turn
aside the stranger from his right; compare Zeph. 3^, with Mal. 3.5. The Prophet
Zechariah (...) a flying roll, which was the curse of God, that went forth over
the face of the whole Earth; and it was to enter into the house of the thief
(which every Extortioner is) to confound and destroy him. The Lord Jesus Christ
is represented in the 7 ad. Psalm, as that righteous king, who should judge,
that is, plead and espouse the cause of the poor, save the children of the
needy, and break in pieces the oppress^^^. This (...) the awful mandate of
Jehovah to the Prophet. Am. 3.^, 10 and 11 verses, (...) in the Palaces at
Ashdod, and in the Palaces in the (...) of Egypt, and say assemble yourselves
upon the mountains of Samaria: and (...) the great tumults in the midst
thereof: and the oppressed in the midst thereof. For they know not to do right,
says the Lord -- who store up violence and robbery in their Palaces. Therefore
thus says the Lord God; an adversary there shall be, even round about the
land; and he shall bring down thy strength from thee, and thy Palaces shall be
spoiled." Holy Job describes in a very particular manner, the character,
wickedness, and punishment of the oppressor. Job, 27.8, and following verses.
For what (says he) is the hope of the hypocrite (for by the way, all
extortioners who pretend to be God's children are gross hypocrites) what is his
hope, though he has gained when God takes away his soul? will God hear his
cry when trouble comes upon him? Will he delight himself in the Almighty? will
he call upon God always? I will teach you by the hand of God, that which is
with the Almighty will I not conceal. Behold all ye yourselves have seen it:
why then are ye thus altogether vain? This is the portion of a wicked man with
God, and the heritage of oppressors, which they shall receive from the
Almighty. If his children be multiplied, it shall be for the sword: and his
offspring shall not be satisfied with bread. Those that remain of him shall be
buried in death; and his widow shall not weep. Though he heap up silver as the
dust, and prepare raiment as the clay; he may prepare it, but the just shall
put it on, and the innocent shall divide the silver. He builds his house as a
moth, and as a booth that the keeper makes. The rich man shall lie down, but
he shall not be gathered; he opens his eyes, and is not. Terrors take hold on
him as waters, a tempest steals him away in the night. The east wind carries
him away, and he departs; and as a storm hurleth him out of his place. For
God shall cast upon him, and not spare: he would fain flee out of his hand. Men
shall clap their hands at him, and shall (...) him out of his place. The sacred
Scriptures pronounce a woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his
house, and declare that he who oppresses the poor to increase his wealth,
shall surely come to want. From there passages of sacred writ, we see the
vengeance of God against extortion, and that ill-gotten wealth is a curse to
its owners and their posterity. There are many examples of this in sacred and
profane History -- I will mention a few out of Scripture. Achan, and not only
his sons and his daughters, but his oxen, his asses, his sheep, his tent, and
all that he had, were destroyed and burnt, because he had acquired gold,
silver, and a Babylonish garment by sinful and unlawful means. Josh. 7. The
treasures which Solomon raised by oppression and heavy taxes, were soon taken
away from his son Rehoboam, by Shishak King of Egypt. 2. Chron. 12.9. Ahab and
Jezabel unjustly deprived Naboth of his vineyard, for which God's curse came on
them and their children -- dogs licked the blood of the cruel monarch, in the
very vineyard that he had unrighteously seized -- his impious queen who had
advised him to it, was thrown headlong out of a window upon the pavement, and
was eaten up by dogs, and their posterity were cut off by an untimely death.
And, very lately (if the public prints are true) a man who had sold a load of
wood at an exorbitant price in Salem, returning home and meeting another load
intended for that place, tried to purchase it, in order to make in unreasonable
profit upon it, and fell down dead.

3dly. EXTORTION if not repented of and forsaken, will issue in our eternal
ruin. It is ranked by the inspired writers with the worst of crimes, threatened
with exclusion from heaven, and everlasting damnation. Know ye not (says the
apostle) that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Be not
deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor the
lascivious, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous,
nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor EXTORTIONERS, shall inherit the kingdom of
God. 1. Cor. 6.9. The Lord declares by the mouth of Ezekiel, that, If a man
beget a son that is a robber, that has defiled his neighbor's wife, has
oppressed the poor and the needy, has spoiled by violence, has not restored
the pledge, and has lift up his eyes to the idols, has committed abomination,
has given forth upon usury, and has taken increase, he shall not live, he
has done all these abominations, he shall surely die, his blood shall be upon
his own head. Ezekiel. 18.10, etc. Heaven is inhabited by those who loved God
above the world, preferred the testimony of a good conscience, before thousands
of gold and silver -- who sought first the kingdom of God and his righteousness
-- who preferred spiritual and eternal joys, before the richest possessions of
this world -- who loved their neighbor as themselves, exercised kindness to all
as they had opportunity, and did to others as they would that others should do
unto them -- who loved their country and the church, more than their own lives
and estates -- whose bowels were moved with compassion for the poor, who pitied
the suffering, sympathized with the afflicted, endeavored to promote the
welfare of mankind, relieved the widow, assisted the fatherless, fed the
hungry, gave drink to the thirsty, took the stranger into their houses,
clothed the naked, visited and assisted the sick and the prisoners, These are
the happy souls who dwell with God in Zion. But an extortioner and an oppressor
is a character the very reverse of all these. He cannot therefore without
repentance and reformation, inherit the kingdom of God. If such an one was
admitted into heaven, he would find no suitable company, occupation or
entertainment there; he would find no one there with whom he could converse
concerning schemes to amass wealth -- he would find none from whom he could
greedily gain by extortion; there is no trade nor merchandise, no buying nor
selling in that blessed world; there he could not engross, forestall, and
pursue that lucrative business which was his chief delight and concern upon
earth: Heaven would be a disagreeable place to him, and therefore he would be
excluded from it as utterly unworthy of, and unfit for its spiritual, holy, and
glorious enjoyments -- there would be great danger, should he be permitted to
reside in the celestial city, that he would rob it of its pure gold and
precious stones.

THUS extortion debases the soul, renders it averse to God and religion, pulls
down the vengeance of the Almighty upon it in this life, and exposes it to
eternal damnation in the life to come. These are the melancholy and
destructive effects of avarice and extortion at all times, but in the present
circumstances of our country, its prevalence is uncommonly pernicious. I will
now therefore, endeavor to show you the peculiar evil tendency of this vice at
the present time, when the continent is filled with a desolating civil war.

1. It tends to disunite the States of America, and dissolve that band of union
on which their safety and existence as a free people depend. One of our
generals with a sight of whose letter I was indulged, declares in it, that
externally, or with regard to the British army and their allies, our affairs
never wore a better aspect than they do now; but internally, or considering our
indolence, pursuit of self-interest, divisions, and especially our excessive
and universal extortion, they never looked worse: He also thought the
providence of God was remarkably against us at the battle of Germantown, when
our troops surprisingly retreated in the midst of victory: It was also his
opinion, that although our cause would finally prevail, this desirable and long
wished for event, would not take place, 'till after New England had been more
severely punished for her sins and ingratitude. I am also told, that the
illustrious General of the enemy, a gentleman of great genius and discernment,
now a spectator of our excesses, has declared, "we shall soon destroy ourselves
without the interposition of foreign troops" -- let us take the hint before it
is too late. FAS EST ABHOSTE DOCERI.

How distressing is the situation of the Continent rendered by our iniquity!
Many respectable families who preferred religion, liberty, and the welfare of
their country, to their private interest, forsook their estates, their houses,
lands, and means of subsistence, with a small pittance, to seek an asylum, a
place of refuge among their brethren in the uninvaded States; and those
brethren from whom they have a right to expect all the compassion, charity, and
kind offices of christian benevolence; instead of helping, pitying, and
supporting them under their misfortunes, are picking their pockets, obliging
them to sell the remains of their broken fortunes to keep themselves from
starving, and taking from them their scanty pittance, by exorbitant prices for
the necessaries of life. Those refugees, who are thus squeesed and oppressed by
their brethren, will naturally be filled with indignation against them, and
must think that those persons have no right to complain of the oppression of
Great Britain, nay cannot seriously oppose it, who oppress one another. This
inhumanity and oppression, has driven many friends of liberty to throw
themselves upon the mercy of the enemy, who, not long before, had bravely
fought against them. Many left their possessions in New York and Long Island,
but meeting with little kindness and hospitality, and being likely to want both
food and clothing in New England, they, in the midst of their distress, and in
the bitterness of their soul, returned to their habitations, thinking that the
oppression of the enemy was less distressing, than that of their unnatural
brethren. The New England States have the only ports that are free for the
trade and navigation of the friends of liberty -- New York, New Jersey, and
Pennsylvania, are by the enemy excluded from them. If they would fetch from
hence the foreign merchandise they so greatly need, they cannot come, but at an
enormous expense, and when they are here, they can purchase but little, the
price of things being exorbitant and unparalleled. No one can tell, except
those who have been eye witnesses of it, how great are the sufferings of our
brethren in the middle colonies, and how grievous and distressing our extortion
is to them: It naturally tends to enkindle hatred, and the most implacable
animosity -- It tends to divide our councils, weaken our efforts in the field,
and set us together by the ears -- This extortion is the more odious and
unnatural, as the southern States had so much companion with New England in her
distress, and sent so many valuable presents for the relief of her poor; and
now the seat of war being removed to such a distance from us, numbers of this
country seem to be so far from sympathizing with their suffering brethren, that
they endeavor to profit by their misfortunes. Instead of keeping our men at
home, that we may complete our quotas of the continental army -- strengthen the
hands of our brave, prudent, and worthy General, and enable him to make one
great effort for the relief and deliverance of our distressed brethren, we are
employing our soldiers on the watery element for our personal advantage;
although the chance is four to one that they will fall into the enemies hands
and suffer death, or a cruel treatment worse than death. We are striving who
shall best improve his private interest, and make the most money, although it
be to the endangering, and perhaps the destruction of our country and our
invaluable liberties.

THERE never was, I think, a better opportunity than now presents itself, to
put an end to the present ruinous war; and perhaps this let slip and neglected,
another may never come. But instead of seizing the opportunity, many seem to
consider this war as a commercial one, where their primary design is to manage
it so as to promote their own filthy lucre. O sordid love of gain to what a
mean and pernicious conduct do thou not impel ignoble and grovling minds. O
detestable avarice! to procure gold at the expense of our neighbor's blood and
happiness. "Is there not some chosen curse, some hidden thunder in the stores
of heaven, red with uncommon wrath, to blast the man who owes his greatness to
his country's ruin."

2. THIS oppression and extortion, have greatly depreciated, and tend to
depreciate the continental currency and thus ruin the grand American cause.
What mortal enemies to their country were the first extortioners? and how
criminally deficient were those who had it in their power to restrain them, and
enforce the laws for regulation, and did not? First the merchants began the
example, and then the farmers took it up, to be even with them, 'till at last
it has got footing amongst laborers, manufacturers, and tradesmen. Many things
are now sold for five or six times the price they used to be; and the
consequence is, that the continent is burdened with an expense for clothing,
provisions, cartage, soldiers wages, and other necessaries, perhaps five times
as much as at the beginning of the war; so that the continental debt
accumulates at an enormous rate. We are obliged to pay as much for one campaign
now, as ought to have served for four or five. As money is the sinews of war,
in proportion as that is depreciated, the means and power of defense are
weakened; and our country is exposed to ruin, slaughter, and devastation. The
success of our cause depends upon the credit of the Congress, and the bills
they have emitted: but if the credit of those bills is lost, how can the cause
be supported.

3. THIS oppression and extortion has a tendency to ruin diminish and
discourage the army, upon whom, under God, the safety and defense of our
country depends. Is it not extremely unreasonable, cruel, and unjust, that a
number of brave men who love their country more than their own lives, families,
and private interests, should, by infernal extortion, have their wages reduced
to nothing, and be deprived of the necessaries of life. These unhappy men
expose themselves to Summer's heat and Winter's cold -- to frost, rain, and
snow; to dews, damps, and piercing winds -- they are exposed to continual
watchings, dangers, and alarms -- to fluxes, fevers, dropsies, agues,
pleurisies, consumptions, and other distempers -- their constitutions are
broken by continual hardships -- they leave their peaceful habitations, their
dear parents, their wives and children, and march through the most tedious
roads, sleep in miserable tents or huts, and are often exposed to the chilling,
piercing, freezing, wintry air without any covering -- they are clothed with
rags, and often infested with filthy vermin. Farmers shut their doors upon
them, will afford them no entertainment, and will give them nothing, or but a
trifle for their money -- Without shoes they march on the snow and ice
barefooted, and mark their way with blood. Sometimes they are taken prisoners
by the enemy, are cruelly kicked, beaten, and insulted -- sometimes are stabbed
with bayonets, or hacked in pieces with broad-swords and cutlasses -- Sometimes
they are put in nauseous suffocating dungeons, prisons, guardships, full of
stench and disease, where they contract mortal distempers, linger away a
miserable existence, and are starved to death; sometimes they are broken under
arms; have a hand or a leg lopped off, are frightfully maimed, or receive a
mortal, excruciating wound, which makes them rend the heaven with their cries.
No tongue can paint; no imagination can conceive, what agonies, what tortures,
what anguish they suffer -- their families are starving at home, whilst they
are dying by inches in camps and fields of battle. All this they do and suffer
for their country; and yet, O barbarous and unfeeling ingratitude! their
country is insensible of their services and sufferings -- and all their
recompense is a little ragged paper money, which their brethren are striving to
render of no value. The hard hearted extortioner has no compassion or sympathy
with these poor devoted bleeding victims, but is striving to grow rich by their
blood, wounds, miseries, and slaughter -- by the ruin of these brave men and
their families -- How hard, how cruel is this! Who would wonder if they should
execrate the authors of their unparalleled sufferings, quit the army, and never
more fight for their ungrateful country. Who can wonder if any more troops
should refuse to enlist, when they consider what discouragements, extortion has
thrown in their way. What generous soldier's breast would not be fired with
indignation, to think that whilst he is ruining health, life, and family, and
undergoing all the hardships of a military life for his country -- the
extortioner should be only intent upon his gain and his ease, and do nothing
for his comfort, or the welfare of his family, but every thing to ruin them.

4. OPPRESSION and extortion naturally tend most to the ruin of those who seem
least to deserve it; and whose sufferings are a great sin and reproach to their
country: I mean the widows and fatherless, ministers of the gospel --
Schoolmasters, the poor, the aged, the infirm -- those who are retired from
worldly business on account of a religious, contemplative life, or for the
public good. It has been observed that the ministers of the gospel have been
true and fast friends to the freedom of America; have exerted their influence
and abilities, to rouse ^^eir countrymen to a sense of their danger -- have
watched over their liberties, and endeavored to animate them bravely to oppose
tyranny and oppression. Now by the prevalency of Extortion, their salaries, as
well as those of the instructors of youth are reduced to but a fourth or fifth
part of their value. The widows and fatherless, of whose interests every
community, and every christian should be peculiarly tender, are exceedingly
injured by the depreciation of the Continental currency -- their incomes being
lessened as much as the abovementioned sallaries -- Many men of worth and
probity who living on their means, devote their time and talents to the service
of their country, are spending their fortunes, whilst the most worthless
members of society, and persons of the least merit, conscience, honor,
integrity, and love to their country are increasing theirs. But I hope that
times so pernicious to the best, and so profitable to the worst of men, will
not long continue. Extortion in a special manner (says one) "is very unmerciful
and distressing to the poor, their circumstances call for our pity and
companion. But what does the extortioner? Instead of affording relief, he adds
to their miseries and wants. Yea further, is not Extortion in a great measure
the cause of their misery? Does it not bring the distressing calamity of
pinching want upon thousands, who otherwise might have been strangers to such
deep affliction forever! What a shocking reflection does this afford! What
complacency can the Extortioner take in his unjust gain, while many from whom
he has extorted it and who are entitled to his mercy and compassion, may be now
groaning and dying for want? at least it is not owing to his benevolence if
they are not."

5. Oppression and Extortion naturally tend to the ruin of those very persons
that practice them. I have shown their obvious tendency to ruin the army and
the country, and in their ruin Extortioners will be involved as much, if not
more than others. I have also shown that ill-gotten wealth is a curse to its
possessors and their posterity. If the enemy should prevail, what will all
their bundles of Continental Bills avail? they will be probably of little more
worth than so much waste paper. By his sordid and exorbitant profits, the
Extortioner is making a sword to pierce his own bowels, and he is pulling down
the pillars that support the goodly fabric of liberty and property, which will
fall upon his head and crush him with its ruins. Extortioners may think they
are safe, because the seat of war is at a distance; but if the Southern States
are subdued, it is to be feared these Northern Colonies will share the same
fate, and if they are conquered, their sufferings probably will be greater than
others, as they have most vigorously opposed the common oppressors -- therefore
it is much better for them to fight the enemy where they are, than to have to
contend with them at home -- the most prudent step is to make one great effort
now, before the enemy make any farther conquests; for I imagine the more places
they have in their possession, humanly speaking, there is the greater
probability of our destruction and their success. If, instead of trying to gain
by Extortion, General Washington had been properly supported, it is probable
the enemy would not have been now in Philadelphia. How painful is the
consideration, that a brave people, so zealous for Liberty, so prodigal of
their blood in it is cause, should now endanger it by that mean, scandalous,
mercenary, sordid vice; the vile nature, baseness, and tendency of which I have
been endeavoring to set before you. How distressing the idea, that a people,
who were the foremost for the public good, should now be ready to sacrifice it
for the basest self-interest, and to a sordid desire of filthy lucre! What will
Europe think of it? What will the rest of the States say of it? Will they not
be ready to suppose that all the boasts of patriotism and public virtue in this
country were false, and that the most detestable views of private advantage lay
concealed under all those fair and specious appearances? What will posterity
think of you? Your renowned ancestors left Great Britain and all their interest
in it, braved the fury of the Atlantic, came to this once barren and howling
wilderness and exposed themselves to Savage cruelty for the sake of Liberty,
and yet their posterity sacrifice that invaluable Jewel, for a little pelf, for
a little white or yellow dirt, for a few bundles of paper money.

ARE not such degenerate men like the mercenary prophet Balaam, cursing their
country for the wages of unrighteousness? For by what better name can I call
the profits of extortioners than the wages of unrighteousness? Are they not
obtained in direct opposition to the advice of Congress, whom we all pretend
(and besure ought above all men) to reverence and respect; to the laws of our
own representatives, whom (if we desire the public good) we never were under
stronger obligations to obey? Thus we teach the enemy to despise those
honorable and respectable assemblies, to whom we owe uncommon love, esteem, and
gratitude -- who for our sakes have stood in the gap and exposed themselves to
the hottest rage of a cruel, bloody, and vindictive ministry -- who have
exposed their persons, lives, families, and estates, to the utmost malice of
tyranny and oppression. If the States of New England had complied with the
Regulations of their Representatives, this extortion and oppression had never
been. What an infamous blot, never to be effaced will it leave upon their
characters -- if after having already performed the most difficult part in
defense of the liberty and happiness of this vast continent, they should now
suffer it to be subdued, through a sordid attachment to private gain and
self-interest? Would not posterity, and generations yet unborn, rise up and
curse the authors of their servitude and misery. Alas! Alas! that the
liberties of America should be trifled with and lost, for the profits of
extortion. I hope no one will be offended at what I say -- my heart is averse
to displease and publish disagreeable things to my brethren, and especially to
those whose kindness I have largely experienced. But I would prefer fidelity to
Christ, and the good of my country, before my own private advantage. And I
think I have a right to speak freely, as I have left by far the principal part
of my fortune, and a state of affluence, for the love of religion, liberty, and
my country, and thereby reduced myself and a numerous family to want and
indigence. But if refugees leave all for liberty and their country, is it not
shameful that those who possess all unhurt, should not be content with a
moderate profit, especially after a plentiful harvest* and considerable success
at sea; so that they have in a manner, the most of the trade and merchandise of
half America in their hands? -- Is not avarice in such circumstances,
unspeakably base and detestable? What would an ancient Roman say to those
extortioners, who pretend to be patriots? would he not blush at their gross
effrontery? would he not think that the christian religion had debased, instead
of ennobling the human mind? However this vice is not countenanced, but greatly
condemned by the Christian religion.

It was a maxim with the Romans Condonare inimicitias reipublicae -- to
sacrifice their private resentment and private interest to the welfare of the
common wealth. History affords illustrious instances of their zeal and
magnanimity, their noble disinterestedness and great self-denial in their
country's cause -- Shall Pagan zeal and patriotsm excel Christian? -- O my
brethren, suffer it not to be said, to the disgrace of our most holy religion.
Detest, abandon a vice so contrary to its dictates, and which sinks you so much
beneath the Heathen. You have noble examples of disinterested love in your
Bibles to animate you to a generous conduct with respect to your country. The
blessed Jesus, to whom you are indebted for life, and breath, and all things,
for all the enjoyments of this life, and the blessed hope of a more glorious
inheritance in the life to come -- this glorious, this divine Savior, denied
himself, and laid down his life for you, and therefore you should be willing to
lay down your lives, and part with your substance for the brethren, Although he
was rich, rich in all the glories of the divine nature, and rich in all the
happiness of the heavenly world, yet he made himself poor for your sakes, that
ye through his poverty might be rich. All the holy Apostles did spend and were
spent for the church and people of God, and did not count their lives dear, if
they could thereby promote the happiness of Men. If they were offered up a
sacrifice for the dear christian brethren, they joy'd and rejoiced with them.
All your pious ancesters forsook England, that land of opulence and delight,
and came to this once howling wilderness out of love to the church of Christ,
and civil and religious liberty -- O let these illustrious examples enkindle in
your breasts a spirit of noble emulation -- pity your bleeding, suffering,
desolated country -- sympathise with the distressed mourning spouse of Christ
-- compassionate your persecuted, spoiled, oppressed brethren, wandering about
with numerous familes, and in want of the necessaries of life, see many who
once were seated in the soft lap of affluence, now put to the greatest shifts
to provide sustenance for themselves and little ones -- see the houses of your
brethren crackling in the flames, the labor of their hands and their paternal
inheritance in the possession of aliens -- Behold your best friends buffetted,
insulted, imprisoned, starved to death, and treated as the offscouring of the
earth, by the inhuman and unrelenting foe. Behold many noble, magnificent, and
stately churches in New York, Philadelphia, New Jersey, and other places, where
once the great Father of the universe was worshipped in spirit and truth --
where the adoring multitude served God in the beauty of holiness -- where a
crucified Savior was preached, and the whole counsel of God faithfully
declared -- See these holy temples either shut up, or shamefully profaned,
turned into hospitals, stables, riding schools and theaters, defiled with filth
and obscenity. See schools and nurseries of learning, where youth were trained
up to be useful in church and state, abandoned, and broken to pieces -- behold
both tutors and scholars, driven from those once peaceful seats of wisdom,
erudition and piety, where they lived on Angels food. See religion and learning
interdicted; trade, commerce and husbandry interrupted, and many parts of this
pleasant land turned into fields of blood -- hear the groans of starving
expiring prisoners -- see the wounds of brave soldiers, behold their pale,
languid countenances, and then judge ye whether this be a time greedily to gain
by Extortion, and to sacrifice the welfare of your bleeding country to your own
private interest. Rather be persuaded that nothing can be a greater injury to
the glorious cause you have espoused, or more provoke God to depart from us and
pour out the vials of his wrath upon you and the land of your nativity.
Consider how oppression destroyed Israel and Judah, and fear least a similar
cause produce a similar effect in America. Consider what an absurd! what a
preposterous thing it is to complain of the oppression of the enemy, whilst you
are so grievously oppressing one another. Reflect upon the vileness, malignity
and attrocious nature of Extortion, its direct contrariety to the express
commands of your great Lord and master, and the plain dictates of his holy
gospel, the curses God has denounced against it -- its destructive consequences
to its perpetrators here, and the eternal damnation with which it will be
punished hereafter -- (...) fatal tendency to break the union of these States;
weaken and dissolve the army; destroy the Continental Bills of credit; ruin the
worthiest and most helpless inhabitants of the land; ministers and poor; widows
and fatherless; and finally ruin the religion and liberty of America, in which
you must be involved; consider that this Extortion is a stupid vice, which,
while it ruins many worthy members of society, can be of little actual benefit
to the Extortioner himself. For one man's Extortion, provoking another's, and
so extending to the community till the whole lump is leavened, the Extortioner
is then, upon the whole, little or no better for his Extortion, and must be
haunted with the stinging reflection, that he is ruining his country out of
pure avarice and baseness of spirit. Consider all these things, and abandon,
detest a crime so enormous, and pregnant with such fatal consequences, and let
it no more be once named amongst you: think it not less a sin because it is so
common, but rather account this an aggravation of its malignity. Associate for
the extirpation of this crying evil, do all you can to prevent it. No doubt if
people were in general willing to put a stop to this vice, remedies might
easily be provided against it: let us comply with the dictates of God's word,
the advice of the honorable Congress, and the regulations of our rulers, and an
end may be put to the growing evil -- If this is not done, I fear our cause and
country will be ruined; and then all that we have been laboring for, at the
expense of so much blood and treasure is lost, and it would have been better if
we had never opposed the measures of oppression. Rouse then, my dear brethren,
consider the fatal consequences of your conduct, and for God's sake, for
Christ's sake, for the churches sake, for your souls sake, for the sake of your
bleeding country, and all that is valuable in life, to a generous mind, abandon
that fatal conduct ever it be too late, and instead of greedily gaining by
Extortion, try who shall do most to raise and encourage the army, relieve our
distressed brethren in the neighboring States, and send such reinforcements to
our wise, great, magnanimous, worthy, brave and prudent General, as may enable
him, with the smiles of Providence, to drive out the Enemy, and deliver his
country -- which may God of his infinite mercy grant for Christ's sake.

AMEN and AMEN.
N. B. Since the foregoing Discourse was Delivered, some small additions have
been made.


