MAXIMS AND MORAL REFLECTIONS BY THE DUKE DE LA ROCHEFOUCAULT.

Printed according to the new EDITION, revised and improved at London in 1775.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED and SOLD by ROBERT BELL, next Door to ST. PAUL'S Church,
in Third-Street. M.DCC.LXXVIII.

TO DAVID GARRICK, ESQUIRE, WHOSE VARIOUS AND INIMITABLE REPRESENTATIONS
DISPLAY A KNOWLEDGE OF THE HUMAN HEART NOT INFERIOR TO THAT OF A ROCHEFOUCAULT,
THESE MAXIMS IN THEIR PRESENT FORM ARE GRATEFULLY INSCRIBED BY ONE LESS
AMBITIOUS OF PATRONAGE THAN PROUD OF HIS FRIENDSHIP.

LOCKYER DAVIS,

PREFACE to the last Edition.
THE Public is here presented with a New Translation of the MORAL MAXIMS of
Francis the Sixth, Duke de la Rochefoucault: a performance of such estimation,
that its noble Author lived to see five or six Editions of it; and since his
death it has run through as many more; not to mention Translations. As far as
the two languages permit, the Translator has followed in the disposition of the
Maxims the alphabetical order of Mr. Amelot de la Houssaye: to whom he is also
beholden for many well-collected authorities from the judicious Tacitus, and
some other ancient writers. In his own notes he has chiefly aimed at the
explanation, or illustration, of his Author's system. He has rejected such
maxims as were manifest repetitions, or apparently spurious; and retained only
such as, after comparison of the best Editions, he concluded to be genuine. He
has also taken great care to express the sense of the Original (in which the
English Translations have been hitherto defective); and at the same time (what
none of them have attempted) to do the Duke de la Rochefoucault the justice to
make him speak English.

Advertisement to the London Edition of 1775.
THIS Edition of the Duke de la Rochefoucault's Maxims is not merely a
republication of the last. The Translation has been revised, and treated with
that sort of freedom, which the former Editor seems to have taken with the
edition that preceded. From this attention, and various additional Notes, the
Edition now submitted to the Public may have obtained, it is hoped, some degree
of advantage. But, after all, to transfuse into our language the force and
spirit of the original with conciseness and perspicuity is rather to be
attempted than executed.

High in esteem as these Maxims are held, it must be allowed that the ingenious
Writer stands criticized by many as too severe a Censor, giving ill
constructions to indifferent actions, and ascribing even to good ones unworthy
motives.

In favor of our Author's system it is alleged, that perfect virtue is not to
be found in the present state of things; that a mixture of error and truth
constitutes too many of our actions; that He has considered the heart of man as
corrupted by pride, seduced by self-love, encompassed by bad example; that
certain human actions, which the world mistake for virtues, are really no more
than their resemblances; that, in spite of the efforts of Reason, Pride and
Self-love never fail to lurk in the recesses of the heart, and diffuse their
venom, for the most part, through its motions and inclinations.

But to enter into a regular defense of this noble Author is not the present
design. M. De Voltaire indeed has not scrupled to assert, that these Maxims
contributed more than any other work to form the taste of the French nation,
and give it a true relish for propriety and correctness. "Though," says he,
there is but one truth running through the whole piece, namely, that self-love
is the spring of all our actions and determinations; yet this thought presents
itself under such a variety of forms, as never fail to strike with new
surprise. This little collection was much read and admired; it accustomed our
authors to think, and to comprize their thoughts in a lively, correct, and
delicate turn of phrase; which was a merit utterly unknown to any European
writer before him, since the revival of letters. His Memoirs Mem d'Anne
d'Autriche.
are still read, and his Maxims are known by heart. Slecle de Louis XIV.


In the Earl of Chesterfield's Letters, lately published, we frequently view
his Lordship both as an admirer and defender of our Author. La Rochefoucault
is, I know, blamed, says his Lordship, but, I think, without reason, for
deriving all our actions from the source of self-love. For my own part, I see a
great deal of truth, and no harm at all, in that opinion. It is sufficient that
we seek our own happiness in every thing we do; and it is as certain that we
can only find it in doing well, and in conforming all our actions to the rule
of right reason, which is the great law of Nature. It is only a mistaken
self-love that is a blameable motive, when we take the immediate and
indiscriminate gratification of a passion, or appetite, for real happiness. But
am I blameable, if I do a good action upon account of the happiness which that
honest consciousness will give me? Surely not. On the contrary, that pleasing
consciousness is a proof of my virtue, etc. etc. Letter 129.
-- Again, Read in the morning some of La Rochefoucault's Maxims; consider
them, examine them well, and compare them with the real characters you meet in
the evening. Letter 225.
-- Till you come to know mankind by your own experience, I know no thing, nor
no man, that can, in the mean time, bring you so well acquainted with them as
Le Duc de la Rochefoucault. His little Book of Maxims, which I would advise you
to look into, for some moments at least, every day of your life, is, I fear,
too like and too exact a picture of Human Nature. I own, it seems to degrade
it, but yet my experience does not convince me that it degrades it unjustly.
Chesterfield's Letters 273.


After such eminent testimonies to an established same, the Reader will hardly
expect any a^olo^y for offering to his perusal another edition of THE DUKE DE
LA ROCHEFOUCAULT'S MAXIMS.

1775. LOCKYER DAVIS.

MAXIMS.
ABILITY.
I. THE desire of appearing to be persons of ability often prevents our being
so.

II. Some weak people are so sensible of their weakness, as to be able to make
a good use of it.

III. The height of ability consists in a thorough knowledge of the real value
of things, and of the genius of the age we live in. Tacit^s says of Seneca,
amoenum illi ingenium, and temporis illius auribus accommodatum. He had a
pleasing genius, which was well-adapted to the times he lived in. M. Amelot de
la Houssaye. Most of the authors immortalized by their cotemporaries have been
indebted to this knowledge; or else to the good fortune of living in an age
with whose turn their abilities coincided. The Augustan age, fond of their new
acquaintance the Greek writers, advanced to the pinnacle of fame all such
Romans as imitated them tolerably well. Hence the undeserved reputation of some
of the author, of that period. Among ourselves, the last age considered Poetry
as comprehensive of all qualifications, even those of ambassadors and
secretaries of slate. The present, on the contrary, thinks it scarce worth a
reading.




IV. It requires no small degree of ability to know when to conceal it. Unus ex
legatis (Helvetiorum) Claudius Cossus, notae facundiae sed dicendi artem apta
trepidatione occultans, atque eo validior, militis animum mitigavit. Tac. H. i.
Claudius Cossus, ambassador from the Suisses, was a man of known eloquence;
which be knew when to conceal: and he appeased a mutiny of the soldiery by
feigning a panic.

Houssaye.


V. Few men are able to know all the ill they do.

VI. There are some affairs, and distempers, which ill-timed remedies make
worse; and great ability is requisite to know when it is dangerous to apply
them. "Felix intempestivis remediis delicta accendebat." Tac. A. xii. Felix
increased the disorders by unseasonable reformations.

Houssaye. Omittere potius praevalida and adulta vitia, quam hoc adsequi, ut
palam fieret quibus flagitiis impares essemus.

Tac. A. iii. There are inveterate aisorders, which it is more prudent to
connive at, than to manifest our impotence by a vain attempt to suppress,
Nocuit (Galba) antiquus rigor and nimia severitas cui jam pares non sumus.

Tac. H. i. Galba hurt himself by acting up to the severity of the ancient
laws, which the times could not bear.

Houss.


ACCENT.
VII. The accent of a man's native country is as strongly impressed on his
mind, as on his tongue.

ACCIDENTS.
VIII. No accidents are so unlucky, but that the prudent may draw some
advantage from them: nor are there any so lucky, but what the imprudent may
turn to their prejudice.

IX. Accidents sometimes happen from which a man cannot well extricate himself
without a spice of madness.

ACTIONS.
X. Great actions, the luster of which dazzles us, are represented by
politicians as the effects of deep (...) whereas they are commonly the effects
of caprice and passion. Thus the w^^ between Augustus and Antony, supposed to
be owing to their ambition to give a master to the world, arose probably from
jealousy. Inter Caepionem and Drusum ex annulo in auction^ venali inimicitiae
coepere, unde origo Socialis Belli. -- Plin. l. xxxiii. c. 1. Pliny the
Historian says, that the Social War had its rise from a private quarrel between
Livius Drusus and Caepio about a ring under sale, for which they bid against
one another.

Houssaye.


XI. Men may boast of their great actions; but they are oftener the effect of
chance, than of design.

XII. Our actions may seem to be under the influence of good or bad stars, to
which they owe the praise or blame they meet with. A thousand superstitions of
this sort were furnished by the religion of the Pagans, which served to raise
their hopes as well as fears.


XIII. How brilliant soever an action may be, it ought not to pass for great
when it is not the effect of great design.

XIV. A certain proportion should be observed between our designs and actions,
if we would reap from them the advantage they might produce.

XV. Our actions are like the jingle of rhyme, which every one repeats in his
own manner.

XVI. We should often be ashamed of our best actions, if the world were witness
to the motives which produce them.

XVII. To praise great actions with sincerity, may be said to be taking part in
them.

ADVICE.
XVIII. There is nothing of which we are so liberal as of advice.

XIX. Nothing is less sincere than our manner of asking and of giving advice.
He who asks advice would seem to have a respectful deference for the opinion of
his friend; whilst yet he only aims at getting his own approved of, and his
friend responsible for his conduct. On the other hand, he who gives it, repays
the confidence supposed to be placed in him by a seemingly disinterested zeal,
whilst he seldom means any thing by the advice he gives but his own interest or
reputation. Lord Shaftesbury, in his Soliloquy, says, No one was ever the
better for advice: for that in general what we called giving advice, was
properly taking an occasion to show our own wisdom at another's expense; and to
receive advice, was little better than tamely to afford another the occasion of
raising himself a character from our defects.


XX. There is near as much ability requisite to know how to make use of good
advice, as to know how to act for one's self.

XXI. We may give advice; but we cannot give conduct.

AFFECTATION.
XXII. We are never made so ridiculous by the qualities we have, as by those we
affect to have.

XXIII. We had better appear to be what we are, than affect to appear what we
are not.

AFFLICTION.
XXIV. Whatever we may pretend, interest and vanity are the usual sources of
our afflictions.

XXV. There are in affliction several kinds of hypocrisy. Under the pretense of
weeping for the loss of one who was dear to us, we weep for ourselves: we weep
over the diminution of our fortune, of our pleasure, of our importance. Thus
have the dead the honor of tears which stream only for the living. I call this
a sort of hypocrisy, because we impose on ourselves. There is another
hypocrisy, which is less innocent, because it imposes on the world. This is the
affliction of such as aspire to the glory of a great and immortal sorrow: when
time, which consumes all things, has worn out the grief which they really had,
they still persist in their tears, lamentations, and sighs. They assume a
mournful behavior; and labor, by all their actions, to demonstrate that their
affliction will not in the least abate till death. This disagreeable, this
troublesome vanity is common among ambitious women. As the sex bars all the
paths to glory, they endeavor to render themselves celebrated by the
ostentation of an inconsolable affliction. There is yet another species of
tears, whose shallow springs easily overflow, and as easily day away: we weep,
to acquire the reputation of being tender; we weep, in order to be pitied; we
weep, that we may be wept over; we even weep, to avoid the scandal of not
weeping.

XXVI. We sometimes lose friends whom we regret more than we grieve for; and
others for whom we grieve, yet do not regret.

XXVII. Most women lament not the death of their lovers so much out of real
affection, as because they would appear to be the more worthy of having been
beloved.

AGE.
XXVIII. Most people, as they approach old age, show in what manner their body
and mind will decay. To a skilful observer, the future desects of a man's mind
and body may sometimes be visible from the time he is adult: us a good
mechanic, from the accurate inspection of a machine, may perhaps predict where
it will decay.


XXIX. We arrive novices at the different ages of life; and want experience,
though we have had many years to gain it. Age does not necessarily confer
experience; nor does even precept; nor any thing but an inter course and
acquaintance with things. And we frequently see those who have wanted
opportunities to indulge their juvenile passions in youth, go preposterous
lengths in old age, with all the symptoms of youth except ability.


AGREEABLENESS.
XXX. We judge so superficially of things, that common words and actions, spoke
and done in an agreeable manner, with some knowledge of what passes in the
world, often succeed beyond the greatest ability. How often have I seen the
most solid merit and knowledge neglected, unwelcome, and even rejected; while
flimsy parts, little knowledge, and less merit, introduced by the Graces, have
been received, cherished, and admired! Ld. Chesterfield's Letters (136th.)


XXXI. We may say of agreeableness, as distinct from beauty, that it is a
symmetry whose rules are unknown; it is a secret conformity of the feat^^es to
one another, to the complexion, to the carriage.

AMBITION.
XXXII. The ambitious deceive themselves in proposing an end to their ambition;
for that end, when attained, becomes a means.

XXXIII. When great men suffer themselves to be subdued by the length of their
misfortunes, they discover that the strength of their ambition, not of their
understanding, was that which supported them. They discover too, that, allowing
for a little vanity, heroes are just like other men.

XXXIV. The greatest ambition entirely conceals itself, when it finds that what
it aspired to is unattainable.

XXXV. What seems to be generosity is often no more than disguised ambition;
which overlooks little interests, in order to gratify great ones.

XXXVI. Moderation must not claim the merit of combating and conquering
ambition; for they can never exist in the same subject. Moderation is the
languor and sloth of the soul; ambition its activity and ardour.

XXXVII. We pass often from love to ambition: but we seldom return from
ambition to love.

APPLICATION.
XXXVIII. Those who apply themselves too much to little things, commonly become
incapable of great ones.

XXXIX. Few things are impracticable in themselves; and it is for want of
application, rather than of means, that men fail of success.

APPEARANCE.
XL. In every profession, every individual affects to appear what he would
willingly be esteemed: so that we may say, The world is composed of nothing but
appearances.

AVARICE.
XLI. Misers mistake gold for their good; whereas it is only a mean of
attaining it. That there is such an irrational avarice as confines itself to
the mere satisfaction arising from heaping up, looking at, and touching gold
and silver; without any regard to their use; every age furnishes us with too
many examples, to admit a doubt. Desire of riches (says Mr. Hobbes in his
Leviathan) is covetousness, a name used always in signification of blame:
because men contending for them are displeased with one another attaining them,
though the desire in itself be to be blamed or allowed, according to the means
by which these ^^ches are sought. Ambition, which is a desire of office or
precedence, is a name used also in the worst sense for the reason
beforementioned.




XLII. Avarice is more opposite to economy than liberality.

XLIII. Extreme avarice almost always makes mistakes. There is no passion that
oftener misses its aim; nor on which the present has so much influence, in
prejudice of the future.

XLIV. Avarice often produces contrary effects. There are many people who
sacrifice their whole fortunes to dubious and distant expectations; there are
others who contemn great future for little present advantages.

BENEFITS.
XLV. We like better to see those on whom we confer benefits, than those from
whom we receive them.

XLVI. Men are not only apt to forget benefits and injuries; but even to hate
those who have obliged them, and to cease to hate those who have injured them.
The very attention to requite kindnesses, and revenge wrongs, seems to be an
insupportable slavery. To have received from one greater benefits than there is
hope to requite, disposes to counterfeit love, but really to secret hatred;
and puts a man into the estate of a desperate debtor, who, in declining the
sight of his creditor, tacitly wishes him there where be might never see him
more. For benefits oblige, and obligation is thraldom, and unrequitable
obligations perpetual thraldom; which is hateful. Leviathan, p. 48.


XLVII. Every body takes pleasure in returning small obligations; many go so
far as to acknowledge moderate ones: but there is hardly any one who does not
repay great obligations with ingratitude.

BUSINESS.
XLVIII. The rust of business is sometimes polished off in a camp; but never in
a court.

CIVILITY.
XLIX. Civility is a desire to receive civility, and to be accounted well-bred.

CLEMENCY.
L. The clemency of princes is often policy, to gain the affections of their
subjects. "Novum imperium inchcantibus utilis clementiae fama." Tac. A. iv. In
the beginning of a reign, the reputation of clemency is serviceable.

Houssaye.


LI. That clemency we make a virtue of proceeds sometimes from vanity,
sometimes from indolence, often from fear, and almost always from a mixture of
all three. Clemency proceeds sometimes from vanity.] Like that of Tiberius
toward Silanus and Cominius. Tac. A. iii, iv. "Patientiam libertatis alienoe
ostent^ns."

Tac. A. vi. Making an ostentation of his patience with regard to the liberties
that were taken with him.

Houssaye. Sometimes from indolence.] Oblivio^e magis quam clementia.

Tac. A. vi. Rather through forgetfulness than clemercy.

Houssaye. Often from fear.] Julius Civilis periculo exemptus, praepotens inter
Batavos, ne supplicio e^us fe^^^ oens alienarctur.

Tac. H. i. Julius Civilis, who has great authority among the Batavi, was
saved; for fear his punishment should irritate that warlike people.

Houssaye.


CONDUCT.
LII. That conduct often seems ridiculous, the secret reasons of which are wise
and solid. That of L. J. Brutus, for example; whose father and eldest brother
Tarquin having mardered, he counterfeited himself a fool, in order to escape
the same danger. Tarquin, thinking his folly real, de pised the man; and,
having possessed himself of his estate, kept him as an idiot, merely with a
view of making sport for his children. At the death of Lucretia, Brutus,
happening to be present, threw off the mask: be drew the potgnard reeking from
her wound and lifting it up toward beaven: "Be witness, ye Gods," be cried,
that from this moment I proclaim myself the avenger of the chaste Lucretia's
death; from this moment I profess myself the enemy of Tarquin. -- An amazement
seized the bearers! -- In the sequel, Tarquin was expelled, and Brutus was
proclaimed Deliverer of the people.


LIII. A man often imagines he acts, when he is acted upon; and while his mind
aims at one thing, his heart insensibly gravitates toward another.

CONFIDENCE.
LIVE. In conversation confidence has a greater share than wit.

LV. The desire of being pitied, or admired, is commonly the true reason of our
confidence.

LVI. The constancy of the wise is only the art of keeping their disquietudes
to themselves.

LVII. We all bear the misfortunes of other people with an heroic constancy.

LVIII. Criminals at their execution affect sometimes a constancy, and contempt
of death, which is, in fact, nothing more than the fear of facing it. Their
constancy may be said to be to the mind, what the fillet is to their eyes.

LIX. Constancy in love is perpetual inconstancy: it attaches us successively
to all the good qualities of the person beloved, giving sometimes the
preference to one, sometimes to another. So that this constancy is no more than
inconstancy confined to a single object.

LX. In love, there are two sorts of constancy; one arises from our continually
finding in the favorite object fresh motives to love; the other from our
making it a point of honor to be constant.

LXI. In misfortunes we often mistake dejection for constancy: we bear them,
without daring to look on them; as cowards suffer themselves to be killed
without resistance.

CONTEMPT.
LXII. We sometimes condemn the present by praising the past; we show our
contempt of what now is, by our esteem for what is no more. We condemn the
present by praising the past.] This is the common track of satirist: Credo
pu^icitiam Saturno rege moratam in terris. I believe there was (...) a thing on
earth as ^^astity in Saturn's reign, (...) And it is no inconsiderable effort
of p^^ical forth. To (...) lieve that things have always been as (...) are,
seems reasonable sonable enough. But to believe, because (...), are thus now,
that they therefore were oppositely different formerly, approaches methinks to
a Credo quia impossible.


LXIII. None but the contemptible are apprehensive of contempt.

CONVERSATION.
LXIV. One reason why we meet with so few people who are reasonable and
agreeable in conversation is, that there is scarce any body who does not think
more of what he has to say, than of answering what is said to him. Even those
who have the most address and politeness think they do enough if they only seem
to be attentive; at the same time their eyes and their minds betray a
distraction as to what is addressed to them, and an impatience to return to
what they themselves were saying: not reflecting that to be thus studious of
pleasing themselves is but a poor way of pleasing or convincing others; and
that to hear patiently, and answer precisely, are the great perfections of
conversation. I must not omit one thing -- which is attention: on attention
never to be wholly engrossed by any past or future object, but instantly to be
directed to the present one, be it what it will. An absent man can make but few
observations -- he can pursue nothing steadily, because his absences make him
lose his way. They are very disagreeable, and haraly to be tolerated, in old
age; but in youth they cannot be forgiven. Ld. Chesterfield's Letters (195th.)


COPIES.
LXV. The only good copies are those which point out the ridicule of bad
originals.

COQUETRY.
LXVI. It is a sort of coquetry, to boast that we never coquet.

LXVII. All women are coquets, though all do not practice coquetry: some are
restrained by fear, some by reason.

LXVIII. Women are not aware of the extent of their coquetry.

LXIX. Women find it more difficult to get the better of their coquetry than of
their love.

LXX. The greatest miracle of love is the reformation of a coquet.

LXXI. We are always afraid of appearing before the person we love when we have
been coqueting elsewhere. Coquets are those who studiously excite the passion
of love; though they mean nothing less than to gratify it. The male coquets are
near as numerous as the female.


LXXII. Coquets take a pride in appearing to be jealous of their lovers, in
order to conceal their being envious of other women.

CRIMES.
LXXIII. There are crimes which become innocent, and even glorious, through their
splendour, number, and excess: hence it is, that public theft is called address;
and to seize unjustly on provinces, is to make conquests. Id in summa fortuna
aequius quod validius; sua retinere privatae domus, de alienis certare regiam
laudem. Tac. A. xv. Power is the justice of sovereigns: it is for private
persons to preserve their own, but for princes to seize what belongs to others.

Houssaye. Auferre, trucidare, rapere, falsis nominibus imperium; atque ubi
solitudinem faciunt, pacem apellant. Tac. in Agric. To ravage, plunder, and
murder, is to reign; to desolate a country is to pacify it.

Houssaye.


LXXIV. We easily forget crimes that are known only to ourselves. Innocentem
quisque se dicit respiciens testem, non conscientiam. Sen. Ep. iii. Most people
fancy themselves innocent of those crimes of which they cannot be convicted.

Houssaye. The English have a law maxim, Nemo tenetur seipsum accusare. No man
is legally compellable to accuse himself.




LXXV. There are people of whom we never believe ill till we see it: but there
are none we ought to be surprised at when we do see it.

LXXVI. Those who are themselves incapable of great crimes are not ready to
suspect others of them.

CUNNING.
LXXVII. The greatest of all cunning is, to seem blind to the snares laid for
us; men are never so easily deceived as while they are endeavoring to deceive
others. "Solum insidiarum remedium est, si non intelligantur." Tac. A. xiv. The
best defense against a secret enemy is, to make him believe you are not aware
of his snares.

Houss.


LXXVIII. Those who have most cunning for ever affect to condemn cunning, that
they may make use of it on some great occasion, and to some great end.

LXXIX. The common practice of cunning is no sign of genius; it almost always
happens that those who use it to cover themselves in one place, lay themselves
open in another.

LXXX. Cunning and treachery proceed from want of capacity.

LXXXI. The sure way to be cheated is, to fancy ourselves more cunning than
others.

LXXXII. We are angry with those who trick us, because they appear to have more
wit than ourselves.

LXXXIII. One man may be more cunning than another, but not more cunning than
all the world.

LXXXIV. Those who are deceived by our cunning appear not near so ridiculous to
us, as we seem to ourselves when deceived by the cunning of others.

CURIOSITY.
LXXXV. There are two kinds of curiosity. One arises from interest, which makes
us desirous to learn what may be useful to us; the other from pride, which
makes us desire to know what others are ignorant of. "Curiosity," says Hobbes,
is a desire to know why and how; such as is in no living creature but man: so
that man is distinguished, not only by his reason, but also by this singular
passion, from other animals; in whom the appetite of food, and other pleasures
of sense, by predominance, take away the care of knowing causes; which is a
lust of the mind, that by a perseverance of delight in the continual and
indefatigable generation of knowledge, exceeds the short vehemence of any
carnal pleasure. Leviathan, p. 26.


DEATH.
LXXXVI. Few people are well acquainted with Death. It is generally submitted
to through stupidity and custom, not resolution: most mer die merely because
they cannot help it.

LXXXVII. Death and the sun are not to be looked at steadily.

LXXXVIII. After having spoken of the falsity of seeming virtues, it is proper
to say something about the falsity of the contempt of death: I mean that
contempt of death which the heathens boasted to derive from their natural
strength, unsupported by the hopes of a better life. There is a wide difference
between suffering death courageously, and contemning it: the one is common
enough; but the other, I believe, never sincere. Every thing has been written
that can persuade us that death is no evil; and some of the weakest as well as
the greatest of men have given celebrated examples in confirmation of this
tenet. Yet I doubt whether any person of good sense ever believed it; and the
pains we take to persuade ourselves and others of it plainly evince that it is
no easy task. A man may, for many reasons, be disgusted with life; but he can
have no reason for contemning death. Even suicides esteem it no slight matter,
and are as much startled at it, and decline it as much as other people, when it
comes in any other shape except that which they have chosen. The remarkable
inequality in the courage of many valiant men proceeds from death's appearing
differently to their imaginations, and seeming more instant at one time than
another. By this means it happens, that, after having contemned what they did
not know, they are at last afraid of what they do know. We must avoid
considering death in all its circumstances, if we would not think it the
greatest of all ills. The wisest and bravest are those who make the best
pretenses for not considering it at all: for every one that views it in its
proper light will find it sufficiently terrible. The necessity of dying made
the whole of philosophic fortitude. The philosophers thought it best to do that
with a good grace which was not to be avoided; and, being unable to make
themselves immortal, they did all they could to immortalize their reputations,
and save what they might out of the general wreck. To be able to put a good
face on the matter, let us by no means discover even to ourselves all we think
about it; let us trust rather to constitution, than to those vain reasonings
which make us believe we can approach death with indifference. The glory of
dying resolutely, the hopes of being regretted, the desire of leaving a fair
reputation, the assurance of being delivered from the miseries of life, and
freed from the caprice of fortune, are alleviating reflections, not to be
rejected: but we must by no means imagine them infallible. These serve indeed
to embolden us, just as in war a poor hedge emboldens the soldiers to approach
an incessant firing. At a distance, they view it as a shelter; when they come
up, they find it but a sorry defense. We flatter ourselves too much, in
fancying that death, when near, will appear what we judged it to be when
distant; and that our opinions, which are weakness itself, will be firm enough
not to give way on this severest of trials. We must be also but ill-acquainted
with the effects of self-love, to imagine that that will permit us to think
lightly of an action which must necessarily be its destruction. Reason, from
whom we expect mighty assistance, is too feeble, on this occasion, to make us
believe what we wish to find true. It is she, on the contrary, who betrays us;
and, instead of inspiring a contempt of death, helps only to discover its
horrors. Indeed all she can do for us is, to advise us to avert our eyes, and
six them on some other object. Cato and Brutus chose noble ones. A footman,
some time since, amused himself with dancing upon the scaffold he was going to
be broken on. Thus different motives sometimes produce the same effect. And so
true it is, that whatever disproportion there may be between the great and the
vulgar, we often see them meet death with the same countenance: but there is
always this difference, that the contempt of death shown by heroes is owing to
their love of glory, which hides it from their sight; and in common people it
proceeds merely from their want of sensibility, which prevents their being
aware of the greatness of the evil, and leaves them at liberty to think of
something else. The contempt of death has been always very justly accounted a
virtue of the first class. Virgil makes it (as it truly is) essential to the
character of a happy man: Quique metus omnes, and inexorabile fatum, Subjecit
pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari. He must be superior to every fear; even
that of death, and its consequences. -- The fear of death is peculiar to man;
and may perhaps be a necessary instinct to counterbalance reason, which might
else, too frequently, prompt him to quit his post: according to that noble
thought of Lucan, Victurosque dei celant, ut vivere durent, Felix esse mori.

The Gods cenceal from men the happiness of death that they may endure life. --
And though we find this instinct operates sufficiently in men, when under no
immediate pressure; yet we may also observe that it is surmountable by the
exertion of every passion, even in the weakest and most timid people; of this
the numberless examples we continually see will not admit a doubt. Nor is there
wanting, among the few philosophic men who have been superior to instinct,
instances of such as have given the irrefutable demonstration, the irrevocable
fact, in confirmation of their rational sortitude, and sincere contempt of the
bugbear death; which, without passion's aid, they have encountered, with
unaverted eyes, and undiverted attention. Nerva's death is thus related by
Ta^itus: Cocceius Nerva, continuus principis, omnis divini humanique juris
sciens. integro statu, corpore (...) so, mortendi consilium cepit. Qued ut
Tiberio cognitum; adsidere, causas requi^^re addere preces: fateri postremo
grave conscientioe, grave famae suae, si proximus amicorum, nullis moriendi
rationibus, vitam fugeret. Aversa^us sermonem Nerva, absrinentiam cibi
conjunxit. A. l. vi. Cocceius Nerva, a man wellskilled in human and divine
laws, in high favor, and in good health, came to a resolution to destroy
himself. When the emperor was informed of it be attended him, inquired into his
reasons, entreated him to desist; and even owned a^ last that it would lie on
his conscience, and be pernicious to his same, to have his best friend make
away with himself, without the least apparent reason. But Nerva declined his
conversation; and starved himself.




DECEIT.
LXXXIX. To be deceived by our enemies, and betrayed by our friends, is not to
be borne; yet are we often content to be served so by ourselves.

XC. It is as easy to deceive ourselves without our perceiving it, as it is
difficult to deceive others without their perceiving it.

XCI. A resolution never to deceive exposes a man to be deceived himself.

XCII. Dullness is sometimes a sufficient security against the attack of an
artful man. Bion used to say, It was no easy thing to stick soft cheese on a
book. Diogenes Laertius.


XCIII. He who imagines he can do without the world deceives himself much; but
he who fancies the world cannot do without him is still more mistaken.

XCIV. In love, the deceit almost always outstrips the distrust.

XCV. We are sometimes less unhappy in being deceived, than in being undeceived
by those we love. And we may cry out with Horace's madman, -- Pol me
occid^stis, amici, Non serv^stis, ^it; cui sic extorta voluptas, Et demptus per
vim mentis gratissimus error. You have undone me, ill-judging friends, in
robbing me of such pleasure; in depriving me, against my consent, of so
delicious a deception.




XCVI. Should even our friends deceive us, though we have a right to be
indifferent to their professions of friendship, we ought ever to retain a
sensibility for their misfortunes.

DECENCY.
XCVII. Decency is the least of all laws, but the most strictly observed.

DESIRE.
XCVIII. It is much easier to suppress a first desire, than to satisfy those
that follow.

XCIX. Before we passionately wish for any thing, we should examine into the
happiness of its possessor.

C. Were we perfectly acquainted with the object, we should never passionately
desire it. Sir Thomas More says, the world is undone by looking at things at a
distance.


DISGUISE.
CI. Were we to take as much pains to be what we ought, as we do to disguise
what we are, we might appear like ourselves, without being at the trouble of
any disguise at all.

CII. We are so used to disguise ourselves to others, that at last ^^ve become
disguised even to ourselves.

CIII. Some disguised falsehoods are so like truths, that it would be judging
ill not to be deceived by them.

DISTRUST.
CIV. Our own distrust justifies the deceit of others. Multi fallere docuerunt
dum timent falli; and alii jus peccandi suspicando fecerunt. Sen. Ep. iii. Many
men provoke others to overreach them by excessive suspicion; their
extraordinary distrust in some sort justifying the deceit.

Houssaye.


CV. That which commonly hinders us from showing the openness of our hearts to
friends, is not so much a distrust of them, as of ourselves.

CVI. Whatever distrust we may have of the sincerity of other people, we always
believe that they are more ingenuoua with ourselves than with any body else.

EASE.
CVII. A man who finds not satisfaction in himself seeks for it in vain
elsewhere.

EDUCATION.
CVIII. Common education instills into young people a second self-love.

ELOQUENCE.
CIX. There is as much eloquence in the tone of voice, in the look, and in the
gesture of an orator, as in the choice of his words. The receipt to make a
speaker, and un applauded one too, is short and easy. Take common sense quantum
sufficit; add a little application to the rules and orders of the House [of
Commons], throw obvious thoughts in a new light, and make up the whole with a
large quantity of purity, correctness, and elegancy of style. Take it for
granted that by far the greatest part of mankind neither analyze nor search to
the bottom; they are incapable of penetrating deeper than the surface. Ld.
Chesterfield's Let. (272d.) The manner of your speaking is full as important
as the matter, as more people have ears to be tickled than understandings to
judge.

Id. Let. 197th.


CX. True eloquence consists in saying all that is proper, and nothing more.

EMPLOYMENT.
CXI. It is easier to appear worthy of the employments we are not possessed of,
than of those we are.

CXII. We may appear great in an employment below our merit; but we often
appear little in one that is too high for us. Tacitus says of Galba, that while
he was a subject, be seemed above his condition; and had be never attained the
imperial dignity, every body would have judged him deserving of it. Major
privato visus, dum privatus fuit; and omnium consensu capax imperii, nisi
imperaasset. H. i. Houssaye.


ENVY.
CXIII. Those who endeavor to imitate us we like much better than those who
endeavor to equal us. Imitation is a sign of esteem, but competition of envy.
Non ita certandi cupidus, quam proper amorem, Quod te imitari aveo. Lucret. I
follow you, not as a competitor, but as an admiring imitator.




CXIV. We often glory in the most criminal passions; but the passion of envy is
so shameful, that we never dare to own it.

CXV. Jealousy is, in some sort, rational and just; it aims at the preservation
of a good which belongs, or which at least we think belongs to us; whereas envy
is a phrenzy, that cannot bear the good of others.

CXVI. Our approbation of those who are entering upon the world is often owing
to a secret envy of those who are well settled in it.

CXVII. Pride, which excites envy, often helps us to moderate it.

CXVIII. Envy is more irreconcilable than hatred.

CXIX. Envy is destroyed by true friendship, and coquetry by true love.

CXX. Our envy always outlives the felicity of its object.

CXXI. More people are free from interest, than from envy.

EXAMPLE.
CXXII. Nothing is so contagious as example: never is any considerable good or
ill done that does not produce its like. We imitate good actions through
emulation; and bad ones through a malignity in our nature, which shame
concealed, and example sets at liberty.

FAMILIARITY.
CXXIII. Familiarity is a suspension of almost all the laws of civility;
libertinism has introduced it into society under the notion of Ease.

FAVORITES.
CXXIV. The hatred of favorites is nothing more than the love of favor. Our
indignation at not possessing it ourselves is soothed and mitigated by the
contempt we express for those who do; and we refuse them our homage, because we
are not able to deprive them of that which procures them the homage of every
one else.

FAULTS.
CXXV. We need not be much concerned about those faults which we have the
courage to own.

CXXVI. We acknowledge our faults, in order to repair by sincerity the hurt
they do us in the opinion of others.

CXXVII. We confess small faults in order to insinuate that we have no great
ones.

CXXVIII. A great genius will sincerely acknowledge his defects as well as his
perfections: it is a weakness, not to own the ill as well as the good that is
in us.

CXXIX. Had we no faults ourselves, we should take less (...) in observing
those of others.

CXXX. We are often more agreeable through our faults, than through our good
qualities.

CXXXI. The greatest faults are those of Great Men.

CXXXII. Dishonest men conceal their faults from themselves as well as others:
honest men know, and confess them.

CXXXIII. There are some faults which, when well managed, make a greater figure
than virtue itself.

CXXXIV. We are not bold enough to say in general, that we have no faults, and
that our enemies have no good qualities; but in particulars we seem to think so.

CXXXV. We have few faults that are not more excusable in themselves than the
means we use to con^^al them.

CXXXVI. We boast of faults that are the opposites to those we really have;
thus, if we are irresolute, we glory in being thought obstinate.

CXXXVII. We easily excuse in our friends those faults that do not affect us.

CXXXVIII. We endeavor to get reputation by those faults we determine not to
amend.

CXXXIX. It seems as if men thought they had not faults enough, for they increase
their number by certain affected singularities; these are cultivated so
carefully, that at last they become natural defects, beyond their power to
reform.

FEAR.
CXL. Few cowards know the extent of their fears.

FIDELITY.
CXLI. The fidelity of most men is one of the arts of self-love, to procure
confidence. It is the means to raise us above others, by mai^ng us the
depositaries of momentous concerns.

CXLII. It is more difficult to be faithful to a mistress when on good terms
with her, than when on bad.

FLATTERY.
CXLIII. We should have but little pleasure were we never to flatter ourselves.

CXLIV. Did we not flatter ourselves, the flattery of others could never hurt
us. Adulatione servilia fingebant, securi de fragilitate credentis. Tac. A.
xvi. People flatter us, because they can depend on our credulity.

Houssaye.


CXLV. Flattery is a sort of bad money, to which our vanity gives currency.

CXLVI. Men sometimes think they hate flattery; but they hate only the manner
of it.

FOLLY.
CXLVII. Folly attends us close through life. If any one seems to be wise, it is
merely because his follies are proportionate to his age and fortune.

CXLVIII. He who lives without folly is not so wise as he imagines.

CXLIX. As we grow old, we grow more foolish and more wise.

CL. It is great folly to affect to be wise by one's self.

CLI. Some follies are like contagious distempers.

CLII. Old fools are more foolish than young ones.

CLIII. There are people fated to be fools; they not only commit follies by
choice, but are even constrained to do so by fortune.

CLIV. No fools are so troublesome as those who have some wit.

FORTUNE.
CLV. Whatever difference may appear in men's fortunes, there is nevertheless a
certain compensation of good and ill, that makes all equal. "Magnae fortunae
pericula." Tac. A. iv. Ex mediocritate fortunae pauciora pericula.

Tac. A. xiv. A great fortune runs great risques; a moderate one is secure.

Houssaye. Multos qui conflictari videantur beatos; ac plerosque quanquam
magnas per opis miserrimos.

Tac. A. vi. Many who seem wretched are happy; and many are miserable in the
midst of riches.

Houssaye.


CLVI Fortune turns every thing to the advantage of her favorites. "Aderat
fortuna etiam ubi arts defuissent." Tac. H. v. Fortune often helps out the
want of ability.




CLVII. The happiness and misery of men depend no less on temper than fortune.
Through certain humors, or passions, and from temper merely, a man may be
completely miserable let his outward circumstances be ever so fortunate. Ld
Shaftesbury, vol. II. p. 84.


CLVIII. Fortune breaks us of many faults, which reason cannot. Pauperes
necessitas, divites satietas, in melius mutat. Necessity reforms the poor, and
satiety the rich Houss.


CLIX. The generality of people judge of us by our reputation, or fortune
Studia milit^m in Caeciunam inclinabant, vigore aetatis, proceritate corporis,
and quedom inane savore Tac. H. ii. The soldiers were well affected to
Caecinna; because he was in his prime, tall and majestic, and much in vogue.

Houssaye.


CLX. To be great, we must know how to push our fortune to the utmost.

CLXI. Fortune exhibits our virtues and vices, as the light shows objects.
Ambigua de Vespasiano fama; solusque omnium ante sc principum in melius mutatus
est. Tac. H. i. Vespasian's reputation was ambiguous, and he was the first
emperor who altered for the better.

Houssaye. Primus Antonius nequaquam pari innocentia post Cremonam (excisam)
ag^bat; satisfactum bello ratus, sou felicitas in tali ingenio avaritiam,
superbiam caeteraque occulta mala patefecit.

Tac. H. iii. Anthony, after the destruction of Cromona, behaved no longer with
discretion and moderation: whether that be considered the war as ended; or that
prosperity disclosed his avarice, ambition, and other hitherto concealed vices.

Houssaye.


CLXII. Fortune is ever deemed blind by those on whom she bestows no favors.

CLXIII. To be able to answer for what we shall certainly do, we should be able
to answer for our fortune.

CLXIV. We should manage our fortune like our constitution; enjoy it when good,
have patience when bad, and never apply violent remedies but in cases of
necessity.

CLXV. Fortune and caprice govern the world.

FRIENDSHIP.
CLXVI. What is commonly called friendship is no more than a partnership; a
reciprocal regard for one another's interests, and an exchange of good offices;
in a word, a mere traffic, wherein self-love always proposes to be a gainer.

CLXVII. Though most of the friendships of the world ill deserve the name of
friendships; yet a man may make use of them occasionally, as of a traffic whose
returns are uncertain, and in which it is usual to be cheated.

CLXVIII. In the distress of our best friends we always find something that
does not displease us. This maxim gave occasion to the celebrated Verses on the
Death of Dr. Swift. The introductory lines of the poem give the Dean's opinion
of our author, and a poetical version of the maxim. They are as follow: As
Rochefoucault his maxims drew
From nature, I believe them true:
They argue no corrupted mind
In him: the fault is in mankind.
This maxim, more than all the rest
Is thought t^^ base for human breast:
"In all distresses of our friends,
"We first consult our private ends;
"While Nature, kindly bent to case us,
"Points out some circumstance to please us."
Swift, vol. VI. See also Ld. Chesterfield's defense of this maxim, Letter
129th.




CLXIX. The reason we are so changeable in our friendships is, that it is
difficult to know the qualities of the heart, and easy to know those of the
head.

CLXX. We love nothing but on our own account, and only follow our taste and
inclination when we prefer our friends to ourselves; and yet it is this
preference that alone constitutes true and perfect friendship.

CLXXI. It is more dishonorable to distrust a friend, than to be deceived by
him.

CLXXII. We often imagine we love men in power; but interest alone is the true
reason of our friendship for them: we espouse not their party to do them good,
but from their hands to receive good. Fatebor and fuisse me Sejano amicum, and
ut essem expetisse. -- Ut quisque Sejano intimus, ita ad Caesaris amicitiam
validus. Tac. A v. I own, I was Sejanus's friend, and that I was very desirous
to be so; for there was no other road to savor.

Houssaye.


CLXXIII. Self-love magnifies, or diminishes, the good qualities of our
friends, in proportion to the satisfaction we take in them; and we judge of
their merit by the terms they keep with us.

CLXXIV. We sometimes lightly complain of our friends, to be beforehand in
justifying our own levity.

CLXXV. We are not much afflicted at the misfortunes of our friends, when they
give us an opportunity of signalizing our affection for them.

CLXXVI. We are fond of exaggerating the love our friends bear us; but it is
often less from a principle of gratitude, than the desire of prejudicing people
in favor of our own merit.

CLXXVII. We always love those who admire us; but we do not always love those
whom we admire.

CLXXVIII. Rare as true love is, it is less so than true friendship.

CLXXIX. The reason why few women give into friendship is, that friendship is
insipid to those who have experienced love. Par la meme raison que le meilleur
vin paroit fade, quand on a gout des liquers. In the same manner as wine is
insipid to dram drinkers, says l' Abbe de la Roche, who, having professedly
undertaken to comment on every maxim of our author, has nothing else worth
transcribing.


CLXXX. In friendship, as in love, we are often happier through our ignorance,
than knowledge.

CLXXXI. It is very difficult to love those we do not esteem; and it is at
least as difficult to love those whom we esteem much more than we do ourselves.

CLXXXII. We are much nearer loving those who hate us, than those who love us
more than we desire.

CLXXXIII. The greatest effort of friendship is, not the discovery of our
faults to a friend, but the endeavoring to make him see his own.

CLXXXIV. The charm of novelty, and long habit, opposite as they are, equally
conceal from us the faults of our friends.

CLXXXV. The generality of friends put us out of conceit with friendship; as
the generality of religious people put us out of conceit with religion.

CLXXXVI. Nothing is more natural, nor more fallacious, than a belief that we
are beloved.

CLXXXVII. Renewed friendships require more conduct than those that have never
been broken.

GALLANTRY.
CLXXXVIII. Though there are many women who never have had one intrigue; there
are scarce any who have had no more than one.

CLXXXIX. We seldom talk of a woman's first intrigue before she has had a
second.

CXC. Love is the smallest part of gallantry.

GLORY.
CXCI. The glory of great men ought always to be rated according to the means
used to acquire it.

CXCII. We exalt the reputation of some, to depress that of others; nor should
we always extol so much the prince of Conde and marshal Turenne, had we not a
mind to blame both. "Populus neminem sine aemulo sinit." Tac. A. xiv. The
public gives to every great man a rival.




CXCIII. It is as commendable to be proud with respect to one's self, as
ridiculous to be so with respect to others. One of Pythagoras s precepts was,
pantoon de malisa aischuneo s'auton. Above all things reverence yourself.


CXCIV. We are unwilling to lose our lives, and yet would fain acquire glory.
H^nce it is, that the brave use more dexterity to avoid death, than men versed
in the chicanery of law do to preserve their estates.

GOODNESS.
CXCV. Nothing is more rare than true goodness: even those who imagine they
possess it having nothing more than complaisance, or weakness.

CXCVI. It is very difficult to distinguish diffusive general goodness from
great address.

CXCVII. None deserve the name of good, who nave not spirit enough, at least,
to be bad: goodness being for the most part but indolence, or impotence.
"Segnis, pavidus, and socordia innocens." Tac. H. i. Lazy, timorous, and good
through stupidity

Houss. Caprice is also, as Mr. Pope has objerved, sometimes a source of
goodness;

"And made a widow happy for a whim."




CXCVIII. A sool has not stuff enough to make a good man.

CXCIX. Resolute people alone can be truly good-natured; such as commonly seem
so are weak and easily soured.

GOOD SENSE.
CC. Good sense should be the taste of all rules, both ancient and modern;
whatever is incompatible with good sense is false.

GOVERN.
CCI. It is more difficult to prevent being governed, than to govern others.
Tacitus says of Agricola, that he Governed his family; which many find a harder
task than to govern a province. Domum suam coercuit; quod plerisque haud minus
arduum est quam provinciam regere. Houssaye.


GREAT MEN.
CCII. Since great men cannot bestow health of body, nor peace of mind, we
certainly pay too dear for all that they can bestow.

GRAVITY.
CCIII. Gravity is a mysterious carriage of the body, invented to cover the
desects of the mind. "The duke de Rochefoucault's definition of gravity," says
Stern, "deserves to be written in letters of gold." -- Yorick had been
speaking to this effect: -- Gravity is an errant scoundrel, and of the most
dangerous kind too, because a sly one; and more honest well-meaning people are
bubbled out of their goods and money by it in one twelvemonth than by pocket
picking and shop-lifting in seven. The very essence of gravity is design, and
consequently, deceit: a taught trick to gain credit of the world for more sense
and knowledge than a man is worth. Trist. Shand. vol. I. chapter xi. "Gravity is of
the very essence of imposture."

Shaftes. Charact. vol. I. p. 11.


GRACE.
CCIV. A good grace is to the body what good sense is to the mind. They are
both the gists of nature; but they may be cultivated, increased, and brought to
perfection. Adorn yourself with all those graces and accomplishments which
without solidity are frivolous; but without which, solidity is to a great
degree useless. Ld. Chesterf. Let. (182d.)


GREEDINESS.
CCV. An able man will arrange his interests, and conduct each in its proper
order. Our greediness often hurts us, by making us prosecute so many things at
once; by too earnestly desiring the less considerable, we lose the more
important.

GRATITUDE.
CCVI. It is with gratitude as with honesty among traders, it helps to carry on
business; and we pay, not because we ought, but in order to find easier credit
another time.

CCVII. Not all who discharge their debts of gratitude should flatter
themselves that they are grateful.

CCVIII. The reason of the mi^^^^koning in expected returns of gratitude is,
that the pride of the giver and receiver can never agree about the value of the
obligation.

CCIX. There is a certain warmth of gratitude, which not only acquits us of
favors received, but even, while we are repaying our friends what we owed,
makes them our debtors. A grateful mind By owing, owes not; but stills pays: at
once Indebted and dischurged. Paradise Lost.


CCX. The gratitude of most men is only a secret desire to receive greater
favors.

HAPPINESS.
CCXI. None are either so happy or so unhappy as they imagine.

CCXII. We take less pains to be happy, than to appear so.

CCXIII. Happiness is in the taste, not in the thing; and we are made happy by
possessing what we ourselves love, not what others think lovely. Horace speaks
thus of luxurious eating: Non in caro nidore voluptas Summa, sed in te ipso
est: tu pulmentaria quaere Sudando. Lib II. Sat ii. The pleasure of eating lies
not in what you eat, but in yourself: therefore exercise makes delicacies.




HATRED.
CCXIV. When our hatred is violent, it sinks us even beneath those we hate.
Tacitus says, that men hate those they injure: Proprium humani ingenii est,
^disse quem ^aes^^is. And the Italian Maxim is, "Chi offense non peraona may;"
Those who injure you, never forgive you. Houssaye.


HEART.
CCXV. Every body speaks well of his heart, but no one dares to speak well of
his head.

CCXVI. Men are sometimes well-acquainted with their head, when they are not so
with their heart.

CCXVII. The head is always the dupe of the heart. Plusieurs diroient en
periode quarree, que quelques reflections que fasse l'esprit, and quelques
resolutions qu'il prenne pour corriger ses travers, le premier sentiment du
coeur renverse tous ses projets. Mais il n'appartient qu'a Made la
Rochefoucault de dire tout en un mot, que l'esprit est toujours la dupe du
coeur. Many could have said in a round period, that whatever reflections the
mind may make, and whatever resolutions it may take to reform its
irregularities, the first motion of the heart overturns all its projects. But
the Duke de la Rochefoucault alone can say all this in a word, the head is
always the dupe of the heart. Bouhours l'Art de Penser. Ld. Chesterfield (Let.
112th) quotes Rochefoucault thus; " L'esprit est souvent la dupe du coeur. If
he had said," adds his Lordship, instead of souvent, presque toujours, I fear
he would have been nearer the truth. But his Lordship, perhaps, quoted from
memory; for in the copies we have consulted toujours is the word used. -- Coeur
and esprit imply so many senses, and heart and mind so few, that the thought,
in our language, so translated, would have been flat. By the heart, however, is
to be understood the seat of the passions, by the mind the seat of reason. Our
author frequently uses the expression. -- Coeur and esprit, says a French
writer, are fashionable words; we hear of nothing else; we have a book called,
A Quarrel between the Mind and the Heart, (Demele du Coeur et de l'Esprit.)




CCXVIII. The head cannot long act the part of the heart.

CCXIX. The imagination cannot invent so many contrarieties as are naturally in
the heart of man.

HEROES.
CCXX. Nature may give very great advantages; but she must have the concurrence
of Fortune, to make Heroes.

CCXXI. There are Heroes in ill, as well as in good. Tacitus of Petronius: Ut
alios industria, ita bunc ignavia, protulerat ad famam; habebaturque non ganeo
and profligaten, sed erudito luxu. A. xvi. Others acquire fame by industry; he
got it by effeminacy; yet he was not accounted a debauchee or spendthrift, but
a man of taste in pleasure.

Houssaye.


HONOR.
CCXXII. One acquired honor is surety for more.

HOPE.
CCXXIII. Hope, deceitful as it is, carries us agreeably through life. It does
more; it extends its influence beyond the grave; and helps to reconcile us to
the stroke of death. "Hope travels through, nor quits us when we die." Pope.


HUMOR.
CCXXIV. Our own caprice is more extravagant than the caprice of fortune.

CCXXV. Fancy sets the value on the gifts of fortune.

CCXXVI. Our humor is more in fault than our understanding.

CCXXVII. We may say of the temper of men, as of most buildings, that it has
several aspects; of which some are very agreeable, some disagreeable.

CCXXVIII. The humors of the body have a regular stated course which
insensibly influences the will; they circulate, and successively exercise a
secret power over us. In short they have a considerable share in all our
actions, though we perceive it not.

CCXXIX. Madmen and fools see every thing through the medium of humor. The
jaundiced eye fancies every thing to be yellow.


CCXXX. The calm or disquiet of our temper depends not so much on affairs of
moment, as on the disposition of the trifles that daily occur.

HYPROCRISY.
CCXXXI. Hypocrisy is the homage that vice pays to virtue.

IDLENESS.
CCXXXII. It is a mistake to imagine, that the violent passions only, such as
ambition and love, can triumph over the rest. Idleness, languid as it is, often
masters them all; she indeed influences all our designs and actions, and
insensibly consumes and destroys both passions and virtues.

CCXXXIII. Idleness, timidity, and shame, often keep us within the bounds of
duty; whilst virtue seems to run away with the honor. Metus temporum obtentui,
ut quod Segnitia erat Sapientia vocaretur. Tac. H. i. There are times wherein
timidity passes for wisaom. Gnarus sub Nerone temporum quibus inertia pro
sapientia fuit. Under Nero it was wisdom to be inactive.

Houssaye.


CCXXXIV. Idleness is more in the mind than in the body.

JEALOUSY.
CCXXXV. Under some circumstances it may not be disagreeable to a man to have a
jealous wife; for she will always be talking of what pleases him.

CCXXXVI. Only such persons who avoid giving jealousy are deserving of it.

CCXXXVII. Jealousy is always born with love, but does not always die with it.

CCXXXVIII. Jealousy is nourished by doubt; it either becomes madness, or
ceases, as soon as we arrive at certainty.

CCXXXIX. In jealousy there is less love than self-love. Witness Rhadamistus,
who threw his beloved wife into a river; ("timore aeger ne quis relicta
potiretur." Tac. A. xiii.) that she might not fall into the hands of another.

Houssaye.


CCXL. There is a species of love whose excess prevents jealousy.

CCXLI. Jealousy is the greatest of evils, and the least pitied by those who
occasion it.

ILLS.
CCXLII. Philosophy easily triumphs over past and future ills; but present ills
triumph over philosophy.

CCXLIII. The good we have received from a man should make us bear with the ill
he does us.

CCXLIV. It is less dangerous to do ill to most men, than to do them too much
good. Beneficia eo usque laeta sunt, dum videntur exsolvi posse; ubi multum
antevenere, pro gratia odium redditur. Tac. A. iv. When benefits are such as
can never be repaid, the benefactor is usually hated instead of thanked.

Houssaye.


CCXLV. A readiness to believe ill without examination is the effect of pride
and laziness. We are willing to find people guilty, and unwilling to be at the
trouble of examining into the accusation.

CCXLVI. Weakness often gets the better of those ills which reason could not.

INCONSTANCY.
CCXLVII. There is an inconstancy that proceeds from the levity or weakness of
the mind, which makes it give into every one's opinions: and there is another
inconstancy, more excusable, which arises from satiety.

INGRATITUDE.
CCXLVIII. An extraordinary haste to discharge an obligation is a sort of
ingratitude.

CCXLIX. There are some ungrateful people who are less to be blamed for their
ingratitude than their benefactors.

CCL. We seldom find people ungrateful so long as we are in a condition to
serve them.

CCLI. It is no great misfortune to oblige ungrateful people, but an
insupportable one to be forced to be under an obligation to a scoundrel.

INFIDELITY.
CCLII. Women in love more easily forgive great indiscretions than small
infidelities.

CCLIII. We find it more difficult to overlook the least infidelity to
ourselves, than the greatest to others.

INNOCENCE.
CCLIV. Innocence finds not near so much protection as guilt.

INTEREST.
CCLV. Interest speaks all languages, and acts all parts, even that of
disinterestedness itself.

CCLVI. Interest, which blinds some people, enlightens others.

CCLVII. The name of virtue is as serviceable to interest as vice.

CCLVIII. Interest puts in motion all the virtues and vices.

CCLIX. Goodnature, that boaster of its great sensibility, is often stifled by
the smallest interest.

CCLX. We condemn vice, and extol virtue, merely through interest.

CCLXI. It is only in little interests that we usually venture to disbelieve
appearances.

INTREPIDITY.
CCLXII. Intrepidity is an extraordinary strength of soul, that renders it
superior to the trouble, disorder, and emotion, which the appearance of danger
is apt to excite. By this quality heroes maintain their tranquillity, and
preserve the free use of their reason, in the most surprising and dreadful
accidents.

JUDGMENT.
CCLXIII. Every one complains of the badness of his memory, but nobody of his
judgment.

JUSTICE.
CCLXIV. The love of justice, in most men, is the fear of suffering by
injustice.

KNOWLEDGE.
CCLXV. To know things well, we should know them in detail; and as that is in a
manner infinite, our knowledge is always superficial and imperfect.

LIBERALITY.
CCLXVI. What we call liberality is seldom more than the vanity of giving: we
are fonder of the vanity than the generosity of the action. Liberality is not
the act of giving, but the noble disposition of the giver.


LOVE.
CCLXVII. No disguise can long conceal love where it is, nor feign it where it
is not.

CCLXVIII. Since it is not in our power to love any more than to let it alone,
a lover has no right to complain of his mistress's inconstancy, nor she of her
lover's levity.

CCLXIX. It is difficult to define love: we may say of it, however, that in the
soul it is a desire to reign, in min^s it is a sympathy, and in bodies a secret
inclination to enjoy what we love after many difficulties. This is surely but a
dark confused account of love; and hardly will any one cry out after having
read it, Nunc scio quid fit amor. Mr. Hobbes has thus defined it, in much fewer
words. "It is," says he, the love of one singularly, with desire to be
singularly beloved. And the same, with fear that the love is not mutual, is
jealousy. Leviathan.


CCLXX. To judge of love by most of its effects, one would think it more like
hatred than kindness. "Quod petiere premunt arcte, faciuntque dolorem
"Corporis, and dentes illidunt saepe labellis."
Lucret. 1. iv. What they desired, they hurt; and 'midst the bliss
Raise pain; when often with a furious kiss
They wound the balmy lip.
Creech.


CCLXXI. There are few people who are not ashamed of their amors when the fit
is over.

CCLXXII. There is only one sort of love, but there a thousand different conies
of it.

CCLXXIII. Love, like fire, cannot subsist without continual motion; it ceases
to exist, as soon as it ceases to hope or fear.

CCLXXIV. Love lends his name to many a correspondence wherein he is no more
concerned than the doge in what is done at Venice.

CCLXXV. The more you love your mistress, the readier you are to hate her.

CCLXXVI. To love, is the least fault of the woman who has abandoned herself to
love. Viros ad unum quedoue maleficium (...) ^^piditates impellunt; mulieres
autem ad omnia male^^^a cupiditas una ducit. Cic. l. iv. de Art. Rhet. Single
vice^ make men commit single crimes; but one vice makes women guilty of all.
And the reason of it is, ^he general co^^empt and ill-usage that custom has
made the consequences of the forfeiture of female virtue. For women, finding
themselves irrecoverably undone by such a slip, and treated as if nothing could
be added to their guilt, stick afterward at no one crime, because they know
they are thought capable of all.




CCLXXVII. There are people who would never have been in love, had they never
heard talk of it.

CCLXXVIII. The pleasure of loving is, to love; and we are much happier in the
passion we feel, than in that we excite.

CCLXXIX. To fall in love, is much easier than to get rid of it.

CCLXXX. Novelty to love is like the bloom to fruit; it gives a luster, which
is easily eff^ced, but never returns.

CCLXXXI. It is impossible to love those a second time whom we have really
ceased to love.

CCLXXXII. We forgive, as long as we love.

CCLXXXIII. In love, we often doubt of what we most believe.

CCLXXXIV. The man who thinks he loves his mistress for her sake is much
mistaken.

CCLXXXV. Young women who would not appear coquets, and old men who would not
be ridiculous, should never speak of love as of a thing that in any wise
concerns them.

CCLXXXVI. A woman keeps her first lover long, if she happens not take a second.

CCLXXXVII. In love, those who are first cured are best cured.

CCLXXXVIII. All the passions make us commit faults; but love makes us guilty
of the most ridiculous ones.

CCLXXXIX. In the old age of love, as in that of life, we continue to live to
pain, though we cease to live to pleasure.

CCXC. There are many cures for love; but not one of them infallible.

CCXCI. Love, all-agreeable as he is, pleases yet more by the manner in which
he shows himself.

CCXCII. A lover never sees the faults of his mistress till the enchantment is
over.

MAGNANIMITY.
CCXCIII. Magnanimity contemns all, to obtain all.

CCXCIV. Magnanimity is sufficiently defined by its name; yet we may say of it,
that it is the good-sense of pride, and the noblest way of acquiring applause.

MAN.
CCXCV. To study men, is more necessary than to study books. "The proper study
of mankind is man," says Mr. Pope. -- "Learning," says Lord Chesterfield, is
acquired by reading books; but the more necessary learning, the knowledge of
the world, is only to be acquired by reading men, and studying all the various
editions of them. Again, All are in general, and yet no two in particular,
exactly alike. Those who have not accurately studied, perpetually mistake: they
do not discern the shades and gradations that distinguish characters seemingly
alike, etc. etc. Let. 243d. Let the great book of the world be your principal
study.

Let. 217th.


CCXCVI. Men and things have their particular point of view: to judge of some,
we should see them near; of others we judge best at a distance.

CCXCVII. The truly honest man is he who valueth not himself on any thing.

CCXCVIII. He must be a truly honest man who is willing to be always open to
the inspection of honest men.

CCXCIX. A man of sense may love like a madman, but never like a fool. Gay
says, however, "in love we are all fools alike;" and, I think, experience
justifies his opinion.


MARRIAGE.
CCC. There are convenient marriages, but no happy ones.

MEMORY.
CCCI. Why have we memory sufficient to retain the minutest circumstances that
have happened to us; and yet not enough to remember how often we have related
them to the same person?

MERIT.
CCCII. Those who think themselves persons of merit, take a pride often in
being unlucky, in order to make themselves and others believe that they are
worthy to be the butt of Fortune.

CCCIII. To undeceive a person prejudiced in favor of his merit, is to do him
the same bad office that was done to the madman at Athens, who fancied all the
vessels that came into the port to be his own. This noble Athenian, when
recovered from his indisposition, declared that he never had more pleasure than
whilst he was distempered, which he remembered well. Adding, that his friends
would have obliged him much, to have let him enjoy a happiness that put him in
possession of all things, without depriving any body of the least. Aelian tells
this story, and calls him Thrasyllus.

"Qui feroit-il, helas, si quelque audacieux
"Alloit pour son malheur lri desiller les yeux?
"Qu'il maudiroit le jour ou son ame insensee
"Perdit l'beureuse erreur qui charmeit sa pensee."
Boileau, Sat. iv. Should some officious person open his eyes, he would curse
the day on which he was deprived of the delightful illusion.




CCCIV. It is a sign of an extraordinary merit, when those who most envy it are
forced to praise it. Ne militibus quidem ingrata fuit Celsi salus, eandem
virtutem admirantibus cui irascebantur. The soldiery, who were angry with
Celsus, yet wished him well on account of his merit. Tac. H. i. Houssaye.


CCCV. Nature gives merit, and fortune sets it to work.

CCCVI. Some people are disgusting with great merit; others with great faults
very pleasing. Quaedam virtutes odio sunt; severitas obstinata, invictus
adversum gratiam animus. Tac. A. xv. There are odious virtues, such as
inflexible severity, and integrity that admits of no favor.




CCCVII. There are people whose whole merit consists in saying and doing
foolish things seasonably. An alteration of conduct would spoil all. Those
perhaps, who with great faults are very pleasing, mentioned in the former maxim.


CCCVIII. The art of setting off moderate qualifications steals esteem; and
often gives more reputation than real merit. Poppaeus Sabinus, modicus
originis, consulatum ac triumphale decus adeptus, maximisque provinciis per
viginti quatuor annos impositus, nullam ob eximiam artem, sed quod par negotiis
neque supra erat. Tac. A. vi. Poppaeus Sabinus, of moderate birth, obtained the
consulship, and the honor of a triumph; and governed for four and twenty years
the greatest provinces, without any extra-ordinary merit; being just capable of
his employments, and in no manner above them.

Houssaye.


CCCIX. Our merit procures us the esteem of men of sense, and our good fortune
that of the public.

CCCX. The appearance of merit is oftener rewarded by the world than merit
itself.

CCCXI. Merit has its season, as well as Fruit.

CCCXII. We should not judge of a man's merit by his great qualities, but by
the use he makes of them.

CCCXIII. Censorious as the world is, it oftener does favor to false merit,
than injustice to true.

MODERATION.
CCCXIV. The moderation of happy people is owing to the calm that Good-fortune
gives to their temper. Tantum honorum atque opum in me cumulasti, ut nihil
felicitati meae desit, nisi moderatio ejus. Caetera invidiam augent. Tac. A.
xiv. You have so loaded me with honors and riches, that nothing can be wanting
to my prosperity; unless it be moderation. Any thing more will but excite envy.

Houssaye.


CCCXV. Moderation is the dread of incurring that envy and contempt which
attend upon the intoxication of prosperity: it is a vain ostentation of the
strength of the mind. Moderation in an exalted station, is the desire of
appearing superior to fortune.

CCCXVI. We make a virtue of moderation, in order to bound the ambition of
great men, and to comfort moderate geniusses for their slender fortune, and
their slender merit.

CCCXVII. Moderation resembles Temperance. We are not unwilling to eat more,
but are afraid of doing ourselves harm.

NEGOTIATION.
CCCXVIII. We are often dissatisfied with those who negotiate our affairs. The
reason is, they almost always sacrifice the interest of their friends to that
of the success of the negotiation; this becomes their own interest, through the
honor they expect for bringing to a conclusion what themselves have undertaken.

OBSTINACY.
CCCXIX. Narrowness of mind is often the cause of obstinacy: we do not easily
believe beyond what we see. Dryden has very justly coupled obstinacy and error:
"Stiff in opinion, always in the wrong."


OLD AGE.
CCCXX. Old Age is a tyrant, which forbids the pleasures of youth on pain of
death.

CCCXXI. Few people know how to be old.

CCCXXII. Old Age gives good advice, when it is no longer able to give bad
example. Terence makes a young fellow speak thus of his old father: "Perii! is
mihi, ubi adbibit plus paulo, sua quae narrat
"facinora!
"Nunc ait, periculum ex aliis facito tibi, quod ex usu siet;
"Astutus!" --
Heautontim. Act. I. Scen. ult. Speaking of another,
Shows how he would act in such a case himself:
Yet when be takes a sup or two too much,
Oh, what mad pranks he tells me of his own!
Colman.


OPPORTUNITY.
CCCXXIII. Opportunities make us known to ourselves and others.

CCCXXIV. In affairs of importance, we ought less to endeavor to make
opportunities, than to use them when they offer.

CCCXXV. All our qualities, both good and bad, are uncertain, dubious, and at
the mercy of opportunity.

PASSIONS.
CCCXXVI. The duration of our passions is no more in our power than the
duration of our lives.

CCCXXVII. Passion often makes a fool of a man of sense: sometimes it makes a
man of sense a fool.

CCCXXVIII. The passions are the only orators that always succeed. They are, as
it were, Nature's art of eloquence, fraught with infallible rules. Simplicity,
with the aid of the passions, persuades more than the utmost eloquence without
it.

CCCXXIX. In the heart of man there is a perpetual succession of the passions;
so that the destruction of one is almost always the production of another.

CCCXXX. Passions often beget their opposites: avarice produces prodigality,
and prodigality avarice: men are often constant through weakness, and bold
through fear.

CCCXXXI. When we subdue our passions, it is rather owing to their weakness
than our strength.

CCCXXXII. So much injustice and self-interest enter into the composition of
the passions, that it is very dangerous to obey their dictates; and we ought to
be on our guard against them even when they seem most reasonable.

CCCXXXIII. Notwithstanding all the care we take to conceal our passions under
the pretenses of religion and honor, they still appear through the flimsy veil.

CCCXXXIV. Absence destroys small passions, and increases great ones; as the
wind extinguishes tapers, and kindles fires.

CCCXXXV. We are by no means aware how much we are influenced by our passions.

CCCXXXVI. While the heart is still agitated by the remains of a passion, it is
more susceptible of a new one, than when entirely at rest.

CCCXXXVII. Those who are during life under the influence of strong passions
are happy; and miserable when cured of them. Those who would eradicate all
hopes and fears out of the human breast, as a means of happiness, are but ill
acquainted with the economy of the mind. The inaction and apathy that are the
necessary attendants on such a state would be greater evils than the most
unbounded license of the passions.


PENETRATION.
CCCXXXVIII. The great fault of penetration is, not the falling short of, but
the going beyond, its mark.

CCCXXXIX. Penetration has an air of divination; it pleases our vanity more
than any other quality of the mind.

PERSEVERANCE.
CCCXL. Perseverance merits neither blame nor praise; it is only the duration
of our inclinations and sentiments, which we can neither create nor extinguish.

PHILOSOPHERS.
CCCXLI. The contempt of riches in the philosophers was a concealed desire of
revenging on Fortune the injustice done to their merit, by despising the good
she denied them. It was a secret to shelter them from the ignominy of poverty;
a bye-way to arrive at the esteem they could not procure by wealth. According
to Aristippus's repartee to Diogenes: "Si pranderet olus p^tienter, regibu uti
"Nollet Aristippus. Si sciret regibus uti,
"Fastidiret olus qui me notat."
Horat. l. I. ep. xvii. If Aristippus could be content with pulse, he would not
baunt the tables of the great. If Diogenes could keep great men company, he
would not live on pulse.




PIETY.
CCCXLII. The piety of old women is often a decent way of escaping the disgrace
and ridicule attendant on decayed beauty; an endeavor to continue themselves
upon a respectable footing. It is also an employment for them; Mr. Pope has
assigned them another. "See how the world its veterans rewards:
"A youth of conquests, an old age of cards.



PITY.
CCCXLIII. Pity is the sense of our own misfortunes in those of another man: it
is a wise foresight of the disasters that may befall ourselves: We assist
others, in order to engage them to assist us on like occasions; so that the
services we offer to the unfortunate are in reality so many anticipated
kindnesses to ourselves. Grief for the calamity of another is pity; and arises
from the imagination that the like calamity may befall himself; and therefore is
called also compassion, and, in the phrase of this present time, a Fellow
feeling: and therefore for calamity arriving from great wickedness the best men
have the least pity; and for the same calamity, those hate pity, that think
themselves least obnoxious to the same. Hobbes's Leviathan. And that celebrated
sentence of Terence, Homo sum, humani nihil alienum a me puto, is indeed the
same opinion, more concisely and mysteriously expressed: I am a man, and feel
for all mankind. Colman.


PLEASING.
CCCXLIV. He who is pleased with nobody, is much more unhappy than he with whom
nobody is pleased.

PRIDE.
CCCXLV. Pride always indemnifies itself; and takes care to be no loser, even
when it renounces vanity.

CCCXLVI. If we were not proud ourselves, we should not complain of the pride
of others.

CCCXLVII. Pride is equal i^ all men; and differs but in the means and manner
of showing itself.

CCCXLVIII. It seems as if Nature, who has so wisely adapted the organs of our
bodies to our happiness, had with the same view given us pride, to spare us the
pain of knowing our imperfections. "And pride bestowed on all, a common
friend." Pope.


CCCXLIX. Pride is more concerned than benevolence in our remonstrances to
persons guilty of faults; and we reprove them not so much with a design to
correct, as to make them believe that we ourselves are free from such failings.

CCCL. Pride will not owe, and self-love will not pay.

CCCLI. Our pride is often increased by what we retrench from our other faults.

CCCLII. The same pride that makes us condemn the faults we imagine ourselves
exempt from, inclines us to despise the good qualities we are not possessed of.

CCCLIII. There is often more pride than goodness in our concern for the
misfortunes of our enemies. We make them feel our superiority, by showing our
compassion.

CCCLIV. Nothing flatters our pride more than the confidence of the Great,
because we esteem it the effect of our own merit; not reflecting that it
proceeds most frequently from their inability to keep a secret. So that
confidence is sometimes a relief of mind, throwing off the oppressive load of
secrecy. The difficulty of keeping a secret has been satirized by the ancient
mythologists in the story of Midas's barber. Midas had taken care to bide,
under a Phrygian bonnet, the deformity of asses ears. His barber discovered the
secret; but, not daring to speak out, imparted it to the earth; whence sprung
reeds, which soon divulged it.


CCCLV. Pride has its caprices, as well as other passions: we are ashamed to
own that we are jealous; yet value ourselves for having been so, and for being
susceptible of it.

PROBITY.
CCCLVI. It is difficult to determine whether a clear, sincere, and honest
procedure be the effect of probity or artifice.

PROMISES.
CCCLVII. We promise according to our hopes, and perform according to our fears.

PROPERTIES.
CCCLVIII. Most men, like plants, have secret properties, which chance
discovers.

PRUDENCE.
CCCLIX. Prudence and love are inconsistent; in proportion as the last
increases, the other decreases. According to Ovid, Love and Dignity are
inconsistent. Non been convenient, nec in una sede morantur, Majestas and Amor.
--


CCCLX. No encomiums are thought too great for prudence; yet cannot it insure
the least event. "Nullum numen abest, si sit Prudentia." Juv. Prudence wants
not the assistance of heaven.




PRAISE.
CCCLXI. The shame that arises from praise which we do not deserve, often makes
us do things we should never otherwise have attempted.

CCCLXII. We seldom heartily praise any but those who admire us.

CCCLXIII. We blame ourselves only to extort praise.

CCCLXIV. We are not fond of praising without a view to self-interest. Praise
is an artful concealed refined flattery; which pleases very differently the
giver and receiver; the one takes it as the reward of his merit, the other
gives it to show his candor and discernment.

CCCLXV. We often use envenomed praise, which, by a side-blow, exposes, in the
person we commend, such faults as we durst not any other way lay open.
"Pessimum inimicorum genus laudantes." Tac. Panegyrists are the most dangerous
enemies.

Houssaye.


CCCLXVI. We seldom praise but to be praised.

CCCLXVII. Few are so wise as to prefer useful reproof to treacherous praise.
Peritissimis, si consulerentur, vera dicturis: arcuere eos intimi amicorum
Vitellii; ita formatis principis auribus, it aspera Quae utilia, nec quidquam
nisi jucundum and loesurum acciperet. Tac. H. iii. Viterlius might have known
the truth from the old officers, but his courtiers kept them off^ having
accustomed him not to hear any thing disagreeable, though useful; but to listen
to every thing pleasing and pernicicus.

Houssaye.


CCCLXVIII. A refusal of praise is a desire to be praised twice.

CCCLXIX. There are reproaches that praise, and praises that reproach.
Reproaches that praise.] Pliny relates of Coesar, that he blamed in so artful a
manner, that be seemed to praise. "Ita reprehendit, ut laudet." Lib. III. Ep.
xii. Houss. Praises that reproach.] Augustus cum Tiberio tribunitiam potestatem
a patribus postularet, quanquam honorifica oratione, quaedam de cultu and
institutis ejus jecerat, Quae velut encusando exprobaret.

Tac. A. i. When Augustus demanded the tribunitial power of the senate for
Tiberius; in an oration he made in his praise, he dropped something about his
temper and a^sposition, that seemed to accuse, while he was excusing him.

Houssaye.


CCCLXX. That modesty which seems to decline praise, is only the desire of
being praised more delicately. "Cui male si palpere recalcitrat." Horat. l. II.
Sat. i. Too strongly guarded from the poet's lays,
He spurns the flatterer and his saucy praise.



CCCLXXI. Ambition to merit praise fortifies our virtue. Praise bestowed on
wit, valor, and beauty, contributes to their augmentation. The senate, says
Tacitus, loaded Nero with praises, to excite the young emperor from the glory
acquired by little actions to greater. Msgnis patrum laudibus; ut juvenilis
animus, levium quoque rerum gloria sublatus, majorss continuaret. A. xiii.
Houssaye.


QUALITIES.
CCCLXXII. Our bad actions expose us not to so much persecution and hatred as
our good qualities. Sinistra erga eminentes interpretatio; nec minus periculum
ex magna fama, quam ex mala. Tac. The world is apt to judge unfavourably of
eminent merit; and a great reputation is as dangerous as a bad one.

Houss.


CCCLXXIII. It is not enough to have great qualities; we must also have the
management of them. Brutidium artibus honestis copiosum, and si rectum iter
pergeret ad clarissima Quaeque iturum, festinatio extimulabat; dum aequales,
dein superiores, anteire parat: quos multos etiam bonos pessumdedit; qui,
spretis Quae tarda cum securitate, praematura vel cum exitio properant. Tac. A.
iii. Brutidius was possessed of good qualities sufficient to have raised him to
the highest dignities, had be not through precipitation quitted the usual
track; laboring to outstrip first his equals, then his superiors: a rock on
which many worthy men have split; while they strove at the greatest hazard to
obtain prematurely, what with a little patience they would have had with
perfect safety.

Houssaye.


CCCLXXIV. There are some good qualities which, when natural, degenerate into
faults; and others which, when acquired, are always imperfect. For example,
Reason must teach us to be frugal of our fortune and our confidence; and, on
the contrary, Nature must give us benevolence and valor.

CCCLXXV. It is with some good qualities as with the senses; they are
incomprehensible and inconceivable to such as are deprived of them.

CCCLXXVI. Naturally to be without envy is a certain indication of great
qualities.

CCCLXXVII. There are bad qualities which constitute great talents.

QUARRELS.
CCCLXXVIII. Quarrels would never last long, if the fault was on one side only.

RAILLERY.
CCCLXXIX. Raillery is more insupportable than Wrong; because we have a right
to resent injuries, but it is ridiculous to be angry at a jest. A jest which
will not bear a serious examination is certainly false wit. Shaftesh.


REASON.
CCCLXXX. We want strength to act up to our reason.

CCCLXXXI. A man is not rational because chance throws reason in his way: He
only is rational who knows, distinguishes, tastes it.

CCCLXXXII. We never desire ardently what we desire rationally.

RECONCILIATION.
CCCLXXXIII. Reconciliation with enemies is owing to a desire of bettering our
condition; the fatigue of war, and an apprehension of some untoward event.

REPENTANCE.
CCCLXXXIV. Repentance is not so much remorse for what we have done, as the
fear of consequences.

REPUTATION.
CCCLXXXV. We except to judges in affairs of small moment, but are content that
our reputation and glory should be dependent on the judgment of men who are
all against us, through jealousy, prejudice, or want of discernment: yet it is
merely to engage these to determine in our favor that we often hazard our ease
and lives.

CCCLXXXVI. Whatever ignominy we may have incurred, it is almost always in our
power to re-establish our reputation. Particularly by a generous death: as
Tacitus says of Sempronius: Constantia mortis haud indignus Sempronii nomine,
vita degeneraverat. A. i. Though he had degenerated from his great ancestors by
a disorderly life, he rendered himself worthy of them by his constancy in death.

Houssaye. "Descendam magnorum haud unquam indignus avorum."

Virg. Receive a soul unsullied yet with shame,
Which not belies my great forefather's name.
Dryden.


RICHES.
CCCLXXXVII. Many people despise riches; yet few know how to bestow them. "Cur
eget indignus quisquam te divite; quare
"Templa ruunt antiqua de^^^; cur, improbe, carae
"Non aliquid patriae tanto emetiris acervo?"
Horat. l. II. Sat. ii. Then why not better use this proud excess
Of worthless wealth? Why lives in deep distress
A man unworthy to be poor, or why
Our sacred shrines in aged ruins lie?
Why not of such a massy treasure spare
To thy dear country, wretch, a moderate share?
Shall thou alone no change of fortune know?
Thou future laughter of thy deadliest foe?
Francis.


CCCLXXXVIII. Ridicule dishonor. more than Dishonor itself. Ridicule excites
contempt and laughter, but can never be a de^ector of falsehood or a test of
truth. Brown against Shaftesh.


SECRETS.
CCCLXXXIX. How can we expect that another should keep our secret, when it is
more than we can do ourselves? See Maxim CCCLVI.


SELF-LOVE.
CCCXC. Self-love is more artful than the most artful of men.

CCCXCI. Self-love is the greatest of flatterers.

CCCXCII. The first impulse of joy we feel from the good-fortune of a friend
proceeds neither from our goodnature, nor friendship; it is the effect of
self-love, which flatters us either with the hope of being happy in our turn,
or of making some advantage of his prosperity.

CCCXCIII. Self-love, well or ill conducted, constitutes virtue and vice.

CCCXCIV. Human prudence, rightly understood, is circumspect enlightened
self-love.

CCCXCV. We are so prepossessed in our own favor, that we often mistake for
virtues those vices that have some resemblance to them, and which are artfully
disguised by self-love. "Species virtutibus similes." Tac. A. xv. Seeming
virtues.

"Ipsa vitia pro virtutibus interpretamur."

Tac. A. i. We mistake vices for virtues.

Houssaye.


CCCXCVI. Notwithstanding all the discoveries that have been made in the
regions of self-love, there still remains much terra incognita.

CCCXCVII. The fondness, or indifference for life, in the old philosophers, was
a taste of their self-love; which ought no more to be controverted than the
taste of the palate, or the choice of colors.

CCCXCVIII. Nothing is so capable of diminishing our self-love, as the
observation that we disapprove at one time of what we approve at another.

CCCXCIX. Self-love never reigns so absolutely as in the passion of love: we
are always ready to sacrifice the peace of those we adore, rather than lose the
least part of our own.

CCCC. The self-love of some people is such, that, when in love, they are more
taken up with their passion, than its object.

CCCCI. Self-love is the love of self, and of every thing for the sake of self.
Self-love makes men idolize themselves, and tyrannize over others, when Fortune
gives the means. Self-love.] Self-love is the spring of all animal action. It
is implanted by Nature in animals with a twofold view; the good of the
individual, and that of the species: and operates on them by a twofold impulse;
an insupportable uneasiness attendant on its suppression, and a pleasurable
sensation annexed to its gratification. In brutes, this motive to action, being
under the sole direction of instinct, is in general uniform and evident, In
man, instinct has been superadded to reason, and self-love becomes complex and
mysierious. It is plain, from fact, that all animals are in some degree social;
some of them (if we may so speak) living under monarchal, some oligarchal,
others democratical, and the rest patriarchal government. The stifling, or
exerting, the principle that thus unites them, has always its concomitant pain
or pleasure. And instinct, where she is sole governess, impells them unvariably
and unerringly to Nature's end and their own good; which are always united,
though not always absolutely the same. For example, animals eat to appease
their bunger, or please their palate; they have no more view to sustenance than
the sexes, in their intercourse, have to propagation. Men, too, so far as they
act under instinct, act unerringly; when that leaves them, they have recourse
to reason; which not being at all times, nor in all persons, equally right and
strong, does not always prompt to what is equally true and just. Society is
undoubtedly the interest of all mankind; and though an universal government has
never yet been, nor most probably ever will be formed, yet the wants of every
man make him confederate with, and join himself to, some particular public.
Now, as in order to the establishment of a state it is indispensably necessary
to supersede some private rights, which are indeed compensated reflectively,
though in a less obvious manner, this seems to produce cases wherein the good
of the government and that of the subject clash. And certainly there are
occasionally instances where the necessities of the commonwealth bear so bard
on particular members as would give them a distaste to society, did not the
uniting principle, the love of the species, the affection for the community of
which they are part, lighten the oppression, still the grievance, and, by
benevolent reflection, even render it pleasureable. To actions deduced from
this source, the self-love of the rest of the Community (which reaps the
benefit of these seeming self-sacrifices) ascribes extraordinary merit, annexes
attendant glory, and calls them virtuous: which virtue, though, relatively to
the kind, it be highly meritorious, is yet not disinterested, because repaid by
the reflex pleasure of the actor: and may also be carried so far as to become
irrational and vicious; for 'to be vir^uous," says Lord Shaftesbury, vol. II. p
77, is to have one's affections right in respect to one's self as well as of
society. So that virtue will be found to be, not a ai^nterested benevolence
toward the species, but a love of that kind which is its own reward; not a
boundless enthusiasm for the public, but the social affection conducted by
reason. It is rational humanity; it is, according to our author, well-regulated
self-love. And, Thus "true self love and social are the same."

Pope's Fssay on Man, Ep. iv.
He never rests out of himself; and settles on external things, just as the be
does on flowers, to extract what may be serviceable. Nothing is so impetuous as
his desires, nothing so secret as his designs, nothing so artful as his
conduct. His suppleness is inexpressible, his metamorphoses surpass those of
Ovid, and his refinements those of chemistry. We cannot fathom the depth, nor
penetrate the obscurity of his abyss. There concealed from the most piercing
eye, he makes numberless turnings and windings: there is he often invisible
even to himself: there he conceives, breeds, and brings up, without being
sensible of it, an infinity of likes and dislikes; some of which are so
monstrous, that he knows them not when brought in to light, or at least cannot
prevail on himself to own them. From the night that envelopes him springs the
ridiculous notions he entertains of himself: thence his errors, his ignorance,
his gross and filly mistakes with respect to himself. Thence is it that he
imagines his sensations dead, when they are only asleep, that he shall never
desire to run again when once tired; and that he has lost all the appetites he
has sated. But this thick darkness, which hides him from himself, hinders him
not from seeing perfectly well whatever is without him; in which he resembles
the eye, that sees all things except itself. In his great concerns and
important affairs, where the violence of desire summoneth his whole attention,
he sees, perceives, understands, invents, suspects, penetrates, and divines all
things; so that one would be tempted to believe that each passion had its
respective magic. Nothing is so close and strong as his attachments; which he
in vain attempts to break through on discovery of the greatest impending
misery. Yet sometimes, in a short time, he effects, and without trouble, what
he had not been able to compass with the greatest efforts, for years. Whence
may well be concluded, that it is by himself that his desires are inflamed,
more than by the beauty and merit of their objects; that it is his taste that
heightens and embellishes them; that it is himself that he pursues; and that he
follows his inclination, when he follows things that are agreeable to his
inclination. He is composed of contrarieties; imperious and obedient, sincere
and hypocritical, merciful and cruel, timid and bold. He has different
inclinations, according to the different tempers that possess and devote him
sometimes to glory, sometimes to wealth, sometimes to pleasure. These he
changes, as age and experience alter: and it is indifferent to him whether he
has many inclinations, or only one; because he can split himself into many, or
collect himself into one, as it is convenient or agreeable to him. He is
inconstant; and the changes, besides those that happen from external causes,
are numberless which proceed from himself. He is inconstant through levity,
through love, through novelty, through satiety, through disgust, through
inconstancy itself. He is capricious; and sometimes labors with eagerness and
incredible pains to obtain things that are no ways advantageous, nay even
hurtful; but which he pursues merely because it is his will. He is whimsical,
and often exerts his whole application in employments the most trifling; takes
the utmost delight in the most insipid, and preserves all his haughtiness in
the most contemptible. He is attendant on all ages and conditions; he lives
every where; he lives on every thing; he lives on nothing. He makes himself
easy either in the enjoyment, or privation, of things; he even goes over to
those who are at variance with him; he enters into their schemes, and, which is
wonderful! along with them hates himself; he conspires his own destruction; he
labors to undo himself; he only desires to BE; and, that granted, he consents
to be his own enemy. We are not therefore to be surprised if he sometimes
closes with the most rigid austerity; and enters boldly into a combination
therewith to ruin himself; because what he loses in one place he regains in
another. When we think he relinquishes his pleasures, he but suspends, or
changes them; and even when he is discomfited, and we think we are rid of him,
we find him triumphant in his own defeat. Such is self-love! of which man's
life is only a long and great agitation. The sea is its representative; in the
flux and reflux of whose waves, self-love may find a lively expression of the
turbulent succession of its thoughts, and of its eternal motion.

SENSATIONS.
CCCCII. It is less difficult to feign the sensations we have not, than to
conceal those we have.

SIMPLICITY.
CCCCIII. Affected simplicity is refined imposture. Domitianus simplicitatis ac
modestiae imagine studium literarum and amorem carminum simulabat; quo velaret
animum, and fratris aemulationi subduceretur. Tac. A. iv. Domitian, under the
mask of simplicity and modesty, affected the love of letters and poetry, the
better to conceal his designs, and avoid his brother's jealousy.

Houssaye.


SINCERITY.
CCCCIV. Sincerity is an openness of heart which is rarely to be found. It is
commonly personated by a refined dissimulation, whose end is to procure
confidence.

CCCCV. A desire to talk of ourselves, and to set our faults in whatever light
we choose, makes the main of our sincerity.

SLANDER.
CCCCVI. We commonly slander more through vanity than malice.

SOBRIETY.
CCCCVII. Sobriety is either the love of health, or an incapacity for debauch.

SOCIETY.
CCCCVIII. Men would not live long in society, were they not the mutual dupes
of each other.

SOUL.
CCCCIX. The health of the soul is as precarious as that of the body; for when
we seem secure from passions, we are no less in danger of their infection, than
we are of falling ill, when we appear to be well.

CCCCX. There are relapses in the distempers of the soul, as well as in those
of the body: thus we often mistake for a cure what is no more than an
intermission, or a change of discase. Dilatae voluptates, dissimulata luxuria,
falsae virtutes, and vitia reditura. Tac. H. i. Suspended pleasures, and
disguised passions, are but false virtues, or vices that will certainly return.

Houssaye.


CCCCXI. The flaws of the soul resemble the wounds of the body; the scar always
appears, and they are in danger of breaking open again.

SUBTILTY.
CCCCXII. Too great subtilty is false delicacy; and true delicacy is solid
subtilty.

TALKATIVENESS.
CCCCXIII. We speak little when vanity prompts us not.

CCCCXIV. As it is the characteristic of great Wits to say much in few words,
so small Wits seem to have the gift of speaking much and saying nothing. (Ceux)
"qui parlent beaucoup, ne disent jamais rien." Boileau, Ep. ix. People who talk
much and say nothing. Or, as Terence expresses it:

"Noe ista hercle magno jam conatu magnas nugas dixerit."

Heautontim. -- "She Will take mighty pains
"To be delivered of some mighty trifle."
Colman.


CCCCXV. The excessive pleasure we find in talking of ourselves ought to make
us apprehensive that it gives but little to our auditors.

CCCCXVI. We know that we should not talk of our wives; but we seem not to know
that we should talk still less of ourselves.

CCCCXVII. We had rather speak ill of ourselves than not speak at all.

CCCCXVIII. It is never more difficult to speak well than when we are ashamed
of our silence.

TASTE.
CCCCXIX. It is as common for men to change their taste, as it is uncommon for
them to change their inclination.

CCCCXX. A good taste is the effect of judgment more than understanding.

CCCCXXI. We give up our interest sooner than our taste.

CCCCXXII. Our taste declines with our merit.

CCCCXXIII. Our self-love bears with less patience the condemnation of our
taste than of our opinion.

TITLES.
CCCCXXIV. Titles, instead of exalting, debase those who act not up to them.

TREACHERY.
CCCCXXV. Men are oftener treacherous through weakness than design.

TRUTH.
CCCCXXVI. Truth is not so beneficial to men as its appearances are prejudicial.

CCCCXXVII. Our enemies, in their judgment of us, come nearer the truth than
we do ourselves.

VALOR.
CCCCXXVIII. The love of glory, the fear of shame, the design of making a
fortune, the desire of rendering life easy and agreeable, and the humor of
pulling down other people, are often the causes of that valor so celebrated
among men.

CCCCXXIX. Valor in private soldiers is a hazardous trade taken up to get a
livelihood.

CCCCXXX. Perfect valor and perfect cowardice are extremes men seldom arrive
at. The intermediate space is prodigious, and contains all the different
species of courage, which are as various as men's faces and humors. There are
those who expose themselves boldly at the beginning of an action; and who
slacken and are disheartened at its duration. There are others who aim only at
preserving their honor, and do little more. Some are not equally exempt from
fear at all times alike. Others give occasionally into a general panic: others
advance to the charge because they dare not stay in their posts. There are men
whom habitual small dangers encourage, and fit for greater. Some are brave with
the sword, and fear bullets: others desy bullets, and dread a sword. All these
different kinds of valor agree in this, that night, as it augments fear, so it
conceals good or bad actions, and gives every one the opportunity of sparing
himself. There is also another more general discretion: for we find that those
who do most, would do more still, were they sure of coming off safe; so that it
is very plain that the fear of death gives a damp to courage. Valor.] Valor
is the contempt of death and pain. Are disheartened at its auration.] Pleraque
coepta initiis valida, spatio languescunt.

Tac. A. iii. Most enterprises that are brisk at first languish toward the
conclusion.

Houssaye. Night gives every one opportunity to spare himself.] "Obscurum
noctis obtentus fugientibus."

Tac. H. ii. The darkness of the night is a protection to runaways.

Houssaye. The fear of death gives a damp to courage.] Major vitoe quam gloriae
cupido.

Tac. A. iv. We have greater love for life than glory.

Houssaye.


CCCCXXXI. Perfect valor consists in doing without witnesses all we should be
capable of doing before the whole world.

CCCCXXXII. Most men sufficiently expose themselves in war to save their
honor, but few so much as is necessary even to succeed in the design for which
they thus expose themselves.

CCCCXXXIII. No man can answer for his courage who has never been in danger.

CCCCXXXIV. A wise man had rather avoid an engagement than conquer.

VANITY.
CCCCXXXV. It is our own vanity that makes the vanity of others intolerable.
Adeo familiare est hominibus, omnia sibi ignoscere, nihil aliis remitteret.
Paterc. l. ii. n. 30. We overlook all faults in ourselves, but none in others.

Houssaye.


CCCCXXXVI. If vanity really overturns not the virtues, it certainly makes them
totter.

CCCCXXXVII. The most violent passions have their intermissions: vanity alone
gives us no respite.

CCCCXXXVIII. The reason why the pangs of shame and jealousy are so sharp is
this: Vanity gives us no assistance in supporting them.

CCCCXXXIX. Vanity makes us do more things against inclination than reason.

VICE.
CCCCXL. When our vices have left us, we flatter ourselves that we have left
them. The vices wait for us through life, like hosts with whom we are obliged
successively to lodge; and it is uncertain whether experience would make us
avoid them, were we twice to take the same journey.


CCCCXLI. Vices enter into the composition of virtues, as poisons into the
composition of medicines. Prudence mixes and tempers, and makes good use of the
compound against the ills of life.

CCCCXLII. The reason we are not often wholly possessed by a single vice, is
that we are distracted by several.

VIOLENCE.
CCCCXLIII. The violence done us by others is often less painful than that we
do to ourselves.

CCCCXLIV. The violence we do ourselves in order to prevent love is often more
rigorous than the cruelty of a mistress.

VIRTUE.
CCCCXLV. Our virtues are commonly disguised vices.

CCCCXLVI. What we mistake for virtue is often no more than a concurrence of
diverse actions and interests, which fortune, or industry, disposes to
advantage. It is not always from the principles of valor and chastity that men
are valiant, and that women are chaste.

CCCCXLVII. Prosperity is a stronger trial of virtue than adversity. Virtue.]
See the note on the 401st Maxim. Secundoe res acrioribus stimulis animos
explorant; quia miserioe tolerantur, felicitate corrumpimur.

Tac. H. i. Prosperity is the touchstone of virtue; for it is less difficult to
bear misfortunes than to remain uncorrupted by pleasure.

Houssaye.


CCCCXLVIII. The virtues are lost in interest, as rivers are in the sea.

CCCCXLIX. To the honor of virtue it must be acknowledged, that the greatest
misfortunes befall men from their vices.

CCCCL. We despise not all those who have vices; but we despise all those who
have no virtues.

CCCCLI. Nature seems to have prescribed to every man at his birth the bounds
both of his virtues and vices.

CCCCLII. Virtue would not go so far, if vanity did not bear her company. Toll
ambitionem and fastuosos spiritus, nullos habebis nec Platones, nec Catones,
nec Scaevolas, nec Scipiones, nec Fabricios. Senec. Take from men ambition and
vanity, and you will have neither heroes nor patriots.

Houssaye.


CCCCLIII. Men dare not, as bad as they are, appear open enemies to virtue:
when therefore they persecute Virtue, they pretend to think it counterfeit, or
else lay some crime to its charge.

VOGUE.
CCCCLIV. There are people, who, like new songs, are in vogue only for a time.

UNDERSTANDING.
CCCCLV. Those are mistaken who imagine wit and judgment to be two distinct
things. Judgment is only the perfection of wit, which penetrates into the
recesses of things, observes all that merits observation, and perceives what
seems imperceptible. We must therefore agree, that it is extensive wit which
produces all the effects attributed to judgment. This is a more rational
account of wit and judgment than that of those antithesis philosophers, who
make aiametrical opposites of two mental operations, which, if not strictly the
same, are at least inseparably united; for nothing can be witty that is not
judicious.


CCCCLVI. Strength and weakness of mind are improper terms; they are in reality
only the good or ill disposition of the organs of the body.

CCCCLVII. It is a common fault to be never satisfied with our fortune, nor
dissatisfied with our understanding.

CCCCLVIII. Politeness of mind consists in a courteous and delicate conception.

CCCCLIX. The gallantry of the mind consists in flattering agreeably.

CCCCLX. It often happens that things present themselves to our minds more
finished than we could make them with much labor.

CCCCLXI. The defects of the mind, like those of the face, grow worse as we
grow old.

CCCCLXII. A man of wit would be often at a loss, were it not for the company
of fools.

CCCCLXIII. It is a better employment of the understanding to bear the
misfortunes that actually befall us, than to penetrate into those that may.

CCCCLXIV. It is not so much through a fertility of invention that we find many
expedients in any one affair; as through a poverty of judgment, which makes us
listen to every thing that imagination presents, and hinders us from discerning
what is best at first.

CCCCLXV. Vivacity, when it increases with age, is not far short of frenzy.

CCCCLXVI. Those who have but one sort of wit are sure not to please long.

CCCCLXVII. Wit tempts us sometimes to play the fool with great courage.
Vivacity and wit make a man shine in company; but trite jokes and loud laughter
reduce him to a buffoon. Chesterf. Let. 134.


CCCCLXVIII. A man of sense finds less difficulty in submitting to a
wrong-headed fellow than in attempting to set him right.

CCCCLXIX. The labors of the body free men from pains of the mind. This it is
that constitutes the happiness of the poor. It is certain that as in the body,
when no labor or natural exercise is used, the spirits, which want their due
employment, turn against the constitution, and find work for themselves in a
destructive way; so in a soul, or mind, unexercised, and which languishes for
want of action and employment, the thoughts and affections, being obstructed in
their due course, and deprived of their natural energy, raise disquiet, and
foment a rancorous eagerness and tormenting irritation. The temper from hence
becomes more impotent in passion, more incapable of real moderation, and, like
prepared fuel, readily takes fire by the like spark. Shaftesbury, vol. II. p.
160.


CCCCLXX. The mind, between idleness and constancy, fixes on what is easy and
agreeable to it. This habit always sets bounds to our enquiries: No man was
over at the trouble to stretch his genius as far as it would go.

CCCCLXXI. Small geniuses are hurt by small events: great geniuses see through
and despise them.

UNTRUTH.
CCCCLXXII. Our aversion to untruth is often but an imperceptible ambition to
make our testimony considerable, and to give our words a religious weight.

WEAKNESS.
CCCCLXXIII. Weakness is the only incorrigible fault men have. It is however a
fault of Nature, for which a man seems to be no more blameable than a vessel is
for being leaky. Lord Chesterfield observes, that men are more unwilling to
have their weaknesses and imperfections known than their crimes: and that if
you hint to a man that you think him ignorant, silly, or even ill-bred or
awkward, he will hate you more and longer than if you tell him plainly you
think him a rogue.

Let. 129.


CCCCLXXIV. Weakness is more opposite to virtue than is vice itself.

CCCCLXXV. Weak people are incapable of sincerity.

CCCCLXXVI. More men are guilty of treason through weakness than any studied
design to betray.

CCCCLXXVII. If there be a man whose weak side has never been discovered, it is
only because we have never accurately looked for it. Lord Chesterfield seems to
have had this maxim full in view when he wrote his 97th Letter. He tells us,
that every body has a prevailing weakness; that Cardinal Richelieu, the ablest
statesman, had the idle vanity to be thought the best poet too; that Sir Robert
Walpole's prevailing weakness was to be thought to have a polite and happy turn
to gallantry, of which he had undoubtedly less than any man living; and that
those who had any penetration applied to it with success.


CCCCLXXVIII. Silence is the happiest course a man can take who is diffident of
himself.

WEARINESS.
CCCCLXXIX. The reason why lovers are never weary of one another is this, they
are always talking of themselves.

CCCCLXXX. We often boast that we are never out of spirtis; and yet are too
much conceited to own that we are not bad company.

CCCCLXXXI. We often forgive those who tire us, but cannot forgive those whom
we tire.

CCCCLXXXII. We are almost always tired with the company of those very persons
of whom we ought never to be tired.

WILL.
CCCCLXXXIII. We have more power than will; and it is only to disculpate us to
ourselves, that we often think things impracticable. Multa experiendo confieri,
Quae segnibus arduoe videntur. Tac. A. xiii. Our laziness persuades us that
those things are impracticable which we might easily accomplish.

Houssaye. And much to the same purpose is Terence's saying: Nil tam difficile
est quin Quae rendo investigari posset.

Heautont. Nothing so difficult but may be soon accomplished by industry.

Colman.


WISDOM.
CCCCLXXXIV. Man's chief wisdom consists in knowing his follies. -- Sapientia
prima (est) Stultitia caruisse. -- Horat. l. I. ep. i. Even in our flights from
vice some virtue lies,
And, free from folly, we to wisdom rise.
Francis.


CCCCLXXXV. Our wisdom is no less at Fortune's mercy than our wealth. "Res
advers^ consilium adimunt." Tac. A. xi. Adversity deprives men of their reason.

Houssaye.


CCCCLXXXVI. It is easier to be wise for others than for ourselves. -- "Ita
quaeso (dii vostram fidem!)
"Itane comparatam esse hominum naturam omnium,
"Aliena ut melius videant and dijudicent
"Quam sua! An eo fit, quia in re nostra aut gaudio
"Sumus praepediti nimio, aut aegritudine?"
Ter. Heaut. Gods! that the nature of mankind is such,
To see and judge of the affairs of others,
Much better than their own! Is It therefore so,
Because that in our own concerns, we feel
The influence of joy and grief too nearly?
Colman.


CCCCLXXXVII. Wisdom is to the mind what health is to the body. -- "Men's sana
in corpore sano."
Juv. Forgive the Gods the rest, and stand confined
To health of body and content of mind,
Dryden.


WOMAN.
CCCCLXXXVIII. Women affect coyness as an addition to their beauty.

CCCCLXXXIX. Women often fancy themselves to be in love when they are not. The
amusement of an intrigue, the emotion of mind produced by gallantry, their
natural passion for being beloved, and their unwillingness to give a denial;
all these make them imagine they are in love, when in fact they are only
coquetting.

CCCCXC. Women are completely cruel only to those they hate.

CCCCXCI. The wit of most women serves rather to fortify their folly than their
reason. Women have an entertaining ta^^le, and sometimes wit; but for solid
reasoning and good sense, I never knew one in my life that had it, or who
reasoned and acted consequentially for four and twenty hours together. Ld.
Chesterf. Let. 129.


CCCCXCII. The virtue of women is often the love of reputation and quiet.

CCCCXCIII. There are few virtuous women who are not weary of their profession.

CCCCXCIV. Most virtuous women, like hidden treasures, are secure because
nobody seeks after them.

CCCCXCV. Youth without, beauty is of as little consequence as beauty without
youth.

CCCCXCVI. The common foible of women who have been handsome, is to forget that
they are now no longer so. Every woman who is not absolutely ugly thinks
herself handsome -- The suspicion of age no woman, let her be ever so old, ever
forgives. -- No flattery is either too high or too low for them. They will
greedily swallow the highest, and gratefully accept of the lowest; and you may
safely flatter any woman, from her understanding down to the exquisite taste of
her fan. Ld. Chesterf. Let. 129, 181.


CCCCXCVII. Most women yield more through weakness than passion; whence it
happens that enterprizing rather than amiable men commonly succeed best with
them. "Whenever the slightest wishes arise," says Lord Chesterfield, "the rest
will soon follow." Again, If you are not listened to the first time, try a
second, a third, and a fourth. If the place is not already taken, depend upon
it it may be conquered. Let. 218, 224. It is difficult to say whether our
author or Lord Chesterfield has been hardest upon the sex. His Lordship however
(among other douceurs) acknowledges, that women are the only refiners of the
merit of men; that it is true they cannot add weight, but they polish and give
a luster to it; that they absolutely stamp every man's character in the beau
monde, and make it either current, or cry it down, and stop it in payments.

Let. 129 -- 218.


CCCCXCVIII. Of all the violent passions that which least misbecomes a woman is
Love. That is to say, in the judgment of the men.


CCCCXCIX. In their first desires women love the lover, afterward the passion.

CCCCC. That woman is much to be pitied who at once possesses both love and
virtue.

YOUTH.
CCCCCI. Youth changes its inclinations through heat of blood; old age
perseveres in it through habit.

CCCCCII. Youth is continual intoxication. It is the fever of Reason.

CCCCCIII. Young people at their entrance upon the world should be either
bashful or giddy; a composed self-sufficiency generally turns to impertinence.

CCCCCIV. Timidity is a fault dangerous to reprehend in those we would reform.
Because temerity, its opposite, is a fault equally dangerous, and it is
difficult to draw the line.


INDEX.
A.
ABility, Maxim 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 30. Absent Man, 64. Absence, 334. Accent, 7.
Accidents, 8, 9. Actions, 10 to 17. Address, 196. Advice, 18, 19, 20, 21.
Affectation, 22, 23, 150. Affliction, 24, 25, 26, 27. Age, 28, 29, 149, 152.
Agreeableness, 30, 31. Ambition, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. Appearance, 40.
Application, 38, 39. Approbation, 116. Attention, 64. Avarice, 41, 42, 43, 44.
B.
Beauty, 495, 496. Benefits, 45, 46, 47. Blame, 363. Business, 48.
C.
Caprice, 165, 224. Civility, 49, 123. Clemency, 50, 51. Conduct, 52, 53.
Confidence, 54, 55, 141, 354. Constancy, 56, 57 58 59, 60, 61. Contempt, 62,
63. Conversation, 54, 64. Copies, 65. Coquetry, 66 to 72, 119, 489. Courage,
433. Cowards, 140. Crimes, 73, 74, 75, 76. Criminals, 58. Cunning, 77 to 84.
Curiosi^y, 85.
D.
Death, 58, 86, 87 88, 194. Deceit, 77, 89 to 96, 104. Decency, 97. Defects,
128, 139. Dejection, 61. Delicacy, 411. Desire, 98, 99, 100, 382. Diffidence,
478. Disguise, 101, 102, 103. Dishonesty, 132. Distrust, 104, 105, 106.
Dullness, 92.
E.
Ease, 107. Education, 108. Eloquence, 109 110. Employment, 111, 112. Enemies,
427. Envy, 113 to 121, 376. Example, 122. Experience, 29.
F.
Falsehood, 103. Familiarity, 123. Fancy, 225. Favorites, 124. Faults, 125 to
139. Fear, 140. Fidelity, 141, 142. Flattery, 143, 144, 145, 146. Folly, 147 to
154, 198. Fortune, 155 to 165, 220, 229. Frauds, 96. Friendship, 166 to 187.
G.
Gallantry, 188, 189, 190. Generosity, 35. Glory, 191, 192, 193, 194. Goodness,
195, 196, 197, 198, 199. Goodnature, 198, 259. Good-sense, 200. Govern, 201.
Grace, 204. Gratitude, 206, 207 208, 209, 210. Gravity, 203. Great-men, 131,
191, 202. Greediness, 205.
H.
Happiness, 211, 212, 213. Hatred, 46, 118, 124, 214. Head, 215, 216, 217, 218.
Heart, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219. Heroes, 220, 221. Honor, 222. Hope, 223.
Humor, 224 to 230. Humors, 228. Hypocrisy, 231.
I.
Idleness, 232, 233, 234. Jealousy, 115, 235 to 241, 438. Ills, 242, 243, 244,
245, 246. Imitation, 113, 122. Imposture, 203, 403. Inconstancy, 59, 247.
Ingratitude, 248, 249, 250, 251. Infidelity, 252, 253. Innocence, 254.
Interest, 121, 2^5 to 261, 421. Intrepidity, 262. Invention, 464. Joy, 392.
Judgment, 263, 464. Justice, 264.
K.
Knowledge, 265. L. Labor, 469. Liberality, 266. Libertinism, 123, 299, 399,
400, 444, 479. Love, 27, 37, 59, 60, 71, 72, 94, 95, 177 to 182, 186, 267 to
292.
M.
Madmen, 229, 303. Magnanimity, 293, 294. Man, 295, 296, 297, 298, 299, 408.
Marriage, 300. Memory, 263, 301. Merit, 302 to 313. Mind, see Understanding,
and Wisdom. Misers, 41. Misfortunes, 33, 57, 61, 96, 175. Moderation, 36, 314,
315, 317.
N.
Negotiation, 318.
O.
Obligations, 47. Obstinacy, 319. Old Age, 320, 321, 322 501. Opportunity, 323,
324, 325. Orator, 109. Organs, 456.
P.
Passions, 326 to 337. Penetration, 338, 339. Perseverance, 340. Philosophy,
242. Philosophers, 341, 397. Piety, 342. Pity, 343. Pleasing, 344. Politeness,
458. Princes, 51. Probity, 356. Pride, 117, 193, 345 to 356. Promises, 357.
Properties, 358. Property, 447. Praise, 361, 363 to 371. Prudence, 359, 360,
394.
Q.
Qualities, 372 to 377. Quarrels, 378.
R.
Raillery, 379. Reason, 380, 381, 382. Reconciliation, 383. Relapse, 410.
Repentance, 384. Reputation, 192, 385, 386. Riches, 341, 387. Ridicule, 388.
S.
Satisfaction, 107. Secrets, 354, 389. Self-love, 108, 142, 173, 390 to 423.
Sensations, 402. Shame, 233, 361, 428. Silence, 418, 478. Simplicity, 403.
Sincerity, 106, 328, 404, 405. Singularities, 139. Slander, 406. Sobriety, 407.
Society, 408. Soul, 409, 410, 411. Spirits, 480. Subtilty, 412.
T.
Talkativeness, 413, 414, 415, 416, 417, 418. Taste, 419, 420, 421, 422, 423.
Temper, 227, 230. Timidity, 233, 504. Titles, 424. Treachery, 81, 425. Truth,
426.
U.
Valor, 228, 428, 429, 430 to 434. Vanity, 145, 413, 435, 436, 437, 438, 439,
452. Vice, 440 441, 442, 449, 451. Violence, 443, 444. Virtue, 233, 395, 445 to
453. Vivacity, 465. Vogue, 454. Understanding, 455 to 471. Untruth, 472.
W.
Weakness, 2, 246, 473, 474, 475, 476, 477, 478. Weariness, 479, 480, 481, 482.
Will, 483. Wisdom, 56, 484, 485, 486, 487. Wish, 99. Wit, 54, 154, 414, 455,
462, 466, 467. Woman, 76 to 72, 188, 189, 190, 252, 342, 488 to 500. World, 93.
Y.
Youth, 108, 495, 501, 592, 503, 504.
FINIS.
Lately published, and now selling at BELL's BOOK-STORE, next Door to ST.
PAUL'S Church, in Third-street, Philadelphia,
PHILOSOPHICAL, and POLITICAL STRICTURES, on the good and bad EFFECTS of
NATIONAL PRIDE: Translated from the German of Mr. ZIMMERMAN, Physician in
ordinary to his Britannic Majesty at Hanover.

EXTRACT from the PREFACE by the English TRANSLATOR.

THIS production bears so much the stamp of truth, freedom and virtue, that it
is surprising a work of such character has not yet been translated into
English, and laid before a nation never wanting to countenance merit, wherever
met with. The author is a SWISS, and writes with the freedom becoming a
virtuous man, born in a country from whence liberty, virtue, truth and
simplicity, have not yet been expelled by oppression, vice, flattery and
luxury. The applause of his own country and of Germany has rendered four large
impressions necessary; to the last of which the author made important
additions. The French, a people not easily pleasea in works of this nature,
have read this performance, translated into their language, with distinguished
approbation; and some of their capital writers have bestowed large encomiums
upon it

Impartial judges will, on perusal of this work, find it to abound with
sterling sense and judicious sentiments; and although it may possibly appear to
disadvantage in the translation, there will however still remain some of the
masterly strokes of our author, however weakened through the transfusion of his
original ideas into English expressions

But what gives us the best grounded hopes of the success of this publication
is derived from our auther's aim to combat prejudice, and to promote the cause
of liberty and virtue, which have always found the most numerous and most
zealous friends in the thinking part of this great and wealthy nation.

Also lately published, and now selling at BELL'S BOOK-STORE,
PRINCIPLES OF POLITENESS, and of KNOWING the WORLD; BY LORD CHESTERFIELD.

M^thodised and digested under distinct Heads, with ADDITIONS, by the Rev. Dr.
JOHN TRUSUER. Concaining every Instruction necessary to complete the Gentleman
and Man of Fashion, to teach him a Knowledge of Life, and make him well
received in all Companies.

A few COPIES of the following much esteemed modern Work, may be had at BELL's
BOOK-STORE, next Door to ST. PAUL'S Church, in Third-street, Philadelphia,
An ESSAY ON CRIMES AND PUNISHMENTS: Written by the MARQUIS BECCARIA, of MILAN.

With a COMMENTARY, Attributed to Monsieur De VOLTAIRE.

EXTRACT from the PREFACE of the TRANSLATOR.

PENAL laws, so considerable a part of every system of legislation, and of so
great importance to the happiness, peace and security of every member of
society, are still so imperfect, and are attended with so many unnecessary
circumstances of cruelty in all nations, that an attempt to reduce them to the
standard of reason must be interesting to all mankind. It is not surprising,
then, that this little book has engaged the attention of all ranks of people
in every part of Europe. It is now about eighteen months since the first
publication; in which time it has passed no less than six editions in the
original language; the third of which was printed within six months after its
first appearance. It has been translated into French; that translation has
also been several times reprinted, and perhaps no book on any subject was ever
received with more avidity, more generally read, or more universally applauded.
N. B. At Bell's Book-Store may also be had, great variety of Books in all arts,
sciences, and languages; especially Greek, Latin, French, and English classics,
Bibles of various kinds, likewise the very best French and English Dictionaries.


