Dancing Exploded.

A SERMON, SHOWING The Unlawfulness, Sinfulness, and bad Consequences of Balls,
Assemblies, and Dances in general.

DELIVERED in CHARLESTOWN, SOUTH CAROLINA, March 22, 1778.

BY OLIVER HEART, A. M.

Rejoice, O young Man, in thy Youth, and let thine Heart cheer thee in the Days
of thy Youth, and walk in the Ways of thine Heart, and in the Sight of thine
Eyes: But know thou, that for all these Things, God will bring thee into
Judgment.

ECCL. xi. 9. CHARLESTOWN, SOUTH CAROLINA: Printed by DAVID BRUCE. M.DCC.LXXVIII

PREFACE.
THE following sermon was first delivered to the people of my charge, at an
evening lecture, upwards of nineteen years ago. Many earnest solicitations that
it might be printed, have been withstood; and it would have still slept in
oblivion, had not the practice inveighed against been revived, and attended to,
in a frantic manner, at a time when every thing in Providence is calling us to
different exercises. The judgments of God are now spread over our land, and the
inhabitants ought to learn righteousness. The alarm of war -- the clangor of
arms -- the garments rolled in blood -- the sufferings of our brethren in the
Northern States, and of others in a state of captivity; together with the late
dreadful conflagration in this town, are so many loud calls to repentance,
reformation of life, and prayer, that the wrath of God may be turned away from
us: Instead of which, we are swallowed up in pleasure and dissipation. It will
hardly be credited, that the fire was scarce extinguished in Charlestown,
before we had Balls, Assemblies and Dances in every quarter: and even in some
of those houses which miraculously escaped the flames. And who can believe that
our youth are now taught to act plays publicly on the stage, while the theater
is crowded with spectators? Is it thus we requite the Lord for our deliverance?
The monumental ruins of this town, will rise up in judgment against the
inhabitants, and condemn them for such impieties. The sons and daughters of
pleasure may scoff at such serious hints, but God will not be mocked. I am no
prophet, nor the son of a prophet, and yet will venture to predict, that other,
and perhaps greater judgments will yet light upon us, unless we repent.

With regard to the following discourse, I have only to say, that it is
presented to public view, at the desire of many friends, and the call of
Providence; and that I have thereby borne my testimony against, what I look
upon as a sinful diversion: and shall now submit it to the blessing of God, and
the candor of those who may read it.

But I cannot conclude without expressing the grateful sense I feel, of my
obligations to the many Gentlemen, who, without my knowledge, or request, have
so liberally contributed toward defraying the expense of this publication;
that little or nothing is left for me to do, save preparing the copy for the
press. They may be assured that their benevolence and generosity will not be
forgotten by

Their obliged friend, (An unworthy servant of Christ) OLIVER HEART.
Charlestown, S. Carolina, April 15th, 1778.
A SERMON.
JOB xxi. 11. Their Children dance.


THE bare reading of my text has, I doubt not, occasioned a strange emotion of
spirits in many of my hearers; by some I may be pitied for my folly, by others,
despised and ridiculed. Be this as it may, it gives me little or no concern. If
I had not been willing to endure the scoff of the world, I should never have
made an open profession of the religion of Jesus; much less should I have
become a preacher of his much-despised gospel. He, however, who ventures to
attack vice, in a public manner, ought to be possessed of some degree of
fortitude and resolution; for sin is a monster of more than a thousand heads;
should he slay some, there will be many yet remaining, and he may expect to be
attacked on every side; especially if he should dare to level at some popular
darling vice; one that has been much caressed, and that too by the more polite
part of the world: in this case, there will be a mighty uproar among the
people. The whole city, or country, will be filled with wrath, as Demetrius and
his associates were, when they cried out, "Great is Diana of the Ephesians."
Or, as Micah, when stripped of his idols, and exclaimed, Ye have taken away my
gods, and what have I more?

However, leaving the event to God, I am determined, in faithfulness to my
trust, to maintain an open and vigorous war with all the vices and sinful
diversions of the age. Were I to act otherwise, my own conscience would condemn
me, and the world might justly reproach me, for my unfaithfulness. This
therefore may justify me, for entering on such a subject; which I shall
introduce by making some remarks on the context; in which Job seems to be at a
loss to account for the dispensations of divine Providence, with regard to the
prosperity of the wicked. The friends of Job were far from comforting him, as
they proposed, under his afflictions, and which they might have done by
observing to him, that one event often happens to the righteous and to the
wicked; so that no man can certainly judge of love or hatred, by all that is
done under the sun; and that chastisements are so far from being positive
tokens of divine wrath, they sometimes rather indicate love; for whom the Lord
loves he chasteneth, and rebukes every son whom he receives. Such hints as
these might have afforded Job some consolation, under his heavy trials. But his
three friends took a contrary method, which wounded, instead of comforting him.
The doctrine which they laid down, and endeavored to maintain was this, that
wicked men only are severely afflicted in this world. Hence, instead of
comforting Job, as an afflicted saint, they censure him as a vile sinner, and
an hypocrite. Job labors to refute their arguments, and maintain his own
innocence. He affirms that the wicked often flourish, become rich and great in
the world; when the righteous, on the other hand, are greatly afflicted, and
stripped of all their worldly possessions. He instances in his own case, and
then proceeds to point out the prosperous circumstances of the wicked, together
with their vain and impious practices.

Mark me, says Job, consider my present dolorous condition, and be astonished,
at the dealings of God with me. Can you justly charge me with any gross and
impious practices, which according to your hypothesis should bring down the
judgments of God upon me? You cannot; therefore lay your hand upon your mouth.
Try no more to vindicate your opinion, when you have a living instance, in
opposition to it, before your eyes. As for my own part, even when I remember my
former flourishing circumstances, and consider how I am stripped naked and
bare, and visited with the most painful and loathsome disorders, I am afraid of
those judgments of the Almighty, and trembling takes hold on my flesh; not
being able to account for my being thus afflicted, while the wicked go on
unpunished. Tell me, if you can, wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea,
are mighty in power? How does this coincide with your opinion, that God will
surely take vengeance on the wicked, in this life? The reverse of this seems to
be the case, for their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God
upon them. They are not afflicted, or plagued like other men. They swim in
affluence and roll in pleasure; there is no end to their wealth. And with their
riches, their families increase, so that they shall not want heirs. Their seed
is established in their sight, and their offspring before their eyes. They live
to see their childrens children, a numerous progeny, around them. So that they
send forth their little ones like a flock, for multitude; they going before
them, like a shepherd; not to the house of God, to engage in solemn devotion;
rather to balls, assemblies and the playhouse, where they take the timbrel and
harp, and such like instruments of music, with which they play, and their
children dance. Thus merrily they go on, regardless of a future state, or
eternal judgment. They spend their days in wealth, which they squander upon
their lusts and pleasures, in great abundance, although they can spare little
or nothing for the poor, or any other pious purposes. After they have thus run
their race -- in a moment they go down to the pit. Without any apprehension of
danger. The wicked have no bands in their death. Their principal concern in
life is to gratify their corrupt inclinations; therefore they say unto God,
depart from us: for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. The thoughts of
God are disagreeable to them, and his ways, which are the ways of holiness,
they cannot endure. Like Pharaoh, they know not the Lord, neither will they
obey him. What is the Almighty, say they, that we should serve him? And what
profit should we have, if we pray unto him? Thus fullness of riches, honor and
pleasure swell men's minds with pride, and beget in them mean, absurd and
atheistical notions of the Deity. They look upon him as a mere idol, as nothing
in the world; and therefore conclude that they can derive no advantage from
praying unto him.

This is the character of the wicked, as drawn by Job; a perfect and upright
man, who feared God and eschewed evil. In the midst of which description, and
as a part of it, stands that very polite, and much esteemed practice of
dancing. A diversion, which in all ages has had its admirers and votaries. To
oppose it, will be to incur the censure of all the gay gentry; and, with them
however, to forfeit all pretensions to polite breeding, and good manners. I am
willing to risque greater consequences than these, that I may maintain a
conscience void of offense, toward God and toward man. Bear with me then,
while I bear my testimony against a practice, which I look upon as sinful, and
opposed to the christian character. And which Job, in our text, certainly
speaks of as constituting part of the character of the wicked. And their
children dance. Observe, it is their children, i. e. the children of such
wicked parents as he was describing. By children we do not always understand
children as to age; sometimes it intends those who have descended from such or
such parents, although they themselves may have arrived at men's or women's
estate. And if we take the word children in our text, in this sense, the
meaning of Job appears evidently to be this, that the families, or posterity of
wicked parents, give into this practice. Would to God that none of the
descendants of pious parents, ever imitated their bad example: and that it
might never be said of any but wicked parents -- And their children dance.

In treating on this uncommon subject, I design

I. To state the argument, by giving a scriptural definition of the word dance.
II. Prove, by various arguments, that dancing, according to the common mode, is
absolutely sinful. III. Reply to the most popular arguments used in favor of
dancing. IV. Conclude with a brief improvement.
I. I am to state the argument, by giving a scriptural definition of the word
dance.

Dancing, according to the scripture account, is sometimes to be taken in a
good sense; and then it is expressive of the inward spiritual joy of the heart,
which was commonly manifested by a comely motion of the body: -- attended with
songs of praise to God, for some deliverance obtained, or mercy received. Thus
was dancing attended to, or practiced by the good people of old, in a religious
way. When their songs were spiritual, and the music, as also the motion of
their bodies, were suited thereto. Agreeable to which are the words in Psalm.
cxlix. 3. Let them praise his name in the dance: let them sing praises unto him
with the timbrel and harp. It was thus David danced before the ark, 2 Samuel vi.
16. And in this manner most of the dances, which the children of Israel had,
were attended to; as you may see by consulting the passages in Scripture, where
they are recorded. As for instance, when the Lord had destroyed Pharaoh and his
army in the Red sea, the Israelitish women sung and danced. See Exodus xv. 20,
21. And Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in her hand,
and all the women went out after her, with timbrels and dances. And Miriam
answered them, sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously; the horse
and his rider has he thrown into the sea. -- Such a song as this becomes a
rational mind, and is suitable to the taste of the greatest saint in the world.
But it would not be so agreeable to our modern dancers; were it to be sung in
their assemblies, it would be to them as smoke to the eves, or vinegar to the
teeth. Unto such music and dancing our Lord alludes, in the parable of the
prodigal son. Such kind of dancing was lawful and holy, and by no means to be
condemned.

But there is another sort of dancing spoken of in scripture, which consists in
a motion of the body, seemly, or unseemly, stirred up by natural or carnal joy,
to please or satisfy ourselves or others: without any view to the glory of God,
or the benefit of souls. Thus that fine young lady, the daughter of Herodias,
danced, on Herod's birth day; it should seem that she opened the ball, and
performed so well as to fill the king with raptures of joy; whereupon, in a
courtly dialect, he promised the young lady whatsoever she should ask, even to
the half of his kingdom. She, being before instructed by her mother, very
modestly asked no greater a reward, than the head of John the Baptist in a
charger. Thus, as a reward for dancing, the harbinger of Christ lost his life.
Enough, one would think, to cause every serious person to abhor the practice
for ever. It is this profane kind of dancing that is intended in our text; the
same with what is now in vogue; and which, if it were set in a proper light,
would not appear altogether such an innocent diversion as is generally
imagined. I proceed therefore,

II. To prove that dancing, according to the common, modern mode, is absolutely
sinful.

Some may be ready to think that this is a strange undertaking, and that I
shall certainly fail in the attempt. It will be but fair, and therefore I have
a right to expect, that you should suspend your judgment, until I have done;
hear with candor, then weigh the arguments in the balance of the sanctuary;
and if they prove too light, or insufficient to prove the point, reject them.

1. Then, I argue that dancing, according to the modern mode is sinful, because
it contributes nothing to the chief end of man, nay, is contrary to it. You
know that the chief end of man is to glorify God. And this ought to be our
principal aim in every thing we do. 1 Cor. x. 31. Whether therefore ye eat or
drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. Now I would ask our
advocates for dancing, what tendency that practice has to glorify God? Can you
say that you have any view to the glory of God in it? I am persuaded you will
not dare thus to give your conscience the lie. And if it should be proved, as I
presume it will, that dancing contributes rather to promote the interest of
Satan than the glory of God, it follows that the practice is directly contrary
to the chief end of man. Only give this one argument its proper scope, and due
weight, and dancing will soon cease.

2. A corroborating argument may be drawn from Romans xiv. 23. Whatsoever is not
of faith is sin: but dancing is not of faith, therefore it is sin. But perhaps
some may query, "What has this text to do with our diversions, or any of our
trivial concerns?" I shall answer in the words of a learned Expositor. "This is
a general rule, or axiom, which is not only applicable to the present case, but
to any other, whether of a natural, civil, moral, or evangelic kind; whatever
is not agreeable to the word and doctrine of faith ought not to be done;
whatever is done without faith, or not in the exercise of it, is culpable, for
without faith nothing can be pleasing to God." Therefore, until it can be
proved that dancing is of faith, you must excuse me if I insist that it is a
sinful practice.

3. Whatever action in life we cannot pray for a blessing upon, must be
unlawful and sinful; and such an one is dancing; therefore it ought to be
avoided. Will any say "we are not bound to seek the blessing of God upon our
ordinary concerns?" I will confront them with the words of Solomon. In all thy
ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths. Prove. iii. 6. Such
universal piety may not indeed suit the taste of frolickers and dancers; but it
well becomes the character of all the professed disciples of Jesus Christ. But
should any query, "Why may we not pray for a blessing on our dances?" I answer,
you may nor, because God has never promised to give a blessing to such
practices; therefore such a prayer would be sin. Nay, you cannot do it, because
it would be a profanation of the deity, and your consciences will not admit of
it.

4. The injunction which is laid upon us to redeem the time, prohibits our
mispending it in such practices. Time is a precious jewel, put into our hands
to improve for eternity; and those who trifle it away, are (in the scripture
account) very fools. Ephesians. v. 15, 16. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not
as fools, but as wise, -- redeeming the time. Can it with truth be said, that
the time which is spent at balls, assemblies and dances is redeemed? No such
thing. It is squandered away -- it is murdered -- it is consumed on our lusts;
and how our dancers will be able to answer to God, for all the time they have
thus shamefully misimproved, another day will determine.

5. It occasions an extravagant waste of money; with which great good might be
done. After enough has been thrown away upon a child, at the dancing school,
to have educated two or three poor children, then truly miss must be dressed
cap-a-pee to make a shining figure at the ball; which expends enough to relieve
a virtuous family in distress, or cloth half a dozen orphan children. If this
is to be good stewards of our money, I confess I am very much mistaken. And
stewards we certainly are, and only stewards of all we possess; and must be
accountable unto God for the spending of our substance. I am apprehensive our
dancers think but too little of this. Sirs, you would do well to consider, that
in a little time the Lord will say, "Come, give an account of thy stewardship,
for thou may be no longer steward."

6. The thoughts of having thus squandered our precious time, must occasion
very uneasy reflections on a dying bed. Unless the conscience should then be
asleep, which would avail but for a little while; for at death the illusion
must vanish, and then it would be still more terrible to awake in hell.
However, those diversions, which were so pleasing to the carnal mind, while in
health and strength, can afford no comfortable reflections in a dying hour. The
dancer will then be ready to say, "Wretch that I was, thus to squander away my
precious time, my health, strength and estate upon my idle diversions! How much
better might I have improved the blessings which Providence bestowed upon me?
How much might I have done for God and my own soul? But, alas, they were
objects, too much neglected! How ought I to have redeemed my time, in preparing
for death and eternity? But, fool that I was, I spent my life in vain mirth,
and sinful pleasures. O, for those precious moments which I have lost! But they
are gone -- they are lost for ever; and I am afraid my God, my heaven, my soul
are lost too! Pity, and pray for me, O my friends; and let my late repentance
be a warning to you. O guard against those sinful diversions on which my poor
soul has been shipwrecked." Such a scene might affect one of our dancers, and
for a little time make him serious. But how soon do such impressions wear off?
And then the libertine returns to his folly.

7. It behooves us to live each day and hour, as we would wish to die; and not
to engage in any thing that would alarm us, in case death should overtake us in
the act. The truth and utility of this assertion none will deny. Let me then
ask, would you be willing to meet with death at a ball, or a dance? You would
not. And how do you know, when you venture on the enchanted ground, that you
shall come away alive? And is this to hold yourselves in readiness? Think, O my
friends, how you would look -- how you would feel, should this ever happen.
Horror would fasten on your countenance, -- trembling seize every joint and
nerve, and the convulsive pangs of conscience would be more intolerable than
the tortures of the bloody inquisition. You would probably use the language of
a fair lady, in a dialogue with death, "I little thought you would have called
so soon:
"And must my morning sun go down at noon?
O, dreadful! To be cut off, in the midst of my pleasures -- to be hurried from
a ball to the bar -- without any time to repent, or prepare for eternity! But
perhaps you will say, "Would you have us always on our knees, waiting for
death? I answer, no. You may boldly meet death when engaged about your secular
concerns, or any of the duties of life. I remember to have read, I think, in
the life of Lord Chief Justice Hale, that at the time of sessions, while one of
the attorneys was pleading, there came on a most terrible thunder storm, which
silenced the attorney; upon which the Judge said to him, Sir, why don't you go
on? Go on, my Lord, said the attorney, don't you see how black the heavens are,
and the lightning rolling on the ground, while the thunder roars as though the
last day were come? -- And suppose it is, said his Lordship, are you not in the
way of your duty? I am here about my business, and I am as willing to go from
hence to judgment, as I should if I were on my knees in my closet. The way of
duty is the way of safety, and while thus engaged we have nothing to fear; but
who could manifest such fortitude at a dance?

8. The conversation at dances is inconsistent with christianity; I will appeal
to the conscience of those who frequent such places, whether or no flattery,
lying, ribaldry and nonsense does not abound there? Little, I fear, is to be
heard, that has any tendency to reform the manners, or improve the mind; much
less, to minister grace to the hearers. There may be enough to corrupt the
morals and viciate the taste of both sexes. Is it not from hence, at least in
part, that we have so much obscene, vulgar and profane conversation amongst us?
Our merry gentry, who delight so much in frolicking and dancing, would do well
to consider how they will answer for all their filthiness, foolish talking,
jesting and such like things; when they come to stand at the bar of God.

9. Again, Many dances are extremely immodest, and incentive to uncleanness.
This is acknowledged by Mr. Addison, although an advocate for dancing. "As for
country dancing, says he, it must indeed be confessed, that the great
familiarity between the two sexes on this occasion, may sometimes produce very
dangerous consequences." But modesty bids me be sparing here, otherwise more
might be said. My soul, come not thou into their secrets, and unto their
assemblies, mine honor, be not thou united.

10. Farther, The music which leads the dance, is often very obscene; the
tunes being adapted to the most vulgar and filthy songs; which have a tendency
to pollute the imagination, and to raise unchaste thoughts in the mind. Thus
the heart becomes a sink of uncleanness -- a cage of all manner of abominable
and filthy lusts.

11. Moreover, The practice we are speaking of, cannot be endured in a
minister. And why so? If there is no harm in it, and if it may be attended to
with advantage, why must ministers be prohibited the practice? The thing speaks
for itself: people are conscious that it is an evil, and therefore, although
they will indulge themselves in it, they will not allow it in those who have
the care of their souls. As for my own part, I think indeed a dancing parson,
is an odd character; and a dancing christian, is not much better. And our
advocates for dancing would do well to consider, that the Almighty has no more
allowed them a dispensation in this case, than their ministers.

12. Once more, This practice renders persons the most unlike to Christ, our
great pattern and exempler. Did Jesus ever indulge himself in mirth? No.
Frequently did he mourn over such impieties, but never did he countenance them,
in any way whatever. The doctrines, precepts and examples of Christ, all
prohibit vain mirth -- idle and sinful diversions. Those who indulge themselves
in these, act diametrically opposite to the religion of Jesus; which enjoins
temperance, mortification, self-denial and the like virtues.

13. In fine, The greatest, and best of men have ever bore a testimony against
the practice of dancing. I shall quote some passages from several authors,
which I shall do in their own words; hoping that their sentiments may make some
impression upon your minds. We shall begin with the observations of that truly
great and good man, Mr. Caryl, upon our text and context.

Their children dance, that is, says Mr. Caryl, they are instructed and taught
the art of music and dancing; or there is rejoicing among them; this is proper
to the age and state of children. Christ himself speaks as if this were the
trade of children. Matt. xi. 16. Whereunto shall I liken this generation? They
are like children sitting in the market place. What do they there? Are they
buying or selling? Are they bargaining or trading? No, that is the business of
men. What do the children there? They call to their fellows and say, We have
piped to you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned to you, and ye have not
lamented. -- They take the timbrel and the harp. They live in pleasure; hence
observe, worldly men breed their children vainly. Here is a description of
their education; they are sent forth as a flock in a dance, playing upon the
timbrel, etc. Here is all the knowledge and literature they are brought up to;
here is all their religion, all the catechism that they are taught. The Lord
gives this report of Abraham, who had a numerous family, I know him that he
will command his children, and his household after him, and they shall keep the
way of the Lord. Genesis xviii. 19. Abraham did not teach his to dance. Here was
education in the fear of the Lord.

Thus far are the words of Mr. Caryl. The pious Mr. Henry, upon the place,
says,

They are merry and live a jovial life. They have their balls and music
meetings, at which their children dance; and dancing is fittest for children,
who know not how better to spend their time, and whose innocence guards them
against the mischiefs which commonly attend it. Their children do not pray, or
say their catechism, but dance and sing, and rejoice at the sound of the organ.
Sensual pleasures are all the delights of carnal people; and as men are
themselves so they breed their children.

I shall add the words of the learned and judicious Dr. Gill, in his exposition
of the text.

And their children dance, either in an inartificial way, skip and frisk, and
play like calves and lambs, and so are very diverting to their parents, as well
as shows them to be in good health; which adds to their parents happiness and
pleasure: or in an artificial way, being taught to dance; and it should be
observed, it is their children, the children of the wicked, and not of the
godly, that are thus brought up; so Abraham did not train up his children, nor
Job his; no instance can be given of the children of good men being trained up
in this manner, or of their children dancing in an irreligious way.

This is the testimony of the great Dr. Gill. Mr. Baxter speaking of dancings,
revellings and idle diversions, interrogates thus,

Do thou not know that thou have higher delights to mind? And are these toys
beseeming a noble soul, that has holy and heavenly matters to delight in? Do
thou not feel what a plague the very pleasure is to thy affections? How it
bewitcheth thee, and befooleth thee, and makes thee out of love with holiness,
and unfit for any thing that is good? Again, Is it sport that thou need?
Do thou not more need Christ, and grace, and pardon, and preparation for
death and judgment, and assurance of salvation? Why then are not these thy
business? Farther, Have thou not a God to obey and serve? And does he not
always see thee? And will he not judge thee? Alas! thou know not how soon.
Though thou be merry in thy youth, and thy heart cheer thee, and thou walk in
the ways of thy heart, and the sight of thine eyes, yet know thou that for all
these things God will bring thee into judgment.

I shall conclude this head with a passage from Moreland's history of the
evangelical churches of the valleys of Piedmont. Here I would observe, that
these were the only pure churches in the world, for several centuries. When the
world wandered after the beast, these people adhered strictly to the religion
of Jesus. They were remarkable for piety, and endured the most cruel
persecutions for the cause of Christ. In the tenth article of their discipline,
which treats of balls and dances, they say,

A ball is the devil's procession, and whosoever enters there, enters into
his procession. The devil is the leader, the middle, and the end of the dance.
So many paces as a man makes in a ball, so many leaps he makes toward hell.
They sin in dancing sundry ways, first, in walking, for all their paces are
numbered; they sin in touching, in their ornaments, in hearing and seeing, in
speaking, in singing, in lies and vanities. A ball is nothing but misery, sin
and vanity.

They observe that the dancing of a damsel, caused John the Baptist's head to
be cut off; and that the dancing of the children of Israel, caused Moses to
break the two tables of the law. They also prove that the ten commandments are
violated by balls. They cite a passage from St. Augustine, wherein he says,
"The miserable dancer, knows not, that so many paces as he makes at a ball,
by so many leaps he draws nearer to hell."

Thus have I offered some reasons and arguments, which have determined me
against dancing; which I have enforced by the testimony of several great and
good men; whether or no the whole has sufficient force to prove the
unlawfulness and sinfulness of the practice, must be left to the candor of
serious minds.

After all, it may be thought that my work is but half done, unless I can
answer whatever may be brought in support of this favorite, and fallely
called, polite diversion. And this brings me,

III. To reply to the most popular arguments used in favor of dancing.

1. One of the most popular arguments (or rather excuses) for this practice is,
"I can see no harm in it, therefore it can be no crime in me." Poor creature.
-- You can see no harm in it. -- This is of as much force, as if a blind man
was to tell us that he could neither distinguish colors, nor see the light. We
may pity your unhappiness, but cannot give you eyes. But you conclude, it
cannot be a crime in you, because you do not view it in that light. If we are
not cognizable for sins of ignorance, Saul was not chargeable with guilt, when
he persecuted the church, and yet, for this reason he accounted himself the
chief of sinners. But it may be you are wilfully blind. You might be better
instructed, if you would. Let me therefore advise you to pray to God for
instruction, in this matter, laying yourself open to conviction; and I am
persuaded you will soon see an evil in dancing, for which you must be
accountable to God.

2. It may be said, "Dancing is a part of good breeding, without which we are
not qualified for company, but shall appear singular and be laughed at."

Perhaps custom may have induced the world to look upon dancing as a branch of
good breeding, rather than any excellency in itself. However, to give this plea
all its force, I will grant that some advantages might be derived from the
dancing school, if properly managed; and possibly may as it is, so far as it
teaches a graceful mein, an easy carriage and a genteel behavior. But these
advantages will by no means compensate for the disadvantages which attend it.
For first, miss who is educated at the dancing school, soon swells with pride
and self-importance, looks down, with an air of disdain, on those who are not
as well accomplished, as herself, and but too much copies the description in
Isai. iii. 16. The daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth
necks, and wanton eyes, walking, and mincing as they go. However, the young
lady's fine acquirements, are not to be buried, in those avocations which
industry inspires; therefore in the next place, immense sums are expended to
equip her for public view. And so, rustling in her silks, powdered a-la mode
and studded with brilliants, she makes her appearance at the ball; where she is
introduced into fine company -- gets a taste for pleasure and dissipation,
which often ends in the destruction of soul and body. The woman who lives in
pleasure, is dead while she lives. 1 Timothy v. 6.

And now, suppose you are not qualified for such company, what is the loss? The
friendship of the world, is enmity with God. James iv. 4. And our greatest
danger lies in our becoming too familiar with it. But you say that you shall be
singular and laughed at. This indeed may be mortifying; but are you as careful
not to be singular in religious society? Perhaps when there, you have nothing
to say, yet this gives you no concern. As to your being laughed at, it need
give you no pain; for if you will shun vice and pursue piety, you shall endure
the laugh of the world, although you should behave ever so well.

3. To vindicate dancing, it is said that "it unbends the mind, and recreates
the body." -- This plea can suit none but such as live a studious, sedentary
life; and there are many exercises, less exposed to temptation, that will
answer those salutary purposes, equally as well. Walking, riding, or manual
labor may be as profitable and efficacious. Besides, it does not appear that
dancing has such a beneficent tendency, as alleged. Strange, that being
deprived of natural rest -- exposed to night damps and inclement air, in a
profuse sweat, should be so salutary. The truth is, the reverse is the case;
and many have danced themselves into eternity.

4. But perhaps we shall meet with some champion in the cause of dancing, who
comes forth, Goliath like, bidding defiance to the armies of Israel, and has
the effrontery to assert, that "the lawfulness of dancing may be supported by
scripture." Can it indeed? If so, our business will be done for us, and we will
promise to give up the point. Why, says this hero, "did not David dance?" Yes.
We know, as well as he, that David danced; but then it was religiously, before
the ark. I have already shown in what sense we are to understand David's
dancing; and it is insolent, as well as perverting of scripture, to bring this
passage to support our irreligious, modern dances. But, says this champion, "
Solomon tells us there is a time to dance." True, and Solomon tells us also,
there is a time to die. If our dancers thought more of this, they would find
less time for that. But let it be proved, if it can, that Solomon intends
dancing according to the common mode: and suppose he should, all that can be
drawn from hence is, that there is a time, in which numbers will be profane
enough to dance.

5. Another plea for dancing, often made use of is this, "We may spend our time
a great deal worse." I reply, it always indicates a bad cause when one vice is
subpoenaed to vindicate another. Nothing therefore, need be said to show the
weakness of this excuse, only, that we may spend our time a great deal better,
themselves being judges.

6. Some have endeavored to plead for this practice, by quoting the example of
professors. "There are such and such, say they, who are professors of religion,
and whom we believe to be good people, who will go to heaven, and yet they can
dance as well as any body." -- More is the pity, that they should lay a
stumbling block in the way of others. Often they are heartily despised by the
people of the world, for their sinful compliances. However, all professors are
not christians. Some who have Jacob's voice, have Esau's hands. And even the
best are liable to err. Therefore follow none, unless they follow Christ. It
will be no excuse in the day of judgment, that you saw professors go to balls
and assemblies, and therefore you thought there could be no harm in such
diversions.

Thus, having given a scriptural definition of the word dance; and proved that
dancing, according to the modern mode, is sinful and attended with bad
consequences; also replied to the most popular arguments, in favor of dancing;
I now come, in the last place,

IV. To make some improvement of the subject.

1. From what has been said, we may see the folly of those parents who put
their children to the dancing-school, and spend such immense sums of money, to
bring them up in pride, gaity and all the vanities of life. Is this to bring up
our children in the fear of the Lord, as Abraham did? Is it to train up a child
in the way he should go, as Solomon directs? Would it not be much better, to
devote our money to pious and charitable uses? Do such parents take as much
care of their childrens souls? Do they instruct them in the principles of the
christian religion, and warn them against sin and vanity? I fear they do not.
Look to it parents; you have the charge of your childrens souls, as well as of
their bodies; and a much weightier charge it is. Think, how dreadful it will be
to have the blood of your dear childrens souls, crying against you, in the day
of judgment. How awful would it be, to have a child thus to address you, on
that day. "Oh! cruel parent; you were the instrument of my being, or I should
not have existed, to have been thus miserable. You cared indeed for my body,
but why did not you care for my soul, and labor to make that happy? You might,
and you ought to have restrained me, when pursuing vanity and folly. But
instead of that, you placed me in the way of temptation; yea, you went with me
yourself, to the devil's seminaries; where I was taught to practice sinful
pleasures. And now, alas! I am to reap the fruit of our doings, to all
eternity." Is the thought shocking? O! give no occasion for the dolorous
complaint.

2. What has been said, reproves those who are attached to, and engaged in the
practice of frolicking, dancing, and such like sinful diversions. I say, such
like diversions; for you would do well to consider, that the arguments against
dancing, will generally hold good against gaming, horse racing and all sinful
diversions. My dear friends, you are highly reprovable; but I rather choose to
address you in soft language. Let the time past suffice you, to have gone on in
sin and folly. Forsake the foolish and live, and walk in the way which leads to
eternal life. You are surely making work for repentance. God grant that it may
be in time.

If after all that has been said, you still remain unconvinced, and can see no
harm in these things, -- suffer me to advise you to pray earnestly, that you
may be enabled to see things in a proper light; and particularly, that you may
have a discovery of the wretchedness of your own wicked and deceitful hearts.
Then seriously ask yourselves these following questions. -- For what was I
made? Do I answer the end of my being? Is God glorified by all my actions? Is
living in pleasure to live like a christian? Must I not shortly die, and give
an account of my actions to God? Have I any time to spare from transacting
business for eternity? If this advice were universally regarded, we should hear
no more of balls, assemblies and dances; instead of which, our temple gates
would be crowded, and the general cry would be, Lord, what shall I do to be
saved? May God send us the happy day, and to his name shall be all praise. AMEN.

FINIS.

