A DISCOURSE DELIVERED ON THE FIFTH OF MARCH, 1778.

A DISCOURSE, PREACHED ON MARCH THE FIFTH, 1778. BY JOHN LATHROP, A. M. PASTOR
OF THE SECOND CHURCH IN BOSTON. Published at the Request of the Hearers.
Together with some Marginal Notes.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by DRAPER and FOLSOM, at their Printing-Office, near
the Lamb Tavern, Newbury-Street. M.DCC, LXXVIII.

A DISCOURSE.
GENESES VI.13. -- The Earth is filled with Violence. --


REASON, that principle which the Author of our existence implanted in our
breast, is sufficient to teach us, The offspring of one common parent ought to
live in constant harmony: And the inspired writings abound with exhortations to
mutual affection, together with the interchange of those kind offices, which
are essential to the happiness of families, and of larger societies.

THE true felicity of those who dwell together in unity, is described in the
old testament, by some of the most pleasing figures of eastern language.
"Behold," says King David, "How good and how pleasant it is, for brethren to
dwell together in unity. It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that
ran down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard, that went down to the skirts of
his garments. As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the
mountains of Zion, for there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for
ever more." Psalm. 133.
-- And the great founder of our Religion, Jesus Christ, has assured us, we
cannot be his disciples, nor may we hope to share in the peculiar blessings
which he has purchased, unless we feel the influence of kind affection one
toward another. John, 13, 34, 35.


BUT a shocking reverse, to what reason dictates, and the scriptures enjoin,
have the actions of mankind exhibited, in all ages of the world.

THE history of the human race, from Adam to the present day, is gloomy and
affecting. In the very page where we read, "Men began to multiply on the face
of the earth," it is also written, "God saw the wickedness of man was great,
and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart, was only evil
continually." And a little after we read, -- "The earth also was filled with
violence." Geneses, vi. Chap.


THIS is the account which comes to us by inspiration from heaven: Such were
the offspring of Adam before the flood, generally abandoned to their lusts, and
under the government of the vilest passions.

SHOULD we now look into the records of human actions, which have been
preserved by faithful men from the earliest times, we shall find the volums
swell with the sad narrative of fraud, injustice, rapine, murder -- and every
kind of violence. --

BY violence we understand an unlawful application of force, or the arbitrary
stretch of power which unreasonable and wicked men, have frequently exercised
over such as were under their control.

AGE, natural superiority, and a great variety of circumstances, give some of
the children of men opportunity to rule over others. And such is the love of
power, which has generally been discovered by the Sons of Adam, that those who
had a little were constantly wishing for more; and those who had arrived to
great authority, grew impatient of restraint, and wished for absolute dominion.

PARENTS have been guilty of violence toward their children: Although the ties
of nature oblige them to treat their offspring with the tenderest affection,
there have been instances of a very different conduct: there have been
instances where it was necessary to apply the Apostolic caution, "Ye fathers
provoke not your children to wrath, but bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord." Ephesians vi.4.


MASTERS have been guilty of violence toward their servants: Men of
unreasonable passions, have treated their slaves and dependants with great
inhumanity, not remembering that "their Master also is in Heaven," Ephesians. vi, 9.
to whom they must give an account.

THE rich have been guilty of violence toward the poor: They have in many
cases extorted from them services without returning a suitable reward. The
Apostle James addresseth himself to covetous oppressors in the following
language. "Behold the hire of the laborers which have reaped down your fields,
which is of you kept back by fr^^d, cries, and the cries of them which have
reaped, have entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath." James v.4.


GOVERNORS and rulers of the earth, have been guilty of violence toward their
subjects. Solomon informs us, he "returned and considered all the oppressions
that are done under the Sun, and behold the tears of such as were oppressed and
they had no comforters; and on the side of their oppressors there was power;
but they had no comforters." Eccles. iv.i.
Such was the melancholy state of the children of men, while under cruel
oppressors, that the wise King of Israel adds, -- "I praised the dead which are
already dead, more than the living, which are yet alive." --

AND should we cast an eye over the Kingdoms of the world at the present day,
we shall discover the effects of oppression and violence, on every quarter of
the globe.

AMBITIOUS and haughty men, by success in war, or by taking advantage of the
weakness or inattention of their neighbors, have established despotism over the
greatest part of the earth. And while some nations have preserved more
liberties than others, none have escaped attacks from the common enemy of human
freedom.

NORTH AMERICA, which seemed to have been reserved in divine providence, as the
last retreat of a virtuous few, who were determined never to yield those rights
which they had received from Heaven to the will of any temporal monarch, has,
for some years past, been threatened with slavery and wretchedness.

UNWEARIED attempts have been made by the powers of Great Britain to deprive
the inhabitants of this land of their most valuable interests; and compel them,
by violence and cruelty, to lay themselves, with every thing precious to them,
at a Tyrant's feet: Ye, so determined is that prince who now disgraces the
throne of his ancestors, to establish absolute Government, through the several
parts, of what he calls, " his dominions," that he would rather spill the blood
of millions, and expose himself, as well as the Nation to infamy and ruin, than
abandon an object so pleasing to him, and which he promises his parliament he "
will steadily pursue." See his Speech Nov. 20. 1777.


THE inhabitants of this State, received the first attacks which were made by
the enemy, on the common rights of America. -- The sons of violence first
pointed the instruments of death at our breasts. --

I MIGHT now call you, my friends and fellow citizens, to remember the fifth of
March, One thousand seven hundred and seventy. -- I might call you to view the
ground, where the blood of our brethren was most wantonly spilled on that
memorable night, but your feelings, I know, will be sufficiently touched by the
worthy Gentleman, who, at the desire of the Town, will soon pronounce an
Oration from this desk.

THE shocking massacre, perpetrated on that gloomy evening, which we shall
never forget, may be considered as the commencement of hostilities by the
British troops in America: And the inhabitants of these States, must have been
justified by the impartial world, had they resolved from that moment, never to
suffer one in the livery of George the III to walk this ground.

BUT such was our patience under aggravated insults -- such our hopes that
after all, the unhappy dispute might be amicably settled, that we saw forces
collecting from all quarters without resisting them. -- We saw the sacred
Charters, which had been given, by former Kings of England to the first
planters of these Colonies -- We saw those sacred Charters which confirmed to
us the essential rights of freemen, the sport of a prince, who was bound by
solemn ties to observe them.

OPPOSITION was not made to that force which we saw collecting against us, till
our enemies carried fire and sword into the heart of the country.

NEVER shall we forget the ninteenth of April, One thousand seven hundred and
seventy-five, when a number of Americans were murdered at LEXINGTON, and we
heard the first solemn call, to arm, and oppose the strength of Great Britain.

SINCE the sword on both sides has been drawn, the operations of war, on the
part of the enemy, have been cruel beyond expression. -- Conquest has not been
the sole object of their exertions. -- Devastation, barbarity and murder, have
been their delight.

SOME of our ancient and most flourishing Towns have been pillaged and burned.
Charlestown was consumed by the enemy on the 17th of June, 1775. The flames of
which warmed the imagination of General Burgoyne, for the striking Description
he gave of the Battle on Bunker's-Hill. -- A great part of FALMOUTH was burnt
in the month of October, 1775, by the infamous Mowat, Capt. of a 16 Gun-Ship.
NORFOLK, one of the oldest and most flourishing Towns in Virginia, was wholly
consumed in the month of January, 1776. KINGSTON, the third Town in the State
of New York, was reduced to ashes in the month of October, 1777. -- Besides the
wanton destruction of these places, between 4 and 500 houses were pulled down
and burnt in Boston, while the town was held by British troops. -- The enemy
took peculiar pleasure in abusing the houses erected for the worship of God.
One venerable pile, known by the name of the OLD-NORTH was torn to pieces by
the sons of violence; those wretches accompaning their impious work, with
language too profane and blasphemous to relate. -- One large and elegant
Building was shamefully defaced, and used as a Manage for their Horse. Three
others, and one among them the most finished and expensive on the Continent,
were prostituted to the purposes of Barracks; and one was used as a Barn to
contain fodder for their Cattle. --


NEITHER the delicacy of the sex, or the infirmities of the aged were
sufficient to secure them against British and Savage in humanity. --

THE weak and infirm have been slain in their houses. -- The venerable head
grown white with years has been mangled by ruffian Soldiers. -- The blooming
virgin dressed for her nuptials, has been seized by Savage hands, hurried away
and murdered with unutterable cruelty See Genesis Gates's Letter to Genesis Burgoyne,
of Sept. 2, 1777. This Letter contains such an account of the unparallelled
barbarity of our enemies, that it should be frequently read, to impress our
m^^^ with a sense of the temper and disposition of the men with whom we are at
war. -- The following is an extract. "That the Savages of America, should in
their warfare, mangle and scalp the unhappy prisoners who fall into their
hands, is neither new nor extraordinary: But that the famous Lieut. Genesis
Burgoyne, in whom the fine Gentleman is united with the Soldier and the
Scholar, should hire the Savages of America to scalp Europians, and the
descendants of Europians: Nay more, that he should pay a price for each scalp
so barbarously taken, is more than will be believed in Europe, until
authenticated facts, should in every Gazette confirm the truth of the horrid
tale. -- Miss M'Rea, a Lady lovely to the sight, of virtuous character, and
amiable disposition, engaged to be married to an officer in your army, was,
with other women and children, taken out of a house near Fort-Edward, and
carried into the woods, and there scalped and mangled in a most shocking
manner. Two parents, with their six children, were all treated with the same
inhumanity, while quietly residing in their once peaceful dwellings. The
miserable fate of Miss M'Rea was particularly aggravated, by her being dressed
to receive her promised husband, but met her murderer, employed by you. Upwards
of an hundred men, women and children have perished by the hands of ruffians,
to whom it is asserted, you have paid the price of blood."
--

BUT I forbear. -- The rehearsal is too shocking. -- Who then could endure the
sight of woes, a description of which we find insufferable? -- None, most
certainly, none could endure the sight of such dreadful scenes, but those
Britains who were so lost to the feelings of humanity, as to reward the Savages
for mangling the innocent and defenseless.

AND besides the open murder of the aged and infirm, -- of women and children,
our enemies have basely starved many of our brethren to death, who were in
their hands as prisoners. -- Many have suffered in the most shocking manner and
died in prisons and guard-ships. -- More than a thousand perished in the city
of New York the winter before last. -- And when our brethren were suffering
hunger and cold, and the vilest insult, a sorded enemy endeavored to prevail on
them to inlist into the British service; but such was the virtue of those
heroes, that the last extreme of misery, was not sufficient to shock their
fidelity to their country. They rather chose to perish in want of all things,
than draw their sword against the liberties of America. -- They met the
approaches of death, in their dismal circumstances, with a degree of fortitude
seldom to be found in the history of mankind. -- Some of our unhappy brethren
who were captivated, and carried to Great Britain, were afterward sent to the
East Indies, from whence they can have little or no reason to expect they shall
ever return.

SUCH acts of meanness and cruelty have our enemies been guilty of. -- Such are
the men who have promised their haughty master, that by devastation and
slaughter they will compel the inhabitants of these States to yield
unconditional subjection to his pleasure.

EVERY son of freedom then throughout this Continent, must be justified in the
view of that God who hates violence and cruelty, when he draws his sword, and
appealing to Heaven, solemnly swears, he will never sheathe it, till those
miscreants -- those enemies to the common rights of mankind, are utterly
destroyed, or drove from this once happy land.

SHOULD the inhabitants of the confederated American States act with wisdom and
spirit, it is certainly in their power, by the common smiles of divine
providence, to establish their independency and secure the blessings of civil
and religious liberty to themselves, and to millions of unborn posterity. And
we have the most convincing evidence, that the supreme Ruler of the universe,
who gives the Kingdoms of the world to whomsoever He will, is ready to grant
every needed assistance.

DIVINE goodness is to be acknowledged in raising up men of the first abilities
to watch over our common rights, and give us warning when those rights were
invaded. -- We esteem converts to the true interest of our country, and rejoice
to see any come in even at the eleventh hour, and join heartily in the cause of
virtue and freedom; but we revere those characters which first appeared, and in
opposition to every danger, boldly impeached the enemies of our liberties, and
conjured us by every thing sacred, not to suffer the inheritance purchased by
the blood of our fathers, to be wrested from us.

HOW remarkably has divine providence taken us up when our circumstances were
most perplexing and difficult?

HEAVEN has frequently sent us supplies of warlike stores when in great want
of them; and prevented the enemy from acting with vigor against us, when we
were prepared but feebly to resist them. There was a time after the Battle on
the Heights of Charlestown when our army, which was not large, had not nine
rounds of powder to a man, nor was any tolerable supply procured till an
ordnance Brig was taken by Capt. Manley, some time in Dec. 1775. In the Spring
after a large Ship with 75 Tons of powder, together with a great variety of
warlike Stores, was taken by Capt. Mugford and brought into Boston. Those two
Captures afforded a large supply. -- The quantities of Provision and
Merchandise taken by the American Cruisers, are immense.


THE temporary advantages of our enemies, have, in several instances, been,
turned against them: And although by accounts which have been laid before the
British parliament, we find they had more than fifty thousand troops in America
the last year, their prospects at present, to be sure, are not better than they
were when the campaign opened. -- One large army, lately under the command of
General Burgoyne is wholly conquered; near half of them wasted and destroyed,
and the remainder are now prisoners of war. And the main body under General How
have effected little more through the last season, than to change their
quarters, from New York to Philadelphia.

TO despair since Heaven has done so much for us, would evidence a criminal
distrust of divine goodness: To be discouraged since the whole force of
Great Britain, aided by large bodies of German hirelings have effected so
little, would discover unpardonable cowardice and meanness of spirit.

WE have every motive to a vigorous exertion, that can operate on the human
mind, -- If we support our liberties we may be as happy a people as ever
existed, -- We shall have it in our power to settle our own forms of
government, and suit them to our peculiar circumstances, our genius and
disposition. -- We have not only the means of subsistence, but we find many of
the means of defense in our own country: And we are at so great a distance from
the other parts of the world, that no enemy will ever attack us if we succeed
in the present struggle.

BUT on the other hand, should we through stupidity; or a want of wisdom, or
spirit in those who are entrusted with our most important affairs; or a general
decay of public virtue in all orders of people among us: -- Should we by the
operation of these or any other causes, suffer our country to be overrun by
the enemy, imagination cannot paint the wretchedness that must follow.

SHOULD we suffer ourselves to be conquered, we must bid adieu, a final adieu
to freedom civil and religious: -- To property: -- To domestic happiness, and
the most valuable blessings which now distinguish Americans from the wretched
subjects, of foreign despotic sovereigns.

WHOEVER thinks of submitting to the power of Britain, as it is now exerted
against us, must endeavor to reconcile himself to the ideas of beggary and
absolute slavery: Yea further, he must endeavor to reconcile himself to the axe
-- the halter -- the gibbit. The dreadful vengeance which will be inflicted on
the Americans, if Great Britain should prevail, may be inferred from the
threatenings which our enemies have denounced, and the cruelties they have
already exercised. -- Many no doubt would be shamefully executed. -- Those who
have most distinguished themselves in the present struggle, would be marked out
as the first victims to British fury. When the anger of an incensed monarch is
in some measure appeased with the blood of thousands, the whole burden of the
war, will no doubt be laid on the miserable survivers.

BUT should any American, propose submission to the government of Great Britain
while the king and parliament are using their utmost endeavors to bring us
under absolute subjection, or extirpate us from the earth, he would deserve the
fate of that timid Athenian, who, for only mentioning an accommodation with the
Persian King, when his numerous armies were spreading desolation far and wide,
was stoned to death; his own mother being the first person to execute the
sentence of the people against him. See Rollin's ancient History. v.3.


IT is seriously to be wished, all ranks of people would meditate on the
miserable condition we shall be in, if we suffer ourselves to be subdued by
Great Britain.

MANY are engaged in the eager pursuit of riches -- many are intrigueing for
places of honor and profit, as inattentive to the public interest, as if our
country were out of danger. -- But what advantage, let me ask those men, --
what advantage can you expect to receive from your wealth, or your titles, if
America is at last subjected to British tyranny? -- Should that ever take
place, through a general stupidity, or want of exertion, your wealth,
especially if it has been acquired in the present war, and your titles which
you hold under those who are denominated by the British government, The leaders
of the rebellion, so far from being of any service will expose you to the
peculiar vengeance of your enemies -- You will be stripped of your money, of your
lands, and your honors, if not deprived of life itself: -- Or should your
estates be spared to you, they will be so burdened with taxes, to defray the
expenses of the war, -- to support a large standing army to hold the country in
subjection after it is once conquered, and maintain a swarm of crown officers
to govern, to plunder and insult you, that your estates would not be worth
possessing: -- Yea, death would be desirable rather than a life of such
dishonor and misery.

MUCH might be said to describe the common wretchedness in which the
inhabitants of this country must be involved, if they suffer themselves to be
subdued, -- but the time allowed me for this exercise, will not suffer me any
farther to enlarge.

AT such a day as this, when we are threatened with the loss of every thing
valuable, -- when our enemies are many and powerful, we should forget, in some
good measure, that we have a private interest: We should employ our utmost
vigor in the cause of the public. A Roman Hero informs us, at a time when the
liberties of the people required his services, he gave himself to the immortal
Gods, and to his country; after that solemn consecration he declares he was
happy. His conduct affords an example worthy of our imitation. -- Every
freeborn son of America should at this time devote himself to the God of
Heaven, and to the service of these United States.

AT once despising danger, and the paltry idea of profit, Americans should at
this time solemnly vow unto the Lord, that they will give themselves no rest,
till our common enemies are wholly subdued.

SHOULD this magnanimity of soul -- this heavenly principle inspire our bosoms:
should it happily exterminate that meanness of spirit -- that criminal
selfishness -- that inordinate love of money which have imbarrassed every thing
for some time past, we might defy the forces of Britain, and laugh at her
threats.

HOW ardently then is this noble affection -- this enthusiasm for the public
good to be desired! May it kindle up in some favorite breast! May it catch from
soul to soul, till the inhabitants of this land in general, feeling the
irresistible inssuence, shall unite in one vigorous effort against the enemies
of our civil and religious liberties and put an end to their existence on this
part of the world.

NOW is the time, the best time in all probability we shall ever have: If we
act with wisdom and spirit the forces at present employed against us may be
ruined before they can be joined by larger numbers. God forbid my country
should let this golden opportunity pass over unimproved! God grant those who
are entrusted with our public affairs may act with wisdom, with spirit, and
decision! And may there be sufficient numbers ready to take the field at this
most critical season!

BUT before we conclude, it becomes us as christians to lament the awful spread
of moral evil, and pray for the universal establishment of the Redeemer's
kingdom, which is a kingdom of righteousness and peace.

SHOCKING have been the calamities which have followed sin in every age of the
world. -- The earth was soon filled with violence, and its wicked inhabitants
were drowned with the flood. -- Far the greatest part of those who now dwell on
the face of the earth are at once abandoned to their lusts, and are in slavery
to arbitrary sovereigns. -- But the reign of moral evil shall not be perpetual.
-- The Son of God came into the world to destroy the works of the devil. -- He
will put an end to violence and oppression. -- He will overset the thrones
which have been established by wickedness, and give universal peace to the
inhabitants of the world.

THE time shall come, when according to prophetic language "The wolf shall
dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf
and the young lion, and the fattling together." And to give us a representation
of an universally pacific disposition, it is added, "And a little child shall
lead them." -- Isaiah 11.6.


LET us look forward to that Day with pleasure and satisfaction. In the mean
time let us unite in earnest prayers to Almighty God, that the sons of vi^^^nce
may be utterly subdued, and that peace may speedily return, and spread her
balmy wings over this bleeding land.

WE pray for the peace of our Jerusalem. "They shall prosper that love thee. --
Peace be within thy walls and prosperity within thy palaces. For my brethren
and companions sakes, I will now say, peace be within thee." Plasm. 122.


AMEN.

